 = = Extinction = = 
 Because Mesopropithecus died out relatively recently and is only known from subfossil remains , it is considered to be a modern form of Malagasy lemur . It may have been among the last subfossil lemurs to go extinct , possibly surviving until 500 years ago , although radiocarbon dating places the most recent remains at 570 – 679 CE for a M. pithecoides from Ampasambazimba . The arrival of humans roughly 2 @,@ 000 years ago is thought to have sparked the decline of Mesopropithecus through hunting , habitat destruction , or both . 
 = Burger King franchises = 
 The majority of the locations of international fast @-@ food restaurant chain Burger King are privately owned franchises . While the majority of franchisees are smaller operations , several have grown into major corporations in their own right . At the end of the company 's fiscal year in 2015 , Burger King reported it had more than 15 @,@ 000 outlets in 84 countries ; of these , approximately 50 % are in the United States and 99 @.@ 9 % are privately owned and operated . The company locations employ more than 37 @,@ 000 people who serve approximately 11 @.@ 4 million customers daily . 
 Since its predecessor 's inception in 1953 , Burger King has used several variations of franchising to expand its operations . In the United States , the company originally relied on a regional franchise model with owners having exclusive expansion rights in a defined geographic territory . This model proved to be problematic as it led to issues of food quality , procedures and image management . A 1970s attempt by one of its largest franchises to take over the chain led to a restructuring of its franchising system , tossing the old method in favor of a restricted , per store licensing model . The 1978 restructuring , led by a new director of operations , firmly placed the mantel of franchise oversight on the shoulders of the company . 
 While Burger King still utilizes a version of its revamped franchising system in the United States , outside of North America its international locations licenses are still sold on a regional basis with franchises owning exclusive development rights for a region or country . These regional franchises are known as master franchises , and are responsible for opening new restaurants , licensing new third party operators , and performing standards oversight of all restaurant locations in these countries ; one of the larger examples of a master franchise is Hungry Jack 's , which oversees over 300 restaurants in Australia . 
 The 2011 purchase of the company by 3G Capital led to a change in how the company interacts with its franchises . The new owners moved to settle any disagreements with its franchises while initiating a sale of the majority of corporate locations with the goal of becoming an exclusive franchisor . The company also entered into several new franchise agreements that will allow it to dramatically expand its presence in several new markets including the BRIC nations . Additionally the company moved to establish new master franchise agreements in several regions while realigning its operations in several markets . 
 = = History = = 
 The company known today as Burger King itself began as a franchise ; the predecessor of the modern company was founded in 1953 in Jacksonville , Florida as Insta @-@ Burger King . The original founders and owners , Kieth J. Kramer and Matthew Burns , opened their first stores around a piece of equipment known as the Insta @-@ Broiler . The Insta @-@ Broiler oven proved so successful at cooking burgers , Kramer and Burns required all of their franchises to carry the device . The rights to open stores in Miami , Florida belonged to two businessmen named James McLamore and David R. Edgerton and their company South Florida restaurants , Inc . Due to operational issues with the Insta @-@ Broiler , in 1954 McLamore and Edgarton made the decision to replace the Insta @-@ Broiler with a mechanized gas grill they called a flame broiler . Even though the company had rapidly expanded throughout the state until its operations totaled more than 40 locations in 1955 , the original Insta @-@ Burger King ran into financial difficulties and the pair of McLamore and Edgarton purchased the national rights to the chain and rechristened the company as Burger King of Miami . 
 When McLamore and Edgarton 's Burger King Corporation began a full franchising system in 1961 , it relied on a regional franchising model where franchisees would purchase the right to open stores within a defined geographic region . These franchise agreements granted the company very little oversight control over its franchisees and resulted in issues of product quality control , store image and design and operations procedures . 
 In 1967 , after eight years of private operation , the Pillsbury Company acquired the Burger King brand and its parent company Burger King Corporation . At the time of the purchase , the chain had grown to 274 restaurants in the United States . Pillsbury continued to grow the company utilizing the existing franchise system despite its flaws . The power of its independent franchises came to a head in 1973 when Chart House , owner of 350 restaurants and one of its largest franchise groups , attempted to purchase the chain from Pillsbury for $ 100 million ( USD ) which Pillsbury declined . When Chart House 's bid failed , its owners Billy and Jimmy Trotter put forth a second plan that would require Pillsbury and Chart House spin off their respective holdings and merge the two entities into a separate company . Again Pillsbury declined the proposed divestiture . After the failed attempts to acquire the company , the relationship with Chart House and the Trotters soured ; when Chart House purchased several restaurants in Boston and Houston in 1979 , Burger King sued the selling franchisees for failing to comply with the right of first refusal clause in their contracts . Burger King won the case , successfully preventing the sale . The two parties did eventually reach a settlement where Chart House kept the Houston locations in their portfolio . Chart House eventually spun off its Burger King holdings and refocused on its higher end chains ; its Burger King holding company , DiversiFoods , was eventually acquired by Pillsbury $ 390 million ( USD ) in 1984 and folded into Burger King 's operations . 
 The regional licensing model remained in place until 1978 when the company hired McDonald 's executive Donald N. Smith to help revamp the company . Smith initiated a restructuring of all future franchising agreements , disallowing new owners from living more than an hour 's drive from their restaurants , preventing corporations from owning franchises and prohibiting franchisees from operating other chains . This new policy effectively limited the size of franchisees and prevented larger franchises from challenging Burger King as Chart House had . Smith also altered the way the company dealt with new properties by making the company the primary owner of new locations and rent or lease the restaurants to its franchises . This policy would allow the company to take over the operations of failing stores or evict those owners who would not conform to the company guidelines and policies . However , by 1988 Burger King parent Pillsbury had relaxed many of Smith 's changes , scaled back on construction of new locations and stalling growth . When Pillsbury was acquired in 1989 by Grand Metropolitan , the company fell further into decline , a pattern which continued under Grand Met successor Diageo . This institutionalized neglect further hurt the standing of the brand , in turn causing significant financial damage to Burger King 's franchises . 
 By 2001 and nearly eighteen years of stagnant growth , many of its franchises were in some sort of financial distress . The lack of growth severely impacted Burger King 's largest franchise , the nearly 400 @-@ store AmeriKing ; the company , which until this point had been struggling under a nearly $ 300 million debt load and been shedding stores across the US , was forced to enter Chapter 11 bankruptcy . The failure of AmeriKing accompanied with declining market position deeply affected the value of the company , and put negotiations between Diageo and the TPC Capital @-@ lead group on hold . The developments eventually forced Diageo to lower the total selling price by almost three @-@ quarters of a billion dollars . After the sale , newly appointed CEO Bradley Blum initiated a program to help the roughly 20 percent of its franchises , including its four largest , who were in financial distress , bankruptcy or had ceased operations altogether . Partnering with the California @-@ based Trinity Capital , LLC , the company established the Franchisee Financial Restructuring Initiative , a program to address the financial issues facing BK 's financially distressed franchisees . The initiative was designed to assist franchisees in restructuring their businesses in order to meet financial obligations , focus on restaurant operational excellence , reinvest in their operations and return to profitability . 
 Individual owners took advantage of the AmeriKing failure ; one of the BK regional owners , Miami @-@ based Al Cabrera , purchased 130 stores located primarily in the Chicago and the upper mid @-@ west , from the failed company for a bargain basement price of $ 16 million , or approximately 88 percent of their original value . The new company , which started out as Core Value Partners and eventually became Heartland Foods , also purchased 120 additional stores from distressed owners and completely revamped them . The resulting purchases made Mr. <unk> <unk> 's largest minority franchisee and Heartland one of Burger King 's top franchises . By 2006 , the company was valued at over $ 150 million , and was sold to New York @-@ based GSO Capital Partners . Other purchasers included a three @-@ way group of NFL athletes Kevin Faulk , Marcus Allen and Michael Strahan who collectively purchased 17 stores in the cities of Norfolk and Richmond , Virginia ; and Cincinnati @-@ based franchisee Dave Devoy , who purchased 32 AmeriKing stores . After investing in new decor , equipment and staff retraining , many of the formerly failing stores have shown growth upwards of 20 percent . 
 With the sale of Burger King to 3G Capital of Brazil in 2010 , Burger King made the decision to sell off almost all corporate owned stores to its franchises by the end of 2013 . On major move towards this goal was the sale of over 275 stores to corporate franchise group Carrols Corporation of New York and nearly 100 stores to the minority held Magic Burger of Florida . 
 = = = International = = = 
 Shortly after the acquisition of the chain by Pillsbury in 1969 , Burger King opened its first Canadian restaurant in Windsor , Ontario , in 1969 . Other international locations followed soon after : Oceania in 1971 with its Australian franchise Hungry Jack 's , and Europe in 1975 with a restaurant in Madrid , Spain . Beginning in 1982 , BK and its franchisees began operating stores in several East Asian countries , including Japan , Taiwan , Singapore and South Korea . Due to high competition , all of the Japanese locations were closed in 2001 ; however , BK reentered the Japanese market in June 2007 . BK 's Central and South American operations began in Mexico in the late 1970s , and by the early 1980s it was operating locations in Caracas , Venezuela , Santiago , Chile and Buenos Aires , Argentina . While Burger King lags behind McDonald 's in international locations by over 12 @,@ 000 stores , by 2008 it had managed to become the largest chain in several countries including Mexico and Spain . The company divides its international operations into three segments : The Middle East , Europe and Africa division ( EMEA ) , Asia @-@ Pacific ( APAC ) and Latin America and the Caribbean ( LAC ) . In each of these regions , Burger King has established several subsidiaries to develop strategic partnerships and alliances to expand into new territories . In its EMEA group , Burger King 's Switzerland @-@ based subsidiary Burger King Europe GmbH is responsible for the licensing and development of BK franchises in those regions . In the APAC region , the Singapore @-@ based BK <unk> , Pte . Ltd. business unit handles franchising for East Asia , the Asian subcontinent and all Oceanic territories . The LAC region includes Mexico , Central and South America and the Caribbean Islands . 
 2012 saw a major international expansion initiative . The primary thrust was aimed at the BRIC nations with several new master franchise agreements in those countries that will eventually create upwards of 2500 new stores by the 2020 . One of these deals also creates the single largest international franchise agreement in the company history , a deal to open over 1000 stores in China with a new " super " <unk> headed by the <unk> family of Turkey . An updated agreement with its Russian franchisee will see a major expansion into Siberia . This move puts Burger King in a superior position to chief rival McDonald 's as it currently doesn 't operate any locations east of the Ural Mountains . 
 Further expansion moves were also made in other global markets during 2012 . The African market saw a new agreement with Grand Parade Investments of South Africa to enter Africa 's largest economy , with restaurants opening in 2013 . In Europe , Burger King returned to the French market in 2012 with an agreement with multinational operator Autogrill , a move that has met with some excitement in the country . The chain left the country in 1997 , closing its 22 franchised and 17 corporate locations after a poorly executed entry into the market that left it unable to compete against McDonald 's and local chain Quick . The partnership with Autogrill is a move to consolidate Burger King 's presence in travel plazas along major highways in France , Italy , Poland and other European nations . 
 Since its purchase in 2011 , Burger King has seen 14 % sales increase in its Latin American and Caribbean operations . The continued expansion in these market could provide a significant portions of Burger King 's growth during the decade of the 2010s . In the Mexican market , Burger King sold 97 corporate @-@ owned locations to its largest franchisee in that country . The deal means multi @-@ chain operator <unk> <unk> de C.V will eventually operate approximately half of Mexico 's 400 + Burger King locations while receiving exclusive expansion rights in Mexico for a twenty @-@ year period . Elsewhere in Central America , Burger King entered in a deal with another of its franchises , the Beboca Group of Panama , to create a new corporate entity to handle expansion and logistics in the LAC region which until this time had no centralized operations group . The deal follows a unification of the company 's web presence in Latin America and the Caribbean , as well as aligning all of its various web initiatives including mobile services , Facebook presence and guest relation tools . The Latin American moves are part of a corporate plan to take advantage of the growing middle class in these regions . 
 The company began its move into Sub @-@ Saharan Africa in May 2013 when Burger King opened its first outlets in South Africa . The company sold franchise rights to local gaming and slots machine operator Grand Parade Investments Ltd . The South African operation sold over double its initial forecasts in its opening weeks with sales of $ 474 @,@ 838 at just one of its outlets in Cape Town in its first seven weeks . In a deal with local petrochemical company <unk> outlets will be opened at filling stations across the country from 2014 . In April 2014 it was announced that due to high demand the number of new outlets being opened in 2014 would be increased from 12 to 14 across the country . 
 In December 2013 , Burger King returned to Finland after three decades of absence . The first restaurant , located on <unk> in central Helsinki , instantly proved so popular that for every day since its opening , people have had to queue in front of the restaurant to get in , sometimes for over half an hour . The only exception so far has been Christmas time , when the restaurant was closed . According to Mikko <unk> , the leader of the Finnish Burger King franchise , the restaurant has attracted over 2000 customers on every single day , which has surprised the restaurant employees and the franchise owners . The long queues have been extensively covered and ridiculed in social media , comparing them to people queuing in front of a McDonald 's restaurant in Moscow , Russia in the early 1990s , and contrasting them with the nearly nonexistent queues to Burger King restaurants in Stockholm , Sweden . 
 = = Relations = = 
 Although the majority of the restaurant locations are privately held by individual owners and its financial dependence on those owners , Burger King 's relationship with its franchises has not always been harmonious . Occasional disagreements between the two have caused numerous issues , and in several instances the company 's and its licensees ' relations have degenerated into precedent @-@ setting court cases . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 In the United States , approximately 90 percent of Burger King 's franchises have banded together to form the Burger King National Franchise Association ( <unk> or NFA ) . The 900 @-@ member group is based in Atlanta , Georgia , and is designed to provide what the group calls Franchisee Relations Advocacy . It acts as a corporate negotiator that mediates with corporate @-@ franchise disputes , as a government lobbying group to deal with issues that effect the fast @-@ food industry as a whole , and it provides group health , property and casualty insurance . In 2001 , the group announced a plan to purchase Burger King from then @-@ parent Diageo after the company put forth a plan to float approximately 20 percent of BKC on the NYSE . The NFA believed that any money raised from the issue would not be put into helping bolster the then flagging BK , but would instead end up being used to help Diageo bolster its liquor brands . The deal collapsed when the NFA was unable to put together an acceptable financing package . 
 When an agreement to purchase Burger King by a group led by TPG Capital was initially reached in 2002 , franchises celebrated the severance of Burger King from Diageo . However , the relationship quickly soured after the 2004 purchase was completed , with the TPG @-@ led management group immediately voicing concerns over the relationship between Burger King and its franchises . In a statement from the new TPG appointed management , Burger King disparaged the NFA as one of the problems interfering with company operations . The new owners also began dismantling franchise advisory committees , replacing them with what Burger King called " excellence advisory councils " that the NFA claimed was made up of corporate picked members that did not truly represent the franchises . Further changes in menu structure , advertising , demographic targeting and franchise @-@ corporate interactions upset the franchise group . Over the next several years TPG made several changes to the company that eventually brought the two sides to loggerheads that devolved into several lawsuits . 
 = = = = Advertising revenues = = = = 
 In a 2005 dispute with the NFA over issues including brand development and advertising , Burger King severed its relations with the group . Claiming that the NFA was resisting structural changes that BK was making in regards to pricing , hours and its new gift card program , CEO John <unk> claimed " many instances of the NFA 's non @-@ cooperation and affirmative disruption of efforts to improve the Burger King system " were the reason for the break . The company also announced that it would be diverting a $ 1 million ( USD ) NFA advertising subsidy into the company 's own advertising fund . In a response , the NFA chairman Daniel Fitzpatrick responded in a letter to Burger King 's parent stating that " to sever relations with the ... NFA is extremely regrettable " and based on " an erroneous set of facts , innuendo and rumor " claimed that the company owed the NFA $ 1 @.@ 7 million in total subsidy funds . The two sides settled their differences in April 2006 when Burger King agreed to pay the disputed subsidy funds to the group . Additionally , Burger King announced that it would honor an October 2004 deal in regards to compensation for the operation of the annual Burger King / franchise convention . 
 A similar issue again arose in 2009 when Burger King diverted several million dollars of advertising rebates paid to its American franchises by Coca Cola Corporation and Dr. Pepper Snapple Group to its own coffers . The company intended to utilize these funds to increase its advertising presence in the United States at a time when corporate advertising costs were falling , which would allow an increased media presence of approximately 25 % from the previous year ( 2008 ) . The NFA contended that Burger King Corporation improperly redirected 40 % of restaurant operating funds ( ROF ) paid by the two beverage suppliers to franchises since 1990 into the corporate advertising budget . These funds were often used by the franchises to pay for beverage support systems such as filtration units and local marketing , and diversion of the funds would cost franchises at least $ 65 million ( USD ) between 2010 @-@ 2012 . These funds often helped the franchises ' bottom lines , as they were often used to offset other costs imposed on the franchises by Burger King , such as the $ 1 ( USD ) Double Cheeseburger . 
 The NFA claimed that the diversion to the parent company violated the beverage contracts between various parties . Negotiations between the two entities eventually failed , which led to a class action suit being filed in the United States District Court for the Southern District of California against Burger King Corporation , Coca @-@ Cola and Dr. Pepper on behalf of all Burger King franchises in the United States in May 2009 . In the filing , the NFA claimed the three defendants were in violation of a 1999 beverage contract that set specific beverage syrup usage goals . The four parties settled shortly after the filing when Burger King agreed to seek advertising funds from other sources . 
 = = = = Hours of operation = = = = 
 In 2007 , Burger King announced its " competitive hours " requirement that mandated locations extend their hours of operation to midnight for most of its American locations . Burger King 's reasoning for the changes were necessary to maintain a competitive stand against McDonald 's and Wendy 's . Burger King stated that roughly 60 % of its franchised locations already operated until mid @-@ night , but it sought to have the extended hours of operation cover 100 % of locations in order to begin a nationwide advertising campaign promoting late @-@ night sales . On 1 June 2008 the company amended the directive to require restaurants to stay open until 2 : 00am Thursday @-@ Saturday and open at 6 : 00am Monday @-@ Saturday . At the time of the announcement , Burger King stated it believed the franchise agreement allowed it set minimum hours and that most of it franchisees had agreed to the extended hours of operation . After the deadline passed , Burger King notified its franchises on 3 July that if any of them failed to implement the new policy by 8 July , the franchises would be in default of their agreement . 
 Many franchises opposed the extensions on multiple grounds ; operators claimed employee and customer safety was jeopardized by the extended hours , with several Miami @-@ area franchises noting incidents in 2006 and 2007 where staff or customers were killed during extended hours . Additionally it was claimed that the extended hours were not profitable due increased costs associated with operating the locations at times with lower customer traffic and subsequent lower sales . Franchises and the NFA noted the franchise agreement only required locations to be open until 11 : 00pm and did not contain riders that allowed the corporate parent to amend the agreement . In response to the changes , three Miami @-@ area franchise filed a suit in July 2008 with the Eleventh Judicial Circuit Court of Florida in Miami to stop the change and force the company to make it optional instead of required . The NFA issued a statement that it " unequivocally supported " the suit , and that " ... the franchisor does not have the enforceable right to mandate extended hours . " 
 Circuit Judge Jon I. Gordon dismissed the lawsuit without prejudice in November requesting the plaintiffs refile with a clarified complaint . An amended complaint was filed by the three franchises a month later . In response to a motion to dismiss filed by the parent company , the judge ruled in January 2009 in favor of Burger King . In his decision , Judge Gordon stated that the franchise contract clearly does provide Burger King the right to establish minimum hours standards for its franchises . After purchase of the company by 3G , Burger King conceded to the franchises request the mandate be changed to a recommendation and relaxed its position on the extended hours . 
 = = = = Value menu pricing = = = = 
 The pricing of Burger King 's value menu had been the focus of multiple , highly contentious disputes between the parent company and its franchises for several years during the TPG ownership period . The dispute was at the center of two separate but related court cases filed against Burger King by an individual Burger King franchise in New York City and the NFA . At the heart of the disputes is the legal concept of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing in regards to long @-@ term franchise agreements . 
 The first indication of the franchises ' displeasure with their parent over this issue came in 2005 and involved claims by a Manhattan @-@ based franchise that the company failed to take into account local market conditions when setting prices . E @-@ Z Eating Corp. , operator of five restaurants in New York and owned by brother @-@ sister partners Elizabeth and Luan Sadik , had been struggling after the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks but had been in a company @-@ sponsored turn around program when Burger King started its new value program in 2006 . The program required all locations to carry a specific set of products at a discounted price , with limited exemptions for certain locations that met a set of criteria . The Sadiks applied for an exemption to the pricing requirement but were turned down by Burger King . In response to the denial , the Sadiks closed two of their locations without consulting Burger King and refused to implement the scheme in their other two locations . Burger King responded by suing the company in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Florida for breach of contract , and eventually revoked the franchise agreement for the remaining two locations in January 2006 . The Sadik 's responded by filing their own lawsuit in 2008 in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York claiming that Burger King had engaged in a breach of the implied duty of good faith and fair in its actions towards the franchise . The actions were eventually consolidated in a single case in the Southern District Court under Judge <unk> G. Cooke , where Burger King requested and was granted a summary judgement against the Sadiks . The judgment was upheld on appeal by the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit in June 2009 . 
 Eventually , the dispute between Burger King and its franchises came to center on the 2009 @-@ 2010 promotion for the Buck Double sandwich . The Buck Double was a quarter @-@ pound double cheese burger designed to compete against the McDonald 's <unk> sandwich . The primary issue was financial in nature , the franchises claimed that Burger King forced them to sell the sandwich at a loss of 10 ¢ per sandwich . Franchisees sued the parent company claiming that it did not have the authority to dictate pricing structures for the independently held franchises . The court dismissed the case in a decision that stated the company could legally dictate pricing structures over its franchises objections , but found that there was enough evidence to allow the franchises to move forward with their claims of dealing in bad faith in a separate case . In response to the decision , the franchise group filed a second suit that claimed the deal was not properly structured and was implemented without the franchises ' consent . The NFA suit claimed BK acted in bad faith by implementing the deal after the franchises had twice voted down the deal . 
 When 3G Capital purchased Burger King in January 2011 , the company moved to resolve all disputes with its franchises . By April , Burger King and the franchises agreed to a non @-@ monetary settlement where the franchise were allowed to <unk> the Buck Double to $ 1 @.@ 29 US $ as well as giving them more power in future in determining the makeup of the Burger King value menu . The parent company also hired a Chicago , Illinois franchisee , Dan <unk> , as its new North American president , a move that helped franchise relations due to his former position with the NFA . 
 = = = International relations = = = 
 = = = = Australia = = = = 
 In 1990 , Hungry Jack 's renewed its franchise agreement with then BK parent Burger King Corporation , which allowed Hungry Jack 's to license third party franchisee . One of the terms and conditions of the renewed agreement required Hungry Jack 's to open a minimum number of new locations each year for the duration of the contract . Shortly after the Australian trademark on the Burger King name lapsed in 1996 , Burger King requested that Cowin rebrand the Hungry Jack 's locations to Burger King , which Cowin declined . Burger King Corporation accused Hungry Jack 's of violating the conditions of the renewed franchise agreement by failing to expand the chain at the rate defined and sought to terminate the agreement . Under the aegis of this claim , Burger King Corporation , in partnership with Royal Dutch Shell 's Australian division Shell Company of Australia Ltd . , began to open its own stores in 1997 beginning in Sydney and extending throughout the regions of New South Wales , Australian Capital Territory and Victoria . In addition , BK sought to limit HJ 's ability to open new locations in the country , whether they were corporate locations or third @-@ party licensees . 
 As a result of Burger King 's actions , Hungry Jack 's owner Jack Cowin and his private holding company Competitive Foods Australia began legal proceedings in 2001 against Burger King 's parent Burger King Corporation with a counter @-@ claim that the company had violated the conditions of the master franchising agreement and was in breach of the contract . In a decision handed down by the Supreme Court of New South Wales that affirmed Cowin 's claims , Burger King was determined to have violated the terms of the contract and as a result was required to pay Cowin and Hungry Jack 's a $ 46 @.@ 9 million ( Aus , $ 41 @.@ 6 million USD 2001 ) award . The court 's decision was one of the first major cases in Australia that implied that the American legal concept of good faith negotiations existed with the framework of the Australian legal system , which until that verdict , had rarely been seen in the country 's courts . In its decision , the Court stated that Burger King had failed to act in good faith during contract negotiations by seeking to include standards and clauses that would engineer a default of the franchise agreement , allowing the company to limit the number of new Hungry Jack ’ s branded restaurants and ultimately claim the Australian market as its own , a purpose that was extraneous to the agreement . 
 After Burger King Corporation lost the case , it decided to terminate its operations in the country , and in July 2002 , the company transferred its assets to its New Zealand franchise group , Trans @-@ Pacific Foods ( TPF ) . The terms of the sale had TPF assume oversight of the Burger King franchises in the region as the Burger King brand 's master franchisee . Trans @-@ Pacific Foods administered the chain 's 81 locations until September 2003 when the new management team of Burger King Corporation reached an agreement with Hungry Jack 's Pty Ltd to re @-@ brand the existing Burger King locations to Hungry Jack 's and make HJP the sole master franchisee of both brands . An additional part of the agreement required Burger King Corporation to provide administrative and advertising support as to insure a common marketing scheme for the company and its products . Trans @-@ Pacific Foods transferred its control of the Burger King franchises to Hungry Jack 's Pty Ltd , which subsequently renamed the remaining Burger King locations as Hungry Jack 's . 
 = = = = Israel , Palestine & the occupied territories = = = = 
 In the summer of 1999 , a geopolitical dispute with the global Islamic community and Jewish groups in the United States and Israel arose over an Israeli franchisee opening stores in the Israeli @-@ occupied territories . When Burger King franchisee in Israel , Rikamor , Ltd . , opened a store in the West Bank settlement of Ma 'aleh Adumim in August of that year , Islamic groups , including the Arab League and American Muslims for Jerusalem , argued that international Burger King parent Burger King Corporation 's licensing of the store helped legitimize the illegal settlement . Beyond the called @-@ for Islamic boycott of the company , the Arab League also threatened the revocation of the business licenses of Burger King 's primary Middle Eastern franchise in the 22 countries that are part of the League 's membership . 
 Burger King Corporation quickly pulled the franchise license for that location and had the store shuttered explaining that Rikamor , Ltd. had violated its contract by opening the location in the West Bank . Several American @-@ based Jewish groups issued statements that denounced the decision as acceding to threats of boycotts by Islamic groups . Burger King Corporation issued a statement that it " made this decision purely on a commercial basis and in the best interests of thousands of people who depend on the Burger King reputation for their livelihood " . 
 Eventually , the regional master franchise for Israel , <unk> Holdings , decided to close its operations in that country and merge all operations with its own local chain , <unk> . It was claimed by <unk> owners Eli and Yuval <unk> that Israelis preferred the taste of the local brand over the American chain . One blogger , a former manager of a Burger King in the United States , claimed that both chains were basically the same in product and preparations , it was Burger King 's failure to fully adapt to the local market tastes that doomed them in that country . By 6 September 2010 all 55 locations in the country were closed down and converted to <unk> . 
 = = Franchisees of note = = 
 = = = Australia = = = 
 Master franchise : Hungry Jack 's Pty . 
 Australia is the only country in which Burger King does not operate under its own name . When the company set about establishing operations there in 1971 , it found that its business name was already trademarked by a takeaway food shop in Adelaide . As a result , Burger King provided the Australian master franchisee , Jack Cowin , with a list of possible alternative names derived from pre @-@ existing trademarks already registered by Burger King and its then corporate parent Pillsbury , that could be used to name the Australian restaurants . Cowin selected the " Hungry Jack " brand name , one of Pillsbury 's US pancake mixture products , and slightly changed the name to a possessive form by adding an apostrophe " s " forming the new name Hungry Jack 's . 
 Hungry Jack 's currently owns and operates or sub @-@ licenses all of the Hungry Jack 's restaurants in Australia . As the master franchise for the continent , the company is responsible for licensing new operators , opening its own stores and performing standards oversight of franchised locations in Australia . As the end of Burger King 's 2012 fiscal year , Hungry Jack 's is the largest Asian / Pacific franchisee of the chain with 347 restaurants either directly owned by parent company Hungry Jack 's Pty or through third party licensees . 
 After the expiration of the trademark in the late 1990s , Burger King unsuccessfully tried to introduce the brand to the continent . After losing a lawsuit filed against it by Hungry Jack 's ownership , the company ceded the territory to its franchisee . Hungry Jack 's is now the only Burger King brand in Australia ; Cowin 's company Hungry Jack 's <unk> is the master franchise and thus is now responsible for oversight of the operations that country with Burger King only providing administrative and advertising support to ensure a common marketing scheme for the company and its products . 
 = = = Brazil = = = 
 Master franchise : Vinci Partners 
 Burger King entered the Brazilian market in 2004 , eventually operating and franchising 108 locations in the country by 2011 . In June of that year , Burger King entered into a new master franchise agreement with Brazilian venture capital firm Vinci Partners . The agreement calls for a tenfold increase in locations in the country by 2016 . Burger King and Vinci are expected to invest about $ 570 million ( US $ ) to expand operations in the country during the five @-@ year period . The expansion deal is an attempt to catch up to American chains that have already established a presence in Brazil as well as the rest of Latin America . 
 = = = China = = = 
 Master franchise : the <unk> family 
 Chinese : <unk> ( lit . Hamburger King ) 
 Through 2012 , Burger King lagged significantly behind McDonald 's ( 1400 locations in China ) and Yum ! Brands ( 4500 KFC and Pizza Hut locations in China ) in the Chinese market , operating less than 100 stores in the country . Previous owners TPG Capital had intended to open hundreds of new locations in the country by this point but had not been able to carry through with their plans . On the other side of <unk> , The <unk> family , along with its partners the <unk> family , operated a major franchisee of Burger King In Turkey through its TAB Gida operation . TAB Gida is Turkey 's largest multi @-@ brand restaurant operator and one of the largest Burger King franchisees in Europe with 450 locations in that country . The previous year , the Cartesian Capital Group had taken a minority stake in TAB Gida , giving the firm access to additional capital for growth in Turkish market . 
 In April 2012 , the <unk> and Cartesian utilized the additional capital to enter into an joint franchise agreement with Burger King to open 1000 + new locations in China over a five- to seven @-@ year period . This agreement is the largest single franchise agreement in the history of Burger King and will make the new Chinese venture the largest BK franchise in the world . The agreement gives the new franchise group control of the existing 63 locations in the country . The expansion has both pluses and minuses for Burger King , as a minor player in the market it yet to truly establish a brand identity as McDonald 's and Yum ! This position could allow Burger King to position itself as a more upscale competitor akin to Starbucks . 
 In January 2014 , Burger King continued its expansion by beating McDonalds to China 's western province of Xinjiang , opening up a store in the capital city of Ürümqi . 
 = = = Multinational = = = 
 = = = = Central and South America = = = = 
 Master franchise : Beboca Ltd . 
 While Burger King has had operations in Central and South America for several years , they were under the auspices of different companies . In December 2012 , Burger King entered into a new agreement with Beboca Ltd . , a franchisee in Panama and Costa Rica . The new agreement establishes a new entity , BK Centro America ( BKCA ) , that will be the new master franchise for Costa Rica , El Salvador , Guatemala , Honduras , Nicaragua and Panama ; BKCA will responsible for the overseeing of development of Burger King in these countries . Additionally , BKCA will provide logistics support , advertising and purchasing assistance not only those countries , but others in Burger King 's Latin American and Caribbean development area . 
 = = = = Central and Eastern Europe = = = = 
 AmRest Holdings ( <unk> : EAT ) is an international fast @-@ food and casual dining restaurant operator . The company is primarily based in Wrocław and operates in Poland , Czech Republic , Hungary , Russia , Bulgaria , Serbia , Croatia , Spain , France and the United States . In 2007 , AmRest received its license to operate Burger Kings in Poland through BK 's Burger King Europe GmbH holding unit . The new license was part of Burger King 's plan to expand its presence in existing European markets while opening new ones . AmRest expected to open several new locations in Poland over a five @-@ year period . By February 2012 , the company was considering using its foothold in India through its La <unk> Italian food chain to bring the Burger King brand to that country . At the time , BK had failed to establish itself with in India at least twice . As of December 2012 , AmRest operates 37 Burger King locations in three countries . 
 = = = = The Middle East = = = = 
 Master franchise : Hana International 
 Arabic : <unk> <unk> 
 Hana International , a wholly owned subsidiary of the Saudi Arabia @-@ based Olayan Group and its partner Kuwait @-@ based MH <unk> Group , is the exclusive master franchisee for the Middle East and North Africa , excluding Israel and Turkey . Hana also operates two holding companies , the Olayan Food Services Company in Saudi Arabia and First Food Services Company in the UAE as well as an operations support / training center in Riyadh . 
 Hana first began operating Burger King restaurants in the region after its parent company Olayan completed its franchise agreement in 1991 . Its first location opened in Riyadh in December 1992 , and expanded across the Middle East opening stores in the neighboring countries of Kuwait , Qatar , Bahrain , and Lebanon in 2001 . By 2007 , the company had grown to over 180 locations in a half dozen countries , all located in Southwest Asia , when it signed an additional franchise agreement to open locations in North Africa , with the first location in Cairo , Egypt . 
 Hana currently owns and operates or sub @-@ licenses over 200 restaurants on the Arabian peninsula , Jordan , Lebanon and Egypt . To accommodate the tenets of the majority Islamic population 's faith in its markets , all of the locations operated and overseen by Hana feature halal meats and do not feature pork based products . Additionally , hamburgers are called <unk> , avoiding the term ham and its association with pork . 
 = = = = North America = = = = 
 Heartland Food Corporation ( Heartland ) came into existence when Miami @-@ based franchisee Al Cabrera purchased a large chunk of stores , 130 locations primarily in the Chicago and the upper mid @-@ west , from the failed franchise AmeriKing for a bargain basement price of $ 16 million , or approximately 88 % of their original value in December 2003 . Taking these stores , he and his partners created a new company called Core Value Partners to renovate and update the locations which had deteriorated during <unk> 's decline . During this time , the company was renamed Heartland Food Corp. and it purchased 120 additional stores from other financially distressed owners and completely revamped them as well . The resulting purchases made Mr. <unk> Burger King 's largest minority franchisee and Heartland one of BKC 's top franchisee groups at the time . By 2006 , the company was valued at over $ 150 million , and was sold to New York @-@ based GSO Capital Partners . 
 2012 saw another major expansion for Heartland when it purchased 121 more stores from Burger King Corporation in March . 40 of the locations , located in the Minneapolis , Minnesota area , belonged to Duke & King - another bankrupt 93 store franchise group that was at one time Burger King 's second largest North American franchisee . That sale , valued at $ 7 @.@ 4 million ( US $ ) , added 40 locations to Heartland 's portfolio . The deal , part of Burger Kings sell off of corporate owned stores , included a stipulation that the Heartland update 275 of its locations to current appearance standards . The remolding provision helped generate a 15 % sales increase in those locations for Heartland . As of January 2013 , Heartland is the second largest franchises of Burger King in North America . The Downers Grove , Illinois @-@ based company owns and operates over 425 restaurants in The United States and Canada . 
 = = = Russia = = = 
 Master franchise : Burger Rus 
 Russian : <unk> <unk> 
 Burger King originally began plans to enter the Russian market as far back as 2006 by partnering with local coffee house chain <unk> . However the company 's plans were delayed several years ; it finally opened its first Russian location in January 2010 at the Metropolis Shopping Mall in North Moscow , and by mid @-@ 2012 the company had almost 70 locations . 2012 saw Russia became the focus of a major international expansion for Burger King with a new plan to increase its presence in that country . The deal between Burger King , Russian master franchise Burger Rus and Russian investment bank <unk> Capital is designed to grow the company from its January 2012 level of 57 to more than 300 within a few years . A good portion of the planned expansion will be focused in the Siberian region of the country , an area that is underserved by fast food chains . Further , the agreement solidified Burger Rus as the exclusive master franchise for the country . Burger Rus chair Dmitry <unk> announced the first Siberian location will be in the city of <unk> by the end of 2012 , with more locations in 2013 . While the chain entered the Russian Market some twenty years after rival McDonald 's , its expansion plans are intended to rapidly put it on a more even footing with McDonald 's and <unk> surpass it as at the time of the announcement , McDonald 's had yet to open any locations east of the Ural mountains . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 = = = = Army and Air Force Exchange Service = = = = 
 The Army and Air Force Exchange Service ( AAFES ) is a specialty retailer that operates military retail stores on US Army and Air Force bases and installations across the world . Burger King was the first restaurant chain to be opened on US military facilities with a location at the US Naval base at Pearl Harbor , however naval facilities are covered by the Navy Exchange Service Command ( <unk> ) . The AAFES opened its first Burger King franchise 1984 at the American military facilities in Ansbach , Germany . The location was the first restaurant opened under a five @-@ year agreement , with a fifteen @-@ year extension , in which the AAFES agreed it would open 185 locations globally . Since that time the AAFES has opened nearly 200 locations in all theaters of operations of the two services . Almost all of the AAFES @-@ operated Burger King restaurants are found on army posts and air force bases ; however some locations , such as the one located at the Baghdad International Airport , are within territories under US military jurisdiction . 
 The AAFES group was given Burger King 's first Award of Excellence in 2002 for the company what it called " its [ AAFES ] ceaseless efforts to support U.S. servicemen and women deployed to locations around the world in support of the war on terrorism . " As the end of Burger King 's 2010 fiscal year , AAFES is the fourth largest US franchisee of the chain with 132 restaurants globally . 
 = = = = Carrols Corporation = = = = 
 Carrols Corporation is the largest global franchisee of Burger King as of January 2013 . Its parent company is Carrols Restaurant Group , at publicly traded corporation ( NASDAQ : <unk> ) . It has held this position since 2002 with the bankruptcy of Chicago @-@ based AmeriKing Inc , which had 367 US locations at its peak . 
 Carrols Corporation was founded in 1960 as a franchisee of the <unk> Freeze Company 's Carrols Restaurants division by Herb Slotnick under the name Carrols Drive @-@ In Restaurants of New York , and by 1968 the company had grown to the point where it purchased the chain from <unk> Freeze . By 1974 Carrols owned and operated over 150 Carrols Club restaurants in the Northeast United States and abroad . In 1975 the company entered into a franchise agreement with Burger King and converted its existing Carrols restaurants in the US into BK locations , closed those stores that were not able to be updated and sold off its international operations . 
 In June 2012 , Carrols acquired 278 BK locations from Burger King for approximately $ 150 million . In exchange , Burger King parent , Burger King Corporation took a 28 @.@ 9 percent stake in the company . The transaction involved a line of credit that would be used by Carrols to renovate more than 450 of its stores and a 29 @.@ 7 % ownership stake in the franchise going to Burger King . Additional agreements will give Carrols the right of first refusal on approximately 500 stores . If it chooses to exercise these rights , Carrols could become the dominant franchisee of Burger King in the United States with possible control of hundreds of locations in twenty states . Three months after the acquisition , Carrols saw a 37 @.@ 8 % increase in total sales and 8 @.@ 9 % same store sales with a 4 @.@ 9 % increase in customer traffic . As of the end of Burger King 's 2012 fiscal year , Carrols operates over 575 restaurants in New York , Ohio , and eighteen other states . 
 = Wehha of East Anglia = 
 Wehha was a pagan king of the East Angles who , if he actually existed , ruled the kingdom of East Anglia during the 6th century , at the time the kingdom was being established by migrants from what is now Frisia and the southern Jutland peninsula . Early sources identify him as a member of the Wuffingas dynasty , which became established around the east coast of Suffolk . Nothing of his reign is known . 
 According to the East Anglian tally from the Textus Roffensis , Wehha was the son of Wilhelm . The 9th century History of the Britons lists both Wehha , who is named as ' Guillem Guercha ' , as the first king of the East Angles , and his son and successor Wuffa , after whom the dynasty was named . It has been claimed that the name Wehha was a hypocoristic version of <unk> , from the Anglo @-@ Saxon poem Beowulf , which , along with evidence such as the finds discovered at Sutton Hoo in 1939 , suggests a connection between the Wuffingas and a Swedish dynasty , the <unk> . 
 = = Background = = 
 Wehha is thought to have been one of the earliest rulers of East Anglia , an independent and long @-@ lived Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdom that was established in the 6th century , and which includes the modern English counties of Norfolk and Suffolk . 
 According to R. Rainbird Clarke , migrants from southern Jutland " speedily dominated " the <unk> , an area of southeast Suffolk , and then , by around 550 , " lost no time in conquering the whole of East Anglia " . Rainbird Clarke identified Wehha , the founder of the dynasty , as one of the leaders of the new arrivals : the East Angles are tentatively identified with the Geats of the Old English poem Beowulf . He used the evidence of the finds at Sutton Hoo to conclude that the Wuffingas originated from Sweden , noting that the sword , helmet and shield found in the ship burial at Sutton Hoo may have been family heirlooms , brought across from Sweden in the beginning of the 6th century . As it is now believed that these artefacts were made in England , there is less agreement amongst scholars that the Wuffingas dynasty was directly linked with Sweden . 
 The extent of the kingdom of the East Angles can be determined from a variety of sources . Isolated to the north and east by the North Sea , there were mainly impenetrable forests to the south and the swamps and scattered islands of the Fens on its western border . The main land route from East Anglia would at that time have been a land corridor , along which ran the prehistoric Icknield Way . The southern neighbours of the East Angles were the East Saxons and across the other side of the Fens were the Middle Angles . It has been suggested that the Devil 's Dyke ( near modern Newmarket ) at one time formed part of the kingdom 's western boundary , but as its construction can only be dated from between the 4th and 10th centuries , it cannot be established to be of Early Anglo @-@ Saxon origin . 
 = = Genealogy = = 
 Wehha is a semi @-@ historical figure and no surviving evidence has survived to show he actually existed or was ever king of the East Angles . The name Wehha is included in tallies of the ruling Wuffingas dynasty : the name appears as <unk> <unk> - Wehha <unk> - in the East Anglian tally from the Textus Roffensis , an important collection of Anglo @-@ Saxon laws and Rochester Cathedral registers that has survived in the form of two distinct books that were bound together in the 13th century . According to this list , which is also known as the Anglian collection , Wehha was the son of Wilhelm , who was the son of <unk> , who was the son of <unk> , the son of <unk> , the son of <unk> , the son of <unk> <unk> , the son of the god Wōden . Wehha 's son Wuffa , after whom the Wuffingas dynasty is named , is also listed . 
 According to the 9th century History of the Britons , a man listed as Guillem Guercha was the first of his line to rule as king of the East Angles . The History of the Britons lists Guillem Guercha 's descendants and ancestors : ' Woden begat Casser , who begat Titinon , who begat Trigil , who begat Rodmunt , who begat Rippa , who begat Guillem Guercha , who was the first king of the East Angles ' . According to the 19th @-@ century historian Sir Francis Palgrave , Guercha was a distortion of Wuffa . D. P. Kirby is among those historians who have concluded from this information that Wuffa 's father was the founder of the Wuffingas line . 
 Despite the Wuffingas ' long list of ancestors — that stretch back to their pagan gods — their power in the region can only have been established in the middle third of the 6th century , if Wehha is taken as the dynastic founder . Martin Carver warns against using the scant material that exists to draw detailed inferences about the earliest Wuffingas kings . 
 The descendants of Wehha 
 See Wuffingas for a more complete family tree . 
 = = The name Wehha = = 
 The name Wehha has been linked as a hypocoristic ( shortened ) version of <unk> , the father of Wiglaf in the Anglo @-@ Saxon poem Beowulf , strengthening the evidence for a connection between the Wuffingas dynasty and a Swedish royal dynasty , the <unk> . It has also been suggested that Wehha is a regular hypocoristic form of Old English names beginning with <unk> ( o ) <unk> , for instance in the unattested name * <unk> . Lindqvist 's conjecture that Wehha is a hypocoristic form of the name Weohstan is linguistically not possible , according to O 'Loughlin , as Weohstan is a later West Saxon name . 
 O 'Loughlin notes that Wehha and his father Wilhelm can be linked with a person named <unk> and his father <unk> , who are listed in a genealogy found a manuscript of the laws of <unk> , a 7th @-@ century king of the Lombards . 
 Wehha may occur on a bronze pail excavated from the Chessell Down cemetery on the Isle of Wight , which possesses the runic inscription <unk> . 
 = = Reign and succession = = 
 Nothing is known of Wehha or of his rule , as no written records have survived from this period in East Anglian history . At an unknown date Wehha was succeeded by Wuffa , who was ruling the kingdom in 571 , according to the mediaeval chronicler Roger of Wendover . The date given by Roger of Wendover cannot be corroborated . 
 = Scorched Earth ( Law & Order : Special Victims Unit ) = 
 " Scorched Earth " is the thirteenth season premiere of the police procedural television series Law & Order : Special Victims Unit and the 273rd episode overall . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on September 21 , 2011 . In the episode , which was inspired by the Dominique Strauss @-@ Kahn sexual assault case , an Italian diplomat is arrested when a hotel maid accuses him of rape . The District Attorney 's office then brings the case to trial , which becomes increasingly complicated as the defense questions the maid 's credibility . Meanwhile , Detective Olivia Benson ( Mariska Hargitay ) struggles to cope with the aftermath of the squad room shooting . 
 The episode was written by David Matthews and was directed by Michael Slovis . It is the first episode to air since Christopher Meloni left the series as leading costar , and marks the first appearance of Kelli Giddish as Amanda Rollins , who was added to the main cast alongside Danny Pino in June 2011 following Meloni 's departure . The episode featured guest appearances from Franco Nero , Stephanie March , and Linus Roache , who reprised his role as Michael Cutter from Law & Order . " Scorched Earth " received mostly positive reviews , though the cast changes received mixed reactions . According to Nielsen ratings , the episode 's original broadcast was watched by 7 @.@ 63 million viewers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Hotel maid Miriam Deng ( Anika Noni Rose ) accuses an Italian diplomat , Roberto DiStasio ( Franco Nero ) , of raping her . While Detective Benson ( Mariska Hargitay ) interviews Deng at the hospital , Detective Amanda Rollins ( Kelli Giddish ) , who has recently transferred from the Atlanta Police Department , finds enough evidence of the assault in Mr. DiStasio 's hotel room . Sergeant Munch ( Richard Belzer ) and Detective Tutuola ( Ice @-@ T ) then race to the airport to arrest him before his plane departs for Italy . 
 DiStasio quickly hires lawyer Marvin Exley ( Ron Rifkin ) and claims diplomatic immunity . After Deng positively identifies DiStasio from the lineup , Tutuola and Benson take him to Dr. Warner 's ( Tamara <unk> ) office for a forensic exam . The results confirm that his DNA matches that recovered from the crime scene . Benson and Assistant District Attorney Alexandra Cabot ( Stephanie March ) then warn Deng that DiStasio 's defense team will claim in court that she fabricated the accusation for monetary reasons and ask her if she has been completely truthful ; she replies that she has been . Later , the police and prosecution learn of a tape recording of Deng in which she admits that she could get a lot of money from DiStasio for assaulting her , weakening her credibility . However , Deng does not retract her accusation and insists that she was raped by DiStasio . 
 During the trial , the defense presents evidence that Deng was convicted of prostitution two years ago . Deng denies the charge and says she had been gang @-@ raped by the soldiers who killed her husband . Deng 's credibility weakens further when the defense presents a surprise witness , Daniel <unk> , who testifies that he had advised her to fabricate the gang rape on her application for political asylum . The jury deadlocks on the rape charge , but finds DiStasio guilty of unlawful imprisonment , and Benson says that he will likely serve a year in prison . 
 Meanwhile , Benson anxiously awaits for the return of Detective Stabler ( Christopher Meloni ) , who was put on administrative leave after the squad room shooting . After noticing two detectives from the Internal Affairs Board in the squad room , Benson reminds Captain Donald Cragen ( Dann <unk> ) that the shooting was justified . However , Cragen tells Benson that Stabler will have to submit a psychiatric exam before he can return to work , having been involved in five prior shootings . At the end , Cragen informs her that Stabler has filed his retirement papers , leaving the NYPD for good . Stunned , Benson leaves for the interrogation room and breaks down in tears . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Scorched Earth " was written by David Matthews and was directed by Michael Slovis . It is the first episode produced under the direction of Warren Leight , who replaced Neal Baer as showrunner after the twelfth season . It is also the first episode of the series without leading costar Christopher Meloni , who left the cast in May 2011 after the negotiations for his new contract failed . In June 2011 , Kelli Giddish and Danny Pino were subsequently added to the cast as Detectives Amanda Rollins and Nick Amaro , respectively . While this episode marks the debut of Giddish 's character , Pino 's character is not introduced until the next episode . In August 2011 , it was announced that Linus Roache would reprise his role as Michael Cutter from the original Law & Order . 
 The episode was inspired by the Dominique Strauss @-@ Kahn arrest . Strauss @-@ Kahn , who was head of the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) and considered the front @-@ runner in the French presidential election , was accused of sexually assaulting a maid at a midtown Manhattan hotel in May 2011 . He pleaded not guilty to all charges , but quit his IMF post , and his presidential candidacy was sidetracked . Subsequently , the case against him weakened as prosecutors said his accuser admitted to lying to a grand jury about events surrounding the attack . Franco Nero portrays a Strauss @-@ Kahn like character , Roberto DiStasio , but he is an Italian dignitary . Ron Rifkin plays DiStasio 's defense attorney , who is similar to Strauss @-@ Kahn 's real life attorney , Benjamin Brafman . 
 New showrunner Warren Leight said of the incident 's inspiration for this episode , " In this case , I don 't believe we ripped from the headlines . I believe the actual story ripped us off . " While the real life case 's twists and turns made for tantalizing headline news , it wound up being " quite annoying , " Leight said . " We had to do rewrites . Everything we had in our initial draft had to be changed . " He joked that the story was so fast @-@ moving that they worried the final scenes would have to be shot live on the day the episode airs . However , he noted , " It 's still ' SVU ' , the shows are still emotionally driven and loaded . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original broadcast on September 21 , 2011 , " Scorched Earth " was watched by 7 @.@ 63 million viewers and acquired a 2 @.@ 4 rating / 6 % share in the 18 – 49 demographic , meaning that it was seen by 2 @.@ 4 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds and 6 % of 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This was a decrease in ratings compared to the season 12 premiere , which was watched by 9 @.@ 68 million viewers . Though Law & Order : Special Victims Unit came in third in its timeslot behind CSI : Crime Scene Investigation and Revenge , it was the most @-@ watched program on NBC that night . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Reviews of the plot were generally positive . Mike Hale of The New York Times described the episode as " taut , restrained and well acted " , as well as " interesting for its extremely close tracking of the Strauss @-@ Kahn case , " and felt that the verdict was " disappointing in dramatic terms but understandable . " <unk> gave the episode a 3 @.@ 5 / 5 rating , calling the episode " your typical SVU fare " , but felt that the episode was missing its typical argument between two of the detectives , as they " provided their own perspectives on the issue and they usually represent the division in the show 's audience 's members . " The site also felt that the crime was a little too current ; the episode 's original broadcast was only a month after the charges against Strauss @-@ Kahn were dismissed . 
 The cast changes were met with mixed reviews . Mike Hale felt that the departure of Christopher Meloni was a relief to the show , as his " tightly wound " character had a " wack @-@ a @-@ doodle intensity [ that ] had taken ' SVU ' way off track " , but still found it hard to imagine the show without him . He said that Meloni 's absence turned the episode " into the best showcase his partner , Olivia , had been given in years . " He called the addition of Michael Cutter was " a big gain " for the show , but felt uncertain about the addition of Detective Rollins , writing : " A scene in which she tried to sweet @-@ talk information out of a jailed suspect was the one really weak moment in the episode . " <unk> also had mixed feeling about Detective Rollins , who is supposed to breathe new life into the series , but wrote that Rollins may end up becoming an interesting character . 
 = Fighter ( song ) = 
 " Fighter " is a song recorded by American singer and songwriter Christina Aguilera for her fourth studio album , Stripped ( 2002 ) . The song was written by Aguilera and Scott Storch , and produced by the latter . It was released by RCA Records as the third single from Stripped on March 13 , 2003 . Inspired by Guns N ' Roses ' song " November Rain " , " Fighter " was characterized as a hybrid of rock and R & B that incorporates elements of arena rock and rock and roll . The track sees Aguilera thanking a man who had done wrong to her for making her a " fighter . " 
 " Fighter " received mostly positive reviews from music critics , who praised Aguilera 's vocals and the song 's empowering lyrics . The single peaked at number 20 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . As of September 2014 , " Fighter " has sold 1 @.@ 184 million copies in the United States . Elsewhere , the song reached the top ten of several national music charts , including those in the United Kingdom , Canada , Australia , and the Netherlands . 
 A music video for " Fighter " was directed by Floria Sigismondi . Aguilera performed the track on three of her major concert tours : Justified and Stripped Tour ( 2003 ) , The Stripped Tour ( 2003 ) , and Back to Basics Tour ( 2006 – 08 ) . " Fighter " has been covered by several artists , including Jordin Sparks and Darren Criss . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 In the book Chicken Soup for the Soul : The Story Behind the Song , Aguilera revealed the occasion , theme and meaning of " Fighter " . She talked about her " very chaotic and abusive " home , where she did not feel " safe " . In school , Aguilera was picked on and alienated because of her musical passion . However , it made her become " smarter and stronger " . To release herself , Aguilera started to write songs at the age of 15 , both music and lyrics ; and it was the way how she found her voice . The writing process of " Fighter " began during her promotion for her debut album in 1999 , when she was " a part of the big craze pop phenomenon " . According to Aguilera , her debut album helped her a lot to develop the process . She wanted to make an " emotionally rich and positive empowering " song , especially for women , in order for them to speak for themselves be strong . About the idea of the track , she revealed , " I was coming up with titles and ideas and deciding what I wanted to write about . I had to sit down and make sense of my feelings and experiences . I learned a lot from the first record that helped me to develop . I took the good and the bad and considered some of the choices I made and became better because of it . 
 Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine characterized " Fighter " as a hybrid of R & B and rock . Meanwhile , a reviewer of Billboard described the song as arena rock @-@ influenced , and AOL Music 's Nana @-@ <unk> <unk> noted the elements of rock and roll . However , Nick Levin from Digital Spy detailed " Fighter " as an arena rock piece . The song was inspired by band Guns N ' Roses ' song " November Rain " ( 1992 ) . Written in the key of E minor , " Fighter " has a moderate tempo of 96 beats per minute . Brian Hiatt from Entertainment Weekly and Chuck Taylor for Billboard likened the track 's musical style to that of Janet Jackson 's " Black Cat " . Aguilera 's vocals on the track span from the low @-@ note of G2 to the high @-@ note of F ♯ 5 ; Taylor labelled Aguilera 's vocals " tornado of a vocal . " 
 At the beginning of " Fighter " , the guitar sound was arranged in the chord progression of Em – G / D – D – C – Em / B – B – Am – C / G – G – B7 . Aguilera speaks the lyrics , " After all you put me through , you 'd think I 'd despise you / But in the end , I wanna thank you , ' cause you made me that much stronger " on the guitar theme by Dave Navarro . Lyrically , Aguilera wants to thank the man who did her wrong rather than insult him , because he helped make her stronger and work harder , thus making her a fighter . At the chorus , she sings , " ' Cause it makes me that much stronger / Makes me work a little bit harder / Makes me that much wiser / So thanks for making me a fighter " . The chords in the guitar part are E5 – F ♯ 5 – G5 – A5 – B5 − C5 – B5 – A5 – G5 – F ♯ 5 – E5 . She continues , " Made me learn a little bit faster / Made my skin a little bit thicker / Makes me that much smarter / So thanks for making me a fighter " . The lyrics of " Fighter " have been recognized as " empowering " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 David Brownie from Entertainment Weekly called it " <unk> than one would expect from a dance @-@ floor strumpet who loves to flaunt her lung power . " Chuck Taylor writing for Billboard complimented " Fighter " for demonstrating that Aguilera " [ has ] got the goods to rise above what so many lesser acts depend on for celebrity . " On behalf of the same publication , Andrew Unterberger wrote that " Fighter " and " Can 't Hold Us Down " are two tracks that helped " expand audience expectations of her image and sound . " Digital Spy 's Nick Levine named it a " strutting arena rock " song , while Nick Butler from Sputnikmusic simply called it " great . " The New York Times editor Kelefa Sanneh positively viewed the track 's theme as " fearless " and " full of mildly rebellious rhetoric . " On a less positive side , BBC Music 's Jacqueline Hodges called the song " hilarious " , while Jancee Dunn from Rolling Stone wrote that the song " is a sterile foray into rock . " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 In the United States , " Fighter " debuted at number 61 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart on April 12 , 2003 , becoming the week 's best @-@ debuting single . In the following week , it jumped to number 56 . On the issue dated April 26 , 2003 , the single charted at number 46 . In its fourth week charting , " Fighter " raised to number 38 . The single grew ten positions , charting at number 28 on May 10 . On May 17 , 2003 , it charted at number 22 . " Fighter " finally peaked at number 20 in its seventh week charting , becoming Aguilera 's ninth top @-@ twenty hit on the chart . On the Pop Songs chart , it peaked at number five . The single also peaked at number 28 on the Adult Pop Songs . On November 1 , 2003 , " Fighter " was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipping more than 500 @,@ 000 copies in the country . As of August 2014 , the single has sold 1 @,@ 184 @,@ 000 million digital units in the United States . On the Canadian Singles Chart , it peaked at number three . 
 Throughout Europe , " Fighter " also attained moderate success on charts , peaking within the top 15 in most of the countries where it charted . It reached number 11 in Belgium ( Flanders ) and Switzerland , number 12 in Norway and Sweden , number 13 in Germany , and number 15 in Denmark , Italy and Spain . In Hungary , it peaked at number 8 on the Mega Top 100 Singles . The single also reached the top five in the Netherlands . On the UK Singles Chart , " Fighter " was a commercial success , peaking at number three and remained there for 13 weeks , becoming the longest @-@ running single from Stripped on the chart . As of February 2013 , " Fighter " has sold 159 @,@ 000 copies in the United Kingdom . The single also garnered success in Australia and New Zealand , peaking at number five and 14 respectively in the two regions . Due to its chart success in Australia , the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) certified " Fighter " gold for its shipments of 35 @,@ 000 copies there . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Fighter " was directed by Floria Sigismondi , who revealed that it would display Aguilera " like I don 't think she 's been portrayed before " . The video was filmed in Los Angeles , California and was inspired by the director 's signature dark theatrics and the life circle of moths . Sigismondi explained the theme and plot of the clip to MTV News : 
 " The song is sort of about transformation , so I took that in a nature kind of way , the way nature deals with transformation . It 's basically about coming from a very poisoned place to an empowerment , a place of strength . I 've always had this fear of moths , and I subconsciously wrote this thing with these moths in it , so I guess I have to deal with it . They 're furry and they carry dust . I found out in old mythology they are supposed to represent the soul . I think that 's very appropriate " . 
 The video begins with Aguilera wearing a black velvet kimono , with a pale complexion and long black hair , refers to a larva . Three pins are lodged in her back , making her hunch . Initially , she is trapped in a glass box , and her kimono is billowing like a balloon . Three Gothic ballerinas eat fruit and then collapse . Aguilera then breaks free from the box by pounding on it until it breaks . She tosses aside her kimono after furiously removing the pins on her back and throwing them away . A tattered , white , moth @-@ covered dress is revealed , symbolizing her metaphoric evolution from the larva to a pupa . In addition , her hair becomes white , and moths fly around her . Near the end , Aguilera wears an Elvira @-@ type spider dress , again proclaiming that she is a " fighter " . 
 The music video for " Fighter " garnered numerous awards . At the 2003 Belgian TMF Awards , the clip won Best Video International . It garnered Aguilera and Sigismondi a Juno Award for Video of the Year at the 2004 ceremony , which was held at Rexall Place in Edmonton , Alberta , Canada . It also earned four MVPA Awards for Best Pop Video , Best Cinematography , Best Make @-@ Up and Best Styling in a Video in 2004 , held at Orpheum Theater in Los Angeles , California . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Aguilera performed " Fighter " on a number of shows . The singer performed the song for the first time at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards , held at Radio City Music Hall in New York City on August 28 , 2003 , in a medley with " Dirrty " . The performance featured Redman as a featured artist , and Dave Navarro as the guitarist . There , she also performed with Madonna , Britney Spears and Missy Elliott a medley of Madonna 's songs " Like a Virgin " and " Hollywood " , and Elliott 's " Work It " . " Fighter " was also performed on Aguilera and Justin Timberlake 's 2003 summer tour Justified and Stripped Tour , in order to support Stripped and Timberlake 's album Justified . In late 2003 , Aguilera performed the track during the tour 's extension , The Stripped Tour , which happened without Timberlake . The performance is included on her first full @-@ length DVD Stripped Live in the U.K. ( 2004 ) . On June 1 , 2007 , during the promotion of Back to Basics , Aguilera performed " Fighter " along with " Ain 't No Other Man " , " Hurt " and " Candyman " at the 2007 Muz @-@ TV Awards . Later , during her 2006 – 07 Back to Basics Tour , the track was performed as the last song in the encore . Barry Walters for Rolling Stone labelled the performance of " Fighter " " ended the show on a hard @-@ rocking high " . It is included on the video release Back to Basics : Live and Down Under ( 2008 ) . 
 On June 8 , 2010 , the singer sang the track with four other songs , " Bionic " , " Not Myself Tonight " , " Beautiful " and " You Lost Me " on The Today Show . Selected as the opener of the show , James Dinh for MTV News named it " aggressive " , while Erika Brooks Adickman for Idolator called the performance a " hot @-@ mess show wardrobe " . On June 11 , 2010 , Aguilera performed " Fighter " , " You Lost Me " , " Not Myself Tonight " along with a medley of " Genie in a Bottle " and " What a Girl Wants " on The Early Show . Later that year , on June 13 , she performed all of her biggest hits on VH1 Storytellers , including " Fighter " . Before performing the song , Aguilera revealed to the crowd , " When I was younger there were a lot of people , as I mentioned before , that were sort of around me for the wrong reasons . There 's always a positive to those negative times because throughout it you come out so much stronger and wiser " . During the Justin Timberlake & Friends benefit show – held by Justin Timberlake on October 24 , 2010 in Las Vegas , Nevada – Aguilera was invited to perform several of her hits , including " Beautiful " , " Fighter " and " Ain 't No Other Man " . On April 16 , 2012 , Aguilera performed " Fighter " again on the second season of US reality show The Voice , on which she is one of the judges and coaches , with her " Team Xtina " and Crenshaw High School choir . Jonathan Hofmann called the performance " insane and bizarre as it sounds " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Since its release , " Fighter " has been recognized as one of Aguilera 's most empowering songs for women due to its lyrics . It was also featured on several shows . On April 6 , 2003 , a 90 @-@ second music video featuring Aguilera preparing for a center court performance at the Staples Center in Los Angeles was premiered for National Basketball Association ( NBA ) ' s " Love It Live " promotional section . The clip also featured several NBA famous acts , including Michael Jordan , Kobe Bryant , Shaquille O 'Neal , and Yao Ming . " Fighter " was also included in the American reality show , The Biggest Loser , which aired by NBC . 
 " Fighter " has been covered on numerous occasions . On May 23 , 2007 , singer Jordin Sparks covered " Fighter " during the season finale of the sixth season of US singing contest American Idol , which made her the winner . On May 26 , 2010 , five female contestants of the ninth season of American Idol : Lacey Brown , Didi <unk> , Katie Stevens , Siobhan Magnus and Crystal <unk> performed a medley of Aguilera 's hits " Beautiful " and " Fighter " , where Aguilera also performed her 2010 single " You Lost Me " . " Fighter " was also covered by her team 's contestants on the second season of The Voice , where she is one of the coaches as well as one of the performers , on April 16 , 2012 . 
 During the second blind auditions of The Voice UK , which was aired on March 31 , 2012 , Denise Pearson ( credited as Denis Pearson ) covered " Fighter " . She was selected to Sir Tom Jones team as a result . American actor Darren Criss , portrayed as his fictional character Blaine Anderson , performed the song on the episode " Big Brother " of US popular TV show Glee , aired on April 10 , 2012 . The version peaked at number 58 on the Hot Digital Songs and at number 85 on the Canadian Hot 100 . Singer CeCe Frey , a participant of the second season of US show The X Factor , made a cover of the song . Sylvia Yacoub from Aguilera 's team on the third season of The Voice also recorded a version of the song . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from " Fighter " CD single liner notes 
 Studios 
 Recorded at The Enterprise Studios in Burbank , California 
 Recorded at Conway Studios in Hollywood , Los Angeles , California 
 Mixed at The Record Plant , Los Angeles , California 
 Mastered at Bernie Grundman Mastering 
 Personnel 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = SMS Rostock = 
 SMS Rostock was a light cruiser of the Karlsruhe class built by the German Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) . She had one sister ship , SMS Karlsruhe ; the ships were very similar to the previous Magdeburg @-@ class cruisers . The ship was laid down in 1911 , launched in November 1912 , and completed by February 1914 . Armed with twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 45 guns , Rostock had a top speed of 28 @.@ 5 knots ( 52 @.@ 8 km / h ; 32 @.@ 8 mph ) and displaced 6 @,@ 191 t ( 6 @,@ 093 long tons ; 6 @,@ 824 short tons ) at full load . 
 Rostock served with the High Seas Fleet as a leader of torpedo boat flotillas for the duration of her career . She served with the screens for both the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group during operations against the British coast and the Battle of Dogger Bank . She was assigned to the screen for the battle fleet during the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 . She saw major action at Jutland and frequently engaged British light forces , culminating in her being torpedoed by destroyers shortly after midnight . She was taken under tow by German torpedo boats , but the following morning the cruiser HMS Dublin came upon the retreating ships . The Germans set scuttling charges aboard Rostock and took off the crew before Dublin arrived on the scene . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Rostock was ordered under the contract name " Ersatz Geier " and was laid down at the Howaldtswerke shipyard in Kiel in 1911 . She was launched on 12 November 1912 ; at her launching , she was christened by the mayor of Rostock , Dr. Magnus <unk> . After completing Fitting @-@ out work , the ship was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 5 February 1914 . The ship was 142 @.@ 2 meters ( 467 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 13 @.@ 7 m ( 45 ft ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 38 m ( 17 @.@ 7 ft ) forward . She displaced 6 @,@ 191 t ( 6 @,@ 093 long tons ; 6 @,@ 824 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two sets of Marine steam turbines driving two 3 @.@ 5 @-@ meter ( 11 ft ) propellers . They were designed to give 26 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 19 @,@ 000 kW ) , but reached 43 @,@ 628 shp ( 32 @,@ 533 kW ) in service . These were powered by twelve coal @-@ fired Marine @-@ type water @-@ tube boilers and two oil @-@ fired double @-@ ended boilers . These gave the ship a top speed of 29 @.@ 3 knots ( 54 @.@ 3 km / h ; 33 @.@ 7 mph ) . Rostock carried 1 @,@ 300 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 300 long tons ) of coal , and an additional 200 tonnes ( 200 long tons ) of oil that gave her a range of approximately 5 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 9 @,@ 300 km ; 5 @,@ 800 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . Rostock had a crew of 18 officers and 355 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 45 guns in single pedestal mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , eight were located amidships , four on either side , and two were side by side aft . The guns had a maximum elevation of 30 degrees , which allowed them to engage targets out to 12 @,@ 700 m ( 41 @,@ 700 ft ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 800 rounds of ammunition , for 150 shells per gun . She was also equipped with a pair of 50 cm ( 19 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes submerged in the hull on the broadside . She could also carry 120 mines . The ship was protected by a waterline armored belt that was 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick amidships . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the deck was covered with up to 60 mm thick armor plate . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Following her commissioning in February 1914 , Rostock was assigned as a torpedo boat flotilla leader with the High Seas Fleet . On 24 January 1915 , Rostock formed part of the support for Admiral Franz von Hipper battlecruisers in the I Scouting Group during a sortie to destroy British light forces known to be operating near the Dogger Bank . The ship steamed with three other light cruisers and nineteen torpedo boats . Rostock and several of the torpedo boats were tasked with screening the port flank of the battlecruiser squadron . The German group encountered five British battlecruisers , resulting in the Battle of Dogger Bank , during which the armored cruiser Blücher was sunk . Rostock participated in the bombardment of Yarmouth and Lowestoft on 24 April 1916 , and as part of the screen for the I Scouting Group . While the battlecruisers bombarded Lowestoft , Rostock and five other cruisers engaged the Harwich Force . Shortly thereafter , the battlecruisers intervened and forced the Harwich Force to withdraw . The German squadron then broke off and returned to port . 
 Rostock also participated in the Battle of Jutland , on 31 May 1916 . She served as the leader of the torpedo boat flotillas , flying the flag of Kommodore Andreas Michelsen . The flotilla was tasked with screening for the battle squadrons of the High Seas Fleet . As the German fleet reached the engagement between the British and German battlecruiser squadrons at 17 : 30 , a pair of destroyers , HMS Nestor and Nicator attempted to attack the German battle line . Rostock and a number of the battleships engaged the destroyers , which were both disabled by the heavy German fire . The battleships destroyed Nestor and Nicator and their crews were picked up by German torpedo boats . 
 At 19 : 32 , Rostock and several torpedo boats crossed through the German line and began to lay a smoke screen to cover the withdrawal of the German fleet . Some twenty minutes later , Michelsen detached several torpedo boats to assist the badly damaged battlecruiser Lützow . By the time the German fleet had assumed its night cruising formation , Rostock fell in with the light cruisers of the IV Scouting Group on the port side of the fleet . Shortly before midnight , Rostock and the IV Scouting Group came into contact with the 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron . Shortly after midnight , the British 4th Destroyer Flotilla attacked the German line , where Rostock was positioned . She joined the cannonade directed against the destroyers as they pressed home their attack . The destroyers launched several torpedoes at the Germans , forcing Rostock and the other cruisers to turn away to avoid them ; this pointed the ships directly at the battleships in the I Battle Squadron . Rostock successfully passed through the formation , but the cruiser Elbing was rammed by one of the battleships and disabled . 
 In the chaos of the night engagement , Rostock 's search lights illuminated the destroyer Broke . Gunfire from Rostock and the battleships Westfalen and Rheinland smothered the British destroyer ; although heavily damaged , she managed to limp back to port . The ship was attacked by the destroyers Ambuscade and Contest ; the two ships each fired a single torpedo at high @-@ speed settings at a range of about 1 @,@ 000 yd ( 910 m ) . One torpedo struck Rostock at 1 : 30 , though it is unknown which destroyer launched it . Rostock was also hit by three 4 in ( 100 mm ) shells , probably from the destroyer Broke . The disabled Rostock called the destroyer S54 to join her ; S54 took Rostock in tow , at times making up to 10 kn ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . The pair was subsequently joined by the destroyers V71 and V73 , which had been detached from the flotilla to escort Rostock back to port . 
 At around 03 : 55 on 1 June , the four German ships encountered the British cruiser Dublin . The three destroyers went alongside the crippled cruiser and evacuated her crew , while flashing the first two letters of the British signal challenge . Smoke screens were laid to obscure the identity of the German warships . After about ten minutes , S54 departed with Rostock 's crew aboard , while V71 and V73 remained . Scuttling charges had been set in the cruiser , but to ensure Rostock sank faster , the two destroyers fired a total of three torpedoes into the ship . Rostock sank bow @-@ first at approximately 04 : 25 , after which V71 and V73 made for Horns Reef at high speed . Of Rostock 's crew , 14 men were killed and 6 were wounded during the battle . In the course of the battle , Rostock fired some 500 rounds of 10 @.@ 5 cm ammunition , more than any other German ship . A second Rostock , of the Cöln class , was launched in April 1918 , but was not completed before the end of the war . 
 = Batavian Republic = 
 The Batavian Republic ( Dutch : <unk> Republiek ; French : République <unk> ) was the successor of the Republic of the Seven United Netherlands . It was proclaimed on 19 January 1795 , and ended on 5 June 1806 , with the accession of Louis I to the throne of Holland . 
 In early 1795 , intervention by French revolutionary forces led to the downfall of the old Dutch Republic . The new Republic enjoyed widespread support from the Dutch population and was the product of a genuine popular revolution . Nevertheless , it clearly was founded with the armed support of the revolutionary French Republic . The Batavian Republic became a client state , the first of the " sister @-@ republics " and later part of the French Empire of Napoleon Bonaparte , and its politics were deeply influenced by the French who supported no fewer than three coups d 'état to bring the different political factions to power that France favored at different moments in its own political development . Nevertheless , the process of creating a written Dutch constitution was mainly driven by internal political factors , not by French influence , until Napoleon forced the Dutch government to accept his brother as monarch . 
 The political , economic and social reforms that were brought about during the relatively short duration of the Batavian Republic have had a lasting impact . The confederal structure of the old Dutch Republic was permanently replaced by a unitary state . For the first time in Dutch history , the constitution that was adopted in 1798 had a genuinely democratic character . For a while the Republic was governed democratically , although the coup d 'état of 1801 put an authoritarian regime in power , after another change in constitution . Nevertheless , the memory of this brief experiment with democracy helped smooth the transition to a more democratic government in 1848 ( the constitutional revision by Johan Rudolph <unk> , limiting the power of the king ) . A type of ministerial government was introduced for the first time in Dutch history and many of the current government departments date their history back to this period . 
 Though the Batavian Republic was a client state , its successive governments tried their best to maintain a modicum of independence and to serve Dutch interests even where those clashed with those of their French overseers . This perceived obduracy led to the eventual demise of the Republic when the short @-@ lived experiment with the ( again authoritarian ) regime of " Grand Pensionary " Rutger Jan Schimmelpenninck produced insufficient docility in the eyes of Napoleon . The new king , Louis Bonaparte ( Napoleon 's own brother ) , surprisingly did not slavishly follow French dictates either , leading to his downfall . 
 = = Background = = 
 The final days of the intermittent constitutional monarchy / republic , the Dutch Republic , which had governed the Netherlands since the late 16th century , were quite eventful . Due to the Fourth Anglo @-@ Dutch War fought at sea that went poorly and lost many of the plantation colonies of the Dutch , the Patriot party revolted against the authoritarian regime of stadtholder William V but were quickly struck down through the intervention of William 's brother @-@ in @-@ law Frederick William II of Prussia in June 1787 . Most Patriots went into exile in France , while Holland 's own " Ancien Régime " strengthened its grip on Dutch government chiefly through the Orangist Grand Pensionary Laurens Pieter van de Spiegel . 
 Only two years later , the French Revolution began , which embraced many of the political ideas that the Patriots had espoused in their own revolt . The Patriots enthusiastically supported the Revolution , and when the French revolutionary armies started to spread that revolution , the Patriots joined in , hoping to liberate their own country from its authoritarian yoke . The Stadtholder joined the ill @-@ fated First Coalition of countries in their attempt to subdue the suddenly anti @-@ Austrian French First Republic . 
 = = Creation of the Republic = = 
 This war also proceeded disastrously for the Stadtholder 's forces , and in the severe winter of 1794 / 95 a French army under general Charles Pichegru , with a Dutch contingent under general Herman Willem Daendels , crossed the great frozen rivers that traditionally protected the Netherlands from invasion . Aided by the fact that a substantial proportion of the Dutch population looked favorably upon the French incursion , and often considered it a liberation , the French were quickly able to break the resistance of the forces of the Stadtholder , and his Austrian and British allies . However , in many cities revolution broke out even before the French arrived and Revolutionary Committees took over the city governments , and ( provisionally ) the national government also . William was forced to flee to England on a fishing boat on January 18 , 1795 . 
 = = Stages in the history of the new Republic = = 
 Though the French presented themselves as liberators , they behaved like conquerors . After acrimonious negotiations between the representatives of the new Batavian Republic , a name that refers to the Germanic tribe of the Batavians that in Dutch nationalistic lore represented both its ancestry and its ancient quest for liberty , and those of the French Republic , a harsh Treaty of The Hague was concluded on May 16 , 1795 . Apart from imposing territorial concessions and a huge indemnity , this obligated the Dutch to maintain a French army of occupation of 25 @,@ 000 men . This changed the Dutch republic from a client state of England and Prussia into a French one ; henceforth it would conduct a foreign and military policy dictated by France , where its predecessor had followed British dictates since 1787 ( an offensive and defensive alliance of the two republics was part of the treaty ) , while its economic policies would in effect also be made subservient to the interests of France . However , this did not mean that it lost its independence in all respects . The program of reform that the Dutch revolutionaries attempted to put in place ( however constrained by the political realities of the French revolution as this was to progress ) was mostly driven by indigenous needs and aspirations . The political events in the Netherlands were mainly derived from Dutch initiative , with some notable exceptions . The French were responsible for at least one of the coups d 'état , and the French ambassador often acted as a proconsul . 
 = = = Revolutionary States @-@ General = = = 
 At first , the revolutionaries used the constitutional machinery of the old confederal republic . They resumed where they had left off after the purge in 1787 of Patriot regents , taking over the offices of the Orangist regents that were now purged in their turn . Though the political make @-@ up of the States @-@ General changed appreciably because of this change in personnel , it retained a number of defenders of the old particularist interests . The first order of business of the revolutionaries therefore was to strive for the reform of the confederal state , with its discrimination of the Generality Lands , and of particular minorities ( Catholics , Jews ) , in the direction of a unitary state , in which the minorities would be emancipated , and the old entrenched interests superseded by a more democratic political order . As a first step the representatives of Brabant were admitted to the States @-@ General . 
 However , a grass @-@ roots democratic movement began to form in the Summer of 1795 , consisting of popular societies ( clubs ) and <unk> ( precinct meetings ) , demanding popular influence on the government . A kind of parallel government in the form of " general assemblies " sprang up next to the city governments and the provincial States that repeatedly came into conflict with the established order . In the Fall of 1795 the States @-@ General started to work on a procedure to peacefully replace itself , " by constitutional means " , with a National Assembly that would possess full executive , legislative and constituent powers . This project at first met with sharp resistance from the conservatives . In some cases even force was used ( as in Friesland and Groningen ) to overcome this opposition . The new National Assembly convened in The Hague on March 1 , 1796 . 
 = = = Struggle for a Constitution = = = 
 Like the old revolutionary States @-@ General , the new National Assembly contained radically opposed parties : the unitary democrats , led by Pieter <unk> , Johan <unk> and Pieter Paulus , and the federalists , such as Jacob Abraham de Mist and Gerard Willem van Marle . But there was a broad continuum of opinion between these poles . In this force @-@ field the federalists held the upper hand after the sudden demise of Paulus ( who might otherwise have acted as a unifier ) . The conservative federalists were more adept at parliamentary manoeuvering ( Rutger Jan Schimmelpenninck proved himself especially adept at this ) . The frustration this engendered among the democrats led them to appeal to popular opinion and to extra @-@ parliamentary action . Meanwhile , the Assembly installed a constitutional commission that in November 1796 presented a report that amounted to a continuation of the old federal arrangements . As this was totally unacceptable to the unitarists , this draft was subsequently amended into its opposite , by a compromise that finally formed a basis for a new Constitution . The Assembly now started upon a discussion of other important matters , like the separation between church and state , and the emancipation of minorities . The organs of the state were to be a bicameral Legislative Corps , to be elected in indirect elections , and a Directoire @-@ like Executive of five members . The end result looked much like the French Constitution of 1795 . This was approved by the Assembly on May 10 , 1797 . 
 The draft @-@ Constitution was to be subjected to a referendum on August 8 , 1797 , after a very lively campaign in which the French ambassador Noël weighed in with a supportive appeal . This probably contributed to the resounding defeat of the proposal ( 108 @,@ 761 votes to 27 @,@ 995 ) . The Assembly was back at square one . At this moment in time foreign events in the form of the 18 Fructidor coup of general Pierre Augereau intervened . This brought the more radical faction to power in France , which proved to be ultimately less patient with the vagaries of the Dutch political process , and more prone to intervene . Elections for a second National Assembly returned one in which the balance of power had shifted to the unitarists in the Fall of 1797 . Nevertheless , the federalists managed to retain control of the new constitutional commission by a bare majority . This led to more <unk> and the unitarists in the Assembly now came with their own proposal in the form of the Declaration of 43 on December 12 , 1797 , containing a nine @-@ point manifesto concerning the minimum conditions to which the new constitution should conform . 
 Now the course of events started to speed up . The new French ambassador Charles @-@ François Delacroix took the side of the radicals . His behavior sufficiently intimidated the opponents of the radical proposals to actually fall in line . The coup that was to follow was therefore in reality superfluous . Nevertheless , the radicals , led by <unk> <unk> and Anthonie Willem <unk> , in cohorts with Pierre Auguste <unk> <unk> , the secretary of the French ambassador , now started to plot the coup d 'état of January 21 – 22 , 1798 , which , with the assistance of general Daendels , put the radicals in power . A rump assembly of about fifty radicals declared itself a <unk> , which in one fell swoop enacted the entire radical program , while the other members of the Assembly were forcibly detained . All provincial sovereignties were repealed ; the dissident members of the Assembly expelled ; an " interim Executive Directory " empowered ; and the constitutional commission reduced to seven radical members . 
 Though the resulting Constitution has sometimes been depicted as a pre @-@ digested French project , it was actually a result of the constitutional commission 's discussions between October 1797 and January 1798 . Except for the purge of the electoral rolls of " crypto @-@ <unk> " and other reactionaries , it might therefore have been acceptable for the moderates , obviating the need for the January coup . In any case , the " suggestions " of Delacroix were politely rejected and the constitutional commission insisted on the following three essential points : universal manhood suffrage , without fiscal qualifications ; the right of revision of the constitution at quinquennial intervals by the voters ; and finally the rejection of the principle of a bicameral legislature , in which each House would have a separate electoral base . 
 The new constitution addressed many of the reformist concerns of the Patriots since 1785 ( no hereditary offices ; no sinecures ; accountability of officials ) . It also came down on the side of economic liberalism ( as opposed to mercantilism ) in the economic debate then raging in republican circles ( and therefore promised to do away with guilds and internal impediments to trade ) . The old provincial @-@ repartition system of public finance was to be replaced by a system of national taxation . There was to be a five @-@ man Uitvoerend Bewind as a collective Executive , with eight national Agenten ( government ministers ) doing the actual Administration work ( Foreign Affairs , Police and Interior , Justice , Finance , War , Navy , National Education , and National Economy ) . Most importantly , as the British historian Simon Schama states : " [ i ] ts central aim was to change the nature of the Dutch state and to bind its new institutions into the framework of an electoral democracy . " As such it had an importance that outlasted the Batavian Republic and set up an ideal to emulate for its successor states . 
 Though the coup of January 22 , 1798 did not bode well for a genuinely democratic approval process for the new constitution ( and the French would have preferred going the " safe " way of approval by the rump assembly ) the plebiscite that started on March 17 ( in the usual form of elections in " primary " assemblies of about 100 @-@ 500 voters ) had a reasonably democratic quality . On April 23 , 1798 , the <unk> voor het <unk> Volk was approved with 153 @,@ 913 votes against 11 @,@ 587 ( i.e. just 641 more people voted for approval in 1798 than had voted for rejection of the previous draft in 1797 ; about 50 % of the electorate had voted . ) The new regime therefore seemed well @-@ grounded in the new doctrine of popular sovereignty . 
 = = = Uitvoerend Bewind = = = 
 Giddy with their success , the radicals now started to overstep their bounds . Their legitimacy was already tenuous , because of the way they had seized power . Now they also lost support in the rump @-@ Assembly because of their partisanship . Not wishing to repeat the mistakes of the French Jacobins they moved against the popular political clubs that formed their political base , thereby alienating their most enthusiastic supporters . On the other hand , at the behest of Delacroix they also moved against " counter @-@ revolutionaries " by having purging commissions removing these people from the electoral rolls , further undermining the legitimacy of the regime , as moderate Patriots were also disenfranchised . The final blow was that the new regime reneged on its promise to elect an entirely new Representative Assembly . 
 = = = = Coup d 'état of the moderates = = = = 
 Meanwhile , the 22 <unk> coup in France undermined Delacroix , because it inspired more sympathy by French foreign minister Talleyrand for the Dutch opposition members who demanded the ambassador 's recall . At the same time , Daendels became disaffected with the regime he had helped put into power because of the depredations of the purging commissions . His French colleague General Joubert was displeased with the radicals because of conflicts about the co @-@ dominion of Flushing . Finally , the newly appointed Agenten were disturbed about the inefficiency of the Uitvoerend Bewind . All these <unk> came together with the putsch on June , 12 , 1798 , of that recidivist , general Daendels , in which he disturbed a dinner party of Delacroix and three members of the Uitvoerend Bewind , violating the diplomatic immunity of the ambassador by putting pistols to his chest . The members of the Representative Assembly were arrested in session . 
 The fall of the <unk> @-@ <unk> Bewind opened the way for the actual implementation of the new constitution . The " Interim Directory " that now came to power ( consisting of a few of the dissenting Agenten ) made haste with organizing elections for the Representative Assembly that convened on July 31 . By the middle of August a new Uitvoerend Bewind had been appointed and the Agenten who had been behind the coup , resumed their original positions . This new regime now started to implement the policies that their radical predecessors had written into the constitution . The coup of June therefore was not a reactionary revolution , but only brought about a change in personnel . Soon most of the people that were arrested at both the January and June coups were released in the spirit of reconciliation that the new regime advocated . The make @-@ up of the Representative Assembly closely resembled that of the second National Assembly of 1797 . 
 The new regime was soon to discover that changes don 't easily come about by legislative fiat . The part of the constitution that worked adequately was the experiment with indirect democracy . During the period in which the constitution was in force , the system of primary assemblies that elected delegates who voted for the respective organs of government worked efficiently , and kept the voters engaged . However , exactly because the Republic was a genuine democracy , other goals of the regime were less easy to attain . The elections often put people into office that were very much opposed to the unitary state that was now enshrined in the constitution , and to other innovations that it entailed , or in any case were of a conservative inclination . 
 This already applied at the top : the constitution contained an age @-@ requirement for the members of the Uitvoerend Bewind , which favored the election of staid Patriot regents , and discriminated against the more talented " young Turks " that were appointed Agents , like Jacobus <unk> , Gerrit Jan Pijman and Isaac Jan Alexander Gogel . The tenor of the Bewind became more conservative in the ensuing years . The agents went to work energetically , however , and started with an onslaught on the old administrative organization of the country , in a deliberate attempt to liquidate the very identity of the old federal structure . The once mighty province of Holland was carved into three pieces : Amstel ( Amsterdam and immediate vicinity ) , Texel ( the northern peninsula ) and Delf ( the southern part ) ; and the other provinces were often merged in larger entities , like Overijssel and <unk> into Ouden <unk> , and Frisia and Groningen into the <unk> department . The aim was to organize the country into units with equal numbers of primary assemblies ( hence the small Amstel department with its large population ) . The first elections for the administrative organs of these new entities were held in March 1799 . But , of course , such a reorganization did not suddenly change the old allegiances of the people living in these areas . In any case , the new local and departmental administrations , though elected , were supposed to execute the policies as centrally laid down by the national government . As the elections often put people in power who represented the old order ( like Joan Arend de Vos van Steenwijk in Ouden <unk> ) this was exceedingly unlikely . To put it differently , the political effort to attain " national unity " through reconciliation of the diverse Patriot factions of all stripes , got in the way of the effort to create an efficient national unitary state , as envisioned by Gogel . 
 = = = = Public finance reform = = = = 
 The unitary state was not an end in itself , but a means to higher ends . The republic had been in dire financial straits even before the revolution of 1795 . The system of public finance that had been the envy of the world in its Golden Age , enabling it to throw far beyond its weight in world politics up to the Peace of Utrecht in 1713 , had become a millstone around its neck . By 1713 the public debt of the province of Holland had reached 310 million guilders ; the debt of the Generality was 68 million ; and the debts of the smaller provinces , and of the cities came on top of this . The debt service of Holland alone in that year required 14 million guilders , which exceeded its regular tax revenue . Most of this humongous public debt was held by Dutch private citizens , so in a sense it merely engendered an internal money circuit in the Dutch economy . However , it was mostly concentrated in the hands of the rentier class , while the debt was serviced by mainly regressive taxes that weighed on the working population . Most importantly , these were taxes levied by the individual provinces , who serviced their own debt , and paid into the Generality coffers according to a repartition schedule last changed in 1616 . Attempts to reform this structure during the 18th century were mainly fruitless . 
 To ameliorate the situation the old Republic maintained a policy of severe austerity during the century , especially economizing on its defense outlays ( which in large part explains why its military and political role declined so much ) . Up to the Fourth Anglo @-@ Dutch War this policy succeeded in bringing down the level of debt , but this war brought a large uptick in the public debt : between 1780 and 1794 the province of Holland alone issued 120 million guilders of new bonds . In 1795 , its total debt stood at 455 million guilders . To this should be added the debts of the United East India Company and its sister , the WIC , and the five Dutch Admiralties for a total of about 150 million guilders . The other provinces owed 155 million guilders . The grand total in 1795 , at the beginning of the Batavian Republic , came to 760 million guilders ; this imposed a debt service of 25 million guilders annually . The indemnity of the Treaty of The Hague immediately added 100 million guilders to this total , and the maintenance of the French army of occupation added about 12 million annually ( while the other funding requirements of the republic added another 20 million annually ) . In 1814 the public debt stood at 1 @.@ 7 billion guilders . 
 The average ordinary revenue of the republic at this time amounted to between 28 and 35 million guilders . However , since the outbreak of the war in 1793 the expenditure had been running at between 40 and 55 millions . For the year 1800 the republic had to find 78 million guilders for its expenditures . In other words , the new Agent of Finance , Gogel , was faced with a financial emergency . He needed to generate about 50 million guilders annually in ordinary revenue on a permanent basis urgently . Besides , as the Dutch tax system was heavily skewed toward highly regressive indirect taxes , which inordinately burdened the impoverished population , he wanted to change this to a system that depended more on direct ( income and wealth ) taxes . Finally , he wanted to do away with the provincial differentiation in the taxation , and construct a nationally standardized system . When he put these reform proposals to the Representative Assembly on September 30 , 1799 , they met with massive resistance . This led to so much delay in its acceptance that by the time it was to be implemented ( in 1801 ) the re @-@ federalisation of the state by the new Staatsbewind regime was already underway . Eventually , Gogel 's reforms were only implemented under the successor state of the Kingdom of Holland . 
 These are ( important ) examples of instances in which the good intentions of the Uitvoerend Bewind and its Agenten met with the political and economic realities of the times . Other necessary reforms ( the abolition of the guilds , the reform of the system of poor relief to mention but a few examples ) equally came to nothing . These defeats progressively led to disenchantment of the population with the regime , that already was in an awkward position because it was also brushed with the tar of the depredations of the French " sister republic " that mainly viewed the Batavian Republic as a milk cow , both collectively ( in its demands for loans at very low interest rates ) and individually ( in the demands of French officials for bribes and other extortions ) . 
 = = = = Anglo @-@ Russian invasion = = = = 
 The sagging popularity of the Republic did not escape the attention of the British intelligence services . However , because this intelligence was filtered through the eyes of Orangist agents in the Republic and émigrés in England , it was erroneously interpreted as possible support for an Orangist restoration . This caused the miscalculation that led to the ill @-@ fated Anglo @-@ Russian invasion in the peninsula of North Holland in 1799 . 
 Though the expedition ended in failure the members of the Uitvoerend Bewind became very nervous in the days before the Battle of Bergen . The Agent for Foreign Affairs , Van der Goes who had been in favor of distancing the Republic from the French , chose this inopportune moment to secretly approach the King of Prussia as a mediator , with a scheme in which the Hereditary Prince was to become a kind of constitutional monarch in a constitution on the model of the American Constitution . The Republic would revert to its traditional neutrality , while Britain would occupy North Holland , and France Zeeland . The overture was rejected , and it caused a lot of embarrassment in the relations with the French Directoire . At this time Napoleon Bonaparte performed his coup of 18 Brumaire , establishing the French Consulate . The Franco @-@ Batavian relations now entered a whole new era . 
 = = = Staatsbewind and the Peace of Amiens = = = 
 = = = = Pressure for constitutional reform = = = = 
 Though Napoleon had a warlike reputation , his policies in his first years as First Consul were aimed at restoring peace in Europe , be it at terms favorable to France . The animus of the members of the Second Coalition was mostly against the French Revolution , its ideas and its consequences . By this time Napoleon himself was convinced of their perfidy . Talleyrand and Napoleon therefore saw a possibility of a compromise , in which France would retain its chain of docile client states , but with the " revolutionary " sting removed , to appease the Allies . That <unk> docility was to be assured by constitutions designed to eliminate not only domestic conflict ( as was the new French political order ) , but also any flashes of impertinent nationalism . France therefore embarked on a program of constitutional reform in the dependent republics , first in the Helvetic Republic , where Napoleon as Mediator imposed the Constitution of Malmaison in 1801 ( followed by the Second Helvetic Constitution a year later ) , restoring the old confederal order . 
 A similar " solution " seemed appropriate for the Batavian Republic . The Batavian government , and its constitution , were particularly disliked by the Consul ( no friend of democracy in any case ) , because of the snub that Amsterdam bankers gave in 1800 to his request for a big loan at the usual generous rate of interest the French expected as a matter of right . He blamed the Uitvoerend Bewind for this , and many other foibles , like undermining the boycott of British goods . To remedy these ills , a new Batavian constitution on the political principles of the Consulate ( union , authority , political office for men of ability and social station ) was needed . The new French ambassador Charles Louis Huguet , marquis de Sémonville he sent to The Hague in 1799 was just the man for this job . 
 Meanwhile , even the minds of reformers like Gogel had become receptive to the need for change . The frustrations of the stalemate between <unk> reformers and democratically elected federalist <unk> had caused a certain disillusionment with democratic politics in the former ( the latter were already convinced ) . An alliance was therefore forming between the would @-@ be reformers , who would like to finally push their reforms through , by " Bonapartist " means , if necessary , and the people who wished to restore the old federal order , in the hands of the old regent class . Director <unk> in particular was amenable to a project that would extend executive power ( and curtail that of the Assembly ) , and revert the constitution to federal devolution . With the help of Sémonville he now started to push a project of constitutional reform that followed the French Constitution of the Year VIII in important respects : a bicameral legislature would be appointed by a " National College " ( akin to the French Senate ) from a list of names produced by a convoluted system of national elections . This met with little enthusiasm by two of the other Directors François <unk> and Jean Henri van Swinden , and by the Representative Assembly , that rejected the project on June 11 , 1801 , by fifty votes to twelve . 
 = = = = Augereau @-@ coup = = = = 
 The majority in the Uitvoerend Bewind ( Gerrit Pijman in particular ) therefore amended the project in a sense that gave re @-@ federalization even more emphasis . They unilaterally convened the primary assemblies by a proclamation on September 14 , 1801 , have a referendum on this new draft constitution . The Assembly defiantly ruled this proclamation illegal on September 18 . Then General Augereau ( he of the Fructidor @-@ coup ) , now commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the French forces in the Netherlands , routinely closed the doors of the Assembly ( by previous arrangement with Pijman ) on September 19 , and arrested the dissident Directors . Despite this military putsch the campaign for the plebiscite took place in an atmosphere of political freedom unthinkable in France . Nevertheless , this did not result in great enthusiasm for the new constitution . When the votes were counted on October 1 , out of 416 @,@ 619 voters only 16 @,@ 771 voted in favor and 52 @,@ 219 against . The Directors then used a sleight of hand that unfortunately would also become familiar in the Dutch constitutional politics of the successor states : they counted the 350 @,@ 000 abstentions as " tacit affirmations " . 
 Unlike the coup of June 1798 , the Augereau coup did present a sharp break with the recent past . The new constitution reduced the role of the legislative branch ( which now did not have the right of initiative ) , and expanded the powers of the Executive , which now became known as the Staatsbewind ( Regency of State ) . The elective principle was reduced to a formality : the Staatsbewind , originally consisting of the three directors taking part in the coup , expanded its membership by co @-@ optation to twelve . This executive then appointed the first 35 members of the legislature . As vacancies arose , these were filled , as far as possible , on a provincial rota and according to national quotas of representatives of each province ( much like the old States @-@ General ) . Except for Holland , the old provinces were reconstituted . The local and provincial administrative organs continued to be elected - no longer by universal manhood suffrage , but by a system of census suffrage . 
 Most important was the change in personnel of these organs , mostly as a consequence of this electoral change . The " democrats " were mostly replaced by Patriot regents , who had no patience with democracy , and by the old Orangist regents , who did not even have to disguise their allegiance as in early 1801 a convenient amnesty was proclaimed . One surprising example is Egbert <unk> Gerrold <unk> van <unk> <unk> , the Orangist burgomaster of Leeuwarden before 1795 , a notorious reactionary . To sum up : the coup represented a counter @-@ revolution . This became clear in the way the iconography of the 1795 revolution disappeared : the epigraph Vrijheid , Gelijkheid , <unk> ( Liberty , Equality , Fraternity ) which had adorned all official publications , was henceforth removed , and the last Liberty Trees were removed from the town squares . Soon the " good old days " of nepotism and venality were restored . Equally , though the abolition of the guilds formally remained , in practice regulation of crafts and trades was reimposed by local ordinances . 
 Officially , the Batavian Republic became the Batavian Commonwealth ( <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = = = = Peace negotiations = = = = 
 Against this background the negotiations for the Treaty of Amiens started in October 1801 . The minor participants in the negotiations between Great Britain and France ( the Batavian Republic and Spain ) were immediately presented with faits <unk> : the preliminary agreement ceded Ceylon , and guaranteed free English shipping to the Cape of Good Hope , without the Dutch even being consulted . The Dutch ambassador in France , Schimmelpenninck , who acted as the Dutch plenipotentiary , vainly protested that the Treaty of The Hague had guaranteed the Dutch colonies , and that France had promised not to make a separate peace . After this separate peace had been concluded , the British were left to negotiate with the minor French allies separately . This did not mean that the Dutch were completely left to their own devices : whenever French interests seemed to be in danger , France decisively intervened on its own behalf , as in the attempt to deduct the value of the Dutch fleet , surrendered in 1799 , that the British had purchased from the Stadtholder , from the indemnification of the Prince of Orange . 
 That indemnification was an important sideshow in the negotiations . The consequence of the Peace Treaty was that the Batavian Republic now received international recognition , even by the British government , and that the old Dutch Republic was now irreversibly dead . This put an end to all pretensions of the Stadtholder and his heirs , such as they were . It may be important to note that these pretensions were dubious to begin with . The Stadtholder was never the sovereign power in the Netherlands , despite understandable misconceptions by foreigners , who may have thought that a country needed a head of state , and the Stadtholder was it . Instead he was an officeholder , appointed by the provincial States , who also was captain @-@ general and admiral @-@ general of the Union ( there was originally no stadtholder on the confederal level ) . In the Orangist revolution of 1747 this office had been revamped to " <unk> @-@ <unk> " and made hereditary , and after the Prussian intervention of 1787 the powers of the Stadtholder had become dictatorial . But formally the States @-@ General had been sovereign since 1588 , and the Stadtholder was merely their " first servant . " The British may have entertained certain fantasies about his formal status , when it suited their purposes . An example would be the Kew Letters he was persuaded to write to the governors of the Dutch colonies in his capacity of captain @-@ general on February 7 , 1795 , ordering them to immediately surrender those colonies to the British " for preservation . " Another example would be their acceptance of the surrender of the Batavian fleet in the name of the Stadtholder in 1799 , as though he was a sovereign prince . But this was all make @-@ believe , and it ended with this Peace ( though it was conveniently revived in 1813 ) . 
 The Prince had reason to feel aggrieved by this . He did have large patrimonial estates in the Netherlands that now were forfeit . Besides , the loss of his hereditary offices entailed a loss of income . According to his own calculations the arrears in all these incomes since 1795 amounted to 4 million guilders . The Staatsbewind refused to pay this , or any sum , point blank , and the peace treaty specifically exempted the Dutch from paying anything . Instead , an arrangement between the French , British and Prussians ( the former stadtholder 's champions ) in the matter was reached that in return for dropping any and all claims William was to be compensated with the abbatial domains of Fulda and Corvey Abbey ( see also Principality of Nassau @-@ Orange @-@ Fulda ) . 
 = = = = Short interlude of peace = = = = 
 The Treaty " generously " restored most of the colonies that had been lost to the British since 1795 , except Ceylon , but including the Cape Colony . This now made the attempts in the Asiatic Council , which had replaced the Directorate of the VOC in 1799 , to reform the management of the colonies , more urgent . Dirk van Hogendorp was commissioned to write a proposal , that met with considerable enthusiasm from the more progressive elements on the council , like Samuel <unk> . <unk> . He proposed to abolish all perquisites and sinecures ; to permit private trade ; to permit native subjects to own private property ; to substitute the " land levies " by a regulated land tax ; and the abolition of all seigneurial rights in the colonies . This met with overwhelming resistance from vested interests . When a new Charter for the colonies was promulgated , Hogendorp 's proposals had been whittled down to insignificance The vestigial democrats on the Council were now purged in favor of Orangist reactionaries like Hendrik <unk> , and Hendrik Van <unk> . In any case , the Republic did not enjoy the possession of its colonies for long . After the resumption of hostilities in 1803 the returned colonies in most cases were soon reoccupied by the British . Java , however , held out till 1811 . 
 Another potentially important consequence of the peace might have been that a number of provisions of the Treaty of The Hague , that had been conditional on a peace , like the reduction of the French army of occupation , would now have become operational . However , the First Consul proved reluctant to reduce the numbers of French troops , or return the port of Flushing , for the good of the Dutch as he pointed out , as they needed many of their own troops in their restored colonies , so the " protection " of the French troops was considered necessary . On the other hand , the departure of the French troops was an indispensable point for the British as they could not allow the Netherlands to be dominated by a hostile power , and the Batavian Republic was incapable of defending its own neutrality . This was to be an insoluble dilemma in the coming years . 
 Real advantages of the peace came in the economic field . As an open economy , the Republic needed unhindered trade . It was heavily dependent on exports of agricultural products to the British markets , and on its services sector ( especially its large merchant fleet , and the banking sector ) , whereas its industry ( whatever remained of it after a century of being confronted by foreign protectionism ) also was dependent on exports . All these sectors had suffered enormously from the war : the British blockade and French and British privateering had almost brought marine trade to a standstill , whereas a commercial treaty with France ( which would have ended French discrimination of Dutch trade in industrial goods ) proved an ever @-@ receding fata <unk> . True , much of the trade had shifted to flags of convenience ( especially that of the U.S.A. and European neutrals like Prussia ) , but the peace made the resurgence of the Dutch carrying trade fully practicable . Nevertheless , some changes proved irreversible , like the shift of trade patterns to German ports , and the decline of the fisheries . 
 = = = = Invasion preparations and economic warfare = = = = 
 In any case , the peace turned out to be of short duration . On May 18 , 1803 , slightly more than a year after the peace , war resumed . Napoleon was now intent on the destruction of Great Britain by culminating in an ambitious planned invasion . The Batavian Republic was to play a major supporting role in this . As the Franco @-@ Batavian alliance 's embodiment , the Staatsbewind was forced to assent to a Convention bringing the total of French and Batavian forces in the Netherlands to 35 @,@ 000 . In addition , 9 @,@ 000 Batavian troops were earmarked for the proposed overseas expedition . Even more importantly , the Dutch were to supply , by December 1803 , five ships @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line , five frigates , 100 gun boats , and 250 flat @-@ bottomed transport craft , capable of holding 60 – 80 men . In total the Dutch were meant to provide transport for 25 @,@ 000 men and 2 @,@ 500 horses ; the major part of Napoleon 's invasion " armada " , and all at Dutch expense . It was all a fantasy on Napoleon 's part , but this did not diminish the real burden it imposed on the finances of the Republic , and on its economy . 
 Another real burden was the economic warfare that Napoleon launched against the British , and which was answered by a British counter @-@ boycott . This was to foreshadow the Continental System which was written into law in 1806 . However already in 1803 it started to somewhat choke off Dutch trade . Ostensibly , the Staatsbewind did its part by prohibiting the import of all enemy goods on July 5 , 1803 . Later it banned cheese exports and butter . These gestures were , however , of little practical effect : in 1804 the volume of general exports to Britain was nearly equal to that in the last year of peace : 1802 . British goods reached Dutch destinations via neutral German ports , or disguised as " American cargo . " The republic was therefore an important " keyhole into Europe " that undermined the economic sanctions against Britain . As the members of the Staatsbewind , and their friends , often profited from this clandestine trade directly , the patience of the French was wearing thin . Matters came to a head when the French commander in the Republic , Auguste de Marmont , ordered in November 1804 that French naval patrols and customs officials were to take over the responsibility for the surveillance of cargoes in Dutch ports , with powers of confiscation without reference to Dutch authorities . This was the last straw for the Staatsbewind . On November 23 , 1804 , they forbade any Batavian official to take orders from the French . 
 = = = Last Grand Pensionary and end of the Republic = = = 
 This act of defiance sealed the fate of yet another of the Batavian regimes . Napoleon had long been dissatisfied with what he viewed as the foot @-@ dragging and inefficiency of the Dutch . As a matter of fact , since the Spring of 1804 informal talks , mediated by Talleyrand , had been under way with the Batavian envoy in Paris , Schimmelpenninck , who had a good personal rapport with Napoleon ( by now emperor ) . Schimmelpenninck was a power in the Batavian Republic by himself . He had played an important role as the leader of the federalist opposition in the " revolutionary " States @-@ General of 1795 , and the first Assembly . Though an opponent of the radicals , he had politically survived the coups of 1798 , and served as ambassador to France , and as plenipotentiary to the Amiens negotiations . Now Napoleon saw him as the person to clean the <unk> stables of the Dutch client state . 
 Schimmelpenninck saw himself in the same light . He had long had a woolly vision of a " national conciliation " in the Netherlands , that made him amenable to a rapprochement with conservative and Orangist circles . These were to become his power base . Though Schimmelpenninck was a convinced federalist , he was a pliable character also . When Napoleon indicated that he preferred a centralized organization of the Dutch state ( as the re @-@ federalized model of the Staatsbewind had clearly not worked out ) , he did not hesitate to implement this in his project of a new constitution , that he constructed in the Summer of 1804 in consultation with the Staatsbewind . As a matter of fact , a delegation of the Staatsbewind , consisting of Schimmelpenninck , and members of the Regency Van der Goes ( the former Agent ) and Van <unk> ( a former Director ) , presented the case for this draft to Napoleon in November 1804 . When the clash about the French customs men therefore took place later in the month , Napoleon came to a speedy decision and soon thereafter the Batavian Republic had a new constitution and government . 
 On May 10 , 1805 , Schimmelpenninck was therefore inaugurated as <unk> ( Grand Pensionary ) of the Batavian Republic . This venerable title ( clearly chosen for sentimental reasons ) had little connection with the former office of the States of Holland ; as a matter of fact , the new office more resembled that of Stadtholder , though even William V , after 1787 , had not possessed the powers Schimmelpenninck was to wield . His was a one @-@ man Executive that would in no way be encumbered by the 19 man Legislative Corps , that had no powers apart from the Pensionary . The Pensionary conducted his business assisted by a Staatsraad , that resembled the French Conseil d 'État more than the old Raad van State , and by Secretaries of State , who resembled the Agenten of the Uitvoerend Bewind . Of course , such an important change in the constitution had to receive the imprimatur of the popular will . A plebiscite was duly organized which elicited 14 @,@ 903 Yes @-@ votes ( against 136 <unk> ) from an electorate of 353 @,@ 322 . The abstentions were counted as " tacit <unk> " in the now well @-@ established tradition . 
 Despite such <unk> reactionary trappings the Schimmelpenninck regime actually accomplished more in its short existence than the previous regimes had accomplished in the ten years since 1795 . This was , of course , mainly due to the diligent preparatory work that Agents like the ubiquitous Gogel ; Johannes Goldberg , for National Economy ; and Johannes van der Palm , for National Education ; had done . Gogel 's General Taxation Plan was finally enacted in June 1805 ; a first government @-@ approved attempt at unification of the Dutch spelling was made ; an embryonic Department of Agriculture and Department of Hydraulics were formed , to foreshadow the later government departments ; even a Pharmacopeia Batavia started the regulation of drugs ; and the School Law of 1806 organized a national system of public elementary education . Most importantly perhaps , the local @-@ government law of July 1805 founded the first Dutch system of public administration . 
 The French reaction to this flurry of reforms was mixed , however . The very zeal of the program might <unk> a renascent nationalism that could work against French interests . The debacle of the Battle of Trafalgar had made it clear that the projected invasion had to be scrapped . The Dutch now began to clamor for economies in the form of the return of the Boulogne flotilla , which annoyed Napoleon , because he still had a use for it . The man who had led that flotilla to Boulogne Carel Hendrik Ver Huell , was now Secretary for the Navy . He had also become a confidant of the emperor , and now engaged in a secret correspondence with Talleyrand and Napoleon . The latter had just concluded the Peace of Pressburg and was busy dividing up Europe in client @-@ kingdoms apportioned to his relatives . He saw a good candidate for such a position in the Netherlands in his brother Louis Bonaparte . 
 Ver Huell started scheming with his French patrons behind the back of Schimmelpenninck and feeding negative information about the Pensionary that found its way into the French press . Schimmelpenninck 's position was weakened by the fact that he was slowly going blind . The Dutch Secretaries of State and the Staatsraad could read the writing on the wall . They were faced with Hobson 's choice : either a complete extinguishing of the national identity in the form of annexation to the Empire , or the lesser evil of a new kingdom under one of Napoleon 's relatives . A Groot <unk> ( Grand Commission ) was formed to conduct the unequal negotiations with the Emperor . The latter , however , refused to speak with the Commission , and only communicated to them through the intermediary of Ver Huell . Talleyrand had meanwhile drafted a " Treaty " which contained the conditions under which the crown of " Holland " was to be offered to Louis : no union of the crowns ; no conscription ; a possible commercial treaty with France ; and the basic freedoms of the Netherlands ( linguistic , religious , judicial ) were to be maintained ; while the civil list was fixed at the " modest sum " of 1 @.@ 5 million guilders . The constitution of the Pensionary was actually to be maintained with a few minor alterations ( the title of <unk> changed to that of King ; and the size of the Staatsraad and the legislative corps nearly doubled ) . 
 The Commission was not allowed to refer back to The Hague . Schimmelpenninck made a last @-@ ditch attempt to have the treaty referred to a plebiscite , but he was ignored . He resigned on June 4 , 1806 . The next day in St. Cloud , after Napoleon had kept them waiting while he received the Turkish ambassador , the hapless commissioners presented their " petition " to Louis to accept the crown of " Holland " , which he graciously did , while Napoleon looked on approvingly . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Kingdom of Holland lasted only four years . Though Louis performed his role beyond all expectations , and did his best to defend the interests of his subjects , this was exactly the reason why Napoleon decided that the Netherlands could no longer be denied the blessings of being reunited with his Empire , though over the objections of Louis . Louis abdicated on July 2 , 1810 , in favor of his son Napoleon Louis Bonaparte , who reigned for ten days . Then the Netherlands were finally reunited with the origins of the " alluvial deposits of the French rivers , " of which the country in the view of Napoleon consists . This reunion did not outlast the effects of the disastrous French invasion of Russia , and the Battle of Leipzig . The Empire melted away , and the independent Netherlands took shape again with every city that the retreating French army of occupation evacuated in the course of 1813 . In the ensuing political vacuum a triumvirate of former Orangist regents , led by <unk> Karel van Hogendorp , invited the former Hereditary Prince ( the old Stadtholder had died in 1806 ) to assume power as " Sovereign Prince . " William VI of Orange landed in Scheveningen on November 30 , 1813 . He duly established control in the Netherlands and was offered the crown of the combined area of the former 17 provinces of the Netherlands ( modern Belgium and the Netherlands ) by the Allies in the secret London Protocol ( also known as the Eight Articles of London ) of June 21 , 1814 , which he accepted exactly one month later . On March 16 , 1815 , the United Kingdom of the Netherlands was proclaimed . 
 = = = Historiographical note = = = 
 According to the British historian Simon Schama the Batavian Republic has been controversially treated by historians . After the end of the Nazi occupation of the Netherlands during World War II there were some who saw a historical parallel between the Dutch National Socialist Movement ( NSB ) and the Patriot revolutionaries , while they pictured William V in the heroic role of Queen Wilhelmina and her government @-@ in @-@ exile . Dutch historian Pieter Geyl opposed such comparisons in his <unk> en <unk> : een historische parallel ( 1946 ) . 
 Still , by that time the Batavians had already had a bad press in Dutch history writing . This may be explained by the fact that the ages @-@ old ideological struggle between the <unk> oriented Orangist party and its successive opponents of a more " republican " bent ( going back to at least the conflict between Johan van <unk> and Prince Maurice ) , of which the Patriots were only the latest incarnation , was being <unk> in the standard works of 19th @-@ century Dutch historians like Guillaume Groen van <unk> , who saw plenty to despise in the " popular @-@ sovereignty " philosophy of the Patriot radicals . In his turn Groen was very influential on the way John Lothrop Motley depicted the old Dutch Republic for an American audience . Motley did not get to deal explicitly with the Batavian Republic , but the way his collaborator William Elliot Griffis dismissed the Patriots speaks for itself : " ... whether under the name of the ' Batavian Republic ' , the Kingdom of Holland , or the provinces of the French empire , the French occupation was virtually a French conquest that had little permanent influence on Dutch history or character . " 
 However most , if not all , characteristics of the current centralized state of the Kingdom of the Netherlands were foreshadowed by the accomplishments of the Batavian Republic , not least the liberal 1848 Constitution . That constitution restored the central tenets of the democratic <unk> of 1798 , under the guise of a Constitutional monarchy , as its author Johan Rudolf <unk> acknowledged . 
 = University of California , Santa Cruz = 
 The University of California , Santa Cruz ( also known as UC Santa Cruz or UCSC ) , is a public research university and one of 10 campuses in the University of California system . Located 75 miles ( 120 km ) south of San Francisco at the edge of the coastal community of Santa Cruz , the campus lies on 2 @,@ 001 acres ( 810 ha ) of rolling , forested hills overlooking the Pacific Ocean and Monterey Bay . 
 Founded in 1965 , UC Santa Cruz began as a showcase for progressive , cross @-@ disciplinary undergraduate education , innovative teaching methods and contemporary architecture . Since then , it has evolved into a modern research university with a wide variety of both undergraduate and graduate programs , while retaining its reputation for strong undergraduate support and student political activism . The residential college system , which consists of ten small colleges , is intended to combine the student support of a small college with the resources of a major university . 
 = = History = = 
 Although some of the original founders had already outlined plans for an institution like UCSC as early as the 1930s , the opportunity to realize their vision did not present itself until the City of Santa Cruz made a bid to the University of California Regents in the mid @-@ 1950s to build a campus just outside town , in the foothills of the Santa Cruz Mountains . The Santa Cruz site was selected over a competing proposal to build the campus closer to the population center of San Jose . Santa Cruz was selected for the beauty , rather than the practicality , of its location , however , and its remoteness led to the decision to develop a residential college system that would house most of the students on @-@ campus . The formal design process of the Santa Cruz campus began in the late 1950s , culminating in the Long Range Development Plan of 1963 . Construction had started by 1964 , and the university was able to accommodate its first students ( albeit living in trailers on what is now the East Field athletic area ) in 1965 . The campus was intended to be a showcase for contemporary architecture , progressive teaching methods , and undergraduate research . According to founding chancellor Dean McHenry , the purpose of the distributed college system was to combine the benefits of a major research university with the intimacy of a smaller college . UC President Clark Kerr shared a passion with former Stanford roommate McHenry to build a university modeled as " several <unk> " ( i.e. , small liberal arts colleges ) in close proximity to each other . Roads on campus were named after UC Regents who voted in favor of building the campus . 
 = = = Impact on Santa Cruz = = = 
 Although the city of Santa Cruz already exhibited a strong conservation ethic before the founding of the university , the coincidental rise of the counterculture of the 1960s with the university 's establishment fundamentally altered its subsequent development . Early student and faculty activism at UCSC pioneered an approach to environmentalism that greatly impacted the industrial development of the surrounding area . The lowering of the voting age to 18 in 1971 led to the emergence of a powerful student @-@ voting bloc . A large and growing population of politically liberal UCSC alumni changed the electorate of the town from predominantly Republican to markedly left @-@ leaning , consistently voting against expansion measures on the part of both town and gown . 
 = = = Expansion plans = = = 
 Plans for increasing enrollment to 19 @,@ 500 students and adding 1 @,@ 500 faculty and staff by 2020 , and the anticipated environmental impacts of such action , encountered opposition from the city , the local community , and the student body . City voters in 2006 passed two measures calling on UCSC to pay for the impacts of campus growth . A Santa Cruz Superior Court judge invalidated the measures , ruling they were improperly put on the ballot . In 2008 , the university , city , county and neighborhood organizations reached an agreement to set aside numerous lawsuits and allow the expansion to occur . UCSC agreed to local government scrutiny of its north campus expansion plans , to provide housing for 67 percent of the additional students on campus , and to pay municipal development and water fees . 
 George Blumenthal , UCSC 's 10th Chancellor , intends to mitigate growth constraints in Santa Cruz by developing off @-@ campus sites in Silicon Valley . The NASA Ames Research Center campus is planned to ultimately hold 2 @,@ 000 UCSC students – about 10 % of the entire university 's future student body as envisioned for 2020 . 
 In April 2010 , UC Santa Cruz opened its new $ 35 million Digital Arts Research Center ; a project in planning since 2004 . 
 = = Campus = = 
 The 2 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 810 ha ) UCSC campus is located 75 miles ( 121 km ) south of San Francisco , in the Ben Lomond Mountain ridge of the Santa Cruz Mountains . Elevation varies from 285 feet ( 87 m ) at the campus entrance to 1 @,@ 195 feet ( 364 m ) at the northern boundary , a difference of about 900 feet ( 270 m ) . The southern portion of the campus primarily consists of a large , open meadow , locally known as the Great Meadow . To the north of the meadow lie most of the campus ' buildings , many of them among redwood groves . The campus is bounded on the south by the city 's upper @-@ west @-@ side neighborhoods , on the east by Harvey West Park and the Pogonip open space preserve , on the north by Henry Cowell Redwoods State Park near the town of Felton , and on the west by Gray Whale Ranch , a portion of Wilder Ranch State Park . The campus is built on a portion of the Cowell Family ranch , which was purchased by the University of California in 1961 . The northern half of the campus property has remained in its undeveloped , forested state apart from fire roads and hiking and bicycle trails . The heavily forested area has allowed UC Santa Cruz to operate a recreational vehicle park as a form of student housing . 
 A number of shrines , dens and other student @-@ built curiosities are scattered around the northern campus . These structures , mostly assembled from branches and other forest detritus , were formerly concentrated in the area known as <unk> , a glen the university razed in 1992 to build colleges Nine and Ten . Students were able to relocate and save some of the structures , however . 
 Creeks traverse the UCSC campus within several ravines . Footbridges span those ravines on pedestrian paths linking various areas of campus . The footbridges make it possible to walk to any part of campus within 20 minutes in spite of the campus being built on a mountainside with varying elevations . At night , orange lights illuminate the occasionally fogged @-@ in paths . 
 There are a number of natural points of interest throughout the UCSC grounds . The " Porter Caves " are a popular site among students on the west side of campus . The entrance is located in the forest between the Porter College meadow and Empire Grade Road . The caves wind through a set of caverns , some of which are challenging , narrow passages . Tree Nine is another popular destination for students . A large Douglas fir spanning approximately 103 feet ( 31 m ) tall , Tree Nine is located in the upper campus of UCSC behind College Nine . The tree had been a popular climbing spot for many years but due to environmental corrosion and fear of student injuries , UC ground services sawed off the limbs to make it nearly impossible to climb . For specific directions , reference : directions to Tree Nine For the less experienced tree @-@ climber , students also frequent Sunset Tree located on the east side of the meadow behind the UCSC Music Center . 
 The UCSC campus is also one of the few homes to Mima Mounds in the United States . They are extremely rare in the United States and in the world in general . 
 = = Academics = = 
 The university offers 63 undergraduate majors and 35 minors , with graduate programs in 33 fields . Popular undergraduate majors include Art , Business Management Economics , Molecular and Cell Biology , and Psychology . Interdisciplinary programs , such as Feminist Studies , American Studies , Environmental Studies , Visual Studies , Digital Arts and New Media , and the unique History of Consciousness Department are also hosted alongside UCSC 's more traditional academic departments . 
 A new joint program , the first of its kind in the University of California system , enables UC Santa Cruz students to earn a bachelor 's degree and law degree in six years instead of the usual seven . The " 3 + 3 BA / JD " Program between UC Santa Cruz and UC Hastings College of the Law in San Francisco accepted its first applicants in fall 2014 . UCSC students who declare their intent in their freshman or early sophomore year will complete three years at UCSC and then move on to UC Hastings to begin the three @-@ year law curriculum . Credits from the first year of law school will count toward a student 's bachelor 's degree . Students who successfully complete the first @-@ year law course work will receive their bachelor 's degree and be able to graduate with their UCSC class , then continue at UC Hastings for the final two years of law study . 
 = = = Research = = = 
 According to the National Science Foundation , UC Santa Cruz spent $ 155 @.@ 5 million on research and development in 2012 , ranking it 120th in the nation . 
 Although designed as a liberal arts @-@ oriented university , UCSC quickly acquired a graduate @-@ level natural science research component with the appointment of plant physiologist Kenneth V. Thimann as the first provost of Crown College . Thimann developed UCSC 's early Division of Natural Sciences and recruited other well @-@ known science faculty and graduate students to the fledgling campus . Immediately upon its founding , UCSC was also granted administrative responsibility for the Lick Observatory , which established the campus as a major center for astronomy research . Founding members of the Social Science and Humanities faculty created the unique History of Consciousness graduate program in UCSC 's first year of operation . 
 Famous former UCSC faculty members include Judith Butler and Angela Davis . 
 UCSC 's organic farm and garden program is the oldest in the country , and pioneered organic horticulture techniques internationally . 
 As of 2015 , UCSC 's faculty include 13 members of the National Academy of Sciences , 24 fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences , and 33 fellows of the American Association for the Advancement of Science . The young Baskin School of Engineering , UCSC 's first professional school and home to the Expressive Intelligence Studio , and the Center for Biomolecular Science and Engineering are gaining recognition , as has the work that UCSC researchers David Haussler and Jim Kent have done on the Human Genome Project , including the widely used UCSC Genome Browser . UCSC administers the National Science Foundation 's Center for Adaptive Optics . 
 Off @-@ campus research facilities maintained by UCSC include the Lick and Keck Observatories and the Long Marine Laboratory . In September 2003 , a ten @-@ year task order contract valued at more than $ 330 million was awarded by NASA Ames Research Center to the University of California to establish and operate a University Affiliated Research System ( <unk> ) . UCSC manages the <unk> for the University of California . 
 = = = Rankings = = = 
 UC Santa Cruz was tied for 82nd in the list of Best National Universities in the United States by U.S. News & World Report 's 2016 rankings . In 2015 Kiplinger ranked UC Santa Cruz 63rd out of the top 100 best @-@ value public colleges and universities in the nation , and 7th in California . Money Magazine ranked UC Santa Cruz 114th in the country out of the nearly 1500 schools it evaluated for its 2015 Best Colleges ranking . The Daily Beast ranked UC Santa Cruz 157th in the country out of the nearly 2000 schools it evaluated for its 2013 Best Colleges ranking . In 2015 – 2016 , UC Santa Cruz was rated tied for 144th in the world by Times Higher Education World University Rankings . In 2015 it was ranked 93rd in the world by the Academic Ranking of World Universities and 269th worldwide in 2015 by the QS World University Rankings . 
 In 2009 , <unk> , an online database of research economics articles , ranked the UCSC Economics Department sixth in the world in the field of international finance . In 2007 , High Times magazine placed UCSC as first among US universities as a " counterculture college . " In 2009 , The Princeton Review ( with Gamepro magazine ) ranked UC Santa Cruz 's Game Design major among the top 50 in the country . In 2011 , The Princeton Review and Gamepro Media ranked UC Santa Cruz 's graduate programs in Game Design as seventh in the nation . In 2012 , UCSC was ranked No. 3 in the Most Beautiful Campus list of Princeton Review . 
 = = Residential colleges = = 
 The undergraduate program , with only the partial exception of those majors run through the university 's School of Engineering , is still based on the version of the " residential college system " outlined by Clark Kerr and Dean McHenry at the inception of their original plans for the campus ( see History , above ) . Upon admission , all undergraduate students have the opportunity to choose one of ten colleges , with which they usually stay affiliated for their entire undergraduate careers . There are cases where some students switch college affiliations as each college holds a different graduation ceremony . Almost all faculty members are affiliated with a college as well . The individual colleges provide housing and dining services , while the university as a whole offers courses and majors to the general student community . Other universities with similar college systems include Rice University and the University of California , San Diego . 
 Each of the colleges has its own , distinctive architectural style and a resident faculty provost , who is the nominal head of his or her college . An incoming first @-@ year student will take a mandatory " core course " within his or her respective college , with a curriculum and central theme unique to that college . College resident populations vary from about 750 to 1 @,@ 550 students , with roughly half of undergraduates living on campus within their college community or in smaller , intramural campus communities such as the International Living Center , the Trailer Park , and the Village . <unk> , academic majors and general areas of study are not limited by college membership , although colleges host the offices of many academic departments . Graduate students are not affiliated with a residential college , though a large portion of their offices , too , have historically tended to be based in the colleges . The ten colleges are , in order of establishment : 
 = = = Admissions = = = 
 For the fall 2015 term , UCSC offered admission to 23 @,@ 022 freshmen out of 44 @,@ 871 applicants , an acceptance rate of 51 @.@ 3 % . The entering freshman class had an average high school GPA of 3 @.@ 76 , and the middle 50 % range of SAT scores were 520 @-@ 640 for critical reading , 550 @-@ 670 for math , and 520 @-@ 640 for writing , while the ACT Composite range was 23 – 29 . 
 = = = Grading = = = 
 For most of its history , UCSC employed a unique student evaluation system . With the exception of the choice of letter grades in science courses the only grades assigned were " pass " and " no record " , supplemented with narrative evaluations . Beginning in 1997 , UCSC allowed students the option of selecting letter grade evaluations , but course grades were still optional until 2000 , when faculty voted to require students receive letter grades . Students were still given narrative evaluations to complement the letter grades . As of 2010 , the narrative evaluations were deemed an unnecessary expenditure . Still , some professors write evaluations for all students while some would write evaluations for specific students upon request . Students can still elect to receive a " pass / no pass " grade , but many academic programs limit or even forbid pass / no pass grading . A grade of C and above would receive a grade of " pass " . Overall , students may now earn no more than 25 % of their UCSC credits on a " pass / no pass " basis . Although the default grading option for almost all courses offered is now " graded " , most course grades are still accompanied by written evaluations . 
 = = Library = = 
 The McHenry Library houses UCSC 's arts and letters collection , with most of the scientific reading at the newer Science and Engineering Library . The McHenry Library was designed by John Carl Warnecke . In addition , the colleges host smaller libraries , which serve as quiet places to study . The McHenry Special Collections Library includes the archives of Robert A. Heinlein , the papers of Anaïs Nin , the papers and drawings of Beat poet Kenneth Patchen , the largest collection of Edward Weston photographs in the country , the mycology book collection of composer John Cage , a large collection of works by Satyajit Ray , the Hayden White collection of 16th @-@ century Italian printing , a photography collection with nearly half a million items , and the Mary Lea Shane Archive . The latter contains an extensive collection of photographs , letters , and other documents related to Lick Observatory dating back to 1870 . 
 A 82 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 7 @,@ 600 m2 ) new addition to the library opened on March 31 , 2008 , including a " cyber study " room and a Global Village café . The original 144 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 13 @,@ 400 m2 ) library reopened on June 22 , 2011 after seismic upgrades and other renovations . 
 = = = Grateful Dead archive = = = 
 In 2008 , UCSC agreed to house the Grateful Dead archives at the McHenry Library . Exhibits of Grateful Dead Archive materials are on display in the Brittingham Family Foundation 's Dead Central Gallery on the 2nd Floor of McHenry Library . The Dead Central exhibit space is open during all library business hours . UCSC plans to devote an entire room at the library , to be called " Dead Central , " to display the collection and encourage research . UCSC beat out petitions from Stanford and UC Berkeley to house the archives . Grateful Dead guitarist Bob Weir said that UCSC is " a seat of neo @-@ Bohemian culture that we 're a facet of . There could not have been a <unk> place for this collection to land . " Silicon Valley entrepreneurs and Dead fans Roger McNamee and Bill Watkins are expected to join a committee to oversee and raise funds for the project . The archive became open to the public July 29 , 2012 . 
 = = Student life = = 
 Though UCSC students come from throughout the United States and the world , most are from California . The following tables show the ethnic and regional breakdown of the student body : 
 UCSC students are known for political activism . In 2005 , a Pentagon surveillance program deemed student opposition to military recruiters on campus a " credible threat , " the only campus antiwar action to receive the designation . In February 2006 , Chancellor Denice Denton got the designation removed . Military recruiters declined to return to UCSC the following year , but returned in 2008 to a more low @-@ keyed student reception and protests using elements of guerrilla theatre , rather than vandalism or physical violence . Thanks to students passing a $ 3 quarterly tuition increase to support buying renewable energy in 2006 , UCSC is the sixth @-@ largest buyer of renewable energy among college campuses nationwide . 
 UC Santa Cruz is also well known for its cannabis culture . On April 20 , 2007 , approximately 2 @,@ 000 UCSC students gathered at Porter Meadow to celebrate the annual " 420 " . Students and others openly smoked marijuana while campus police stood by . The once student @-@ only event has grown since the city of Santa Cruz passed Measure K in 2006 , an ordinance making marijuana use a low @-@ priority crime for police . The 2007 event attracted a total of 5 @,@ 000 participants . The university does not condone the gathering , but has taken steps to regulate the event and ensure security for all participants . On April 20 , 2010 , the school administration shut down the west entrance to campus and limited the amount of buses that could drive through campus . 
 Another well known tradition is what is known as " First Rain " . Students run around campus naked or nearly naked to celebrate the school year 's first night of heavy rain . The run begins at Porter and proceeds to travel through all the other colleges , collecting more students in its train . 
 = = = Student government = = = 
 The Student Union Assembly was founded in 1985 to better coordinate bargaining positions between students and administration on campus @-@ wide issues . All the residential colleges and six ethnic and gender @-@ based organizations send delegates to SUA . There is a total of 138 recognized student groups as of 2008 . 
 = = = Student media = = = 
 All Student media organizations are funded by a student council referendum of $ 3 @.@ 20 per student per quarter . 
 City on a Hill Press , a weekly publication that serves as the traditional campus newspaper . 
 Fish Rap Live ! , the alternative , comedic paper . 
 <unk> , the Third World and Native American Student Press Collective publishes issues about every quarter for various communities of color at UCSC . Its peak years were during the 1970s , 1980s and 1990s . 
 Student Cable Television ( SCTV ) disbanded at the beginning of the 2010 academic school year . On The Spot ( OTS ) , replaced the defunct SCTV organization , continuing the student @-@ run television opportunities . On The Spot airs on channel 28 only on campus . 
 The Moxie Production Group , which produces content on a quarterly basis . 
 The Project , a quarterly paper , for UCSC 's radical community . 
 The <unk> Guide , published on sporadic years , introduces new students to UCSC 's radical history and various political issues that face the campus and community . 
 Rapt Magazine , a quarterly literary and arts magazine . 
 Leviathan Jewish Journal , a Jewish student life publication . 
 On The Spot , a student @-@ run broadcast media organization , that produces a variety of shows including Press Center Live ( Sketch @-@ Comedy ) , ART ( Music videos ) , and game shows . 
 Banana Slug News , a television broadcast news program . 
 Chinquapin , an open @-@ ended creative journal sponsored by the creative writing department . 
 Turnstile , a poetry journal . 
 " Gaia Magazine , " a magazine about environmental and sustainability subjects that is published once a year . 
 Red Wheelbarrow , a " literary arts " journal . 
 Matchbox Magazine , an annual humanities publication , started at UCSC , that operates across many UC campuses . 
 <unk> , an annual student @-@ run film journal associated with the Film and Digital Media department . 
 <unk> , the student @-@ run campus radio station . 
 Santa Cruz <unk> , a local activist resource with a lot of UCSC content . 
 The Film Production Coalition which produces films on a quarterly basis . 
 = = = Housing = = = 
 Most of the UCSC undergraduate housing is affiliated with one of the ten residential colleges . The residence halls , which include both shared and private rooms , typically house fifteen to twenty students per floor and have common bathrooms and lounge areas . Some halls have coed floors where men and women share bathroom facilities , others have separate bathroom facilities for men and women . Single @-@ gender , gender @-@ neutral and substance @-@ free floors are also available . 
 All of the colleges , except for Kresge , have both residence halls and apartments . Kresge is all apartments . Apartments are typically shared by four to eight students , have common living / dining rooms , kitchens and bathrooms , and a combination of shared and private bedrooms . Apartments at colleges other than Kresge are generally reserved for students above the freshman level . 
 In addition to the residential colleges , housing is available at the Village on the lower quarry , populated by continuing and transfer students ( in 2016 @-@ 17 , this will be restricted to only continuing students ) ; the Redwood Grove Apartments , which is available to continuing student applicants from all colleges ; and the University Town Center , located downtown , that serves both continuing and transfer students . The Transfer Community is located in sections of both the A and B Buildings at Porter College and over 500 residents live within this theme housing . Graduate Student Housing is available near Science Hill , and UCSC also offers Family Student Housing units as well as a Camper Park for student @-@ owned trailers and RVs . 
 = = = Greek life = = = 
 UCSC is home to few fraternities and sororities . The first Greek organization on campus , Theta Chi , was given colony status on January 10 , 1987 and chartered on October 14 , 1989 ( designation : Theta Iota ) . In the beginning , fraternities like Theta Chi and Sigma Alpha Epsilon were met with strong opposition from the student body . Student groups like P.A.C. ( People 's Alternative Community ) , <unk> ( Students Against Greek Environments ) , and M.A.C. ( Men 's Alternative Community ) protested the existence of Greek life at the UCSC campus . 
 In 2003 , the campus gained national notoriety when MTV 's reality show Fraternity Life documented the lives of students pledging Delta Omega Chi . During the shooting , a few of the students fished a 15 @-@ year @-@ old koi named Midas out of a pond at Porter College , barbecued it , and ate it . Since the incident was captured on video , the individuals involved were charged with misdemeanor grand theft and vandalism . 
 In 2016 , six students affiliated with the sorority alpha Kappa Delta Phi and the fraternity Lambda Phi Epsilon were arrested as part of a suspected Ecstasy drug ring when Homeland Security Investigations , the US Drug Enforcement Administration , the US Postal Inspection Service @-@ San Jose Team , and the Santa Cruz Police Department Neighborhood Enforcement Team found over $ 100 @,@ 000 in MDMA ( about 5 @,@ 000 tablets ) . 
 Greek life at UCSC includes fraternities Sigma Lambda Beta , Tau Kappa Epsilon , Sigma Pi , Lambda Phi Epsilon , Sigma Phi Zeta , Alpha Epsilon Pi , Pi Alpha Phi , and Delta Lambda Psi , the nation 's first gender neutral queer Greek organization . Sororities that are members of the National Panhellenic Council at the University of California , Santa Cruz include Gamma Phi Beta and Kappa Kappa Gamma . Recently in June 2016 the Theta Xi chapter of Kappa Alpha Theta was chartered to bring a third National sorority to UC Santa Cruz . Local sororities on campus include Delta Sigma Theta , Sigma Lambda Gamma , Sigma Alpha Epsilon Pi , alpha Kappa Delta Phi , Gamma Phi Beta , Kappa Kappa Gamma , Sigma Pi Alpha , Tri Chi , Sigma Omicron Pi , Kappa Zeta , and Alpha Psi . Lambda Theta Alpha , a Latina sorority which was established in fall 2012 . The most recent Greek lettered organization added to the campus was Zeta Phi Beta sorority , which chartered its chapter Gamma Phi as of Spring 2016 . 
 Aside from social fraternities and sororities on campus , there are also a number of professional organizations as well . There are Kappa Gamma Delta , a <unk> sorority , Sigma Mu Delta , a <unk> fraternity , Alpha Phi Omega , a coed service fraternity , Phi Alpha Delta , a pre @-@ law fraternity , and Delta Sigma Pi , a co @-@ ed professional business fraternity . 
 = = Sustainability = = 
 Though UCSC has been known for its conservation efforts and environmentally minded students since it was founded , since 2000 enthusiasm for the UCSC sustainability movement has grown steadily among students and administrators alike . Students established the Student Environmental Center ( SEC ) in 2001 , have held annual Earth Summits , and established a sustainability funding body , the Campus Sustainability Council . In 2004 , the UC Policy on Sustainable Practices was released , stating that the University of California Office of the President was committed to minimizing its impact on the environment and reducing its dependence on non @-@ renewable energy . This set the scene for huge breakthroughs in 2006 , when a Committee on Sustainability and Stewardship ( CSS ) was established and a campus @-@ wide Sustainability Assessment was completed . The following year , the pilot Sustainability Office was created to help institutionalize sustainability , coordinate communication and collaboration between the many entities already engaged in campus sustainability activities at UCSC , support policy implementation , and serve as a resource for the campus . Sustainability has become a major part of every aspect of the campus , and students , staff , and faculty campus @-@ wide are working toward sustainability in a variety of different ways . 
 = = = Organizations = = = 
 The following is a list of UCSC sustainability organizations , departments , gardens , and funding bodies on the UCSC campus : 
 = = Athletics = = 
 UCSC competes in Division III of the NCAA as an Independent member . There are fifteen varsity sports – men 's and women 's basketball , tennis , soccer , volleyball , swimming , cross country and diving , and women 's golf . UCSC teams have been Division III nationally ranked in tennis , soccer , men 's volleyball , and swimming . UCSC maintains a number of successful club sides . It has won multiple national championships in men 's tennis and a women 's Division II championship in club rugby . 
 In 2016 , due to a mounting debt in funding of the athletic program , the university polled its students on whether or not they would approve an increase in tuition which would be necessary to maintain the athletic program . There was a significant doubt that the students would approve this increase . Contrary to the predictions , a majority of the students approved a significant addition to their annual tuition to maintain the existence of the athletic program . 
 = = Notable alumni and faculty = = 
 Notable alumni of the University of California , Santa Cruz include co @-@ founder of the Black Panther Party Huey P. Newton ( BA 1974 , PhD 1980 ) ; actress and comedian Maya Rudolph ( BA 1995 ) ; founder of Huffington Post and BuzzFeed Jonah Peretti ( BA 1996 ) ; filmmaker Cary Fukunaga ( BA 1999 ) ; and several Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning journalists . Notable attendees include actor and comedian Andy Samberg filmmaker Miranda July and Glenn S. Lipson ( B.A. , Psychology 1981 ) ; forensic psychologist . 
 Notable UC Santa Cruz alumni include : 
 = Lexie Grey = 
 Alexandra Caroline " Lexie " Grey , M.D. is a fictional character from the medical drama television series Grey 's Anatomy , which airs on ABC in the United States . The character was created by series ' producer Shonda Rhimes and was portrayed by actress Chyler Leigh from the third through eighth seasons . She was introduced as a surgical intern in season three . Serving as Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) ' s half sister , she transferred to the fictional Seattle Grace Hospital , after her mother 's sudden death . Eventually named a surgical resident , the character was originally contracted to appear for a multi @-@ episode story arc , but received star billing in the fourth season . 
 The character 's focal storyline involved a romantic relationship with plastic surgeon Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) . She sustained life @-@ threatening injuries after an aviation accident , in the eighth season finale , which ultimately ended in her death . The character 's death resulted in mixed critical feedback and the reason given for the departure was Leigh 's desire to spend more time with her family . Rhimes has characterized Lexie as being a dork , as well as having issues with saying how she feels . Leigh has been moderately well received by critics , and was among the cast to receive a Screen Actors Guild Award nomination for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series in 2007 . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Lexie Grey is the daughter of Thatcher Grey ( Jeff Perry ) and his second wife , Susan Grey ( Mare Winningham ) . She grew up with her younger sister , Molly Grey @-@ Thompson ( Mandy Siegfried ) and through @-@ out her childhood was kept unaware that she also had an older half @-@ sister , Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) , born to Thatcher and his first wife , Ellis Grey ( Kate Burton ) . Lexie is first mentioned when Molly is admitted to Seattle Grace Hospital , with Susan informing Meredith that Lexie is a student at Harvard Medical School . At some subsequent point , Lexie learns of Meredith 's existence . She graduates from medical school and is accepted to take her surgical internship at Mass General hospital , but following her mother 's sudden death from complications stemming from the hiccups , Lexie instead opts to move back to Seattle to be closer to her father , taking up an internship at Seattle Grace Hospital , one year behind Meredith who is due to begin her residency . 
 = = = Season 4 = = = 
 The night before her internship begins , Lexie meets Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) at Joe 's Bar , mirroring his initial meeting with Meredith . The pair flirt , but Derek makes his excuses and leaves . On her arrival at the hospital , Lexie meets George O 'Malley ( T.R. Knight ) who quickly realizes her identity . Lexie promises to keep George 's secret that he is repeating his internship after failing his intern exam and the pair strike up a friendship . Lexie is assigned to be Cristina Yang 's ( Sandra Oh ) intern , and is dubbed " three " by Cristina , who doesn 't take the time to learn her name . Lexie is eager to get to know her half @-@ sister Meredith , but receives a hostile response when she introduces herself , and her later frequent attempts to bond with Meredith are similarly rebuffed . Lexie begins a brief sexual relationship with Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) , who discovers that Thatcher has descended into alcoholism following Susan 's death . When Meredith scolds Lexie for not looking after Thatcher , she finally retaliates and decides to stop pursuing a relationship with Meredith . Lexie bonds with patient Nick Hanscom ( Seth Green ) , and is present when his exposed artery blows , causing him to suffer massive blood loss . She manages to stop the bleeding , but is distraught when Nick later dies anyway . Feeling sympathy for Lexie , Cristina invites her to join her and Meredith in drinking and dancing , causing the sisters relationship to begin to thaw . The following morning , Meredith goes out of her way to make Lexie breakfast , which she politely eats despite an allergy to eggs , resulting in her having to be treated at the hospital . Lexie and George agree to move in together , but they can only afford a dilapidated apartment which Lexie attempts to improve by stealing decorations from the hospital . She begins to develop romantic feelings for George , and discovers that he had only failed his intern exam by one point , encouraging him to try and convince the Chief that he deserves a second chance . 
 = = = Season 5 = = = 
 Lexie continues to harness romantic feelings for George , oblivious to the fact that he doesn 't see her in the same way . She prioritizes helping George study over taking part in a surgery with Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) , but feels betrayed when George doesn 't request that she become one of his interns after passing his exam . Finally realizing that he doesn 't feel the same way , Lexie gives up on her feelings for George and the pair 's friendship begins to fizzle out . She later begins a flirtation with Mark , and the pair begin an unlikely romantic relationship , though they are forced to keep it a secret when Meredith and Derek warn Mark away from Lexie . Lexie discovers that some of her fellow interns have secretly been performing simple procedures on each other and begins taking part . Sadie Harris ( Melissa George ) joins the society , and seeking a more daring procedure , suggests removing her appendix . Though Lexie agrees , she quickly finds herself out of her depth , resulting in Meredith and Cristina having to intervene to save Sadie 's life . Lexie and the other interns are put on probation . Derek finds Lexie distraught at the day 's events , and allows her to move into the attic at his and Meredith 's house . Mark comes clean to Derek about his relationship with Lexie , resulting in the two men getting into a fist fight . The pair continue to feud , resulting in Lexie beginning to stress eat , though they eventually reconcile . Lexie is delighted when Meredith asks her to be a bridesmaid at her and Derek 's wedding , though they eventually give the ceremony to Alex and cancer @-@ stricken Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) . Mark decides to purchase a house and invites Lexie to move in with him , however she declines , concerned about how fast their relationship is progressing . 
 = = = Season 6 = = = 
 Lexie feels guilt following George 's death , having abandoned their friendship after he failed to reciprocate her romantic feelings towards him . Mark comforts her , and she eventually agrees to move into his new apartment with him . Thatcher is admitted into the hospital with liver failure stemming from his former alcoholism . When Lexie is found to not be a suitable transplant candidate , Meredith steps in and donates part of her liver , not to help Thatcher , but to spare Lexie the grief of losing her father . Mark and Lexie receive a shock when a girl named Sloan Riley shows up claiming to be Mark 's daughter , and her parentage is soon confirmed . Sloan announces her pregnancy and Mark quickly agrees to let her and the baby move in without consulting Lexie , resulting in her ending their relationship . She engages in a one @-@ night stand with Alex , but feels guilty the following day . She confesses to Mark who is furious with her , officially ending their relationship . Despite secretly suppressing her feelings for Mark , Lexie and Alex resume a casual relationship . Lexie takes part in a surgery on a patient named Alison Clark ( Caroline Williams ) and informs her husband Gary Clark ( Michael O 'Neill ) that it was a success . However , moments later Alison suffers a stroke and falls into a coma that she is deemed unlikely to wake from . As Alison had signed a DNR form , Lexie is forced to turn off the machine keeping her alive , despite Gary begging her to stop . After failing in an attempt to sue the hospital , a grief @-@ stricken Mr Clark later returns to the hospital with a gun , seeking revenge on Lexie , Derek and Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) . After witnessing Mr Clark shoot a nurse dead , Mark shields Lexie and the pair attempt to save a critically wounded Alex . Seeking supplies , Lexie heads out into the hospital and comes face to face with Mr Clark who attempts to shoot her , but she is saved by a SWAT team member who wounds Clark at the last moment allowing her to escape . Lexie and Mark proceed to save Alex 's life . After a showdown with Richard , Gary Clark eventually commits suicide , having killed eleven people and wounding another seven , as well as causing Meredith to suffer a miscarriage . 
 = = = Season 7 = = = 
 Lexie feels responsible for the shooting and is unable to cope with the guilt , eventually suffering from a breakdown . She is admitted to the hospital 's psychiatric facility and is sedated for over fifty hours , with Meredith remaining by her side through it all . Alex on the other hand is less sympathetic and breaks off his and Lexie 's fling . After both realizing that they continued to have feelings for each other , Lexie and Mark resume their relationship , but their brief happiness is ruined when Lexie discovers that during their breakup , Mark had impregnated his best friend Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) and she again ends their relationship . Eager to win Lexie back , Mark recruits his protégé Jackson Avery ( Jesse Williams ) to try to bring him back into Lexie 's favour , but his plan backfires when Jackson and Lexie develop romantic feelings for each other , resulting in them starting a relationship of their own . Mark is furious and tries to win Lexie back , but shortly after Callie is involved in a car accident and Lexie consoles Mark . The next episode , Lexie explains that she will go back to Mark if he continues to pursue her , despite her belief that they aren 't suited , he agrees to let her go , giving her and Jackson his blessing . 
 = = = Season 8 = = = 
 Although initially happy in her relationship with Jackson , Lexie is distraught when she learns that Mark has begun a relationship with a woman named Julia . At a charity softball match , her jealousy gets the better of her , resulting in her throwing a ball at Julia . Sensing that Lexie is still in love with Mark , Jackson calls off their relationship . Lexie begins working with Derek 's service and becomes increasingly proficient in neurosurgery , helping Derek with a set of " hopeless cases " - high risk surgeries for patients who had otherwise run out of options . During a surgery , Derek is called away on an emergency , leaving Lexie and Meredith to carry out the procedure on their own . Though Derek had instructed them to merely reduce the patient 's brain tumour , Meredith allows Lexie to remove it completely . The sisters celebrate the successful surgery , but when the patient wakes up , Lexie is devastated to discover that the patient suffered severe brain damage , losing the ability to speak . Alex , Jackson and April Kepner ( Sarah Drew ) move out of Meredith 's house without inviting Lexie to join them , and with Derek and Meredith settling down with baby Zola , Lexie begins to feel increasingly lonely and isolated . After being left babysitting Zola on Valentine 's Day , she decides to try to salvage her relationship with Mark . However , after plucking up the courage to visit his apartment , she finds Mark studying with Jackson and loses her nerve , instead claiming that she was visiting to set up a play date for Zola and Sofia . When Mark confides in Derek that he and Julia have been discussing having a baby , Derek warns Lexie not to miss her chance again , resulting in her professing her love to a shell @-@ shocked Mark , who merely thanks her for her candour . He later confesses to Derek that he feels the same way , but is unsure about how to go about things . Days later , Lexie is named as part of a team of surgeons that will be sent to Boise to separate conjoined twins , along with Mark , Meredith , Derek , Cristina and Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ) ; however , while flying to their destination , the doctors ' plane crashes in the wilderness . Lexie is crushed under debris from the plane , but manages to alert Mark and Cristina to help her . The pair try in vain to free Lexie , who realises that she is suffering from a hemothorax and is unlikely to survive . While Cristina tries to find Meredith , Mark takes Lexie by the hand and professes his love for her , telling her that they were " meant to be " . While fantasizing about the future that she and Mark could have had together , Lexie succumbs to her injuries , and dies moments before Meredith arrives . The remaining doctors are left in the woods waiting for rescue , with Mark refusing to let go of Lexie 's hand . 
 = = = Season 9 onwards = = = 
 The remaining surgeons are rescued from the woods days later , and Lexie 's body is returned to Seattle . Weeks later , a traumatized Cristina reminisces to Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) about her time in the woods , telling him that she had fought with wild animals to keep them away from Lexie 's body . Weeks after the crash , Meredith comes across a young girl presenting with injuries identical to Lexie 's , and tirelessly works to save the girls life , with the experience eventually causing her to come to terms with her sister 's death . Despite making it home from the woods , Mark later died from the injuries he sustained in the crash . When the survivors of the plane crash pool their compensation money to purchase the hospital , they agree to rename the hospital to " Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital " in tribute of Lexie and Mark . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Casting and creation = = = 
 Leigh first appeared on the show during the last two episodes of the third season as Meredith 's half @-@ sister , Lexie Grey . Following Isaiah Washington 's departure , who portrayed Preston Burke , it was reported that show 's executives were planning on adding new cast members , such as Lexie . She was officially upgraded to a series ' regular on July 11 , 2007 , for the fourth season . On casting Chyler Leigh as Lexie , Grey 's Anatomy creator Shonda Rhimes said : " We met with a lot of young actresses , but Chyler stood out — she had a quality that felt right and real to me . It felt like she could be Meredith 's sister , but she had a depth that was very interesting . " 
 In September 2011 , Leigh requested an extended summer hiatus , in order to spend more time with her family . This was granted by Rhimes , though the actress returned in mid @-@ October . Leigh 's character died in the eighth season finale . In May 2012 , Rhimes revealed why she decided to have Lexie die : " I love Chyler and I love the character of Lexie Grey . She was an important member of my Grey 's family . This was not an easy decision . But it was a decision that Chyler and I came to together . We had a lot of thoughtful discussion about it and ultimately we both decided this was the right time for her character 's journey to end . As far as I 'm concerned , Chyler will always remain a part of the Shondaland family and I can 't wait to work with her again in the future . " Following the death of her character , Leigh released a statement saying : 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 Leigh 's character has been called " reliable , trustworthy , timid , and apprehensive " by Grey 's Anatomy executives . In her early appearances , it was learned that Lexie has a photographic memory , which she applied to her surgical career . This led her to being nicknamed " <unk> " by Alex Karev . The character has also been described as an " innocent young intern " by Alex Keen of The Trades . 
 Of the character , Leigh said : " She 's a very vulnerable person from a very healthy background — she knows how to make good relationships but at this point [ season four ] , she 's coming into so much opposition she 's trying to adjust to it . " Debbie Chang of BuddyTV commented on Lexie 's early characterization , including her sexual relationship with Karev : 
 Similarities have been established between Lexie and Meredith . Series writer , Stacy McKee , commented on this : 
 " Lexie ’ s struggling to be hardcore herself . I don ’ t know if I ’ d go so far as to say , perhaps , this kind of struggle must run in the family , but … Okay . Fine . It must run in the family – because Lexie , though she ’ s very different from Meredith in many many ways , in this one way – they seem to be exactly alike . Meredith and Lexie both want to succeed . They want to be strong . They want to feel normal . They want , so much , to be whole . But it ’ s a struggle – a genuine struggle for them . Being hardcore doesn ’ t come naturally . Sometimes , they have to fake it . " 
 Lexie entertained several relationships throughout her time on Grey 's Anatomy . In her early appearances , she maintained a friendship with George O 'Malley , until developing romantic feelings towards him . Rhimes offered the insight : " I love them as friends . They make good friends . We all have that friend we met in school or the gym or somewhere – we just hit it off right away . And right away there was no pretense or airs . Just pure honesty . That ’ s Lexie and George . They ’ re really good friends and I can see the friendship evolving into something even greater . At least , that ’ s what Lexie is hoping . She is my kind of girl . The girl who likes the guy because he is a GOOD guy and that ’ s what George is . He is a good guy and that ’ s something that Lexie could use now . She ’ s going through her own challenges what with Meredith and losing her own mother and trying to keep things afloat . I ’ m rooting for Lexie . She ’ s my kind of girl and I hope that she gets what she deserves : love . And more kisses . There should always be that . " Lexie 's most significant relationship was with Mark Sloan . Following her death , Rhimes said : 
 = = Reception = = 
 Leigh has received mixed feedback for her role as Lexie Grey . People , less than impressed , criticized the way Leigh 's character initially approached her sister , calling it " rude " . Jennifer Armstrong of Entertainment Weekly was also critical of Leigh 's early appearances , referring to her as " awkward " . However , Armstrong later noted that the " sparkling " friendship development between Lexie and O 'Malley " won her over " . The character 's transition from season four to five was positively reviewed , with Keen of The Trades writing : " Her presence and confidence have increased quite a bit since last season , and actress , Chyler Leigh , does a fantastic job of making this progression feel seamless . Since the series has defused the tension between Little Grey and Big Grey ( aka Meredith ) , Lexie has clear sailing through the season and steals the show as one of the best current characters on the series . " 
 Lexie was strongly criticized by Laura Burrows from IGN , being called " awful " . Burrows also wrote : " Everything she says and does is obnoxious and does harm to someone . Lexie is an idiot and should be shot or drowned or exploded . " The character 's relationship with Sloan has been well received , with Chris Monfette of IGN writing : " Sloan 's honest relationship with Lexie helped to make both characters infinitely more interesting and mature . " Leigh served as a primary vocalist in " Song Beneath the Song " , the Grey 's Anatomy music event , and was well received , with the Boston Herald 's Mark Perigard praising her performance . The character was listed in Wetpaint 's " 10 Hottest Female Doctors on TV " . In 2007 , at the 14th Screen Actors Guild Awards , Leigh and the rest of the cast of Grey 's Anatomy , received a nomination for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series . 
 = 7 World Trade Center = 
 7 World Trade Center refers to two buildings that have existed at the same location in the World Trade Center site in Lower Manhattan , New York City . The current structure is the second building to bear that name and address in the World Trade Center . The original structure , part of the old World Trade Center , was completed in 1987 and was destroyed in the September 11 attacks . The current building opened in 2006 . Both buildings were developed by Larry Silverstein , who holds a ground lease for the site from the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey . 
 The original 7 World Trade Center was 47 stories tall , clad in red exterior masonry , and occupied a trapezoidal footprint . An elevated walkway connected the building to the World Trade Center plaza . The building was situated above a Consolidated Edison power substation , which imposed unique structural design constraints . When the building opened in 1987 , Silverstein had difficulties attracting tenants . In 1988 , Salomon Brothers signed a long @-@ term lease , and became the main tenants of the building . On September 11 , 2001 , 7 WTC was damaged by debris when the nearby North Tower of the World Trade Center collapsed . The debris also ignited fires , which continued to burn throughout the afternoon on lower floors of the building . The building 's internal fire suppression system lacked water pressure to fight the fires , and the building collapsed completely at 5 : 21 : 10 pm , according to FEMA , while the 2008 NIST study placed the final collapse time at 5 : 20 : 52 pm . The collapse began when a critical internal column buckled and triggered structural failure throughout , which was first visible from the exterior with the crumbling of a rooftop penthouse structure at 5 : 20 : 33 pm . The collapse made the old 7 World Trade Center the first tall building known to have collapsed primarily due to uncontrolled fires , and the only steel skyscraper in the world to have collapsed due to fire . 
 Construction of the new 7 World Trade Center began in 2002 and was completed in 2006 . The building is 52 stories tall ( plus one underground floor ) , making it the 28th @-@ tallest in New York . It is built on a smaller footprint than the original , allowing Greenwich Street to be restored from Tribeca through the World Trade Center site and south to Battery Park . The new building is bounded by Greenwich , Vesey , Washington , and Barclay streets . A small park across Greenwich Street occupies space that was part of the original building 's footprint . The current building 's design emphasizes safety , with a reinforced concrete core , wider stairways , and thicker fireproofing of steel columns . It also incorporates numerous green design features . The building was the first commercial office building in New York City to receive the U.S. Green Building Council 's Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design ( LEED ) certification , where it won a gold rating . It was also one of the first projects accepted to be part of the Council 's pilot program for Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design – Core and Shell Development ( LEED @-@ CS ) . 
 = = Original building ( 1983 – 2001 ) = = 
 = = = Design and layout = = = 
 The original 7 World Trade Center was a 47 @-@ story building , designed by Emery Roth & Sons , with a red granite facade . The building was 610 feet ( 190 m ) tall , with a trapezoidal footprint that was 330 ft ( 100 m ) long and 140 ft ( 43 m ) wide . Tishman Realty & Construction managed construction of the building , which began in 1983 . In May 1987 , the building opened , becoming the seventh structure of the World Trade Center . 
 The building was constructed above a Con Edison substation that had been on the site since 1967 . The substation had a caisson foundation designed to carry the weight of a future building of 25 stories containing 600 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 56 @,@ 000 m2 ) . The final design for 7 World Trade Center was for a much larger building than originally planned when the substation was built . The structural design of 7 World Trade Center therefore included a system of gravity column transfer trusses and girders , located between floors 5 and 7 , to transfer loads to the smaller foundation . Existing caissons installed in 1967 were used , along with new ones , to accommodate the building . The 5th floor functioned as a structural diaphragm , providing lateral stability and distribution of loads between the new and old caissons . Above the 7th floor , the building 's structure was a typical tube @-@ frame design , with columns in the core and on the perimeter , and lateral loads resisted by perimeter moment frames . 
 A shipping and receiving ramp , which served the entire World Trade Center complex , occupied the eastern quarter of the 7 World Trade Center footprint . The building was open below the 3rd floor , providing space for truck clearance on the shipping ramp . The spray @-@ on fireproofing for structural steel elements was gypsum @-@ based <unk> which had a two @-@ hour fire rating for steel beams , girders and trusses , and a three @-@ hour rating for columns . 
 Mechanical equipment was installed on floors four through seven , including 12 transformers on the 5th floor . Several emergency generators installed in the building were used by the Office of Emergency Management , Salomon Smith Barney , and other tenants . In order to supply the generators , 24 @,@ 000 gallons ( 91 @,@ 000 L ) of diesel fuel were stored below ground level . Diesel fuel distribution components were located at ground level , up to the ninth floor . After the World Trade Center bombings of February 26 , 1993 , New York City mayor Rudy Giuliani decided to situate the emergency command center and associated fuel tanks at 7 World Trade Center . Although this decision was criticized in light of the events of 9 / 11 , the fuel in the building is today not believed to have contributed to the collapse of the building . The roof of the building included a small west penthouse and a larger east mechanical penthouse . 
 Each floor had 47 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 4 @,@ 400 m2 ) of rentable office space which made the building 's floor plans considerably larger than most office buildings in the City . In all , 7 World Trade Center had 1 @,@ 868 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 173 @,@ 500 m2 ) of office space . Two pedestrian bridges connected the main World Trade Center complex , across Vesey Street , to the third floor of 7 World Trade Center . The lobby of 7 World Trade Center had three murals by artist Al Held : The Third Circle , Pan North XII , and <unk> VII . 
 = = = Tenants = = = 
 In June 1986 , before construction was completed , Silverstein signed Drexel Burnham Lambert as a tenant to lease the entire 7 World Trade Center building for $ 3 billion over a term of 30 years . In December 1986 , after the Boesky insider @-@ trading scandal , Drexel Burnham Lambert canceled the lease , leaving Silverstein to find other tenants . Spicer & Oppenheim agreed to lease 14 percent of the space , but for more than a year , as Black Monday and other factors adversely affected the Lower Manhattan real estate market , Silverstein was unable to find tenants for the remaining space . By April 1988 , Silverstein had lowered the rent and made other concessions . 
 In November 1988 , Salomon Brothers withdrew from plans to build a large new complex at Columbus Circle in Midtown and agreed to a 20 @-@ year lease for the top 19 floors of 7 World Trade Center . The building was extensively renovated in 1989 to accommodate the needs of Salomon Brothers . This led to the alternative naming of the building as the Salomon Brothers building . Most of three existing floors were removed as tenants continued to occupy other floors , and more than 350 tons ( U.S. ) of steel were added to construct three double @-@ height trading floors . Nine diesel generators were installed on the 5th floor as part of a backup power station . " Essentially , Salomon is constructing a building within a building – and it 's an occupied building , which complicates the situation " , said a district manager of Silverstein Properties . The unusual task was possible , said Larry Silverstein , because it was designed to allow for " entire portions of floors to be removed without affecting the building 's structural integrity , on the assumption that someone might need double @-@ height floors . " 
 At the time of the September 11 , 2001 , attacks , Salomon Smith Barney was by far the largest tenant in 7 World Trade Center , occupying 1 @,@ 202 @,@ 900 sq ft ( 111 @,@ 750 m2 ) ( 64 percent of the building ) which included floors 28 – 45 . Other major tenants included ITT Hartford Insurance Group ( 122 @,@ 590 sq ft / 11 @,@ 400 m ² ) , American Express Bank International ( 106 @,@ 117 sq ft / 9 @,@ 900 m ² ) , Standard Chartered Bank ( 111 @,@ 398 sq ft / 10 @,@ 350 m ² ) , and the Securities and Exchange Commission ( 106 @,@ 117 sq ft / 9 @,@ 850 m ² ) . Smaller tenants included the Internal Revenue Service Regional Council ( 90 @,@ 430 sq ft / 8 @,@ 400 m ² ) and the United States Secret Service ( 85 @,@ 343 sq ft / 7 @,@ 900 m ² ) . The smallest tenants included the New York City Office of Emergency Management , National Association of Insurance Commissioners , Federal Home Loan Bank , First State Management Group Inc . , Provident Financial Management , and the Immigration and Naturalization Service . The Department of Defense ( DOD ) and Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) shared the 25th floor with the IRS . Floors 46 – 47 were mechanical floors , as were the bottom six floors and part of the seventh floor . 
 = = = 9 / 11 and collapse = = = 
 = = = = Collapse = = = = 
 As the North Tower collapsed on September 11 , 2001 , heavy debris hit 7 World Trade Center , damaging the south face of the building and starting fires that continued to burn throughout the afternoon . The collapse also caused damage to the southwest corner between Floors 7 and 17 and on the south face between Floor 44 and the roof ; other possible structural damage included a large vertical gash near the center of the south face between Floors 24 and 41 . The building was equipped with a sprinkler system , but had many single @-@ point vulnerabilities for failure : the sprinkler system required manual initiation of the electrical fire pumps , rather than being a fully automatic system ; the floor @-@ level controls had a single connection to the sprinkler water riser ; and the sprinkler system required some power for the fire pump to deliver water . Also , water pressure was low , with little or no water to feed sprinklers . 
 After the North Tower collapsed , some firefighters entered 7 World Trade Center to search the building . They attempted to extinguish small pockets of fire , but low water pressure hindered their efforts . Over the course of the day , fires burned out of control on several floors of 7 World Trade Center ; the flames visible on the east side of the building . During the afternoon , fire was also seen on floors 6 – 10 , 13 – 14 , 19 – 22 , and 29 – 30 . In particular , the fires on floors 7 through 9 and 11 through 13 continued to burn out of control during the afternoon . At approximately 2 : 00 pm , firefighters noticed a bulge in the southwest corner of 7 World Trade Center between the 10th and 13th floors , a sign that the building was unstable and might collapse . During the afternoon , firefighters also heard creaking sounds coming from the building . Around 3 : 30 pm , FDNY Chief Daniel A. Nigro decided to halt rescue operations , surface removal , and searches along the surface of the debris near 7 World Trade Center and evacuate the area due to concerns for the safety of personnel . According to FEMA , the building started to collapse at 5 : 20 : 33 pm EDT when the east mechanical penthouse started crumbling , but differing times are given as to what time the building completely collapsed — at 5 : 21 : 10 pm EDT according to FEMA , and at 5 : 20 : 52 pm EDT according to NIST . There were no casualties associated with the collapse . 
 = = = = Reports = = = = 
 In May 2002 , the Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) issued a report on the collapse based on a preliminary investigation conducted jointly with the Structural Engineering Institute of the American Society of Civil Engineers under leadership of Dr. W. Gene Corley , P.E. FEMA made preliminary findings that the collapse was not primarily caused by actual impact damage from the collapse of 1 WTC and 2 WTC but by fires on multiple stories ignited by debris from the other two towers that continued burning unabated due to lack of water for sprinklers or manual firefighting . The report did not reach conclusions about the cause of the collapse and called for further investigation . 
 Subsequently , the National Institute of Standards and Technology ( NIST ) was authorized to lead an investigation into the structural failure and collapse of the World Trade Center Twin Towers and 7 World Trade Center . The investigation , led by Dr S. Shyam Sunder , drew upon in @-@ house technical expertise as well as the knowledge of several outside private institutions , including the Structural Engineering Institute of the American Society of Civil Engineers ( SEI / ASCE ) ; the Society of Fire Protection Engineers ( <unk> ) ; the National Fire Protection Association ( NFPA ) ; the American Institute of Steel Construction ( <unk> ) ; the Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat ( CTBUH ) ; and the Structural Engineers Association of New York ( <unk> ) . 
 The bulk of the investigation of 7 World Trade Center was delayed until after reports were completed on the Twin Towers . In the meantime , NIST provided a preliminary report about 7 World Trade Center in June 2004 , and thereafter released occasional updates on the investigation . According to NIST , the investigation of 7 World Trade Center was delayed for a number of reasons , including that NIST staff who had been working on 7 World Trade Center were assigned full @-@ time from June 2004 to September 2005 to work on the investigation of the collapse of the Twin Towers . In June 2007 , Shyam Sunder explained , " We are proceeding as quickly as possible while rigorously testing and evaluating a wide range of scenarios to reach the most definitive conclusion possible . The 7 WTC investigation is in some respects just as challenging , if not more so , than the study of the towers . However , the current study does benefit greatly from the significant technological advances achieved and lessons learned from our work on the towers . " 
 In November 2008 , NIST released its final report on the causes of the collapse of 7 World Trade Center . This followed NIST 's August 21 , 2008 , draft report which included a period for public comments . In its investigation , NIST utilized <unk> to model events leading up to collapse initiation and LS @-@ <unk> models to simulate the global response to the initiating events . NIST determined that diesel fuel did not play an important role , nor did the structural damage from the collapse of the Twin Towers or the transfer elements ( trusses , girders , and cantilever overhangs ) . The lack of water to fight the fire was an important factor . The fires burned out of control during the afternoon , causing floor beams near column 79 to expand and push a key girder off its seat , triggering the floors to fail around column 79 on Floors 8 to 14 . With a loss of lateral support across nine floors , column 79 buckled – pulling the east penthouse and nearby columns down with it . With the buckling of these critical columns , the collapse then progressed east @-@ to @-@ west across the core , ultimately overloading the perimeter support , which buckled between Floors 7 and 17 , causing the remaining portion of the building above to fall downward as a single unit . The fires , fueled by office contents , along with the lack of water , were the key reasons for the collapse . 
 When the first 7 World Trade Center collapsed , debris caused substantial damage and contamination to the Borough of Manhattan Community College 's Fiterman Hall building , located adjacent at 30 West Broadway , to the extent that the building was not salvageable . A revised plan called for demolition in 2009 and completion of the new Fiterman Hall in 2012 , at a cost of $ 325 million . The adjacent Verizon Building , an art deco building constructed in 1926 , had extensive damage to its east facade from the collapse of 7 World Trade Center , though it was able to be restored at a cost of US $ 1 @.@ 4 billion . 
 Files relating to numerous federal investigations had been housed in 7 World Trade Center . The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission estimated over 10 @,@ 000 of its cases were affected . Investigative files in the Secret Service 's largest field office were lost , with one Secret Service agent saying , " All the evidence that we stored at 7 World Trade , in all our cases , went down with the building . " Copies of emails in connection with the WorldCom scandal that were later requested by the SEC from Salomon Brothers , a subsidiary of Citigroup housed in the building , were also destroyed . 
 The NIST report found no evidence supporting conspiracy theories that 7 World Trade Center was brought down by controlled demolition . Specifically , the window breakage pattern and blast sounds that would have resulted from the use of explosives were not observed . The suggestion that an incendiary material such as thermite was used instead of explosives was considered unlikely by NIST because of observations of the fire and the building 's structural response to the fire , and because it is unlikely the necessary quantity of material could have been planted without discovery . 
 Based on its investigation , NIST reiterated several recommendations it had made in its earlier report on the collapse of the Twin Towers , and urged immediate action on a further recommendation : that fire resistance should be evaluated under the assumption that sprinklers are unavailable ; and that the effects of thermal expansion on floor support systems be considered . Recognizing that current building codes are drawn to prevent loss of life rather than building collapse , the main point of NIST 's recommendations was that buildings should not collapse from fire even if sprinklers are unavailable . 
 = = New building = = 
 The new 7 World Trade Center has 52 stories and is 741 ft ( 226 m ) tall . The building has 42 floors of leasable space , starting at the 11th floor , and a total of 1 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 160 @,@ 000 m2 ) of office space . The first ten floors house an electrical substation which provides power to much of Lower Manhattan . The office tower has a narrower footprint at ground level than did its predecessor , so the course of Greenwich Street could be restored to reunite TriBeCa and the Financial District . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 David Childs of Skidmore , Owings and Merrill worked in conjunction with glass artist and designer James Carpenter to create a design that uses ultra @-@ clear , low @-@ iron glass to provide reflectivity and light , with stainless @-@ steel spandrels behind the glass to help reflect sunlight . Stainless steel used in the building façade is molybdenum @-@ containing Type 316 , which provides improved resistance to corrosion . To enclose the power substation and improve its aesthetics , the base of the building has a curtain wall with stainless steel louvers that provide ventilation for the machinery . During the day , the curtain wall reflects light , while at night it is illuminated with blue LED lights . The curtain wall around the lobby uses heavily laminated , heat @-@ strengthened glass that meets high standards for blast resistance . At night , a large cube of light above the lobby also emanates blue light , while during the day it provides white light to the lobby , and at dusk it transitions to violet and back to blue . Inside the main lobby , artist Jenny Holzer created a large light installation with glowing text moving across wide plastic panels . The entire wall , which is 65 ft ( 20 m ) wide and 14 ft ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) tall , changes color according to the time of day . Holzer worked with Klara Silverstein , the wife of Larry Silverstein , to select poetry for the art installation . The wall is structurally fortified as a security measure . 
 The building is being promoted as the safest skyscraper in the U.S. According to Silverstein Properties , the owner of the building , it " will incorporate a host of life @-@ safety enhancements that will become the prototype for new high @-@ rise construction " . The building has 2 @-@ ft ( 60 cm ) -thick reinforced @-@ concrete and fireproofed elevator and stairway access shafts . The original building used only drywall to line these shafts . The stairways are wider than in the original building to permit faster egress . 
 7 World Trade Center is equipped with Otis destination elevators . After pressing a destination floor number on a lobby keypad , passengers are grouped and directed to specific elevators that will stop at the selected floor ( there are no buttons to press inside the elevators ) . This system is designed to reduce elevator waiting and travel times . The elevator system is integrated with the lobby turnstile and card reader system that identifies the floor on which a person works as he or she enters and can automatically call the elevator for that floor . 
 Nearly 30 percent of structural steel used in the building consists of recycled steel . Rainwater is collected and used for irrigation of the park and to cool the building . Along with other sustainable design features , the building is designed to allow in plenty of natural light , power is metered to tenants to encourage them to conserve energy , the heating steam is reused to generate some power for the building , and recycled materials are used for insulation and interior materials . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Construction of the new 7 World Trade Center began on May 7 , 2002 , with the installation of a fence around the construction site . Tishman Construction Corporation of New York began work at the new 7 World Trade Center in 2002 , soon after the site was cleared of debris . Restoring the Con Ed electrical substation was an urgent priority to meet power demands of Lower Manhattan . Because 7 World Trade Center is separate from the main 16 @-@ acre ( 6 @.@ 5 ha ) World Trade Center site , Larry Silverstein required approval from only the Port Authority , and rebuilding was able to proceed quickly . Building Seven was not included in the original World Trade Center master plan by Daniel Libeskind , but was designed by Skidmore , Owings & Merrill under the leadership of David Childs , who largely redesigned One World Trade Center . 
 Once construction of the power substation was complete in October 2003 , work proceeded on building the office tower . An unusual approach was used in constructing the building ; erecting the steel frame before adding the concrete core . This approach allowed the construction schedule to be shortened by a few months . Construction was completed in 2006 at a cost of $ 700 million . Though Silverstein received $ 861 million from insurance on the old building , he owed more than $ 400 million on its mortgage . Costs to rebuild were covered by $ 475 million in Liberty Bonds , which provide tax @-@ exempt financing to help stimulate rebuilding in Lower Manhattan and insurance money that remained after other expenses . 
 A 15 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 1 @,@ 400 m2 ) triangular park was created between the extended Greenwich Street and West Broadway by David Childs with Ken Smith and his colleague , Annie <unk> , of Ken Smith Landscape Architect . The park comprises an open central plaza with a fountain and flanking groves of sweetgum trees and boxwood shrubs . At the center of the fountain , sculptor Jeff Koons created Balloon Flower ( Red ) , whose mirror @-@ polished stainless steel represents a twisted balloon in the shape of a flower . 
 = = = Opening = = = 
 The building was officially opened at noon on May 23 , 2006 , with a free concert featuring Suzanne Vega , Citizen Cope , Bill Ware Vibes , Brazilian Girls , <unk> , Pharaoh 's Daughter , Ronan Tynan ( of the Irish Tenors ) , and special guest Lou Reed . Prior to opening , in March 2006 , the new 7 World Trade Center frontage and lobby were used in scenes for the movie Perfect Stranger with Halle Berry and Bruce Willis . 
 Since the building opened , several unleased upper floors have been used for events such as charity lunches , fashion shows , and black @-@ tie galas . Silverstein Properties allowed space in the new building to be used for these events as a means to draw people to see the building . From September 8 to October 7 , 2006 , the work of photographer Jonathan Hyman was displayed in " An American Landscape " , a free exhibit hosted by the World Trade Center Memorial Foundation at 7 World Trade Center . The photographs captured the response of people in New York City and across the United States after the September 11 , 2001 , attacks . The exhibit took place on the 45th floor while the space remained available for lease . 
 By March 2007 , 60 percent of the building had been leased . In September 2006 , Moody 's signed a 20 @-@ year lease to rent 15 floors of 7 World Trade Center . Other tenants that had signed leases in 7 World Trade Center , as of May 2007 , include ABN AMRO , Ameriprise Financial Inc . , Darby & Darby P.C. , Mansueto Ventures LLC , business publisher of Fast Company and Inc . , and the New York Academy of Sciences . 
 The space occupied by Mansueto Ventures has been designed to use the maximum amount of natural light and has an open floor plan . The space used by the New York Academy of Sciences on the 40th floor , designed by H3 Hardy Collaboration Architecture , works with the parallelogram shape of the building . Keeping with the green design of the building , the <unk> uses recycled materials in many of the office furnishings , has zoned heating and cooling , and lights that detect motion , coming on automatically only when people are present , and adjust according to incoming sunlight . 
 Silverstein Properties also has offices and the Silver Suites executive office suites in 7 World Trade Center , along with office space used by the architectural and engineering firms working on 1 World Trade Center , 150 Greenwich Street , 175 Greenwich Street , and 200 Greenwich Street . The building became fully leased in September 2011 when <unk> Inc. was reported to have leased a 125 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot space on the top floor . 
 = The Only Exception = 
 " The Only Exception " is a song by the American rock band Paramore . It was released by Fueled by Ramen in February 2010 as the third single from the band 's third studio album , Brand New Eyes ( 2009 ) . The song was written by band members Hayley Williams and Josh Farro ; Paramore is also credited as being co @-@ producers to the song . The song was generally well received by music critics ; praise of the song was mainly about Williams ' vocal performance . Music critics reviewing the song noted that " The Only Exception " was a different musical theme for the band . 
 " The Only Exception " has been the most successful single from Brand New Eyes , having topped the United Kingdom Rock Chart and peaked at No. 13 and No. 17 in New Zealand and Australia respectively . The single has become the band 's third of five top forty hits to date on the Billboard Hot 100 . A music video for the song , directed by Brandon Chesbro , was released on February 17 , 2010 , via the band 's official website . The song received a Grammy nomination for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals . It was the band 's most successful single to date until the release of " Ain 't It Fun " ( 2014 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 " The Only Exception " was released as the third single from the band 's 2009 studio album Brand New Eyes in February 2010 . It was noticed by music critics that , Paramore , who usually write and record darker material , mainly of the alternative genre , had , musically , gone in a different direction with " The Only Exception " . Rolling Stone described the song as " a subtle , Radiohead @-@ esque ballad . " The song 's lyrics pertain to the protagonist not believing that love exists and trying to live without it , mainly to avoid rejection , but eventually realizing that it does exist , describing the person as being their " only exception " . Many fans believe that the song was written as an ode to Chad Gilbert from New Found Glory . Incidentally , Williams has declined to comment directly on the issue , merely saying , " Read a couple blogs , and you 'll figure it out . " 
 Other themes include trying to pursue a relationship , as well as trying to make a relationship last , which can be seen in the lyrics , " I know you 're leaving in the morning , when you wake up / Leave me with some kind of proof it 's not a dream " . According to the sheet music published on Musicnotes.com by Alfred Music Publishing , the single is written in the time signature of 12 / 8 . The song is played in the key of B Mixolydian and is sung in the vocal range of F # 3 to D # 5 . " The Only Exception " has a moderately slow tempo of forty eight beats per minute . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " The Only Exception " received generally positive reviews from contemporary music critics . Williams ' vocal performance was mainly praised by music critics . Mikael Wood , a writer for Spin felt that " The Only Exception " was a " surprisingly soulful acoustic number " and compared its musical structure to Coldplay 's Parachutes @-@ era . Wood commented that the song was an " upgrade " that consisted of " focus and intensity " . Leonie Cooper of NME noted in his review for Brand New Eyes that Paramore were able to " showcase their maturity " with multiple ballad songs , specifying " The Only Exception " . Cooper commented that while the song 's lyrics seemed to be a " nondescript love song " that does not " quite warrant the abrupt change of pace " , he praised Williams ' vocals . Cooper further stated , 
 " [ The song ] feels like something Katy Perry would dismiss for being too lightweight , with its mechanical , campfire strumming and general uninspiring air . Its saving grace , however , comes with Williams ' vocals , which are flawless and sturdy throughout . Even though the song gets soppy , she never does – weakness just ain 't in this lady 's repertoire , and for that we offer her a hefty high five . " 
 Marc Hirsh of The Boston Globe listed " The Only Exception " as the highlight of Brand New Eyes , crediting the song as being an " essential " . Hirsh said that " The Only Exception " is " probably the best place to start " with the album , describing Williams ' vocals as " forging a connection " rather than " simply spitting out her feelings " ; he also praised the other band members for locking in at a " sympathetic simmer " . Channing Freeman of Sputnikmusic felt that that " The Only Exception " had similarities to " The Boy Who Blocked His Own Shot " by Brand New . Freeman stated that on Paramore 's All We Know Is Falling , " My Heart " was a " blunt and obvious song " that focused on a " climax to be emotional " , but with " The Only Exception " , Paramore have " figured out that it doesn 't have to finish loud to incite a reaction in the listener " . He also noted that the song shows that Williams ' lyrics have " definitely improved " . Jesse <unk> of Slant felt that the lyrics to " The Only Exception " may be " irredeemably over @-@ the @-@ top " but its " vocal melodies are the stuff of perfect pop " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 It peaked at number 12 on the Billboard component chart for Pop Songs ; the song remained on the chart for twenty weeks . However , on the week of June 12 , 2010 , the song debuted at number ninety on the Billboard Hot 100 . It has since peaked at No. 24 , becoming ( at the time ) the most successful Paramore single overall ( outside of alternative airplay – Misery Business remains their most @-@ successful alternative @-@ pop airplay single to date ) . It was their third top forty hit in the US , preceding Still Into You and Ain 't It Fun , which became their fourth and fifth top forty hits , respectively . " The Only Exception " also became the band 's first foray onto Adult Contemporary stations , peaking at number 28 on the component Billboard Adult Contemporary chart . The track was more successful internationally , peaking generally within the top twenty on multiple countries ' charts . On the New Zealand RIANZ singles chart , it debuted at number thirty @-@ eight on February 22 , 2010 . The following week , the song moved up fifteen positions to number twenty @-@ three . The song peaked at number thirteen . After four weeks on the chart , " The Only Exception " peaked at number two on the United Kingdom 's Rock Chart on March 14 , 2010 , staying at that position for three weeks but moving up to number one on the chart 's issue date of April 5 , 2010 . The song entered the UK Singles Chart at number eighty on March 28 , 2010 . It peaked at number thirty @-@ one . The track peaked at number forty @-@ seven in Austria on March 28 , 2010 . The single also debuted as its peak position , number eighty @-@ four , on the Eurochart Hot 100 Singles chart on April 24 , 2010 . " The Only Exception " debuted at number fifty @-@ nine in Brazilian Hot 100 Airplay chart in June 2010 , becoming the group 's first single to enter the Brazilian charts , achieving the following months the position at No. 32 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 A music video for " The Only Exception " was directed by Brandon Chesbro , who had been working with Paramore for over two years . The song 's music video was Chesbro 's music video directorial debut . Prior to " The Only Exception " video , Chesbro had been approached to direct music videos for Brand New Eyes ' two previous singles , but decided against it due to creative opinions . In December 2009 , he was asked to direct the music video for " The Only Exception " . Although the story board process took a while , the video was filmed in four days . The music video premiered on February 17 , 2010 , on Paramore 's website . Williams confirmed that as part of a Valentine 's Day theme , the band selected cards that were sent to them by fans and featured them in the video . In an interview with MTV , Chesbro commented on filming the scene involving Williams lying on Valentine 's Day 's styled @-@ cards during the music video , saying , 
 " The band has crazy fans . All those cards are so detailed [ ... ] these kids spent serious time on these cards . That 's my favorite shot of the whole video . It was the first thing we shot and I thought that if something falls apart and we only have that one shot , that could be the video all by itself and it 'd be perfect . " 
 The music video opens with Williams waking up on a couch next to an unnamed sleeping male and writes a note that says " I 'm sorry " . From there she walks to a room and hugs her father , who 's mentioned in song . A conversation ensues with Williams taking a photo of someone presumed to be her mother . The video continues with Williams in her room staring at the photo on a mirror , singing about how love , " does not exist . " She moves through a costume closet and into a restaurant set , where a rotating cast of men pose as her date . Then into the next room , there 's a wedding — everyone is wearing white ( the other band members in attendance ) , but Williams comes dressed in black ; she flees the scene from where the bride enters . During the chorus of the song , the clip cuts to the scenes where Williams is lying down on a giant pile of Valentine @-@ themed cards . Throughout the video , clips of Williams singing with the rest of Paramore in a dim @-@ lighted background are shown . In the video 's final moments , Williams spots the same male she woke up to at the beginning of the video in the crowd at a rock show . After fantasizing of the two being together through all sets from the start of the video , she makes her way back through the various rooms to the original set in the beginning . When Williams sings " And I 'm on my way to believing " , she returns to the couch where the male is still asleep , and hides the note she wrote in her pocket as she lies back down next to him . 
 The music video for " The Only Exception " was generally well received by music critics . Kyle Anderson , a writer for MTV , commented that the music video is " by far the most visually interesting and complex clip the group has ever produced . " Anderson further stated that " despite the complexity of the video , the whole process was remarkably efficient " . She remarked that based on the video 's outcome that it was " a little bit surprising " to know that it was directed by a first @-@ time director . Mike Sheffield of Spin viewed the music video as a " love story " and described it as being " Valentine 's Day + epic Emo balladry = Paramore 's brand new video for ' The Only Exception ' " . Chesbro said that he was happy with the final product of the music video and that directing the video made him become more interested in directing videos , saying , " I 'd really like to do more videos now [ ... ] This video turned out so perfect that I 'm worried nothing else will turn out as good . But if this is my only video , I was super @-@ proud to be a part of it . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The track has been performed by Paramore on many occasions . The band 's first performance of the song was on November 1 , 2009 in Nashville . Paramore performed a live version of " The Only Exception " for The Ellen DeGeneres Show . 
 The band performed the chorus and outro of the song on the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards on September 12 , 2010 . 
 = = The Only Exception EP = = 
 The Only Exception is Paramore 's third EP , released exclusively to the iTunes Store on September 28 , 2010 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The following personnel contributed to " The Only Exception " : 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 Paramore performed a live version of " The Only Exception " for The Ellen DeGeneres Show . 
 The band performed the chorus and outro of the song on the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards on September 12 , 2010 . 
 Paramore performed " The Only Exception " in VH1 Divas 2010 with the song " Misery Business " , " Decode " and " My Hero " 
 The band performed " The Only Exception " in in Madison Square Garden with the song " Misery Business " and " Brick by Boring Brick " 
 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 The music video appears in Paramore 's Videos . All of Them . Ever . 
 The song appears in 2011 Grammy Nominees by the Nominees in 53rd Grammy Awards . 
 = = = Covers = = = 
 Sam Tsui and Kurt Schneider did an acoustic cover . 
 April Chase did a cover , the Directed an shot is Marco <unk> 
 Rachel G. Fox did an acoustic cover 
 Chris Ninni and Ben Hazlewood covered the song in The Voice Australia 
 Kelly Clarkson covered the song as part of her Stronger Tour 
 Masha covered " The Only Exception " on her popular YouTube channel on March 25 , 2012 . 
 Julien <unk> did a cover of " The Only Exception " for Valentine 's Day 2014 . 
 = = = Glee cover = = = 
 The song was performed in the Britney Spears @-@ themed episode " Britney / Brittany " of the US television series Glee , which aired September 28 , 2010 . Lea Michele , in character as Rachel Berry , sang the song at the end of the episode as an apology to her boyfriend Finn Hudson , played by Cory Monteith . The performance was praised by most critics , with Rolling Stone 's Erica Futterman calling it " gorgeous and tender " and Entertainment Weekly 's Tim Stack praising it as the episode 's " nice , emotional capper " . Williams complimented Michele 's vocals on the rendition through her Twitter account . The cover was released as a single and charted at number twenty @-@ two in both Canada and Ireland , twenty @-@ six in the US , and sixty in Australia , with sales of 89 @,@ 000 copies in the US according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 = = = Rock Band music gaming platform = = = 
 The song was made available for download on May 15 , 2012 to play in Rock Band 3 Basic and PRO mode utilizing real guitar / bass guitar , and MIDI compatible electronic drum kits / keyboards plus vocal harmonies . It is also playable in Rock Band Blitz . 
 = Vampire = 
 A vampire is a being from folklore who subsists by feeding on the life essence ( generally in the form of blood ) of the living . In European folklore , vampires were undead beings that often visited loved ones and caused mischief or deaths in the neighbourhoods they inhabited when they were alive . They wore shrouds and were often described as bloated and of ruddy or dark countenance , markedly different from today 's gaunt , pale vampire which dates from the early 19th century . 
 Although vampiric entities have been recorded in most cultures , the term vampire was not popularized in the west until the early 18th century , after an influx of vampire superstition into Western Europe from areas where vampire legends were frequent , such as the Balkans and Eastern Europe , although local variants were also known by different names , such as shtriga in Albania , vrykolakas in Greece and strigoi in Romania . This increased level of vampire superstition in Europe led to mass hysteria and in some cases resulted in corpses actually being staked and people being accused of vampirism . 
 In modern times , however , the vampire is generally held to be a fictitious entity , although belief in similar vampiric creatures such as the chupacabra still persists in some cultures . Early folk belief in vampires has sometimes been ascribed to the ignorance of the body 's process of decomposition after death and how people in pre @-@ industrial societies tried to rationalise this , creating the figure of the vampire to explain the mysteries of death . <unk> was also linked with legends of vampirism in 1985 and received much media exposure , but has since been largely discredited . 
 The charismatic and sophisticated vampire of modern fiction was born in 1819 with the publication of The Vampyre by John Polidori ; the story was highly successful and arguably the most influential vampire work of the early 19th century . However , it is Bram Stoker 's 1897 novel Dracula which is remembered as the quintessential vampire novel and provided the basis of the modern vampire legend . The success of this book spawned a distinctive vampire genre , still popular in the 21st century , with books , films , and television shows . The vampire has since become a dominant figure in the horror genre . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The Oxford English Dictionary dates the first appearance of the English word vampire ( as <unk> ) in English from 1734 , in a travelogue titled Travels of Three English Gentlemen published in The Harleian Miscellany in 1745 . Vampires had already been discussed in French and German literature . After Austria gained control of northern Serbia and Oltenia with the Treaty of Passarowitz in 1718 , officials noted the local practice of exhuming bodies and " killing vampires " . These reports , prepared between 1725 and 1732 , received widespread publicity . The English term was derived ( possibly via French <unk> ) from the German <unk> , in turn derived in the early 18th century from the Serbian vampir ( Cyrillic : <unk> ) , when Arnold Paole , a purported vampire in Serbia was described during the time when Northern Serbia was part of the Austrian Empire . 
 The Serbian form has parallels in virtually all Slavic languages : Bulgarian and Macedonian <unk> ( vampir ) , Bosnian : <unk> , Croatian vampir , Czech and Slovak <unk> , Polish <unk> , and ( perhaps East Slavic @-@ influenced ) <unk> , Ukrainian <unk> ( upyr ) , Russian <unk> ( upyr ' ) , Belarusian <unk> ( upyr ) , from Old East Slavic <unk> ( <unk> ' ) ( note that many of these languages have also borrowed forms such as " vampir / <unk> " subsequently from the West ; these are distinct from the original local words for the creature ) . The exact etymology is unclear . Among the proposed proto @-@ Slavic forms are * <unk> and * <unk> . 
 Another , less widespread theory , is that the Slavic languages have borrowed the word from a Turkic term for " witch " ( e.g. , Tatar <unk> ) . Czech linguist Václav Machek proposes Slovak verb " <unk> sa " ( stick to , thrust into ) , or its hypothetical anagram " <unk> sa " ( in Czech , archaic verb " <unk> " means " to thrust violently " ) as an etymological background , and thus translates " <unk> " as " someone who thrusts , bites " . An early use of the Old Russian word is in the anti @-@ pagan treatise " Word of Saint Grigoriy " ( Russian <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , dated variously to the 11th – 13th centuries , where pagan worship of <unk> is reported . 
 = = Folk beliefs = = 
 The notion of vampirism has existed for millennia . Cultures such as the Mesopotamians , Hebrews , Ancient Greeks , and Romans had tales of demons and spirits which are considered precursors to modern vampires . However , despite the occurrence of vampire @-@ like creatures in these ancient civilizations , the folklore for the entity we know today as the vampire originates almost exclusively from early @-@ 18th @-@ century southeastern Europe , when verbal traditions of many ethnic groups of the region were recorded and published . In most cases , vampires are revenants of evil beings , suicide victims , or witches , but they can also be created by a malevolent spirit possessing a corpse or by being bitten by a vampire . Belief in such legends became so pervasive that in some areas it caused mass hysteria and even public executions of people believed to be vampires . 
 = = = Description and common attributes = = = 
 It is difficult to make a single , definitive description of the folkloric vampire , though there are several elements common to many European legends . Vampires were usually reported as bloated in appearance , and ruddy , purplish , or dark in colour ; these characteristics were often attributed to the recent drinking of blood . Indeed , blood was often seen seeping from the mouth and nose when one was seen in its shroud or coffin and its left eye was often open . It would be clad in the linen shroud it was buried in , and its teeth , hair , and nails may have grown somewhat , though in general fangs were not a feature . Although vampires were generally described as undead , some folktales spoke of them as living beings . 
 = = = = Creating vampires = = = = 
 The causes of vampiric generation were many and varied in original folklore . In Slavic and Chinese traditions , any corpse that was jumped over by an animal , particularly a dog or a cat , was feared to become one of the undead . A body with a wound that had not been treated with boiling water was also at risk . In Russian folklore , vampires were said to have once been witches or people who had rebelled against the Russian Orthodox Church while they were alive . 
 Cultural practices often arose that were intended to prevent a recently deceased loved one from turning into an undead revenant . Burying a corpse upside @-@ down was widespread , as was placing earthly objects , such as scythes or sickles , near the grave to satisfy any demons entering the body or to appease the dead so that it would not wish to arise from its coffin . This method resembles the Ancient Greek practice of placing an obolus in the corpse 's mouth to pay the toll to cross the River Styx in the underworld . It has been argued that instead , the coin was intended to ward off any evil spirits from entering the body , and this may have influenced later vampire folklore . This tradition persisted in modern Greek folklore about the vrykolakas , in which a wax cross and piece of pottery with the inscription " Jesus Christ conquers " were placed on the corpse to prevent the body from becoming a vampire . 
 Other methods commonly practised in Europe included severing the tendons at the knees or placing poppy seeds , millet , or sand on the ground at the grave site of a presumed vampire ; this was intended to keep the vampire occupied all night by counting the fallen grains , indicating an association of vampires with <unk> . Similar Chinese narratives state that if a vampire @-@ like being came across a sack of rice , it would have to count every grain ; this is a theme encountered in myths from the Indian subcontinent , as well as in South American tales of witches and other sorts of evil or mischievous spirits or beings . 
 In Albanian folklore , the dhampir is the hybrid child of the karkanxholl ( a werewolf @-@ like creature with an iron mail shirt ) or the lugat ( a water @-@ dwelling ghost or monster ) . The dhampir sprung of a karkanxholl has the unique ability to discern the karkanxholl ; from this derives the expression the dhampir knows the lugat . The lugat cannot be seen , he can only be killed by the dhampir , who himself is usually the son of a lugat . In different regions , animals can be revenants as <unk> ; also , living people during their sleep . <unk> is also an Albanian surname . 
 = = = = Identifying vampires = = = = 
 Many elaborate rituals were used to identify a vampire . One method of finding a vampire 's grave involved leading a virgin boy through a graveyard or church grounds on a virgin stallion — the horse would supposedly balk at the grave in question . Generally a black horse was required , though in Albania it should be white . Holes appearing in the earth over a grave were taken as a sign of vampirism . 
 Corpses thought to be vampires were generally described as having a healthier appearance than expected , plump and showing little or no signs of decomposition . In some cases , when suspected graves were opened , villagers even described the corpse as having fresh blood from a victim all over its face . Evidence that a vampire was active in a given locality included death of cattle , sheep , relatives or neighbours . Folkloric vampires could also make their presence felt by engaging in minor poltergeist @-@ like activity , such as hurling stones on roofs or moving household objects , and pressing on people in their sleep . 
 = = = = Protection = = = = 
 = = = = = <unk> = = = = = 
 <unk> , items able to ward off revenants , are common in vampire folklore . Garlic is a common example , a branch of wild rose and hawthorn plant are said to harm vampires , and in Europe , sprinkling mustard seeds on the roof of a house was said to keep them away . Other <unk> include sacred items , for example a crucifix , rosary , or holy water . Vampires are said to be unable to walk on consecrated ground , such as that of churches or temples , or cross running water . 
 Although not traditionally regarded as an apotropaic , mirrors have been used to ward off vampires when placed , facing outwards , on a door ( in some cultures , vampires do not have a reflection and sometimes do not cast a shadow , perhaps as a manifestation of the vampire 's lack of a soul ) . This attribute , although not universal ( the Greek vrykolakas / <unk> was capable of both reflection and shadow ) , was used by Bram Stoker in Dracula and has remained popular with subsequent authors and filmmakers . 
 Some traditions also hold that a vampire cannot enter a house unless invited by the owner , although after the first invitation they can come and go as they please . Though folkloric vampires were believed to be more active at night , they were not generally considered vulnerable to sunlight . 
 = = = = = Methods of destruction = = = = = 
 Methods of destroying suspected vampires varied , with staking the most commonly cited method , particularly in southern Slavic cultures . Ash was the preferred wood in Russia and the Baltic states , or hawthorn in Serbia , with a record of oak in Silesia . Potential vampires were most often staked through the heart , though the mouth was targeted in Russia and northern Germany and the stomach in north @-@ eastern Serbia . 
 Piercing the skin of the chest was a way of " deflating " the bloated vampire . This is similar to the act of burying sharp objects , such as sickles , in with the corpse , so that they may penetrate the skin if the body <unk> sufficiently while transforming into a revenant . In one striking example of the latter , the corpses of five people in a graveyard near the Polish village of <unk> , dating from the 17th and 18th centuries , were buried with sickles placed around their necks or across their abdomens . 
 Decapitation was the preferred method in German and western Slavic areas , with the head buried between the feet , behind the buttocks or away from the body . This act was seen as a way of hastening the departure of the soul , which in some cultures , was said to linger in the corpse . The vampire 's head , body , or clothes could also be spiked and pinned to the earth to prevent rising . 
 Romani people drove steel or iron needles into a corpse 's heart and placed bits of steel in the mouth , over the eyes , ears and between the fingers at the time of burial . They also placed hawthorn in the corpse 's sock or drove a hawthorn stake through the legs . In a 16th @-@ century burial near Venice , a brick forced into the mouth of a female corpse has been interpreted as a vampire @-@ slaying ritual by the archaeologists who discovered it in 2006 . 
 Further measures included pouring boiling water over the grave or complete incineration of the body . In the Balkans , a vampire could also be killed by being shot or drowned , by repeating the funeral service , by sprinkling holy water on the body , or by exorcism . In Romania , garlic could be placed in the mouth , and as recently as the 19th century , the precaution of shooting a bullet through the coffin was taken . For resistant cases , the body was dismembered and the pieces burned , mixed with water , and administered to family members as a cure . In Saxon regions of Germany , a lemon was placed in the mouth of suspected vampires . 
 In Bulgaria , over 100 skeletons with metal objects , such as plough bits , embedded in the torso have been discovered . 
 = = = Ancient beliefs = = = 
 Tales of supernatural beings consuming the blood or flesh of the living have been found in nearly every culture around the world for many centuries . The term vampire did not exist in ancient times . Blood drinking and similar activities were attributed to demons or spirits who would eat flesh and drink blood ; even the Devil was considered synonymous with the vampire . 
 Almost every nation has associated blood drinking with some kind of revenant or demon , or in some cases a deity . In India , for example , tales of <unk> , ghoul @-@ like beings that inhabit corpses , have been compiled in the <unk> <unk> ; a prominent story in the <unk> tells of King Vikramāditya and his nightly quests to capture an elusive one . <unk> , the returned spirits of evil @-@ doers or those who died insane , also bear vampiric attributes . 
 The Persians were one of the first civilizations to have tales of blood @-@ drinking demons : creatures attempting to drink blood from men were depicted on excavated pottery shards . Ancient Babylonia and Assyria had tales of the mythical Lilitu , synonymous with and giving rise to Lilith ( Hebrew <unk> ) and her daughters the <unk> from Hebrew demonology . Lilitu was considered a demon and was often depicted as subsisting on the blood of babies . And <unk> , female shape changing , blood drinking demons , were said to roam the night among the population , seeking victims . According to Sefer Hasidim , <unk> were creatures created in the twilight hours before God rested . An injured <unk> could be healed by eating bread and salt given her by her attacker . 
 Greco @-@ Roman mythology described the <unk> , the Lamia , and the striges . Over time the first two terms became general words to describe witches and demons respectively . Empusa was the daughter of the goddess Hecate and was described as a demonic , bronze @-@ footed creature . She feasted on blood by transforming into a young woman and seduced men as they slept before drinking their blood . The Lamia preyed on young children in their beds at night , sucking their blood , as did the <unk> or <unk> . Like the Lamia , the striges feasted on children , but also preyed on adults . They were described as having the bodies of crows or birds in general , and were later incorporated into Roman mythology as strix , a kind of nocturnal bird that fed on human flesh and blood . 
 In <unk> mythology <unk> is the troubled soul of the dead rising from the grave . Some <unk> can be living people with certain magical properties . Some of the properties of the <unk> include : the ability to transform into an animal , invisibility , and the propensity to drain the vitality of victims via blood loss . 
 = = = Medieval and later European folklore = = = 
 Many myths surrounding vampires originated during the medieval period . The 12th @-@ century English historians and chroniclers Walter Map and William of Newburgh recorded accounts of revenants , though records in English legends of vampiric beings after this date are scant . The Old Norse draugr is another medieval example of an undead creature with similarities to vampires . 
 Vampires proper originate in folklore widely reported from Eastern Europe in the late 17th and 18th centuries . These tales formed the basis of the vampire legend that later entered Germany and England , where they were subsequently embellished and popularized . One of the earliest recordings of vampire activity came from the region of Istria in modern Croatia , in 1672 . Local reports cited the local vampire Jure <unk> of the village <unk> near <unk> as the cause of panic among the villagers . 
 A former peasant , Jure died in 1656 . However , local villagers claimed he returned from the dead and began drinking blood from the people and sexually harassing his widow . The village leader ordered a stake to be driven through his heart , but when the method failed to kill him , he was subsequently beheaded with better results . That was the first case in history that a real person had been described as a vampire . 
 During the 18th century , there was a frenzy of vampire sightings in Eastern Europe , with frequent <unk> and grave diggings to identify and kill the potential revenants . Even government officials engaged in the hunting and staking of vampires . Despite being called the Age of Enlightenment , during which most folkloric legends were quelled , the belief in vampires increased dramatically , resulting in a mass hysteria throughout most of Europe . 
 The panic began with an outbreak of alleged vampire attacks in East Prussia in 1721 and in the Habsburg Monarchy from 1725 to 1734 , which spread to other localities . Two famous vampire cases , the first to be officially recorded , involved the corpses of Petar Blagojevich and Arnold Paole from Serbia . Blagojevich was reported to have died at the age of 62 , but allegedly returned after his death asking his son for food . When the son refused , he was found dead the following day . Blagojevich supposedly returned and attacked some neighbours who died from loss of blood . 
 In the second case , Paole , an ex @-@ soldier turned farmer who allegedly was attacked by a vampire years before , died while <unk> . After his death , people began to die in the surrounding area and it was widely believed that Paole had returned to prey on the neighbours . Another famous Serbian legend involving vampires concentrates around a certain Sava <unk> living in a watermill and killing and drinking blood from millers . The character was later used in a story written by Serbian writer Milovan Glišić and in the Yugoslav 1973 horror film <unk> inspired by the story . 
 The two incidents were well @-@ documented . Government officials examined the bodies , wrote case reports , and published books throughout Europe . The hysteria , commonly referred to as the " 18th @-@ Century Vampire Controversy " , raged for a generation . The problem was exacerbated by rural epidemics of so @-@ claimed vampire attacks , undoubtedly caused by the higher amount of superstition that was present in village communities , with locals digging up bodies and in some cases , staking them . 
 = = = = Dissertations on <unk> = = = = 
 From 1679 , Philippe Rohr devotes an essay to the dead who chew their shrouds in their graves , subject resumed later by Otto in 1732 , and then by Michael Ranft in 1734 . The subject was based on the peculiar phenomenon that when digging up graves , it was discovered that some corpses had at some point either devoured the interior fabric of their coffin or their own limbs . This distinguishes the relationship between vampirism and nightmares which were believed that many cases of vampirism were simply illusions brought by the imagination . While in 1732 an anonymous writer calling itself " the doctor Weimar " discusses the non @-@ putrefaction of these creatures , from a theological point of <unk> in 1733 , Johann Christoph <unk> wrote a general treatise on vampirism and the Marquis d <unk> Boyer cites local cases . Theologians and clergymen are also addressing the topic . 
 Dom Augustine Calmet , a French theologian and scholar , put together a comprehensive treatise in 1751 titled Treatise on the Apparitions of Spirits and on Vampires or <unk> which investigated the existence of vampires , demons , spectres and many other matters relating to the occult of his time . Calmet conducted extensive research and amassed reports of vampire incidents and extensively researched theological and mythological accounts as well . He had numerous readers , including both a critical Voltaire and supportive demonologists who interpreted the treatise as claiming that vampires existed . In his Philosophical Dictionary , Voltaire wrote : 
 These vampires were corpses , who went out of their graves at night to suck the blood of the living , either at their throats or stomachs , after which they returned to their cemeteries . The persons so sucked waned , grew pale , and fell into consumption ; while the sucking corpses grew fat , got rosy , and enjoyed an excellent appetite . It was in Poland , Hungary , Silesia , Moravia , Austria , and Lorraine , that the dead made this good cheer . 
 Some theological disputes arose . The non @-@ decay of vampires ' bodies could recall the incorruption of the bodies of the saints of the Catholic Church . A paragraph on vampires was included in the second edition ( 1749 ) of De <unk> Dei <unk> et sanctorum <unk> , On the beatification of the servants of God and on canonization of the blessed , written by Prospero <unk> ( Pope Benedict XIV ) . In his opinion , while the incorruption of the bodies of saints was the effect of a divine intervention , all the phenomena attributed to vampires were purely natural or the fruit of " imagination , terror and fear " . In other words , vampires did not exist 
 The controversy only ceased when Empress Maria Theresa of Austria sent her personal physician , Gerard van Swieten , to investigate the claims of vampiric entities . He concluded that vampires did not exist and the Empress passed laws prohibiting the opening of graves and desecration of bodies , sounding the end of the vampire epidemics . Despite this condemnation , the vampire lived on in artistic works and in local superstition . 
 = = = Non @-@ European beliefs = = = 
 Beings having many of the attributes of European vampires appear in the folklore of Africa , Asia , North and South America , and India . Classified as vampires , all share the thirst for blood . 
 = = = = Africa = = = = 
 Various regions of Africa have folktales featuring beings with vampiric abilities : in West Africa the Ashanti people tell of the iron @-@ toothed and tree @-@ dwelling <unk> , and the Ewe people of the adze , which can take the form of a firefly and hunts children . The eastern Cape region has the <unk> , which can take the form of a large taloned bird and can summon thunder and lightning , and the Betsileo people of Madagascar tell of the <unk> , an outlaw or living vampire who drinks the blood and eats the nail clippings of nobles . 
 = = = = The Americas = = = = 
 The Loogaroo is an example of how a vampire belief can result from a combination of beliefs , here a mixture of French and African <unk> or voodoo . The term Loogaroo possibly comes from the French loup @-@ <unk> ( meaning " werewolf " ) and is common in the culture of Mauritius . However , the stories of the Loogaroo are widespread through the Caribbean Islands and Louisiana in the United States . Similar female monsters are the <unk> of Trinidad , and the <unk> and <unk> of Colombian folklore , while the Mapuche of southern Chile have the bloodsucking snake known as the Peuchen . Aloe vera hung backwards behind or near a door was thought to ward off vampiric beings in South American superstition . Aztec mythology described tales of the <unk> , skeletal @-@ faced spirits of those who died in childbirth who stole children and entered into sexual liaisons with the living , driving them mad . 
 During the late 18th and 19th centuries the belief in vampires was widespread in parts of New England , particularly in Rhode Island and Eastern Connecticut . There are many documented cases of families <unk> loved ones and removing their hearts in the belief that the deceased was a vampire who was responsible for sickness and death in the family , although the term " vampire " was never actually used to describe the deceased . The deadly disease tuberculosis , or " consumption " as it was known at the time , was believed to be caused by nightly visitations on the part of a dead family member who had died of consumption themselves . The most famous , and most recently recorded , case of suspected vampirism is that of nineteen @-@ year @-@ old Mercy Brown , who died in Exeter , Rhode Island in 1892 . Her father , assisted by the family physician , removed her from her tomb two months after her death , cut out her heart and burned it to ashes . 
 = = = = Asia = = = = 
 Rooted in older folklore , the modern belief in vampires spread throughout Asia with tales of ghoulish entities from the mainland , to vampiric beings from the islands of Southeast Asia . 
 South Asia also developed other vampiric legends . The <unk> or <unk> is the soul of a man who died an untimely death . It wanders around animating dead bodies at night , attacking the living much like a ghoul . In northern India , there is the <unk> , a vampire @-@ like creature with a head encircled by intestines and a skull from which it drank blood . The figure of the <unk> who appears in South Asian legend and story may sometimes be rendered as " Vampire " ( see the section on " Ancient Beliefs " above ) . 
 Although vampires have appeared in Japanese cinema since the late 1950s , the folklore behind it is western in origin . However , the <unk> is a being whose head and neck detach from its body to fly about seeking human prey at night . 
 Legends of female vampire @-@ like beings who can detach parts of their upper body also occur in the Philippines , Malaysia and Indonesia . There are two main vampire @-@ like creatures in the Philippines : the Tagalog <unk> ( " blood @-@ sucker " ) and the Visayan <unk> ( " self @-@ <unk> " ) . The mandurugo is a variety of the aswang that takes the form of an attractive girl by day , and develops wings and a long , hollow , thread @-@ like tongue by night . The tongue is used to suck up blood from a sleeping victim . 
 The manananggal is described as being an older , beautiful woman capable of severing its upper torso in order to fly into the night with huge bat @-@ like wings and prey on unsuspecting , sleeping pregnant women in their homes . They use an elongated proboscis @-@ like tongue to suck fetuses from these pregnant women . They also prefer to eat entrails ( specifically the heart and the liver ) and the phlegm of sick people . 
 The Malaysian Penanggalan may be either a beautiful old or young woman who obtained her beauty through the active use of black magic or other unnatural means , and is most commonly described in local folklore to be dark or demonic in nature . She is able to detach her fanged head which flies around in the night looking for blood , typically from pregnant women . Malaysians would hang <unk> ( thistles ) around the doors and windows of houses , hoping the Penanggalan would not enter for fear of catching its intestines on the thorns . 
 The <unk> is a similar being from Balinese folklore of Indonesia . A <unk> or <unk> in Indonesia , or Pontianak or <unk> in Malaysia , is a woman who died during childbirth and became undead , seeking revenge and terrorizing villages . She appeared as an attractive woman with long black hair that covered a hole in the back of her neck , with which she sucked the blood of children . Filling the hole with her hair would drive her off . Corpses had their mouths filled with glass beads , eggs under each armpit , and needles in their palms to prevent them from becoming <unk> . This description would also fit the <unk> <unk> . 
 Jiangshi , sometimes called " Chinese vampires " by Westerners , are reanimated corpses that hop around , killing living creatures to absorb life essence ( qì ) from their victims . They are said to be created when a person 's soul ( 魄 <unk> ) fails to leave the deceased 's body . However , some have disputed the comparison of jiang shi with vampires , as jiang shi are usually represented as mindless creatures with no independent thought . One unusual feature of this monster is its greenish @-@ white furry skin , perhaps derived from fungus or mould growing on corpses . Jiangshi legends have inspired a genre of jiangshi films and literature in Hong Kong and East Asia . Films like Encounters of the Spooky Kind and Mr. Vampire were released during the jiangshi cinematic boom of the 1980s and 1990s . 
 = = = Modern beliefs = = = 
 In modern fiction , the vampire tends to be depicted as a suave , charismatic villain . Despite the general disbelief in vampiric entities , occasional sightings of vampires are reported . Indeed , vampire hunting societies still exist , although they are largely formed for social reasons . Allegations of vampire attacks swept through the African country of Malawi during late 2002 and early 2003 , with mobs stoning one individual to death and attacking at least four others , including Governor Eric <unk> , based on the belief that the government was colluding with vampires . 
 In early 1970 local press spread rumours that a vampire haunted Highgate Cemetery in London . Amateur vampire hunters flocked in large numbers to the cemetery . Several books have been written about the case , notably by Sean Manchester , a local man who was among the first to suggest the existence of the " Highgate Vampire " and who later claimed to have exorcised and destroyed a whole nest of vampires in the area . In January 2005 , rumours circulated that an attacker had bitten a number of people in Birmingham , England , fuelling concerns about a vampire roaming the streets . However , local police stated that no such crime had been reported and that the case appears to be an urban legend . 
 In 2006 , a physics professor at the University of Central Florida wrote a paper arguing that it is mathematically impossible for vampires to exist , based on geometric progression . According to the paper , if the first vampire had appeared on 1 January 1600 , and it fed once a month ( which is less often than what is depicted in films and folklore ) , and every victim turned into a vampire , then within two and a half years the entire human population of the time would have become vampires . The paper made no attempt to address the credibility of the assumption that every vampire victim would turn into a vampire . 
 In one of the more notable cases of vampiric entities in the modern age , the chupacabra ( " goat @-@ sucker " ) of Puerto Rico and Mexico is said to be a creature that feeds upon the flesh or drinks the blood of domesticated animals , leading some to consider it a kind of vampire . The " chupacabra hysteria " was frequently associated with deep economic and political crises , particularly during the mid @-@ 1990s . 
 In Europe , where much of the vampire folklore originates , the vampire is usually considered a fictitious being , although many communities may have embraced the revenant for economic purposes . In some cases , especially in small localities , vampire superstition is still rampant and sightings or claims of vampire attacks occur frequently . In Romania during February 2004 , several relatives of Toma Petre feared that he had become a vampire . They dug up his corpse , tore out his heart , burned it , and mixed the ashes with water in order to drink it . 
 <unk> and the Vampire lifestyle also represent a relevant part of modern day 's occultist movements . The mythos of the vampire , his <unk> qualities , allure , and predatory archetype express a strong symbolism that can be used in ritual , energy work , and magick , and can even be adopted as a spiritual system . The vampire has been part of the occult society in Europe for centuries and has spread into the American sub @-@ culture as well for more than a decade , being strongly influenced by and mixed with the neo gothic aesthetics . 
 = = = = Collective noun = = = = 
 <unk> ' has been used as a collective noun for vampires , possibly based on the Wiccan usage . An alternative collective noun is a ' house ' of vampires . David <unk> , author of <unk> , suggests in <unk> No. 566 the use of the collective noun ' basement ' , as in " A basement of vampires . " 
 = = Origins of vampire beliefs = = 
 Commentators have offered many theories for the origins of vampire beliefs , trying to explain the superstition – and sometimes mass hysteria – caused by vampires . Everything ranging from premature burial to the early ignorance of the body 's decomposition cycle after death has been cited as the cause for the belief in vampires . 
 = = = Pathology = = = 
 = = = = Decomposition = = = = 
 Paul Barber in his book Vampires , Burial and Death has described that belief in vampires resulted from people of pre @-@ industrial societies attempting to explain the natural , but to them inexplicable , process of death and decomposition . 
 People sometimes suspected vampirism when a cadaver did not look as they thought a normal corpse should when disinterred . Rates of decomposition vary depending on temperature and soil composition , and many of the signs are little known . This has led vampire hunters to mistakenly conclude that a dead body had not decomposed at all , or , ironically , to interpret signs of decomposition as signs of continued life . 
 Corpses swell as gases from decomposition accumulate in the torso and the increased pressure forces blood to ooze from the nose and mouth . This causes the body to look " plump , " " well @-@ fed , " and " ruddy " — changes that are all the more striking if the person was pale or thin in life . In the Arnold Paole case , an old woman 's exhumed corpse was judged by her neighbours to look more plump and healthy than she had ever looked in life . The exuding blood gave the impression that the corpse had recently been engaging in vampiric activity . 
 Darkening of the skin is also caused by decomposition . The staking of a swollen , decomposing body could cause the body to bleed and force the accumulated gases to escape the body . This could produce a groan @-@ like sound when the gases moved past the vocal cords , or a sound reminiscent of flatulence when they passed through the anus . The official reporting on the Petar Blagojevich case speaks of " other wild signs which I pass by out of high respect " . 
 After death , the skin and gums lose fluids and contract , exposing the roots of the hair , nails , and teeth , even teeth that were concealed in the jaw . This can produce the illusion that the hair , nails , and teeth have grown . At a certain stage , the nails fall off and the skin peels away , as reported in the Blagojevich case — the dermis and nail beds emerging underneath were interpreted as " new skin " and " new nails " . 
 = = = = Premature burial = = = = 
 It has also been hypothesized that vampire legends were influenced by individuals being buried alive because of shortcomings in the medical knowledge of the time . In some cases in which people reported sounds emanating from a specific coffin , it was later dug up and fingernail marks were discovered on the inside from the victim trying to escape . In other cases the person would hit their heads , noses or faces and it would appear that they had been " feeding . " A problem with this theory is the question of how people presumably buried alive managed to stay alive for any extended period without food , water or fresh air . An alternate explanation for noise is the bubbling of escaping gases from natural decomposition of bodies . Another likely cause of disordered tombs is grave robbing . 
 = = = = Contagion = = = = 
 Folkloric vampirism has been associated with clusters of deaths from unidentifiable or mysterious illnesses , usually within the same family or the same small community . The epidemic allusion is obvious in the classical cases of Petar Blagojevich and Arnold Paole , and even more so in the case of Mercy Brown and in the vampire beliefs of New England generally , where a specific disease , tuberculosis , was associated with outbreaks of vampirism . As with the pneumonic form of bubonic plague , it was associated with breakdown of lung tissue which would cause blood to appear at the lips . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 In 1985 biochemist David Dolphin proposed a link between the rare blood disorder porphyria and vampire folklore . Noting that the condition is treated by intravenous haem , he suggested that the consumption of large amounts of blood may result in haem being transported somehow across the stomach wall and into the bloodstream . Thus vampires were merely sufferers of porphyria seeking to replace haem and alleviate their symptoms . 
 The theory has been rebuffed medically as suggestions that porphyria sufferers crave the haem in human blood , or that the consumption of blood might ease the symptoms of porphyria , are based on a misunderstanding of the disease . Furthermore , Dolphin was noted to have confused fictional ( bloodsucking ) vampires with those of folklore , many of whom were not noted to drink blood . Similarly , a parallel is made between sensitivity to sunlight by sufferers , yet this was associated with fictional and not folkloric vampires . In any case , Dolphin did not go on to publish his work more widely . Despite being dismissed by experts , the link gained media attention and entered popular modern folklore . 
 = = = = Rabies = = = = 
 Rabies has been linked with vampire folklore . Dr Juan Gómez @-@ Alonso , a neurologist at <unk> Hospital in Vigo , Spain , examined this possibility in a report in Neurology . The susceptibility to garlic and light could be due to hypersensitivity , which is a symptom of rabies . The disease can also affect portions of the brain that could lead to disturbance of normal sleep patterns ( thus becoming nocturnal ) and hypersexuality . Legend once said a man was not rabid if he could look at his own reflection ( an allusion to the legend that vampires have no reflection ) . Wolves and bats , which are often associated with vampires , can be carriers of rabies . The disease can also lead to a drive to bite others and to a bloody frothing at the mouth . 
 = = = <unk> theories = = = 
 In his 1931 treatise On the Nightmare , Welsh psychoanalyst Ernest Jones asserted that vampires are symbolic of several unconscious drives and defence mechanisms . Emotions such as love , guilt , and hate fuel the idea of the return of the dead to the grave . Desiring a reunion with loved ones , mourners may project the idea that the recently dead must in return yearn the same . From this arises the belief that folkloric vampires and revenants visit relatives , particularly their spouses , first . 
 In cases where there was unconscious guilt associated with the relationship , however , the wish for reunion may be subverted by anxiety . This may lead to repression , which Sigmund Freud had linked with the development of morbid dread . Jones surmised in this case the original wish of a ( sexual ) reunion may be drastically changed : desire is replaced by fear ; love is replaced by sadism , and the object or loved one is replaced by an unknown entity . The sexual aspect may or may not be present . Some modern critics have proposed a simpler theory : People identify with immortal vampires because , by so doing , they overcome , or at least temporarily escape from , their fear of dying . 
 The innate sexuality of bloodsucking can be seen in its intrinsic connection with cannibalism and folkloric one with incubus @-@ like behaviour . Many legends report various beings draining other fluids from victims , an unconscious association with semen being obvious . Finally Jones notes that when more normal aspects of sexuality are repressed , regressed forms may be expressed , in particular sadism ; he felt that oral sadism is integral in vampiric behaviour . 
 = = = Political interpretations = = = 
 The reinvention of the vampire myth in the modern era is not without political overtones . The aristocratic Count Dracula , alone in his castle apart from a few demented retainers , appearing only at night to feed on his peasantry , is symbolic of the parasitic Ancien regime . In his entry for " Vampires " in the Dictionnaire <unk> ( 1764 ) , Voltaire notices how the end of the 18th century coincided with the decline of the folkloric belief in the existence of vampires but that now " there were stock @-@ jobbers , brokers , and men of business , who sucked the blood of the people in broad daylight ; but they were not dead , though corrupted . These true suckers lived not in cemeteries , but in very agreeable palaces " . 
 Marx defined capital as " dead labour which , vampire @-@ like , lives only by sucking living labour , and lives the more , the more labour it sucks " . Werner Herzog , in his Nosferatu the Vampyre , gives this political interpretation an extra ironic twist when protagonist Jonathon Harker , a middle @-@ class solicitor , becomes the next vampire ; in this way the capitalist bourgeois becomes the next parasitic class . 
 = = = Psychopathology = = = 
 A number of murderers have performed seemingly vampiric rituals upon their victims . Serial killers Peter Kürten and Richard Trenton Chase were both called " vampires " in the tabloids after they were discovered drinking the blood of the people they murdered . Similarly , in 1932 , an unsolved murder case in Stockholm , Sweden was nicknamed the " Vampire murder " , because of the circumstances of the victim 's death . The late @-@ 16th @-@ century Hungarian countess and mass murderer Elizabeth Báthory became particularly infamous in later centuries ' works , which depicted her bathing in her victims ' blood in order to retain beauty or youth . 
 = = = Modern vampire subcultures = = = 
 Vampire lifestyle is a term for a contemporary subculture of people , largely within the Goth subculture , who consume the blood of others as a pastime ; drawing from the rich recent history of popular culture related to cult symbolism , horror films , the fiction of Anne Rice , and the styles of Victorian England . Active vampirism within the vampire subculture includes both blood @-@ related vampirism , commonly referred to as sanguine vampirism , and psychic vampirism , or supposed feeding from <unk> energy . 
 = = = Vampire bats = = = 
 Although many cultures have stories about them , vampire bats have only recently become an integral part of the traditional vampire lore . Indeed , vampire bats were only integrated into vampire folklore when they were discovered on the South American mainland in the 16th century . Although there are no vampire bats in Europe , bats and owls have long been associated with the supernatural and omens , although mainly because of their nocturnal habits , and in modern English heraldic tradition , a bat means " Awareness of the powers of darkness and chaos " . 
 The three species of actual vampire bats are all endemic to Latin America , and there is no evidence to suggest that they had any Old World relatives within human memory . It is therefore impossible that the folkloric vampire represents a distorted presentation or memory of the vampire bat . The bats were named after the folkloric vampire rather than vice versa ; the Oxford English Dictionary records their folkloric use in English from 1734 and the zoological not until 1774 . Although the vampire bat 's bite is usually not harmful to a person , the bat has been known to actively feed on humans and large prey such as cattle and often leave the trademark , two @-@ prong bite mark on its victim 's skin . 
 The literary Dracula transforms into a bat several times in the novel , and vampire bats themselves are mentioned twice in it . The 1927 stage production of Dracula followed the novel in having Dracula turn into a bat , as did the film , where Béla Lugosi would transform into a bat . The bat transformation scene would again be used by Lon Chaney Jr. in 1943 's Son of Dracula . 
 = = In modern fiction = = 
 The vampire is now a fixture in popular fiction . Such fiction began with 18th @-@ century poetry and continued with 19th @-@ century short stories , the first and most influential of which was John Polidori 's The Vampyre ( 1819 ) , featuring the vampire Lord Ruthven . Lord Ruthven 's exploits were further explored in a series of vampire plays in which he was the anti @-@ hero . The vampire theme continued in penny dreadful serial publications such as Varney the Vampire ( 1847 ) and culminated in the pre @-@ eminent vampire novel of all time : Dracula by Bram Stoker , published in 1897 . 
 Over time , some attributes now regarded as integral became incorporated into the vampire 's profile : fangs and vulnerability to sunlight appeared over the course of the 19th century , with Varney the Vampire and Count Dracula both bearing protruding teeth , and Murnau 's Nosferatu ( 1922 ) fearing daylight . The cloak appeared in stage productions of the 1920s , with a high collar introduced by playwright Hamilton Deane to help Dracula ' vanish ' on stage . Lord Ruthven and Varney were able to be healed by moonlight , although no account of this is known in traditional folklore . Implied though not often explicitly documented in folklore , immortality is one attribute which features heavily in vampire film and literature . Much is made of the price of eternal life , namely the incessant need for blood of former equals . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 The vampire or revenant first appeared in poems such as The Vampire ( 1748 ) by Heinrich August <unk> , Lenore ( 1773 ) by Gottfried August Bürger , Die Braut von Corinth ( The Bride of Corinth ) ( 1797 ) by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe , Robert Southey 's Thalaba the Destroyer ( 1801 ) , John Stagg 's " The Vampyre " ( 1810 ) , Percy Bysshe Shelley 's " The Spectral Horseman " ( 1810 ) ( " Nor a yelling vampire reeking with gore " ) and " Ballad " in St. <unk> ( 1811 ) about a reanimated corpse , Sister Rosa , Samuel Taylor Coleridge 's unfinished Christabel and Lord Byron 's The <unk> . 
 Byron was also credited with the first prose fiction piece concerned with vampires : The Vampyre ( 1819 ) . This was in reality authored by Byron 's personal physician , John Polidori , who adapted an enigmatic fragmentary tale of his illustrious patient , " Fragment of a Novel " ( 1819 ) , also known as " The Burial : A Fragment " . Byron 's own dominating personality , mediated by his lover Lady Caroline Lamb in her unflattering roman @-@ a @-@ clef , <unk> ( a Gothic fantasia based on Byron 's wild life ) , was used as a model for Polidori 's undead protagonist Lord Ruthven . The Vampyre was highly successful and the most influential vampire work of the early 19th century . 
 Varney the Vampire was a landmark popular mid @-@ Victorian era gothic horror story by James Malcolm Rymer and Thomas Peckett Prest , which first appeared from 1845 to 1847 in a series of pamphlets generally referred to as penny dreadfuls because of their inexpensive price and typically gruesome contents . The story was published in book form in 1847 and runs to 868 double @-@ columned pages . It has a distinctly suspenseful style , using vivid imagery to describe the horrifying exploits of Varney . Another important addition to the genre was Sheridan Le Fanu 's lesbian vampire story Carmilla ( 1871 ) . Like Varney before her , the vampire Carmilla is portrayed in a somewhat sympathetic light as the compulsion of her condition is highlighted . 
 No effort to depict vampires in popular fiction was as influential or as definitive as Bram Stoker 's Dracula ( 1897 ) . Its portrayal of vampirism as a disease of contagious demonic possession , with its undertones of sex , blood and death , struck a chord in Victorian Europe where tuberculosis and syphilis were common . The vampiric traits described in Stoker 's work merged with and dominated folkloric tradition , eventually evolving into the modern fictional vampire . 
 Drawing on past works such as The Vampyre and " Carmilla " , Stoker began to research his new book in the late 19th century , reading works such as The Land Beyond the Forest ( 1888 ) by Emily Gerard and other books about Transylvania and vampires . In London , a colleague mentioned to him the story of Vlad Ţepeş , the " real @-@ life Dracula , " and Stoker immediately incorporated this story into his book . The first chapter of the book was omitted when it was published in 1897 , but it was released in 1914 as Dracula 's Guest . 
 The latter part of the 20th century saw the rise of multi @-@ volume vampire epics . The first of these was Gothic romance writer Marilyn Ross ' Barnabas Collins series ( 1966 – 71 ) , loosely based on the contemporary American TV series Dark Shadows . It also set the trend for seeing vampires as poetic tragic heroes rather than as the more traditional embodiment of evil . This formula was followed in novelist Anne Rice 's highly popular and influential Vampire Chronicles ( 1976 – 2003 ) . 
 The 21st century brought more examples of vampire fiction , such as J.R. Ward 's Black Dagger Brotherhood series , and other highly popular vampire books which appeal to teenagers and young adults . Such vampiric paranormal romance novels and allied vampiric chick @-@ lit and vampiric occult detective stories are a remarkably popular and ever @-@ expanding contemporary publishing phenomenon . L.A. Banks ' The Vampire Huntress Legend Series , <unk> K. Hamilton 's erotic Anita Blake : Vampire Hunter series , and Kim Harrison 's The Hollows series , portray the vampire in a variety of new perspectives , some of them unrelated to the original legends . Vampires in the Twilight series ( 2005 – 2008 ) by Stephenie Meyer ignore the effects of garlic and crosses , and are not harmed by sunlight ( although it does reveal their supernatural nature ) . <unk> Mead further deviates from traditional vampires in her Vampire Academy series ( 2007 – present ) , basing the novels on Romanian lore with two races of vampires , one good and one evil , as well as half @-@ vampires . 
 = = = Film and television = = = 
 Considered one of the preeminent figures of the classic horror film , the vampire has proven to be a rich subject for the film and gaming industries . Dracula is a major character in more films than any other but Sherlock Holmes , and many early films were either based on the novel of Dracula or closely derived from it . These included the landmark 1922 German silent film Nosferatu , directed by F. W. Murnau and featuring the first film portrayal of Dracula — although names and characters were intended to mimic Dracula 's , Murnau could not obtain permission to do so from Stoker 's widow , and had to alter many aspects of the film . In addition to this film was Universal 's Dracula ( 1931 ) , starring Béla Lugosi as the Count in what was the first talking film to portray Dracula . The decade saw several more vampire films , most notably Dracula 's Daughter in 1936 . 
 The legend of the vampire was cemented in the film industry when Dracula was reincarnated for a new generation with the celebrated Hammer Horror series of films , starring Christopher Lee as the Count . The successful 1958 Dracula starring Lee was followed by seven sequels . Lee returned as Dracula in all but two of these and became well known in the role . By the 1970s , vampires in films had diversified with works such as Count <unk> , Vampire ( 1970 ) , an African Count in 1972 's Blacula , the BBC 's Count Dracula featuring French actor Louis Jourdan as Dracula and Frank Finlay as Abraham Van Helsing , and a Nosferatu @-@ like vampire in 1979 's Salem 's Lot , and a remake of Nosferatu itself , titled Nosferatu the Vampyre with Klaus Kinski the same year . Several films featured female , often lesbian , vampire antagonists such as Hammer Horror 's The Vampire Lovers ( 1970 ) based on Carmilla , though the plotlines still revolved around a central evil vampire character . 
 The pilot for the Dan Curtis 1972 television series Kolchak : The Night Stalker revolved around reporter Carl Kolchak hunting a vampire on the Las Vegas strip . Later films showed more diversity in plotline , with some focusing on the vampire @-@ hunter , such as Blade in the Marvel Comics ' Blade films and the film Buffy the Vampire Slayer . Buffy , released in 1992 , foreshadowed a vampiric presence on television , with adaptation to a long @-@ running hit TV series of the same name and its spin @-@ off Angel . Still others showed the vampire as protagonist , such as 1983 's The Hunger , 1994 's Interview with the Vampire : The Vampire Chronicles and its indirect sequel of sorts Queen of the Damned , and the 2007 series Moonlight . Bram Stoker 's Dracula was a noteworthy 1992 film which became the then @-@ highest grossing vampire film ever . 
 This increase of interest in vampiric plotlines led to the vampire being depicted in films such as Underworld and Van Helsing , and the Russian Night Watch and a TV miniseries remake of ' Salem 's Lot , both from 2004 . The series Blood Ties premiered on Lifetime Television in 2007 , featuring a character portrayed as Henry Fitzroy , illegitimate son of Henry VIII of England turned vampire , in modern @-@ day Toronto , with a female former Toronto detective in the starring role . A 2008 series from HBO , entitled True Blood , gives a Southern take to the vampire theme . 
 In 2008 the BBC Three series Being Human became popular in Britain . It featured an unconventional trio of a vampire , a werewolf and a ghost who are sharing a flat in Bristol . Another popular vampire @-@ related show is CW 's The Vampire Diaries . The continuing popularity of the vampire theme has been ascribed to a combination of two factors : the representation of sexuality and the perennial dread of mortality . Another " vampiric " series that has come out between 2008 and 2012 is the Twilight Saga , a series of films based on the book series of the same name . 
 In quite another type of depiction , Count von Count , a harmless and friendly vampire parodying Bela Lugosi 's depictions , is a major character on the children 's television series Sesame Street . He teaches counting and simple arithmetic through his compulsion to count everything , a trait he shares with certain other vampires of folklore . 
 The 2005 CW series Supernatural has also depicted vampires . The main characters , Sam and Dean Winchester , along with other hunters , believe that the true way to kill a vampire is to decapitate the <unk> show 's vampires are shown in a rather negative light , though some are shown mercy after being found to not harm humans . 
 = = = Games = = = 
 The role @-@ playing game Vampire : the Masquerade has been influential upon modern vampire fiction and elements of its terminology , such as embrace and sire , appear in contemporary fiction . Popular video games about vampires include Castlevania , which is an extension of the original Bram Stoker Dracula novel , and Legacy of Kain . Vampires are also sporadically portrayed in other games , including The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion , when a character can become afflicted with <unk> haemophilia . A different take on vampires is presented in Bethesda 's other game Fallout 3 with " The Family " . Members of the Family are afflicted with a manic desire to consume human flesh , but restrict themselves to drinking blood to avoid becoming complete monsters . 
 = Survival of the Fittest ( The Spectacular Spider @-@ Man ) = 
 " Survival of the Fittest " is the pilot episode of the animated television series The Spectacular Spider @-@ Man , which is based on the comic book character Spider @-@ Man , created by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko . The episode was written and directed by the series developers , Greg Weisman and Victor Cook . In the episode , Spider @-@ Man ( Josh Keaton ) faces the evil Vulture ( Robert Englund ) as he begins his junior year in high school . 
 Sony Entertainment originally conceived The Spectacular Spider @-@ Man as a series of four DVDs , and asked Weisman and Cook to develop it . The central idea was to follow Spider @-@ Man in his younger years in the comics ; Weisman and Cook wanted to incorporate the styles of the early comic publications by Lee and Ditko . Reviewers have cited other influences in the themes , such as the live action film series and the Ultimate Spider @-@ Man continuity . 
 " Survival of the Fittest " originally aired on March 8 , 2008 , on the Kids ' WB block on The CW . It had previously been shown to a large audience at the 2008 WonderCon . The episode was the highest rated program of the Kids WB ! 2007 @-@ 2008 combined with the second episode " Interactions " and alone received a Nielsen rating of 1 @.@ 2 / 3 . It was well received by critics , IGN calling it " a Spider @-@ Man story that feels like classic Spider @-@ Man , and that 's a good thing . " 
 = = Plot = = 
 The night before school starts , Spider @-@ Man , alter ego of Peter Parker ( Josh Keaton ) , foils an attempted bank robbery ; in the background , a shadowed figure tells his henchman " Hammerhead " to summon the " Enforcers " to kill Spider @-@ Man . The next day , an aerodynamic engineer named Adrian Toomes ( Robert Englund ) is outraged at OsCorp for stealing his anti @-@ gravity project , until Norman Osborn ( Alan <unk> ) arrives and he is escorted out by security , Toomes turns to Octavius and declares that he no longer blames him for the theft of his work . Meanwhile , Peter arrives at school and tells his friends Gwen ( Lacey Chabert ) and Harry ( James Arnold Taylor ) that he is determined to get a date with Sally Avril , though both she and Flash Thompson ( Joshua LeBar ) humiliate him in front of everyone . After school , Peter and Gwen are offered an internship at Dr. Connor 's lab , where the former was given his superpowers ; both accept . Peter goes to Harry 's apartment , where Norman congratulates him on his newfound career . Toomes , going by the name " Vulture , " breaks in wearing a suit with built @-@ in metallic wings and talons , with his anti @-@ gravity technology incorporated to it and kidnaps Norman . Peter slips out to don the Spider @-@ Man costume and pursues Vulture . He succeeds in rescuing Norman but loses to Vulture in a fight . 
 Later , Peter goes to the lab where he meets up with Gwen , his close friend Eddie Brock ( Benjamin Diskin ) , and the Conners . When he finds out he will not be paid for the internship , he tries to sell pictures to the Daily Bugle publisher J. Jonah Jameson ( Daran Norris ) , though he is kicked out near immediately . 
 That night , Norman is attacked by the Vulture once more and when Spider @-@ Man tries to stop him , he is fired upon by the Enforcers , who distract him while Vulture chases after Norman 's limousine . While being pursued by the Enforcers , he follows after Vulture and ends up defeating him while getting the assassins off his back . When he returns home , his Aunt May ( Deborah Strang ) gives him a curfew to ensure he doesn 't come home late again and gives him a slice of pie . 
 = = Production = = 
 The Spectacular Spider @-@ Man was originally conceived by Sony Entertainment as a series of four animated DVDs that chronicled the Spider @-@ Man character in his youth . The company brought in Victor Cook and Greg Weisman to help with development . Weisman had had critical success with the series Gargoyles , while Cook worked on the Hellboy animated features . They both had been Spider @-@ Man fans for decades , as well . 
 Weisman wanted to incorporate the early stages of the comic when Stan Lee and Steve Ditko where the character was in his younger stages ; Cook agreed because he had yet to see it done before in any type of adaptation for the character . Other influences on the style were the Ultimate Spider @-@ Man comics and the live action film adaptions of the comic publications . When the idea was changed to an animated television series , they still kept a similar chronicle style where " each episode stands alone as its own story , but like the comic book itself it ’ s a saga . Then each three episodes is a story and those three episodes are what would be on the DVD releases . " 
 The original title for the series was The Amazing Spider @-@ Man , based on the Spider @-@ Man comic publication of the same name . In mid @-@ 2007 , the title was changed to The Spectacular Spider @-@ Man , as well a Spider @-@ Man comic series . Weisman prepared for his role as a story editor of the new series by going out and purchasing the first seven volumes of The Essential Spider @-@ Man , which he had previously read as a <unk> he re @-@ read them in order to " get the voice of those early stories " and took extensive notes . 
 The show was given a specific budget , so Weisman and Cook wanted to allow the animation to " move " more than anything , giving it simple and stylistic designs . Sam Raimi , director of the Spider @-@ Man live action films , " set the bar " for the fluent movement styles Spider @-@ Man has , which Weisman and Cook were in complete agreement of incorporating into the series . When designing the Vulture , the two employed the dark green shades from his original design , a color which they use thematically for most of their villains and other negative aspects of Peter 's life , along with touches of blood @-@ like red . His wings were employed in the same style that his comic book counterpart ; " [ They are ] for steering [ ... ] they don ’ t keep him air born , " Weisman describes . Vulture was voiced by Robert Englund , iconic for his portrayal as the horror film character Freddy Kruger . 
 " Survival of the Fittest " was written by Weisman and directed by Cook . The episode originally aired on March 8 , 2008 , on the Kids WB ! block for The CW network . It had previously been shown to a packed audience at the 2008 WonderCon ; several goers were forced to stand and the creators and other members of the crew took the stage to answer questions . When Disney XD premiered the series , it aired the episode , along with the following two , " Interactions " and " Natural Selection , " on March 23 , 2009 . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 " Survival of the Fittest " follows a title scheme given by Weisman that follows " The Education of Peter Parker . " For the episode and beginning arc of season one , the titles are based on Biology . The scene in the episode in which Spider @-@ Man catches Norman Osborn in mid @-@ air and makes several sarcastic comments to Vulture , such as " You guys play hot potato hardcore ! " and " He may be right . I only rent [ the skies ] , ” were described by Comic Mix reviewer Alan <unk> as in the attitude of Bugs Bunny . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Survival of the Fittest " received a Nielsen rating of 1 @.@ 2 / 3 , which is considered high for American television . The rating was the top mark for the 10 : 00 a.m. timeslot for the 2007 @-@ 2008 season and was a 20 % increase of the previous week 's . In key kids 2 @-@ 11 , it received a rating of 1 @.@ 4 / 5 , a 25 % increase from the previous week 's mark in the demographic . 
 Since airing , the episode has received positive reviews from critics . IGN reviewer Eric Goldman gave the episode an eight out of ten rating , commenting that it was " literally jam @-@ packed with classic Spider @-@ Man characters " and " a Spider @-@ Man story that feels like classic Spider @-@ Man . " Goldman praised the 1960s @-@ inspired style and described the humor as both " corny " and " legitimately , " along with the fight sequences . Goldman enjoyed the fight sequences where Spider @-@ Man faces the Vulture and Fancy Dan and gave " <unk> " to the sound design teams for the " distinctive " noises made by Vulture 's motors , along with the animation style . 
 Sean Elliot , senior edit of iF Magazine , gave " Survival of the Fittest " an " A " ; Elliot wrote that it was " a Spider @-@ man cartoon that 's for all ages and ranges . " Elliot said that he enjoyed the usage of several different Spider @-@ Man villains to the point of watching the episode twice . Though the Vulture is not a favorite of Elliot 's , he commented that the episode made him seem " pretty cool ; " he went on to praise the voice cast , including Englund 's performance as Vulture . Like Goldman , Elliot commented favorably on the animation style and nods to classic comic stories and said that it had a " bit for every level of Spider @-@ man fan . " 
 = Mello ( Death Note ) = 
 Mihael <unk> ( Japanese : <unk> ・ <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> <unk> ) , universally referred to by the mononym Mello ( <unk> , Mero ) , is a fictional character in the manga series Death Note , created by Tsugumi Ohba and Takeshi Obata . Mello is introduced alongside Near as a potential substitute for L. Both Mello and Near were raised at <unk> 's House , an orphanage established by Watari , L 's assistant . However , Mello refuses to work with Near to capture a murderer dubbed " Kira " . Over the course of Death Note , he joins the mafia , obtains a Death Note , causes the death of some people , and dies before he can expose Kira 's identity . Mello has also appeared in other media from the series , including video games , and light novels . 
 The character of Mello was created , along with Near , to break the endless cycle of confrontations between the detective L and Light Yagami , the persona behind Kira . Both Mello and Near were designed after L , and were initially envisioned as twins and sons of L. Ultimately , this idea was dropped , with their designs switched compared to the original concept . He is voiced in the Japanese anime series by Nozomu Sasaki and in the English adaptation by David Hurwitz . Merchandise has been created for the character , including plush dolls and action figures . Mello has received mixed commentary by manga and anime publications . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In Death Note = = = 
 Mello , whose real name is Mihael <unk> , grew up in <unk> 's House , an orphanage for intellectually gifted children , and is one of two potential successors to L — the best detective in the world . When L dies , it is proposed to him to work with Near , the other potential successor , to find L 's murderer , a criminal dubbed " Kira " . Mello rejects the proposal , citing their bad relationship and different personalities . Then , he leaves the orphanage and joins the Mafia . Aware of a Death Note — a book that allows anyone to murder individuals just by knowing their faces and names — in Japanese police 's possession , Mello abducts its director ; Kira , however , kills the director . Afterwards , Mello proceeds to kidnap <unk> Yagami , the daughter of the police 's vice @-@ director , Soichiro Yagami ; Mello succeeds in obtaining the Death Note this time . 
 Light Yagami , the true identity of Kira , discovers the location of Mello 's hideout . An indirect result of this is that Mello meets the Shinigami Sidoh , the original owner of Mello 's Death Note . Sidoh reveals to him — in exchange for some of Mello 's chocolate — that there are two extra fake rules ( in addition to a number of real ones specified to each Death Note 's owner ) . Mello begins to theorize that whoever Kira is , he probably used these spurious rules to fool the Japanese police into thinking he is innocent . However , Light launches a SWAT team led by Soichiro to raid the hideout . In order to escape , Mello detonates remote @-@ controlled explosives , after one of his Mafia accomplices fatally wounds Soichiro . Mello is left with a scar on his face , and the failure of his Mafia scheme leaves his real name in Light 's hands . 
 Mello invades SPK — an organization that aims to catch Kira — to retrieve a photograph of himself from Near . Before he leaves SPK , Mello tells Near about Sidoh and the fake rules , which sharpens Near 's suspicions on Light . Mello then enlists the help of his friend Matt to spy on Misa Amane , suspecting she is helping Kira . After learning that Light is Kira and Near is going to attempt to apprehend him , Mello and Matt kidnap Kiyomi Takada , Kira 's spokesperson . Matt pretends to attack Takada , and Mello offers to take her to safety . Takada agrees but then realizes his identity . Mello forces her to strip naked to get rid of any tracking devices . However , Takada uses a hidden piece of Death Note paper to kill Mello , as Light had told her his name and what to do in such a situation . Mello 's actions ultimately lead to Lights downfall ; Teru Mikami uses the hidden real Death Note to try to kill Takada , which leads to Near learning that the notebook Mikami had been using prior is fake and swapping the real Death Note with his own fake for the final confrontation with Kira . 
 = = = In other media = = = 
 Aside from the initial anime and manga , Mello appears in other media based on Death Note . He serves as the narrator of <unk> Isin 's light novel Death Note Another Note : The Los Angeles BB Murder Cases . He is featured in two video games ; in the Death Note @-@ based Death Note : L o Tsugu Mono , he can serve as Kira or Kira 's accomplice , and in the Weekly Shōnen Jump @-@ based fighting game Jump Ultimate Stars , he is a support character . Mello also appears in the animated special Death Note : Relight 2 : L 's Successors , which retells the second half of the anime . On it , his story is almost the same , the only exception is that Mello 's involvement with the mafia is removed . 
 = = Creation and conception = = 
 Tsugumi Ohba , Death Note 's writer , introduced Near and Mello together because he felt L individually could not defeat Kira and that introducing only one new character would produce a " repeat " of the struggle between Light and L. Ohba asked Takeshi Obata , artist of the series , to make both characters look " a little ' L @-@ ish . ' " Ohba " wavered " in their ages and considered making the characters the sons of L. As Ohba wanted to " include a little L " in Near and Mello , Obata tried to keep " the weirdness and the panda eyes " . Since L is an important character , Obata felt that he had made Near and Mello look too much like L. When he first heard about Near and Mello , Obata assumed that they would join as a team and work together , so he envisioned the two as twins , describing the creation of the character designs as " a major struggle " . At first , he tried to depict Mello as having " more energy than Near " . However , the designs for the characters became switched at a later phase ; the final Mello had Near 's design and vice versa . When Obata created the designs , his editor wrote the wrong names to accompany them ; when Obata received approval for the designs , it was too late to point out that the labels were incorrect . Initially , for him , Mello was " more calm and feminine " , but later he felt that " it 's better " that the switch occurred . 
 Ohba did not initially develop Mello and Near 's personalities as he wanted to " reveal " them through their actions . He added the chocolate trait because he believed that chocolate " represented all sweets " and that the trait would fit with the story arc in the United States . Obata designed Mello 's clothing based on clothes he enjoys drawing , which includes " shiny " leather . At first , Mello 's hair was cut straight across ; Obata preferred Mello 's hair becoming messy , which occurred later in the story . Obata became grateful when Ohba added the scar since he felt that he could draw Mello " looking cooler " . Ohba added Mello 's scar to the thumbnails as the trait would give him " more depth " ; he further added Mello looks " more intense " and " more human " with the scar . After drawing Mello 's updated appearance with the scar , Obata " finally [ felt that he could draw Mello ] really well " . Obata said that the fact that Ohba and Obata did not regularly meet in person was for the best , because if Obata had told Ohba about his satisfaction with Mello 's new appearance , Ohba might not have killed Mello . However , Obata felt sad when Mello died in the story shortly afterwards . 
 Ohba considered having Mello be the character who ultimately defeats Light . According to Ohba , after the disappearance of Sidoh , the writer " struggled " with Mello 's role . Ohba 's idea of Mello ultimately defeating Light and Near , being " the best " , was strong in his mind , but once Mello had " learned too much about the Death Note " , he had to kill him to " sustain the intensity of the story " . As a result , Ohba did not give Mello a " large role " at the conclusion of Death Note and instead had Mello negatively affect Light " indirectly " . Ohba gave Mello a " very plain " death , depicted in only one panel ; he felt that if Mello had perished " dramatically " it would reveal the truth behind his death . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Merchandise based on his character has been released , including action figures and plush dolls . Moreover , several publications for manga and anime have commented on Mello 's character . Referring to Mello and Near 's introduction , Julie Rosato of Mania.com said the " focus on both makes for a clash of attitudes and rough transitions " . However , as they were introduced in the anime , IGN 's Tom S. <unk> criticized how it is not explained " what Mello is doing and how it differs from Near 's story . " Writing for Active Anime , Holly Ellingwood stated they " truly represent – Light 's newest and greatest enemies " , while Briana Lawrence from Anime News Network said both could be " much better characters " if they were treated as individuals instead of " different halves of L " . Erin Finnegan from Pop Culture Shock praised Death Note : The Last Name for the absence of Mello and Near . 
