 Anime News Network 's Casey Brienza stressed Mello 's presence as a narrator in the light novel " makes things a bit too breathless in places and a bit too self @-@ conscious in others " . A. E. Sparrow from IGN praised how the introduction of Mello , " a man of action " , " spiced things up a bit " as he brought " actually " action to the series . Manga News said Mello is " an interesting character " as he is " unpredictable " and also praised the action scenes he brings . As such , they criticized his almost total absence in volume 10 as he is " one of the few to bring some new blood to the series " . After Mello 's death , <unk> wrote " Mello deserved more . " On the other hand , Mello is " an unhinged character that only offers unpredictability " , according to Chris Beveridge of <unk> AnimeLand and Manga News presented opposite opinions if whether or not Mello is charismatic character , with the former declaring he does not replace L as he lacks charisma . 
 = Russian monitor Koldun = 
 Koldun ( Russian : <unk> ) was an Uragan @-@ class monitor built for the Imperial Russian Navy in Belgium in the mid @-@ 1860s . The design was based on the American Passaic @-@ class monitor , but was modified to suit Russian engines , guns and construction techniques . She was one of two ships of the class to be built in Belgium and assembled in Russia . Spending her entire career with the Baltic Fleet , the ship was only active when the Gulf of Finland was not frozen , but very little is known about her service . She was stricken in 1900 from the Navy List , converted into a coal barge in 1903 and renamed Barzha No. 324 . Abandoned by the Soviets in Finland in 1918 , the ship was later scrapped by the Finns . 
 = = Description = = 
 Koldun was 201 feet ( 61 @.@ 3 m ) long overall , with a beam of 46 feet ( 14 @.@ 0 m ) and a draft of 10 @.@ 16 – 10 @.@ 84 feet ( 3 @.@ 1 – 3 @.@ 3 m ) . She displaced 1 @,@ 500 – 1 @,@ 600 long tons ( 1 @,@ 500 – 1 @,@ 600 t ) , and her crew numbered eight officers and 88 enlisted men in 1865 . They numbered 10 officers and 100 crewmen in 1877 . 
 The ship was fitted with a two @-@ cylinder , horizontal direct @-@ acting steam engine built by the Belgian Cockerill Company . It drove a single propeller using steam that was provided by two rectangular boilers . Specific information on the output of the ship 's engine has not survived , but it ranged between 340 – 500 indicated horsepower ( 254 – 373 kW ) for all the ships of this class . During Koldun 's sea trials on 21 July 1864 , she reached a maximum speed of 6 knots ( 11 km / h ; 6 @.@ 9 mph ) . The ship carried a maximum of 190 long tons ( 190 t ) of coal , which gave her a theoretical endurance of 1 @,@ 440 nmi ( 2 @,@ 670 km ; 1 @,@ 660 mi ) at 6 knots ( 11 km / h ; 6 @.@ 9 mph ) . 
 Koldun was designed to be armed with a pair of 9 @-@ inch ( 229 mm ) smoothbore muzzle @-@ loading guns purchased from Krupp of Germany and rifled in Russia , but the rifling project was seriously delayed and the ship was completed with nine @-@ inch smoothbores . These lacked the penetration power necessary to deal with ironclads and they were replaced by license @-@ built 15 @-@ inch ( 380 mm ) smoothbore muzzle @-@ loading Rodman guns in 1867 – 68 . The Rodman guns were replaced around 1876 with the originally intended nine @-@ inch rifled guns . 
 All of the wrought @-@ iron armor that was used in the Uragan @-@ class monitors was in 1 @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) plates , just as in the Passaic @-@ class ships . The side of the ship was entirely covered with three to five layers of armor plates , of which the three innermost plates extended 42 inches ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) below the waterline . This armor was backed by a wooden beam that had a maximum thickness of 36 inches ( 914 mm ) . The gun turret and the pilothouse above it was protected by eleven layers of armor . The conning tower armor was 11 inches ( 279 mm ) thick . Curved plates six layers thick protected the base of the funnel up to a height of 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) above the deck . Unlike their predecessors , the Uragans were built without deck armor to save weight , but Koldun 's deck was reinforced by the addition of 0 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) armor plates after completion . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Construction of Koldun began on 9 November 1863 by the Belgian firm of Cockerill for assembly in Saint Petersburg . The ship was laid down on 9 December 1863 and she was launched on 8 May 1864 . She entered service on 1865 and cost a total of 1 @,@ 237 @,@ 000 rubles , almost double her contract cost of 600 @,@ 000 rubles . The ship was assigned to the Baltic Fleet upon completion and she , and all of her sister ships except Latnik , made a port visit to Stockholm , Sweden in July – August 1865 while under the command of General Admiral Grand Duke Konstantin Nikolayevich . 
 Sometime after Koldun was completed , an armored ring , 5 inches ( 127 mm ) thick and 15 inches ( 381 mm ) tall , was fitted around the base of the turret to prevent splinters from jamming it . Later , an armored , outward @-@ curving bulwark was fitted around the top of the turret to protect any crewmen there . Three sponsons were later added , probably during the 1870s , to the upper portion of the turret . Each sponson , one above the gun ports and one on each side of the turret , mounted a light gun , probably a 1 @.@ 75 @-@ inch ( 44 mm ) Engstrem gun , for defense against torpedo boats . A fourth gun was mounted on a platform aft of the funnel when a hurricane deck was built between the funnel and the turret , also probably during the 1870s . 
 Little is known about the ship 's career other than that she was laid up each winter when the Gulf of Finland froze . Koldun was reclassified as a coast defense ironclad on 13 February 1892 and turned over to the Port of Kronstadt for disposal on 6 July 1900 , although she was not stricken until 17 August . During 1903 , the ship was converted into a coal barge by the removal of her turret , her side armor , and its wooden backing , and by the division of her hull into three holds . She was redesignated as Barzha No. 31 , Barzha No. 50 and , in 1914 , Barzha No. 323 . The ship was abandoned by the Soviets when they were forced to withdraw from Finland in April 1918 according to the terms of the Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk and was later scrapped by the Finns . 
 = Ashlawn = 
 Ashlawn , also called the Joshua Perkins House , is a two @-@ story , central @-@ hall frame farmhouse dating from the 18th century in Sprague , Connecticut . The house 's namesake is its first owner , Joshua Perkins , a farmer and son of the prominent Captain Matthew Perkins , a farmer and founding member of the Hanover Society . Ashlawn 's main house has a five @-@ bay front facade with pilasters supporting broken @-@ base pediments . The inside has well @-@ documented woodwork for its moldings and wainscotting . The house has integrated an older structure , likely a central @-@ chimney structure built in the second quarter of the 18th century , as an ell . 
 In 2002 , the house was maintained by Ruth Rosiene , a descendant of the Perkins . Ashlawn is listed under the National Register of Historic Places as an example of Georgian architecture and locally important for its connection with the Perkins family . It was added to the National Register of Historic Places on June 4 , 1979 . 
 = = History = = 
 The land upon which Ashlawn stands was originally part of a 1 @,@ 200 @-@ acre ( 490 ha ; 1 @.@ 9 sq mi ) parcel purchased by Joshua Perkins ' grandfather Joseph Perkins and great @-@ great uncle Jacob Perkins . The town of Lisbon , Connecticut , was originally known as <unk> , the name believed to derive from the Perkins ' place in Gloucestershire , England . Joseph Perkins ' father , Captain Matthew Perkins , was a prominent farmer and founder of the Hanover Society in 1761 . Matthew Perkins held approximately 1 @,@ 000 acres ( 400 ha ; 1 @.@ 6 sq mi ) in Hanover and owned three slaves as part of his assets ; he died in 1773 . Joshua Perkins is believed to have deeded the land . Joshua Perkins , the eldest son of Matthew Perkins , was born in 1740 . A farmer and a selectman , he served in 1786 and 1787 before going to serve in the Connecticut state legislature in 1789 and again in 1801 . In 1825 , he deeded 400 acres ( 160 ha ) , containing the house , to his son Charles Perkins . Joshua Perkins died in 1833 , living to be 93 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Ashlawn , named for the ash trees that once sat in front of the house , is also known as the Joshua Perkins House , after its first owner . Ashlawn is described by the National Register of Historic Places as a " late 18th @-@ century , 2 @-@ story , central @-@ hall frame farmhouse with a pitched and end gable overhang . " The date of construction , both of the main house and its older ell , is unknown , as is the architect . The house rests upon a fieldstone foundation with dressed stone ; the cellar of the house has notches in stone that are believed to have been for the " cool storage of foods " . The register lists the architecture as being Georgian . 
 The five @-@ bay front facade has two flat Doric pilasters and two more pilasters , located off the central bay support the broken @-@ base pediment . The original door was replaced with a 19th @-@ century door that has a 20 @-@ pane fanlight and is flanked by two flat pilasters that support the broken @-@ base pediment over the door . The main house originally had two @-@ chimney design and another chimney was added to the east wall for a 20th @-@ century furnace . Most of the windows in the house were replaced in the 19th century with 2 @-@ over @-@ 2 sash , except for two attic windows of each end of the gable which retain the smaller paned sashes . The house includes an earlier one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half story ell in the rear that appears to have been a two @-@ room central chimney structure that was integrated into the design of the main house and built in the second quarter of the 18th century . The chimney was replaced in the 19th century . A storage shed also sits behind the house . The property also had a dairy barn that was rebuilt following its destruction in the 1938 New England hurricane . 
 The register 's nomination gives details of the paneling and molding throughout the house . Entering through the front of the house leads to the central hall with a paneled wainscot below the chair rail , forward of the rising stairwell on the left . There is cornice molding and a molded chair rail with runners for the inside shutters . The woodwork in the west front room has a paneled fireplace and is wainscoted below the chair rail . The east rear room is divided in two , with one of the divisions being a bathroom . The upstairs rooms have molded chair rails and cased flair posts . However , the east front room lacks a fireplace while the western one is paneled as the first floor 's front west room . The roof of the house is framed by sawn collar beams that were pegged to rafters which were hewn . The chimney stacks are angled so that they emerge symmetrically from the roof . 
 The original entrance to the ell in the center along the east wall , the door was replaced with a modern door at the time of nomination . Inside , a winding staircase leads to the attic . To the north is the kitchen , retaining a hewn summer beam and flared cased posts while sporting modern cabinets and wallpaper . The room to the south also has a visible hewn summer beam and its original casing on the flared posts . The attic is finished with vertically placed beaded boarding , and the roof is framed with hewn rafters . 
 = = Importance = = 
 The National Register of Historic Places nomination form describes Ashlawn as a historically significant as " an expression of rural Georgian architecture and for its associations with the Perkins family , particularly influential in the settlement of the Hanover section of Sprague . " The nomination also notes that it is " one of the finest of its type in the surrounding area " , calling it a stylish farmhouse built for a prominent farmer . The Town of Sprague placed it among the many historic districts in their small area , which " add substantial aesthetic value " on top of being historic . 
 In 2002 , Ruth Rosiene , a descendant of the Perkins and Ashlawn 's owner , was featured in an article by The Day . Rosiene had been maintaining the house for years , which required repainting every four or five years . A photo in the article shows the latch on the door that was described as possibly original . The article notes that the original sliding shutters are now absent , whereas the original nomination form from 1979 stated they were not installed . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = The Break @-@ Up ( 30 Rock ) = 
 " The Break @-@ Up " is the eighth episode of the first season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock . It was written by co @-@ executive producers Brett Baer and Dave Finkel , and directed by Scott Ellis . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) in the United States on December 14 , 2006 . Guest stars in this episode include Rachel Dratch , Chris Hansen , Keith Powell , Lonny Ross , and Dean Winters . 
 In the episode , Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) finally dumps Dennis Duffy ( Winters ) and prowls the singles scene , where she proves to be particularly inept at picking up guys , under Jenna Maroney 's ( Jane Krakowski ) tutelage . Meanwhile , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) and James " Toofer " Spurlock ( Powell ) clash , landing both in sensitivity training , and Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) dates a certain " high @-@ ranking African @-@ American member of the Bush Administration . " 
 " The Break @-@ Up " received generally good reception from critics . According to the Nielsen ratings system , the episode was watched by 5 @.@ 9 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 2 @.@ 8 rating / 8 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . Scott Ellis received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series for " The Break @-@ Up " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) comes home to find her wall full of knife holes , a great <unk> roaming her apartment , and a complete stranger on her bed , all courtesy of her boyfriend , Dennis Duffy ( Dean Winters ) . She breaks up with him , but Dennis claims squatter 's rights , so she gives him a week to move out . Liz and her friend , Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) , go out to try to pick up some men , but are very unsuccessful . The next day , Dennis walks in to the staff office of TGS with Tracy Jordan , announcing he has found a new apartment and reads a heartfelt letter to Liz . The staff suddenly turns on Liz after Dennis walks out , and Jenna suggests to Liz that in light of the previous night 's disaster , she should re @-@ consider getting back together with him . She suggests making a list of pros and cons . Liz compiles her list of pros and cons . She marks down a positive remark after coming home to find that Dennis has cleaned up the apartment , put up shelves and a TV stand , and left her dinner . In the evening , Dennis returns with an early Christmas present for Liz . She invites him in , but soon sees Dennis on Dateline 's To Catch a Predator . As a result of this , Liz breaks up with Dennis , and marks it down as a con . 
 Meanwhile , James " Toofer " Spurlock ( Keith Powell ) is upset that Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) is cross @-@ dressing on TGS because it is demeaning to African @-@ Americans . After a bit of objection , Toofer convinces Tracy to stop , handing the female character over to Josh Girard ( Lonny Ross ) . Once Josh 's character is successful , Tracy is upset with Toofer . Liz convinces Toofer to work with Tracy . As they work together , Tracy gets upset with Toofer 's supposed lack of blackness , and endearingly calls Toofer a racial slur . The next morning , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) , Liz , Toofer , and Tracy sit down for a meeting about Tracy 's vocabulary from the previous night . Tracy and Jack point out that the African @-@ American community has adopted the word to deprive it of its meaning . In trying to reach out to Tracy , Toofer says the word again but because of his perceived cultural whiteness , everyone , including Tracy , is offended in a way they weren 't when Tracy used the term . Tracy and Toofer attend sensitivity training , start arguing , and in the process develop a new sketch for TGS . When show starts running short on time , Liz offers Tracy the option to either air the sketch or one from the Star Jones cooking show , Tracy chooses the latter . Toofer is initially upset , but agrees with Tracy 's decision when he finds the sketch funny . 
 In a subplot , Jack is secretly dating Condoleezza Rice , but gets upset when he sees Vladimir Putin touching her back . After being put on hold by Condoleezza , Jack walks into the bathroom and runs into Dennis there . Dennis , finding Jack a kindred spirit , shares his understanding of his relationship , motivating Jack to play hard to get . As a result , Jack breaks up with Condoleezza . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Break @-@ Up " was written by that season 's co @-@ executive producers Brett Baer and Dave Finkel , and directed by Scott Ellis . This episode was the first writing credit for both Baer and Finkel , and the first one Ellis directed for 30 Rock . Baer and Finkel would later collaborate on the episode " Fireworks " , that aired in the show 's first season on April 5 , 2007 . " The Break @-@ Up " originally aired on NBC on December 14 , 2006 as the eighth episode of the series . 
 This episode was actor Dean Winters ' third appearance on the series as the character , Dennis Duffy , a former boyfriend of Tina Fey 's character , Liz Lemon . He appeared in the episodes " Jack Meets Dennis " and " Tracy Does Conan " . Finkel has appeared on the show in a 10 @-@ second internet sitcom , Makin ' It Happen , alongside staff writer Kay Cannon . The two play husband and wife . A series of Makin ' It Happen was produced and the webisodes aired on NBC.com. 
 Rachel Dratch , longtime comedy partner and fellow Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) alumna of Fey , the latter who was the show 's head writer from 1999 until 2006 , was originally cast to portray Jenna Maroney . Dratch played the role in the show 's original pilot , but in August 2006 , actress Jane Krakowski was announced as Dratch 's replacement . Executive producer Lorne Michaels announced that while Dratch would not be playing a series regular , she would appear in various episodes in a different role . In this episode , Dratch played Pamela Smew , a group therapist in charge of sensitivity training between Tracy and Toofer . This was Dratch 's fifth appearance on the series . Various other cast members of SNL have appeared on 30 Rock . These cast members include : Chris Parnell , Fred Armisen , Kristen Wiig , Will Forte , Jason Sudeikis and Molly Shannon . Fey and Tracy Morgan have both been part of the main cast of SNL . Chris Hansen of Dateline NBC 's television segment To Catch a Predator appeared as himself in this episode , in which he confronts Dennis on To Catch a Predator . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen ratings system , " The Break @-@ Up " was watched by 5 @.@ 9 million households in its original American broadcast . It earned a 2 @.@ 8 rating / 8 share in the 18 – 49 demographic . This means that it was seen by 5 @.@ 9 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 8 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This was a decrease from the previous episode , " Tracy Does Conan " , which was watched by 6 @.@ 84 million American viewers . Scott Ellis , director of the episode , received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Directing For a Comedy Series at the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards . Since airing , the episode received good reviews from television critics . 
 IGN contributor Robert Canning said that " The Break @-@ Up " was " well put together " , noting that it had " [ g ] ood set ups and good execution " and that it " gave us good comedy " as it had " plenty to work with . " In regards to the Liz and Dennis story , he admitted that while it was funny , it was " fairly stereotypical . " Canning commented that Jack 's relationship with Condoleezza Rice in the episode was a " great concept " and " offered up a good number of chuckles " , although " it never became as clever as it appeared it was going to be . " Canning gave the episode a 6 @.@ 5 out of 10 rating . TV Guide 's Matt Mitovich was complimentary towards the episode , reporting , " Now this is what I 'm talking about . Second @-@ tier cast integration , multiple stories going on , intimations that Condoleezza Rice likes phone sex ... Another winning week for NBC 's 30 Rock . " Mitovich enjoyed the fact that Jack was in a relationship with Rice , writing that another show " would build [ the ] whole episode around them " but that 30 Rock " made it that much funnier by playing it in the background and thus getting to be more outrageous with it . " Julia Ward of AOL 's TV Squad wrote that Alec Baldwin " always knocks the ball out of the park on the acting front " but noted that " the best material " in this episode belonged to the Tracy and Toofer story . " The show does have a tendency to telegraph its punchlines , but it was nice to have the two men 's differences resolved by finding the funny in a Star Jones / excessive vomiting sketch . " Ward was complimentary towards Jane Krakowski , observing that her " comic timing " in " The Break @-@ Up " was " impeccable as usual , but it would be nice to see her character get a tad more three @-@ dimensional . " Amy Amatangelo of the Boston Herald enjoyed Dean Winters ' appearances on the show , citing that he does a " hilarious turn " as Dennis , while the Houston Chronicle 's Mike McDaniel opined that Winters had a " [ s ] <unk> @-@ stealing and hilarious role " on the show . 
 = 2010 – 11 Calgary Flames season = 
 The 2010 – 11 Calgary Flames season was the 31st season in Calgary and 39th for the Flames franchise in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . The Flames finished second in the Northwest Division but failed to qualify for the playoffs after finishing 10th in the Western Conference . It was the second consecutive season that the Flames missed the playoffs . 
 The franchise reached two milestones during the season : In November , Curtis Glencross scored the 10,000th goal in franchise history dating back to the founding of the Atlanta Flames in 1972 , and in January , the Flames played their 3,000th game . Calgary hosted the 2011 Heritage Classic , an outdoor game against the Montreal Canadiens . The Flames won the game 4 – 0 as goaltender Miikka Kiprusoff became the first goaltender to record a shutout in an NHL outdoor game . 
 Individually , forward Craig Conroy played his 1,000th game before retiring mid season . Team captain Jarome Iginla scored his 500th career assist in January , then recorded his 1,000th point in March en route to leading the team in scoring with 86 points . Former owner Doc Seaman was posthumously inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame . 
 The season marked a turning point for the organization , as General Manager Darryl Sutter announced in December that he was stepping down from the position after eight years with the Flames . Assistant General Manager Jay Feaster assumed full responsibility for the team on an interim basis . 
 = = Pre @-@ season = = 
 Failure to qualify for the 2010 Stanley Cup playoffs resulted in changes to the team 's management and evaluation structure . Former Tampa Bay Lightning general manager Jay Feaster was hired to serve as an assistant to Darryl Sutter , while three scouts were released by the organization as it planned to take a new direction in its amateur scouting . 
 The organization participated in a five @-@ team prospects tournament held in Penticton , British Columbia , that included the Vancouver Canucks , Edmonton Oilers , Anaheim Ducks and San Jose Sharks . Calgary 's prospects played three games , defeating the Ducks 8 – 4 before losing to the Oilers and Canucks by 5 – 3 and 5 – 4 scores , respectively . 
 The Flames played seven games as part of their exhibition schedule , including split @-@ squad games on September 21 against the Vancouver Canucks , with each city hosting one of the match @-@ ups . Calgary faced the New York Islanders in Saskatoon for the second consecutive season . They went unbeaten in the pre @-@ season , recording seven consecutive victories . 
 Calgary ended the exhibition season with several injuries to key players . Centre Daymond Langkow remained sidelined following a neck injury suffered the previous season , while Ryan Stone ( knee ) was also out . Matt Stajan suffered a shoulder separation , David Moss also suffered a shoulder injury and Ales Kotalik was lost to a knee injury . As a result of the injuries , the Flames signed centre Brendan Morrison to a contract ; Morrison had been in training camp with the Canucks before being released . Rookie defenceman T. J. Brodie proved the surprise player of training camp . Expected to start the year with the Abbotsford Heat of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) , Brodie impressed the Flames ' coaching staff and earned a position on the team to begin the NHL season . 
 = = Regular season = = 
 = = = October – December = = = 
 The Flames endured a disastrous start to the season , suffering two shutout losses in their first three games . The second , a 3 – 0 loss to the Florida Panthers , ended with Flames fans loudly booing the team as it left the ice . Three more players were lost to injury , <unk> <unk> and Rene Bourque ( head injuries ) and Adam Pardy ( shoulder ) , while the team 's top scoring line of Jarome Iginla , Olli Jokinen and Alex Tanguay was held pointless . The team 's early struggles resulted in a lengthy meeting between the players and coaches about the team 's need to compete harder . The team responded to the meeting with a stronger effort in a 5 – 3 victory over the Oilers in which Iginla and Tanguay scored their first goals of the season alongside Matt Stajan , who took Jokinen 's spot on the top line . 
 The win over Edmonton began a streak where Calgary won five of six games , ending with another victory over the Oilers , 5 – 4 in a shootout , on October 26 . The Flames ended October with consecutive home losses , to the Colorado Avalanche and Washington Capitals , in which they surrendered two @-@ goal leads in both . The team entered November in the midst of a streak where they lost six of seven games . During the slump , rookie forward Brett Sutter was arrested in Scottsdale , Arizona , on charges that he assaulted a cab driver . Sutter apologized for the incident and his teammates issued a release expressing support , but he was demoted to Abbotsford a few days later . He was subsequently traded to the Carolina Hurricanes along with Ian White in exchange for defenceman Anton <unk> and forward Tom <unk> in a deal that was being discussed by the two teams prior to Sutter 's legal troubles . 
 Calgary struggled to a 4 – 7 – 2 record in November , losing six of their last seven road games during the month . However , the team ended the month with its star players playing their best games of the season . Kiprusoff recorded his third shutout of the season in a 3 – 0 win against the Minnesota Wild while Iginla scored eight goals and 12 points in the final nine games of the month . Though they sat in 14th place in the 15 @-@ team Western Conference , the Flames ended November only five points out of a playoff spot . The organization reached a milestone during the month , as Curtis Glencross scored the 10,000th goal in the history of the Flames franchise during a 3 – 2 victory over the Philadelphia Flyers on November 26 . 
 The team 's struggles continued into December , where the Flames lost four of six games to begin the month . Back @-@ to @-@ back victories over the Columbus Blue Jackets and Toronto Maple Leafs on December 13 and 16 , respectively , marked the first time the team won consecutive games since late October . The latter victory also spoiled Dion Phaneuf 's first return to Calgary following his trade to Toronto the previous season . The Flames followed the victories with three consecutive losses , but entered the Christmas break on a positive note with a 3 – 2 shootout victory over the Dallas Stars . 
 Despite a victory over the Buffalo Sabres after Christmas , and with the team still mired in 14th place in the Western Conference , General Manager and Executive Vice President Darryl Sutter announced his resignation from both positions on December 28 , exactly eight years after he was hired by the team to become its coach in 2002 . The move was not entirely Sutter 's decision , as he was asked by the organization to step aside . The decision came as a shock to many fans , even as it was believed to be inevitable following the team 's decline in recent seasons . Jay Feaster assumed control of the team , serving as acting general manager . 
 = = = January – April = = = 
 Calgary ended 2010 with three consecutive wins and won their first game in 2011 for a season @-@ high four @-@ game winning streak . The streak came to an end at the hands of the New York Islanders on January 3 , a contest that marked the Flames franchise 's 3,000th game in its history . Losses to Vancouver , Detroit and Carolina followed , the latter two in overtime , but the Flames ' four @-@ game eastern road trip that began in Carolina ended with the team registering two wins and six points . The last game of the trip , against the Montreal Canadiens , saw the team come back from a 4 – 0 deficit to force the contest into overtime before Montreal prevailed . Kiprusoff struggled throughout the road trip , and was jeered by the fans on the team 's first game home , a 6 – 0 loss to Minnesota . 
 The team rebounded from the loss , as backup goaltender Henrik Karlsson led the Flames to a 7 – 4 victory over the Dallas Stars on January 21 . Kiprusoff then showed a return to form by making 41 saves to lead the Flames to a 4 – 3 shootout win over Vancouver the following night . Victories over the Nashville Predators and St. Louis Blues allowed the Flames to enter the All @-@ Star break on a four @-@ game winning streak . Posting a 10 – 3 – 3 record in the 16 games leading up to the break , the Flames had pulled themselves to within two points of the eighth and final playoff spot in the West , and stood six points shy of fourth in the conference . 
 Exactly 100 days after the Flames last held a playoff position , they climbed back into the top eight with a 7 – 0 – 1 run that culminated in a 3 – 1 victory over the Chicago Blackhawks . Jokinen tied a franchise record for points in a period during a February 14 game against the Colorado Avalanche when he scored four points in the first period of a 9 – 1 win . The last Flame to accomplish the feat was Al MacInnis in 1991 . The victory also marked Kiprusoff 's 250th win as a member of the Flames . 
 The Flames hosted the Montreal Canadiens at McMahon Stadium in February for the 2011 Heritage Classic . The game was played before 41 @,@ 022 fans who braved a <unk> as cold as − 21 ° C ( − 6 ° F ) . Calgary won the game , 4 – 0 , on the strength of Bourque 's two goals , including the 100th of his career . Kiprusoff became the first goaltender in NHL history to record a shutout at an outdoor game , and his play remained strong following the Heritage Classic , as he shut the Blues out in back @-@ to @-@ back games on February 27 and March 1 . He then became the first goaltender in 25 years to stop two penalty shots in one game to lead the Flames to a 4 – 3 win over the Blue Jackets on March 4 as the Flames moved into fifth place in the West . Two nights later , Iginla scored his 30th goal of the season on a penalty shot against Pekka Rinne of the Nashville Predators . In doing so , he became the 10th player in NHL history to score at least 30 goals in ten consecutive seasons . 
 Jay Bouwmeester , the NHL 's active " ironman " leader , broke Karlis <unk> ' League record for consecutive games played by a defenceman when he appeared in his <unk> consecutive game on March 15 against the Phoenix Coyotes . Bouwmeester last missed a game in the 2003 – 04 season when he suffered a broken foot . He remained 400 games behind Garry Unger 's overall record of 914 consecutive games played . 
 A period of struggle through the middle part of March saw the Flames drop back out of a playoff spot . A 5 – 4 shootout victory over the Oilers on March 26 represented only their second win in eight games . While they ended that night just one point behind the eighth place Blackhawks , Chicago had played three fewer games at that point . A controversial loss to the Ducks on March 30 left Calgary three points behind Chicago with four games to play . The Flames had an apparent tying goal disallowed after Anaheim 's Ryan Getzlaf appeared to pull the puck out of the net in a game the Ducks went on to win 4 – 2 . 
 The Flames gained a boost when it was announced that injured forward Daymond Langkow had been cleared to return to action on April 1 against the Blues . It was Langkow 's first game in over a year after suffering cracked <unk> in his neck late in the 2009 – 10 season . Langkow recorded an assist in that game , a 3 – 2 victory . Iginla was involved in all three goals for Calgary ; his second goal of the night , and game winner , was the 1,000th point of his NHL career . 
 = = Post @-@ season = = 
 Though the Flames won their third consecutive game in April with a 6 – 1 victory over Edmonton , victories the same night by the Ducks and Blackhawks officially eliminated Calgary from playoff contention . Individually , Iginla recorded his 12th career hat trick to reach the 40 goal mark for the fourth time in his career while Kiprusoff tied Mike Vernon 's franchise record of 262 wins . The Flames ended their season with an overtime loss to the Canucks . Though they ended the year second in the Northwest Division , the Flames finished tenth in the Western Conference , three points behind the eighth place Blackhawks . 
 Several coaches were released by the organization at the conclusion of the season . Goaltender Coach Jamie McLennan and Video Coach Rob Cookson were the first to be let go . McLennan had joined the coaching staff in 2009 after retiring as a player , while Cookson had been a member of the Flames ' staff for nine years . Assistant Ryan McGill was later relieved of his position , while assistant Dave Lowry was the only member of Brent Sutter 's staff who was retained by the Flames . 
 While several players were invited to participate in the 2011 IIHF World Championship , Jarome Iginla , Jay Bouwmeester , Mark Giordano , Curtis Glencross and Alex Tanguay all turned down invitations to play for Team Canada for various reasons . Mikael Backlund and prospect Tim Erixon both played for Sweden . The pair won silver medals after the Swedes were defeated by Finland in the championship final . 
 = = Schedule and results = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ season = = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = Player statistics = = 
 = = = Skaters = = = 
 Note : GP 
 = Games played ; G = 
 Goals ; A 
 = Assists ; Pts = 
 Points ; + / − 
 = Plus / Minus ; PIM = 
 Penalty Minutes 
 = = = Goaltenders = = = 
 Note : GP 
 = Games Played ; TOI = 
 Time On Ice ( minutes ) ; W 
 = Wins ; L = 
 Losses ; OT 
 = Overtime Losses ; GA = 
 Goals Against ; GAA = Goals Against Average ; SA = Shots Against ; SV 
 = Saves ; Sv % = 
 Save Percentage ; SO = Shutouts 
 † Denotes player spent time with another team before joining Flames . Stats reflect time with the Flames only . ‡ Traded mid @-@ season 
 Bold / italics denotes franchise record 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 The NHL announced on June 22 , 2010 , that late owner Doc Seaman had been inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in the builder 's category . Seaman was one of the original owners who brought the team to the city , played a key role in the construction of the Olympic Saddledome and in bringing the 1988 Winter Olympics to Calgary . 
 Several players reached major games played milestones in October . Rookie defenceman T. J. Brodie and goaltender Henrik Karlsson both played their first NHL games , while Karlsson earned his first win at the same time . Meanwhile , veteran defencemen Robyn Regehr and Cory Sarich each played their 800th games . 
 Thirty @-@ nine @-@ year @-@ old Craig Conroy became the second @-@ oldest player in NHL history to play 1 @,@ 000 games on October 28 . The talkative forward began his NHL career in 1995 with the Montreal Canadiens and after playing with the St. Louis Blues for several seasons , was acquired by Calgary in 2001 in a trade that was initially unpopular in Calgary . Conroy has since become one of the Flames ' most popular players . He played only nine more games before announcing his retirement as a player to join the Flames ' front office as an assistant to General Manager Jay Feaster . 
 Daymond Langkow was named a finalist for the Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy , awarded to the player who " best exemplifies the qualities of perseverance , sportsmanship and dedication to hockey . " He was nominated after making his return to the Flames lineup one year after a slapshot to the neck left him with broken vertebrae . Ray Emery of the Anaheim Ducks and Ian Laperriere of the Philadelphia Flyers were also named finalists for the award . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 = = = Milestones = = = 
 = = Transactions = = 
 Two former Flames were brought back into the fold on the first day of the free agent signing period . Calgary first signed Alex Tanguay to a one @-@ year , $ 1 @.@ 7 million contract and then generated considerable debate by signing Olli Jokinen to a two @-@ year , $ 6 million deal . The re @-@ acquisition of Jokinen was especially surprising to fans and media alike , as the centre was shipped to the New York Rangers in a controversial trade only four months previous after a disappointing 2009 – 10 season in Calgary . The signing was sharply criticized by local and national media , though reaction amongst fans was mixed as polls suggested only a minority opposed the moves . 
 = = = Trades = = = 
 = = = Additions and subtractions = = = 
 = = Draft picks = = 
 The Flames entered the 2010 NHL Entry Draft without a selection in the first two rounds . They would have picked 13th overall , however that pick was traded to the Phoenix Coyotes as part of a 2009 trade for Olli Jokinen . Their second round pick went to the Chicago Blackhawks as part of a 2008 deal in which Calgary acquired Rene Bourque . The Flames ' first selection was early in the third round , a pick acquired from the Columbus Blue Jackets in exchange for Anton Stralman . They selected Max Reinhart with that pick . His father Paul was also a former Flames draft pick . Calgary made one trade at the draft , sending their sixth round pick ( 163rd overall ) to the Sharks in exchange for goaltender Henrik Karlsson . 
 Statistics are updated to the end of the 2014 – 15 NHL season . † denotes player was on an NHL roster in 2014 – 15 . 
 = = Abbotsford Heat = = 
 For the second year , the Flames ' top affiliate was the Abbotsford Heat of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) . The Heat finished the 2010 – 11 AHL season with a 38 – 32 – 4 – 6 record , fourth in the North Division , but failed to qualify for the Calder Cup playoffs . The Heat struggled offensively for much of the season ; Matt Keith was the team 's leading scorer at just 35 points , while T. J. Brodie and Jon <unk> had 34 points each . Brodie , a rookie , was the team 's lone representative at the 2011 AHL All @-@ Star Game . Leland Irving established himself as the team 's top goaltender early in the year . His 30 wins was second in the AHL , and he led the league in shutouts with eight . 
 The uncertainty surrounding the NHL 's Phoenix Coyotes and a possible relocation to Winnipeg resulted in speculation that the Heat would also be relocating . Vancouver radio station <unk> reported that if the Coyotes relocated , the Manitoba Moose would move to Abbotsford , and the Heat to the nearby community of Chilliwack . Flames president Ken King refuted the argument , noting that the Heat were in only their second year of a ten @-@ year agreement with the City of Abbotsford . 
 = Owen Hunt = 
 Owen Hunt , M.D. is a fictional character from the medical drama television series Grey 's Anatomy , which airs on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States . The character was created by series ' producer Shonda Rhimes , and is portrayed by actor Kevin McKidd . He was introduced in season five as a U.S. Army trauma surgeon who served in war @-@ torn Iraq , and subsequently joins the fictional Seattle Grace Hospital to teach medicine as a surgical attending , head of trauma surgery , and eventual chief of surgery , sometimes with unorthodox methods . Originally contracted to appear for a multi @-@ episode story arc , he was upgraded to a series ' regular at the conclusion of his first appearance . 
 The fictional character served as a love interest for surgical fellow Cristina Yang , and had an unstable personality when first introduced , suffering from PTSD . McKidd 's connection with fellow actress Sandra Oh ( Cristina Yang ) has been acclaimed amongst critics , with Matt Roush of TV Guide calling the " instant sparks " between McKidd and Oh " electrifying " . McKidd was nominated for two awards for his work on the show , winning one of them . Chris Monfette of IGN has praised the addition of " fresh , new characters " such as Owen Hunt . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Before his regular appearances on the show , Owen Hunt was a United States Army surgeon , specializing in trauma surgery . The character makes a dramatic first appearance when he performs a tracheotomy on a man with a pen , winning the admiration of resident Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) . He is offered a job by former chief of surgery Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) , but declines , explaining that he has not completed his tour in Iraq . He later becomes the new head of trauma surgery , at Seattle Grace Mercy West Hospital , and manages to irk both Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) and Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) , head of neurosurgery and plastic surgery , respectively , who view his treatment of some of the patients as crude . He is also rebuffed by resident Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) when he stabs a set of pigs and then orders the residents and interns to save their lives , in order to teach them medicine on " live tissue . " Hunt eventually embarks on a relationship with Yang , but it comes to a sudden close when his PTSD gets the best of him , and he unconsciously strangles her . Soon after the breakup , he begins therapy with the hospital psychiatrist , Dr. Wyatt . Some time later , a soldier visits the hospital for treatment , and his presence influences Owen to contemplate returning to the US Army . When he shares this with Cristina , she disagrees with his decision , stating that she doesn 't want him to die , and the two eventually rekindle their relationship . Owen brings in Teddy Altman ( Kim Raver ) , his best friend and colleague from when he was in the army , as the new head of cardiothoracic surgery . When it is revealed that Hunt and Altman may be potential lovers , Hunt and Yang 's relationship is challenged , and eventually concluded by Yang . 
 During a hospital shooting , Owen is shot and injured , attracting the sympathy of Cristina , who subsequently restores their relationship . Due to the emotional reverberations of the shooting crisis , Owen and Cristina decide to wed one another shortly after their reconciliation , not wanting to risk separation . When Cristina discovers she is pregnant , Owen is displeased with her desire to abort the baby , and the two separate from each other . In the fallout of resident Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) ' s tampering with Derek Shepherd 's Alzheimer 's trial , Owen is promoted to Chief of Surgery after Webber steps down . After substantial thought , Owen reluctantly decides to accompany Cristina to the abortion , uniting the two . Owen 's friendship with Teddy ends when Owen lies to Teddy about her husband 's sudden death , due to Owen wanting her to finish a surgery she was currently performing and Teddy blaming Owen for her husband 's death . Feeling abandoned and disconcerted after an altercation with Cristina , Owen has a one @-@ night stand with a patient 's friend . Cristina consequently finds out , terminates their relationship , and their marriage is tested . After Cristina passed her medical boards , she reconciles with Owen , but reveals to him that she is leaving Seattle to go to Mayo Clinic . Teddy and Owen eventually became friends again . After learning that she has been offered a job at Med Com , Owen fires her assuring her that he will be okay . He also fires April Kepner ( Sarah Drew ) because the hospital cannot afford to keep her due to her not being a Board certified . Months later , Hunt visits Kepner and rehires her as he realized he made a mistake . 
 In season 9 Cristina and Owen 's marriage is again very strained . Cristina is working at Mayo Clinic and Owen in Seattle but she returns . Owen asks for a divorce . He later shows that he is still in love with her and only asked for a divorce so Cristina and the others involved in the plane crash get the money . Cristina and Owen reconcile in episode 9 before Bailey 's wedding . 
 In season 10 , Cristina decides to accept a job to run a state of the art clinic in Switzerland . Owen supports her decision as he realizes no good could come from him asking her to stay , but requests her not to leave him until she has to leave him for good , following which , they both spend two weeks leading to her permanent departure together . While saying her farewell to her colleagues of the last seven years , there is a possible act of terrorism in Seattle , which later turns out to be just a gas main explosion . Cristina has a quick but emotional goodbye hug with Derek , Bailey , and Webber , leaves her shares of the hospital to Alex , and dances it out with Meredith one last time to an old favorite song . Owen , however , is busy saving a patient in the O.R. , so they share a silent goodbye through the gallery 's glass . 
 In Season 11 , Owen develops a relationship with Amelia Shepherd . This is off and on throughout Season 11 and 12 until the end of Season 12 where he and Amelia get married . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Casting and creation = = = 
 Shonda Rhimes , series ' creator , says that the character was envisioned " an old @-@ fashioned tortured hero " and likens him to Heathcliff . Originally set to appear in a multi @-@ episode story arc , Kevin McKidd 's contract was extended , securing him a slot as a series ' regular of Grey 's Anatomy . In July 2008 , Entertainment Weekly announced the possibility of McKidd becoming a series ' regular , with this possibility eventually being confirmed by People . When asked of how he got involved with the show , McKidd offered the insight : 
 McKidd told BuddyTV , " It 's been really great . I was nervous when I started because every job I 've ever done before this , I have been in the job right from day one when everybody 's new and getting to know each other . So I was nervous because I had never done this before . And I feel really grateful to the Grey 's cast and crew and everyone there , really , because they 've been so nice to me and gracious and accepting of me joining the show . The transition was much easier than I thought it might be , which I 'm very grateful for . " McKidd has told People that he thinks Grey 's Anatomy is a great show and he feels lucky to be on it . Shonda Rhimes , the series ' creator , said of his addition , " I am excited to have Kevin McKidd joining us for the season , he 's been a delight to collaborate with and brings incredible passion , talent and creativity to his work . Plus , he ’ s already got the ‘ Mc ’ built into his name so we had to keep him . " 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 The American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) characterized Hunt as " confident " , " innovative " , " intelligent " , while he also can be " aggressive " , " brazen " , " presumptuous " , " hasty and rash " . McKidd said of his character : " [ ... ] He 's not an easy character to connect to , I think . There 's some darkness to him and there 's some danger to him that I think is really interesting and exciting to play . [ ... ] " Additionally , McKidd describes Hunt as " very instinctive , and follows his gut , and he 's very impulsive , and very immediate . He immediately assesses a situation . And he 's very honest , sometimes painfully honest , with himself and with others . He wants to make himself better . He wants to improve himself as a person . He 's a decent guy , a sort of a guy I 'd like to go out and have a beer with . " McKidd 's unorthodox teaching methods have been the subject of controversy . McKidd said of this : 
 " You know , I think , at the end of the day , [ Owen ] ' s basically a good man who has some pretty extreme teaching techniques that he learned in the army . And all these things that are in the show are actually the way trauma surgeons are taught . But I think probably beyond that , he very much just calls a spade a spade and looks at each scenario . He 's not trying to be difficult . He just looks at each scenario and each case and each patient and knows what is needed and when to cut to the chase , and doesn 't want to mess about with the periphery of it . And sometimes that gets him into trouble , and sometimes that is for the best . So , it 'd be interesting and kind of exciting to see where he goes . " 
 The look of Owen has been described as hardcore and the antithesis of the other males on the show . McKidd says it 's not just the look of Owen , but the fact that in his profession , he is dealing with life and death everyday . The one distinction he finds between his character and the others is that Owen does not care what other people think of him . When McKidd returned from his first appearance , his character appeared to have been changed . McKidd told TV Guide : " Yes , that was who he really is in the premiere , but now we 're seeing what can happen to a good man , a good soldier and good surgeon [ because of war ] . " 
 The character of Owen Hunt had an almost instant attraction to Cristina Yang since his first appearance at Seattle Grace , illustrated by the passionate kiss they share soon after they meet . Owen 's story and connection with fellow character Cristina has been a topic of discussion . McKidd said : " Between him [ Owen ] and her [ Cristina ] , it ’ s going to get really complex and kind of tense and explosive . " Owen and Cristina have experienced roadblocks in their fictional relationship , and continue to . McKidd offered this insight on his character 's relationship with Cristina : 
 McKidd has referred to his character and the character of Cristina Yang as " soulmates . " Speaking of Owen 's PTSD storyline , McKidd stated : " What 's exciting about telling this story with this character is that it 's quite brave of ABC and Shonda [ Rhimes ] , on a prime @-@ time network TV show , to address a tough subject , and one that people don 't necessarily want to hear about . But so far the writing room is handling it beautifully . They 're not banging people over the head with it but exploring it in a sensitive and interesting way . " Owen and Cristina have struggled with their fictional relationship in season eight , leading to Owen having a sexual affair . Directly before the episode involving the affair aired , McKidd said to Entertainment Weekly : " The thing about Owen is that he tries to do things perfectly , and obviously , he messes up as the chief because you have to make these odd black @-@ and @-@ white decisions and sometimes you make the wrong decision . There ’ s a lot of stress in his life at the moment , so he ’ s trying not to let that affect his efficiency as chief . " Although the characters ' marriage is tested , McKidd reported to The Hollywood Reporter : " I think they 're meant for each other . I hold out faith in Cristina and Owen , even though they go to the darkest places out of all the couples on the show . It 's going to get worse but it 's going to get better soon . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The character has received generally positive feedback from television critics . Weeks after Hunt 's first appearance on the show , Matt Roush of TV Guide commented that " Hunt / McKidd is the most encouraging thing to happen to Grey 's Anatomy in quite a while . " He also added : " The instant sparks between him [ Hunt ] and Yang were electrifying . " On the other hand , Robert Rorke of the New York Post states that McKidd was brought in as Hunt to " boost the sagging fortunes " of the show 's ratings . Kelley L. Carter of USA Today , describes Hunt as " hardcore " and " the antithesis of the other males on the show . " Chris Monfette of IGN said that the fifth season of Grey 's Anatomy was an improvement on the previous two seasons , attributing this in part to the introduction of " fresh , new characters " , Owen and Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ) . He also referred to McKidd as " the season [ five ] ' s best , most effective addition " , adding : 
 Margaret Lyons of New York Magazine judged Hunt " too sad " for the first part of the ninth season . In 2010 , Kevin McKidd was nominated for the Prism Award for Best Performance in a Drama Series ' Multi @-@ Episode Storyline , and won the award . In 2011 , McKidd was nominated for the Prism Award for Best Performance in a Drama Series , for his work on Grey 's Anatomy . McKidd was nominated , along with the rest of the Grey 's Anatomy cast , for Best Drama Series at the 21st GLAAD Media Awards , in 2010 . Also in 2010 , McKidd , and the rest of the cast , were nominated for Outstanding Drama Series , at the NAACP Image Awards . The same nomination was received at the 2011 NAACP Image Awards , with the cast winning the award . At the 43rd NAACP Image Awards , in 2012 , McKidd and the cast were nominated yet again for Outstanding Drama Series . 
 = James Franck = 
 James Franck ( 26 August 1882 – 21 May 1964 ) was a German physicist who won the 1925 Nobel Prize for Physics with Gustav Hertz " for their discovery of the laws governing the impact of an electron upon an atom " . He completed his doctorate in 1906 and his habilitation in 1911 at the Frederick William University in Berlin , where he lectured and taught until 1918 , having reached the position of professor <unk> . He served as a volunteer in the German Army during World War I. He was seriously injured in 1917 in a gas attack and was awarded the Iron Cross 1st Class . 
 Franck became the Head of the Physics Division of the Kaiser Wilhelm Gesellschaft for Physical Chemistry . In 1920 , Franck became professor ordinarius of experimental physics and Director of the Second Institute for Experimental Physics at the University of Göttingen . While there he worked on quantum physics with Max Born , who was Director of the Institute of Theoretical Physics . His work included the Franck – Hertz experiment , an important confirmation of the Bohr model of the atom . He promoted the careers of women in physics , notably Lise Meitner , Hertha Sponer and Hilde Levi . 
 After the NSDAP came to power in Germany in 1933 , Franck resigned his post in protest against the dismissal of fellow academics . He assisted Frederick Lindemann in helping dismissed Jewish scientists find work overseas , before he left Germany in November 1933 . After a year at the Niels Bohr Institute in Denmark , he moved to the United States , where he worked at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore and then the University of Chicago . During this period he became interested in photosynthesis . 
 Franck participated in the Manhattan Project during World War II as Director of the Chemistry Division of the Metallurgical Laboratory . He was also the chairman of the Committee on Political and Social Problems regarding the atomic bomb , which is best known for the compilation of the Franck Report , which recommended that the atomic bombs not be used on the Japanese cities without warning . 
 = = Early life = = 
 James Franck was born in Hamburg , Germany , on 26 August 1882 , the second child and first son of Jacob Franck , a banker , and his wife Rebecca née <unk> Drucker . He had an older sister , Paula , and a younger brother , Robert Bernard . His father was a devout and religious man , while his mother came from a family of rabbis . Franck attended primary school in Hamburg . Starting in 1891 he attended the Wilhelm @-@ Gymnasium , which was then a boys @-@ only school . 
 Hamburg had no university then , so prospective students had to attend one of the 22 universities elsewhere in Germany . Intending to study law and economics , Franck entered the University of Heidelberg in 1901 , as it had a renowned law school . He attended lectures on law , but was far more interested in those on science . While there , he met Max Born , who would become a lifelong friend . With Born 's help , he was able to persuade his parents to allow him to switch to studying physics and chemistry . Franck attended mathematics lectures by Leo <unk> and Georg Cantor , but Heidelberg was not strong on the physical sciences , so he decided to go to the Frederick William University in Berlin . 
 At Berlin , Franck attended lectures by Max Planck and Emil Warburg . On 28 July 1904 he saved a pair of children from drowning in the Spree River . For his Doctor of Philosophy ( Dir . Phil . ) under Warburg 's supervision , Warburg suggested that he study corona discharges . Franck found this topic too complex , so he changed the focus of his thesis . Entitled Über der <unk> <unk> der <unk> ( " On the Mobility of Ions " ) , it would subsequently be published in the Annalen der Physik . 
 With his thesis completed , Franck had to perform his deferred military service . He was called up on 1 October 1906 and joined the 1st Telegraph Battalion . He suffered a minor horse riding accident in December and was discharged as unfit for duty . He took up an assistantship at the Physikalische Verein in Frankfurt in 1907 , but did not enjoy it , and soon returned to Frederick William University . At a concert Franck met Ingrid Josephson , a Swedish pianist . They were married in a Swedish ceremony in Göteborg on 23 December 1907 . They had two daughters , Dagmar ( <unk> ) , who was born in 1909 , and Elisabeth ( Lisa ) , who was born in 1912 . 
 To pursue an academic career in Germany , having a doctorate was not enough ; one needed a <unk> <unk> , or habilitation . This could be achieved with either another major thesis or by producing a substantial body of published work . Franck chose the latter route . There were many unsolved problems in physics at the time , and by 1914 he had published 34 articles . He was the sole author of some , but generally preferred working in collaboration with Eva von Bahr , Lise Meitner , Robert Pohl , Peter Pringsheim , Robert W. Wood , Arthur <unk> or Wilhelm Westphal . His most fruitful collaboration was with Gustav Hertz , with whom he wrote 19 articles . He received his habilitation on 20 May 1911 . 
 = = Franck – Hertz experiment = = 
 In 1914 , Franck teamed up with Hertz to perform an experiment to investigate fluorescence . They designed a vacuum tube for studying energetic electrons that flew through a thin vapour of mercury atoms . They discovered that when an electron collided with a mercury atom it could lose only a specific quantity ( 4 @.@ 9 electron volts ) of its kinetic energy before flying away . A faster electron does not decelerate completely after a collision , but loses precisely the same amount of its kinetic energy . Slower electrons just bounce off mercury atoms without losing any significant speed or kinetic energy . 
 These experimental results provided confirmation of Albert Einstein 's photoelectric effect and Planck 's relation ( E = fh ) linking energy ( E ) and frequency ( f ) arising from <unk> of energy with Planck 's constant ( h ) . But they also provided evidence supporting the model of the atom that had been proposed the previous year by Niels Bohr . Its key feature was that an electron inside an atom occupies one of the atom 's " quantum energy levels " . Before a collision , an electron inside the mercury atom occupies its lowest available energy level . After the collision , the electron inside occupies a higher energy level with 4 @.@ 9 electron volts ( eV ) more energy . This means that the electron is more loosely bound to the mercury atom . There were no intermediate levels or possibilities . 
 In a second paper presented in May 1914 , Franck and Hertz reported on the light emission by the mercury atoms that had absorbed energy from collisions . They showed that the wavelength of this ultraviolet light corresponded exactly to the 4 @.@ 9 eV of energy that the flying electron had lost . The relationship of energy and wavelength had also been predicted by Bohr . Franck and Hertz completed their last paper together in December 1918 . In it , they reconciled the discrepancies between their results and Bohr 's theory , which they now acknowledged . In his Nobel lecture , Franck admitted that it was " completely incomprehensible that we had failed to recognise the fundamental significance of Bohr ’ s theory , so much so , that we never even mentioned it once " . On 10 December 1926 , Franck and Hertz were awarded the 1925 Nobel Prize in Physics " for their discovery of the laws governing the impact of an electron upon an atom . " . 
 = = World War I = = 
 Franck enlisted in the German Army soon after the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 . In December he was sent to the Picardy sector of the Western Front . He became a deputy officer ( <unk> ) , and then a lieutenant ( <unk> ) in 1915 . He was awarded the Iron Cross , Second Class , on 30 March 1915 , and the city of Hamburg awarded him the Hanseatic Cross on 11 January 1916 . While in hospital with pleurisy , he co @-@ wrote yet another scientific paper with Hertz , and he was appointed an assistant professor in his absence by Frederick William University on 19 September 1916 . Sent to the Russian front , he came down with dysentery . He returned to Berlin , where he joined Hertz , Westphal , Hans Geiger , Otto Hahn and others at Fritz Haber 's Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry , working on the development of gas masks . He was awarded the Iron Cross , First Class , on 23 February 1918 . He was discharged from the Army on 25 November 1918 , soon after the war ended . 
 With the war over , Haber 's Kaiser Wilhelm Institute now returned to research , and Haber offered Franck a job . His new post came with more pay , but was not a tenured position . It did however allow Franck to pursue his research as he wished . Working with new , younger collaborators such as Walter Grotrian , Paul Knipping , Thea Krüger , Fritz Reiche and Hertha Sponer , his first papers at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute examined atomic electrons in their excited state , results that would later prove important in the development of the laser . They coined the term " metastable " for atoms spending an extended time in a state other than that of least energy . When Niels Bohr visited Berlin in 1920 , Meitner and Franck arranged for him to come to the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute to talk with the younger staff without the presence of the <unk> ( " bigwigs " ) . 
 = = Göttingen = = 
 In 1920 , the University of Göttingen offered Max Born its chair of theoretical physics , which had recently been vacated by Peter Debye . Göttingen was an important centre for mathematics , thanks to David Hilbert , Felix Klein , Hermann Minkowski and Carl Runge , but not so much for physics . This would change . As part of his price for coming to Göttingen , Born wanted Franck to head experimental physics there . On 15 November 1920 , Franck became Professor of Experimental Physics and Director of the Second Institute for Experimental Physics , a fully tenured professor ordinarius . He was allowed two assistants , so he brought Hertha Sponer with him from Berlin to fill one of the positions . Pohl , a gifted teacher , headed the First Institute , and handled the lectures . Franck refurbished the laboratory with the latest equipment using funds from his own pocket . 
 Under Born and Franck , Göttingen was one of the world 's great centres for physics between 1920 and 1933 . Although they published only three papers together , Born and Franck discussed every one of their papers with each other . Gaining admittance to Franck 's laboratory became highly competitive . His doctoral students included Hans <unk> , Arthur R. von Hippel , Wilhelm <unk> , Fritz Houtermans , Heinrich Kuhn , Werner <unk> , Walter Lochte @-@ <unk> and Heinz Maier @-@ <unk> . In supervising doctoral candidates , Franck had to ensure that thesis topics were well @-@ defined , and would teach the candidate how to conduct original research , while still staying within the limits of the candidate 's ability , the laboratory 's equipment and the institute 's budget . Under his direction , research was carried out into the structure of atoms and molecules . 
 In his own research , Franck developed what became known as the Franck @-@ Condon principle , a rule in spectroscopy and quantum chemistry that explains the intensity of <unk> transitions , simultaneous changes in electronic and vibrational energy levels of a molecule due to the absorption or emission of a photon of the appropriate energy . The principle states that during an electronic transition , a change from one vibrational energy level to another will be more likely to happen if the two vibrational wave functions overlap more significantly . The principle has since been applied to a wide variety of related phenomena . 
 = = Exile = = 
 This period came to an end when the Nazi Party won power in Germany in an election on 2 March 1933 . The following month it enacted the Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service , which provided for the retirement or dismissal of all Jewish civil servants , along with political opponents of the government . As a veteran of the First World War , Franck was exempt , but he submitted his resignation anyway on 17 April 1933 . He once commented that science was his God and nature was his religion . He did not require his daughters to attend religious instruction classes at school , and even let them have a decorated tree at Christmas ; but he was proud of his Jewish heritage all the same . He was the first academic to resign in protest over the law . Newspapers around the world reported it , but no government or university protested . 
 Franck assisted Frederick Lindemann in helping dismissed Jewish scientists find work overseas , before he left Germany in November 1933 . After a brief visit to the United States , where he measured the absorption of light in heavy water with Wood at Johns Hopkins University , he took up a position at the Niels Bohr Institute in Copenhagen . He needed a new collaborator , so he took on Hilde Levi , whose recent thesis had impressed him . His original intention was to continue his research into the fluorescence of vapours and liquids , but under Bohr 's influence they began to take an interest in biological aspects of these reactions , particularly photosynthesis , the process by which plants use light to convert carbon dioxide and water into more organic compounds . Biological processes turned out to be far more complicated than simple reactions in atoms and molecules . He co @-@ authored two papers with Levi on the subject , which he would return to over the following years . 
 Franck found a position at the <unk> <unk> in Copenhagen for Arthur von Hippel , who was now his son in law , having married his daughter Dagmar . He decided to provide financial security for his children by dividing his Nobel Prize money between them . The gold medal itself was entrusted to Niels Bohr for safekeeping . When Germany invaded Denmark on 9 April 1940 , the Hungarian chemist George de Hevesy dissolved the gold medal , along with that of Max von Laue in aqua regia to prevent the Germans from taking them . He placed the resulting solution on a shelf in his laboratory at the Niels Bohr Institute . After the war , he returned to find the solution undisturbed and precipitated the gold out of the acid . The Nobel Society then recast the Nobel Prize medals . 
 In 1935 , Franck moved to the United States , where he had accepted a professorship at Johns Hopkins University . The laboratory there was poorly equipped compared to the one in Göttingen , but he received $ 10 @,@ 000 for equipment from the Rockefeller Foundation . A more intractable problem was that the university had no money to hire skilled staff . Franck was concerned about his family members remaining in Germany , and needed money to help them emigrate . He therefore accepted an offer from the University of Chicago , where his work on photosynthesis had attracted interest , in 1938 . 
 Franck 's first paper there , co @-@ authored with Edward Teller , was on photochemical processes in crystals . Hans Gaffron became his collaborator . They were joined by Pringsheim , who escaped from Belgium after the German invasion . Franck arranged a position for Pringsheim at his laboratory . Both his daughters and their families moved to the United States , and he was also able to bring out his elderly mother and aunt . He became a naturalised United States citizen on 21 July 1941 , so he was not an enemy alien when the United States declared war on Germany on 11 December 1941 . His daughters still were , though , so they were restricted from travelling , and could not take care of their mother when she fell ill and died on 10 January 1942 , although they were permitted to attend her funeral . 
 In February 1942 , Arthur H. Compton established its Metallurgical Laboratory at the University of Chicago . As part of the Manhattan Project , its mission was to build nuclear reactors to create plutonium that would be used in atomic bombs . The Metallurgical Laboratory 's Chemistry Division was initially headed by Frank Spedding , but he preferred hands on work to administration . Compton then turned to Franck , with some trepidation owing to his German background . Compton later wrote : 
 How Franck welcomed an invitation to join our project ! It was a vote of confidence that far exceeded his hopes , and it gave him a chance to do his part for the cause of freedom . " It 's not the German people I 'm fighting " , he explained . " It 's the Nazis . They have a stranglehold over Germany . The German people are helpless until we can break the strength of their Nazi masters . " The chemists welcomed Franck as an elder scientific statesman whose guidance they were glad to follow . 
 In addition to heading the Chemistry Division , Franck was also the chairman of the Metallurgical Laboratory 's Committee on Political and Social Problems regarding the atomic bomb , which consisted of himself and Donald J. Hughes , J. J. Nickson , Eugene <unk> , Glenn T. Seaborg , J. C. Stearns and Leó Szilárd . In 1945 , Franck warned Henry A. Wallace of their fears that " mankind has learned to unleash atomic power without being ethically and politically prepared to use it wisely . " The committee compiled what became known as the Franck Report . Finished on 11 June 1945 , it recommended that the atomic bombs not be used on the Japanese cities without warning . In any event , the Interim Committee decided otherwise . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Franck married Sponer in a civil ceremony on 29 June 1946 . In his post @-@ war research , he continued to tackle the problem of explaining the mechanism of photosynthesis . Meitner saw no break between his early and later work . She recalled that 
 Franck enjoyed talking about his problems , not so much to explain them to others as to satisfy his own mind . Once a problem had aroused his interest he was completely captivated , indeed obsessed by it . Common sense and straight logic were his main tools , together with simple apparatus . His research followed an almost straight line , from his early studies of ion <unk> to his last work on photosynthesis ; it was always the energy exchange between atoms or molecules that fascinated him . 
 In addition to the Nobel Prize . Franck was awarded the Max Planck Medal of the Deutsche Physikalische Gesellschaft in 1951 and the Rumford Medal of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences for his work on photosynthesis in 1955 . He became an honorary citizen of Göttingen in 1953 , and was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society ( ForMemRS ) in 1964 . He died suddenly from a heart attack while visiting Göttingen on 21 May 1964 , and was buried in Chicago with his first wife . In 1967 , the University of Chicago named the James Franck Institute after him . A lunar crater has also been named in his honour . His papers are in the University of Chicago Library . 
 = Lord of Scoundrels = 
 Lord of Scoundrels is a Regency romance novel by American author Loretta Chase . Published in 1995 by Avon Books , it is the third installment of her <unk> series . Set in 1828 , the story follows the Marquess of Dain , a half @-@ English half @-@ Italian aristocrat known as " Lord Beelzebub " and the " Lord of Scoundrels " for his unscrupulous , immoral behavior . Hardened due to a difficult childhood , Dain meets his match in Jessica Trent , a 27 @-@ year @-@ old bluestocking more than capable of trading wits with him . 
 Chase had a love for Italian culture , and decided that this background would provide ample motivation for Dain , being the product of his parents ' inability to understand each other 's cultures . As with many of her stories , Chase made her heroine a strong female , deciding to model Jessica after the type of women who lived a few generations previously and who had " a more practical , frank attitude toward sex " . Lord of Scoundrels is a retelling of the fairytale Beauty and the Beast , with the author stating that like the Beast , Dain is an outcast and misfit among his society . 
 Lord of Scoundrels was positively received upon its release , and in 1996 it earned the RITA Award for " Best Short Historical " , a prize given annually by the Romance Writers of America . Also during that year , Lord of Scoundrels won the Romantic Times ' " Regency Historical Romance " award . Literary critics and romance readers have since described it as one of the best historical romances ever written , praising the novel for its wit and well @-@ developed characters . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Background 
 In the story 's prologue , Sebastian <unk> is born in Devon to the 2nd Marquess of Dain and his Italian wife , Lucia <unk> . The Marquess is disgusted with the child , describing him as the " Devil 's spawn " and a " wizened olive thing with large black eyes , ill @-@ proportioned limbs , and a grossly oversize nose " . Eight years later , the tempestuous Lucia abandons her husband for her lover . <unk> by his father and told that his mother is an " evil , godless creature " , Sebastian is sent off to Eton where he is teased by his classmates over his appearance . The boy grows up learning to hide his feelings ; given no inheritance by his father , Sebastian acquires clever ways to make his fortune and uses money to <unk> get his way . 
 Plot 
 The story begins in 1828 , Paris . Sebastian , now the intelligent but immoral 3rd Marquess of Dain , meets his match in Miss Jessica Trent , who has arrived in the city to rescue her unintelligent , nearly penniless brother Bertie from Dain 's bad influence . Dain and Jessica are instantly attracted to the other , though each seeks to hide their feelings . Dain has developed a hard , sarcastic personality ; he is hostile to noblewomen , as he believes they care only for money . Jessica , a 27 @-@ year @-@ old beautiful , strong @-@ willed bluestocking , has refused dozens of marriage proposals over the years and wishes to maintain her independence . 
 The two exchange wits ; Jessica requests that Dain send her brother back to England in exchange for a valuable religious icon she will sell him , while Dain wants the icon or else he will destroy her reputation and ruin her brother . They reach an impasse , and while her reputation remains intact , Dain spends the week personally overseeing Bertie 's disintegration from excessive drinking and gambling . Jessica angrily confronts him and the two unexpectedly kiss . Later , at a party they almost consummate their relationship before being discovered by other party @-@ goers . Dain coldly departs , assuming Jessica invited the others to force him to honorably marry her , leaving her angry that he would leave her reputation in tatters so casually . 
 Jessica sues him for the loss of her reputation . To her surprise , Dain converts this proposition into a marriage proposal , and they are wedded in London several weeks later . En route to his estate in Devon , Dain assumes she is repulsed by his " gross <unk> 's body " , when the opposite is true . Filled with self @-@ loathing over his appearance and personality , Dain initially avoids consummating their relationship despite Jessica 's efforts to seduce him . They eventually do , and Dain apologizes for what he realizes has been his difficult behavior . 
 Later , they enter into a disagreement over his illegitimate son ; Dain despises the eight @-@ year @-@ old boy 's calculating mother and wants nothing to do with them , while Jessica sympathetically wants to rescue the boy from his poor living conditions . The boy , Dominick , is becoming ill @-@ behaved and reminds Dain self @-@ <unk> of himself at his age . Eventually , with Jessica 's prodding , Dain is persuaded to rescue the neglected boy from his mother 's clutches . While doing so , the Marquess comes to terms with his mother 's abandonment and realizes that Dominick is just as scared and lonely as he was as a boy . Dominick is invited to live at the <unk> estate , while the boy 's mother , to her pleasure , is given a large stipend and told to find her fortune in Paris . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 American author Loretta Chase began her writing career in 1987 by crafting traditional novels in the Regency romance literary subgenre ; Lord of Scoundrels , published in 1995 , was her ninth such novel released . It was the third installment of her <unk> ( also known as Scoundrels ) series , following The Lion 's Daughter ( 1992 ) and Captives of the Night ( 1994 ) . As such , some of the characters who feature in Lord of Scoundrels , such as the Comte d 'Esmond and Francis Beaumont , also appear in previous Chase works . In 2007 , Chase said Lord of Scoundrels was her only book " that came to me as a gift from the writing gods . Every other book is a struggle , some bloodier than others . This book was pure fun from start to finish " . 
 Possessing a love for Italian culture , Chase decided to make her male protagonist , Dain , a " mongrel English aristocrat " and half @-@ Italian . By giving Dain Italian ancestry through his mother , Chase was able to develop his character and justify his motivations . She explains , " Having Dain be half @-@ Italian fit so many aspects of his story : his background as well as his behavior , which does get operatic at times " . Chase adds that Dain 's difficult childhood stemmed from his parents ' inability to accept each other 's cultures , which then " warps him and makes him a misfit . In a loving household , he would have grown up with a better self @-@ image , and would have dealt with bullying at school in a different way , and thus would have grown up into someone altogether different from the man Jessica meets in that antique shop " . 
 When writing the novel , Chase knew that her female protagonist had to be strong enough to equal Dain 's forceful personality . Chase admits that because the novel is set in the period leading up to the Victorian era , a woman like Jessica could not have dealt with Dain , writing that " if Jessica were like what we assume to be the typical young lady of her time , she could never handle Dain , and he ’ d think her too boring to live " . Chase instead modeled Jessica after the type of women who lived a few generations previously and who had " a more practical , frank attitude toward sex " . 
 Wishing to depict Jessica as the " Extreme Female " , Chase emphasizes her clothing and gives Dain " a chance to exercise his caustic wit " , as he deems the latest fashions to be ridiculous . Upon their first meeting he silently observes that Jessica is wearing " a blue <unk> of some sort and one of the hideously <unk> bonnets currently in fashion " . Jessica differs from many other Chase heroines by being interested in fashion ; the author felt that " the way they dress , to a great extent , tells us who they are , in the same way that other heroines ’ simpler or less fashionable attire expresses something about them " . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Lord of Scoundrels is typically classified as a Regency romance novel , though its story is set in the post @-@ Regency era of 1828 . It features a strong female heroine , a characteristic that Chase has become known for including in her romances . The author explains that " for most of history , and in too many cases today , women are considered ( and too often consider themselves ) lesser beings who do not matter . In my books , the women are not lesser , and they do matter . In other words , I make the world the way I think it should be " . Romantic fiction scholars have identified Jessica Trent as a " feminist heroine " with whom the " alpha male hero " has met his match . Chase inverts many qualities typical of the archetypical romantic hero and heroine . Near the end of the story , Jessica is the one who initiates consummation of their marriage , by seducing Dain . Afterwards , Jessica promptly falls asleep , causing her husband to seethe " that was what he was supposed to do " . 
 In her entry for The Bloomsbury Introduction to Popular Fiction , Maryan Wherry posits that Lord of Scoundrels represents a modern retelling of the classic fairytale Beauty and the Beast , suggesting Chase 's story is a morality tale of " restoring humanity " that is directed at " all levels of society " ( rather than at the lower classes as classic fairytales were intended ) . Chase makes direct reference to this fairytale in the novel , when Dain silently compares his relationship with Jessica to that of Beauty and the Beast . 
 In a 2007 interview , the author described the novel as her " Beauty and the Beast story " , stating that like the Beast , Dain is an outcast and misfit among the novel 's society . Chase describes Dain as " truly awful : rude , overbearing , and intimidating ... He consciously uses his <unk> in the same way he uses his vast wealth and his social position : to control his world and protect himself . It 's sad , in a way , because he ’ s isolated , like the Beast of the fairy tale trapped in his castle . But Dain is not pitiful by any means : He ’ s smart , cynical , and sarcastic , with a sharp eye for the ridiculous . He has a sense of humor and is adept with clever comebacks and <unk> " . Jessica represents the Beauty of the story , someone who " enters the Beast ’ s lair of her own accord " as his equal " no matter how awful " he acts . 
 Leading up to the couple 's marriage , Dain cynically makes many assurances that he will provide for Jessica financially . At one point , Jessica brings a defamation lawsuit against Dain before they agree to convert it into a prenuptial agreement , leading English professor <unk> Kamblé to liken their relationship to " a take @-@ over bid " . Kamblé has studied the presence of capitalism and modern economics on storylines in the contemporary romance genre . To her , while Lord of Scoundrels is a Regency romance novel and thus less apt to depict the types of economic pairings seen in many contemporary romances , Kamblé argues that Dain 's repeated monetary promises still contain " echoes of the kind of wealth , monetary security , and financial reward that the heroes of Harlequin Mills and Boon promise as husbands " . The couple is physically attracted to each other , while financial considerations also play a factor . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Lord of Scoundrels was released in January 1995 by Avon Books , the same publisher that had released Chase 's last two novels . According to Chase 's website , the novel has been published in over fourteen languages . A Spanish translation was released in 2006 , while a Japanese translation was released in 2008 . Its e @-@ book edition , published by HarperCollins , landed on The New York Times Best Seller list in August 2011 . In 1996 , the novel earned the RITA Award for " Best Short Historical " , a prize given annually by the Romance Writers of America . It also won the 1996 " Regency Historical Romance " award , granted by the Romantic Times . In a review by that publication , M. Helfer praised Chase for being " an exquisite storyteller who creates sharply original characters and moves them in new and exciting ways . One of the true treasures of the genre , she epitomizes the essence of excellence in every word she writes " . 
 Soon after its release , the book also won accolades from other award bodies , including " Best Historical Single Title Romance " by Romance Readers Anonymous and " Best Historical Romance " by Reader 's Voice . In 2014 , romance novelist Madeline Hunter recalled Lord of Scoundrels being " the ' must read ' of the season " when it was published in 1995 , and described it as " witty , heartfelt , with a flawed hero and an indomitable heroine , [ and with ] pacing so perfect a reader could only hold on for the ride . It was no surprise that a book that pushed so many peoples ' happy buttons ended up winning a RITA that year . I think there would have been a revolt if it had not " . 
 The novel 's popularity has endured and it is still considered one of the best historical romances ever published . The website " All about Romance " voted it in first place for four years , and it was also deemed the " Best All @-@ Time Historical Romance " by Romance Readers Anonymous for four years . In a 2010 list of " must @-@ reads in romance " for Kirkus Reviews , Sarah Wendell deemed it her favorite historical romance and believed her successful recommendation to a male professor proved its worth . Author Anne Browning Walker , in a similar list of " Smart Romance Books " for Publishers Weekly , included Lord of Scoundrels and observed Chase 's penchant for " creating smart , thoughtful , witty , and well @-@ meaning heroines " . Also writing for Publishers Weekly , author Beverly Jenkins called Lord of Scoundrels an example of " Chase at the top of her game " and opined that its " characters are full @-@ bodied and evenly matched . The passion is to die for , and every romance reader I know has this book on their keeper shelf " . 
 Elissa <unk> of RT Book Reviews wrote in 2014 , " Some consider Loretta Chase ’ s epic tale to be the best Regency ever written " . Novelist <unk> James recommended Lord of Scoundrels for readers interested in trying historical romance for the first time , saying the novel is " just brilliant , hysterically funny , sexy dialogue " . Chase herself has expressed surprise at the novel 's enduring popularity , writing that she " saw no indication it would become such a reader favorite " . On January 23 , 2015 , fans discussed their views and favorite parts of the novel on Twitter , using the hashtag # <unk> , and Avon Books randomly gave away signed copies to those participating . 
 = New York State Route 324 = 
 New York State Route 324 ( NY 324 ) is an east – west state highway located in the western portion of New York in the United States . Officially , NY 324 begins at NY 384 in Niagara Falls and overlaps Interstate 190 ( I @-@ 190 , the Niagara Section of the New York State Thruway ) south to Grand Island , where it separates from I @-@ 190 and continues southward as Grand Island Boulevard . As signed , however , NY 324 begins at the southern end of the official overlap and is contained entirely within Erie County . At the southern edge of Grand Island , NY 324 joins I @-@ 190 to cross over to the mainland , where it runs due east across three towns before reaching its eastern end at a junction with NY 5 in the town of Clarence . 
 NY 324 is known by two names along its routing : Grand Island Boulevard on Grand Island and Sheridan Drive in the northern suburbs of Buffalo . As the latter , the route serves as a major commercial strip for Tonawanda , Amherst , and Clarence . NY 324 , assigned c . 1933 , is one of two routes to occupy part of Sheridan Drive ; the other is New York State Route 325 , which follows the westernmost 1 @.@ 42 miles ( 2 @.@ 29 km ) of the street . NY 324 once extended northwest to downtown Niagara Falls ; however , it was truncated to its current western terminus c . 1962 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 According to the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) , NY 324 begins at NY 384 in eastern Niagara Falls . NY 324 heads south , overlapping with I @-@ 190 ( the Niagara Section of the New York State Thruway ) across the North Grand Island Bridge to Grand Island , where it leaves the expressway at exit 20 . However , as signed , NY 324 begins at the north end of Grand Island , where it splits off from the Interstate Highway as Grand Island Boulevard . South of exit 20 , the official and signed routings are identical . 
 Maintenance of the route is split between NYSDOT , the New York State Thruway Authority ( NYSTA ) , and Erie County . All but the northernmost 0 @.@ 02 miles ( 0 @.@ 03 km ) of the portion of the route that overlaps with I @-@ 190 is maintained by NYSTA . The two county @-@ maintained sections extend from exit 20B to Grand Island Boulevard on Grand Island and from exit 15 to Grand Island Boulevard in Tonawanda , where NY 324 utilizes small portions of the county @-@ owned Long Road and Kenmore Avenue , respectively . The remainder of NY 324 is maintained by NYSDOT . 
 From I @-@ 190 exit 20 , NY 324 runs in a more southeasterly direction , serving as the main commercial strip on Grand Island , before it overlaps I @-@ 190 in order to cross the Niagara River . It parts company with the Interstate Highway on the other side of the river at exit 15 , where it turns north to parallel I @-@ 190 on Kenmore Avenue . After 250 yards ( 229 m ) , it veers east onto Tonawanda 's portion of Grand Island Boulevard for 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) to a junction with Sheridan Drive . The latter carries NY 325 , a 1 @.@ 42 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 29 km ) route that begins at NY 266 on the banks of the Niagara and passes through a commercial and industrial area of the town of Tonawanda . NY 324 takes on the Sheridan Drive name here and assumes a more due easterly course across northern Erie County . Though the street is signed as a state highway on both NY 324 and NY 325 , most residents simply refer to this road by its local name . 
 Through much of this portion , the road is divided , with a tree @-@ lined median strip . Businesses , both local and national , line both sides of the road and traffic is heavy . It crosses some other major strips such as Niagara Falls Boulevard ( U.S. Route 62 or US 62 ) , a major contributor to traffic on Sheridan due to the proximity of the Boulevard Mall , and Millersport Highway ( NY 263 ) , which feeds the Amherst campus of the University at Buffalo . In Amherst it meets the Youngmann Expressway ( I @-@ 290 ) where NY 240 ( Harlem Road ) , reaches its northern end . Past the Youngmann development abates , green returns to the roadside and the median ends , although the road remains four @-@ lane and high @-@ volume . There is another pocket of development around the Wegmans supermarket north of Williamsville , which has seen some rapid growth in the last few years . 
 NY 324 crosses its last major route , Transit Road ( NY 78 ) , on an overpass just north of the once @-@ thriving Eastern Hills Mall , which had been the premier mall in the Buffalo area until it began losing tenants and customers to the larger Walden Galleria in Cheektowaga . Beyond Transit , the road is still four @-@ lane but primarily residential as it enters the Town of Clarence . After Harris Hill Road , the highway bends to the southeast once again for a final mile into its eastern end at Main Street ( NY 5 ) . This last section was widened from two lanes to four in the mid @-@ 1990s , and has seen some development but still remains lightly trafficked most of the day . 
 = = History = = 
 When NY 324 was assigned c . 1933 , it began at NY 384 ( River Road ; now NY 266 ) in the town of Tonawanda and followed Sheridan Drive eastward to NY 5 in the town of Clarence . By 1935 , what is now NY 324 between Niagara Falls and Tonawanda via Grand Island was designated as NY 325 . NY 324 was extended northward to NY 384 in Niagara Falls c . 1937 , supplanting the entirety of NY 325 . The NY 325 designation was reassigned to the short piece of Sheridan Drive not designated as NY 324 . The route was extended one final time by 1948 to follow NY 384 westward from the North Grand Island Bridge into downtown Niagara Falls . 
 NY 324 remained unchanged until c . 1962 when the overlap with NY 384 was removed . Although the overlap with the new I @-@ 190 on the North Grand Island Bridge was also removed from maps during the same period , and is no longer signed , this overlap was never officially removed from either NYSDOT 's description of the route or the annual NYSDOT Traffic Data Report . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Ehrhardt ( typeface ) = 
 Ehrhardt is an old @-@ style serif typeface released by British branch of the Monotype Corporation in 1938 . Ehrhardt is a modern adaptation of printing types of " stout Dutch character " from the Dutch Baroque tradition sold by the Ehrhardt foundry in Leipzig . These are believed to have been cut by the Hungarian @-@ Transylvanian priest and punchcutter Miklós ( Nicholas ) <unk> Kis while in Amsterdam in the period from 1680 to 1689 . 
 From 1937 to 1938 , Monotype re @-@ cut the type for modern @-@ day usage , and it has become a popular book typeface . Ehrhardt has a slightly condensed design , giving it a strongly vertical , crisp appearance . 
 = = Historical background = = 
 Miklós Kis , a Transylvanian Protestant priest and schoolteacher , became deeply interested in printing after being sent to Amsterdam to help print a Hungarian Protestant translation of the Bible . This was a period of considerable prosperity for the Netherlands and a time when its styles of printing were very influential across Europe , making it a centre for the creation of new typefaces . He developed a second career as a punchcutter , an engraver of the punches used as a master for making moulds for metal type , working on commission for printers and governments . Kis returned to Transylvania around 1689 and may have left matrices ( the moulds used to cast type ) in Leipzig on his way home . The Ehrhardt type foundry of Leipzig released a surviving specimen sheet of them around 1720 . 
 Kis 's surviving matrices were first acquired by Stempel , and are now held in the collection of the <unk> ( Museum of Printing ) , Darmstadt . They were earlier often called the Janson designs , after the Dutch printer Anton Janson , based in Leipzig , who it was once believed might have created them , and Linotype 's revival of the same designs in a less condensed form accordingly is named Janson . Kis 's identity as the maker of the typefaces was rediscovered by comparison with type from Hungarian archive sources ( including an autobiography ) on which his name was identified . 
 = = Modern history = = 
 Monotype 's development of Ehrhardt took place under the influence of executive and historian of printing Stanley Morison , not long after their successful creation of Times New Roman , which had also been ( more loosely ) inspired by Dutch Baroque printing . It began from a recognition that the Janson designs were well @-@ respected by fine printers of the Arts and Crafts period such as Daniel Berkeley Updike , who could print books from them using hand @-@ set type cast from surviving original matrices owned by the Stempel company of Germany . Morison had discussed what he knew of their history with Updike in their extensive correspondence from the 1920s onwards . Modernised versions of the Janson designs were being created by Linotype and Monotype 's American branch at the same time . In addition , Morison was interested in the history of printing in Leipzig , a centre of the German book trade , and would later write an article on the topic . 
 During the early 20th century , many companies such as Monotype worked to develop revivals of historic typefaces for the modern hot metal typesetting system , which could be made more accurately and better @-@ aligned through pantograph engraving systems , as opposed to historic typefaces which had been hand @-@ carved out of steel . 
 Monotype developed a revival of the Ehrhardt typefaces using a rediscovered specimen sheet as a source , while simultaneously also working on Van <unk> , a revival of the work of Christoffel van <unk> ( d . 1669 ) , a slightly earlier Dutch Baroque punch @-@ cutter . Ehrhardt 's original working title was ' Old <unk> ' , according to veteran Monotype designer Robin Nicholas . 
 Developed by the Monotype drawing office team in Salfords , Surrey , led by Fritz <unk> , the project veered away from a purely faithful revival towards a denser , more condensed design . This differentiated it from the other Janson revivals on the market . Nicholas commented " I think it was Morison 's take on Janson - made a little heavier and narrower to give improved legibility and economy . " <unk> expert Yannis <unk> wrote of being told by a Monotype manager that the typeface was designed particularly for sale in Germany " to appeal to those who have a weakness for <unk> " ( blackletter or ' Gothic ' typefaces , still very popular in Germany in the 1930s ) . In its dense design it may be able to compliment blackletter well , and Morison in his article on Leipzig printing suggested that this might have been a motivation behind the original 's design style . 
 The finished design was first displayed in Monotype 's journal , the Monotype Recorder , in 1938 with an unsigned blurb in what Carter would later call " the accents of Morison " . Morison 's article on the history of printing in Leipzig would later be typeset in it and it was also used to set a festschrift on his work after his death . 
 = = Distinctive features = = 
 Distinctive features of Ehrhardt include an ' A ' with gently curving bar matching the centre @-@ link of the ' B ' , a wide ' T ' with <unk> serifs on either side and a ' b ' with no foot on the left . In italic the ' J ' has a crossbar , the ' w ' has sharp reverse curves towards the top and left , and the ' v ' has a flourish on the left . The face has high stroke contrast ( difference between thick and thin strokes ) by the standards of most old @-@ style serif fonts . In order to allow compact line spacing , descenders were kept reasonably short . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Ehrhardt attracted considerable attention on its initial release ; Monotype 's publicity material <unk> it as " in the opinion of some authorities , the most important new book face since Times New Roman " . However Ehrhardt remains considerably less well @-@ known than many of Monotype 's other classic serif designs of the interwar period , such as Times , Perpetua , Garamond or Bembo . 
 Harry Carter ( who with George <unk> made the modern attribution to Kis ) wrote that " the letters of Monotype Ehrhardt are like those of the Janson , but the appearance of a page set in it is different . The Janson is more rotund and has greater contrast of thick and thin . " Writing in the 1970s , Carter had misgivings about the condensation , saying that it came close to turning Kis 's work into an " accurate drudge " but that " it is a successful type @-@ face " . He also noted the irony that , unknown to the Monotype drawing office , Kis had designed himself a set of more condensed typefaces for use in Florence which they might have used as a more authentic model . Printing historian James Mosley 's review of Morison 's memoir , A Tally of Types , described the original metal type as " crudely drawn " compared with some earlier Monotype designs , and suggested that this was due to a change in works management at Monotype with the retirement of head engineer Frank Pierpont . 
 Notable books set in Ehrhardt include the Oxford World 's Classics series , the New English Bible , the Pelican Shakespeare and the Penguin 60s . It has also been used by Faber and Faber and The Iconic magazine . An extremely rare infant variant of the typeface also exists , which can be seen in the American edition of the book Hey ! Get off Our Train by John Burningham . 
 = = Extensions = = 
 Monotype later created a bold and bold italic ( called a semi @-@ bold in some digitisations ) to match the roman and italic of the original release . ( True bold type did not exist in Kis 's time . ) Released in 1967 , Fleet Titling was a capitals @-@ only alphabet intended to serve as a companion for titling use . It was created by Monotype 's occasional collaborator John Peters , a Cambridge University Press designer who also worked as a private printer . Monotype used it for their logo and letterhead . More oddly , Monotype in the 1960s used Ehrhardt as a base for printing in the Initial Teaching Alphabet . This alphabet system , intended to be used to teach children to read , used alternative characters for different sounds spelled with the same letter , like t 's and c 's dropped below the baseline of the text . 
 = = <unk> and alternative versions = = 
 Monotype has digitised Ehrhardt into the <unk> and OpenType font formats . It is sold in standard and professional releases , some releases including text figures and small caps ( in the roman style only ) . Like several other Monotype typefaces digitised in the early period of computerised publishing , it is sold under two releases credited both to Monotype itself and to Adobe , the latter only in the standard version without small caps . Fleet Titling and the Initial Teaching Alphabet version have not been digitised . 
 Inspired by Ehrhardt , designer and lawyer Matthew <unk> created a revival called Equity , praising its " satisfying heft and authority " . This design was inspired by his experiences of office needs from working as a lawyer ; it was created for sale with separate grades designed to suit different types of paper and printers , and separate small caps fonts ( in regular and bold ) intended for use in Word . Font Bureau also created the very large revival family Kis . Unlike other digitisations , this has been released in optical sizes , with a separate display @-@ size font intended for headlines . It is used by the Los Angeles Times but ( as of 2015 ) has not been released for online sale . 
 = What You Waiting For ? = 
 " What You Waiting For ? " is a song by American singer and songwriter Gwen Stefani from her debut solo studio album , Love . Angel . Music . Baby . ( 2004 ) . Written by Stefani and Linda Perry , the song is the album 's opening track and was released as Stefani 's debut solo single . " What You Waiting For ? " details Stefani 's lack of inspiration , fear of producing the album , as well as her reaction to pressures exerted by her record label . It is primarily an electropop song and introduces Stefani 's four back @-@ up dancers , the Harajuku Girls , who had a major input into the album 's production . 
 " What You Waiting For ? " was released as the album 's lead single ; according to Stefani , as an " explanation for doing the record " . The song was well received by critics , and was frequently cited as a highlight of the album . The single was commercially successful , topping the chart in Australia and reaching the top 10 in several countries . It was certified gold in the United States , and was nominated for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance at the 47th Grammy Awards . The song has been remixed a number of times , and was covered by the indie rock band Franz Ferdinand and singer Marina and the Diamonds . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 During the night of the 2003 Grammy Awards , Perry forced Stefani into a chokehold , and demanded that they were " gonna write songs together ! " , to which Stefani reluctantly agreed . Soon after , Stefani finished the Rock Steady Tour with her band No Doubt , and took a call from her label , who informed her that Perry was in a studio ready to collaborate , and that Perry " only [ had ] five days out of the whole year to work with [ her ] . " Stefani has since admitted that she was frustrated by not being able to see her husband Gavin Rossdale , and was intimidated at the thought of collaboration , in particular with Perry , who she did not feel was qualified to write dance music . Stefani was exhausted by the recently completed tour , and shortly afterwards suffered an emotional breakdown , which she spent in bed crying . 
 During their first day of work , the two wrote a song titled " Fine by You " , which Stefani later described as " a stupid love song , but really good " . Perry remarked that the song " wasn 't right " , and the track was excluded from the album . The session was unproductive , due in part to Stefani 's self @-@ consciousness and writer 's block , and she at one stage broke down in tears in the studio . Stefani has since admitted that writing songs without her band members felt " humiliating and intimidating even if they 're sweet and excited , because you 're drowning in their creativity " . 
 That night , Perry began work on another track , which she played for Stefani the next day to motivate her . Stefani was impressed with the track , and Perry asked her , " What are you waiting for ? " According to Perry , Stefani took the question as a dare , replying , " You 're totally challenging me , right ? " The two began writing lyrics for the new wave @-@ styled song based on Stefani 's writer 's block and fears about making a solo record , and it grew into " What You Waiting For ? " 
 Stefani came up with the idea of the Harajuku Girls while writing the song . Stefani first saw the women of Harajuku , known for their unique style drawing from Gothic Lolita and cyberpunk fashion , in 1996 and had admired them since . She decided to mention them in the line " You Harajuku Girls , damn you got some wicked style " , and the concept grew into a running theme on Love . Angel . Music . Baby . , which went as far as to feature one song named after and dedicated to them . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " What You Waiting For ? " combines the genres of electropop , new wave , dance @-@ rock , and funk , and was composed in common time and in the key of G minor . It is written in verse @-@ chorus form , and its instrumentation derives from the guitar and electronic keyboard . The song opens with an emotional piano solo as a tribute to Stefani 's time with No Doubt . The verse begins at only 60 beats per minute and gradually slows , mixed with sounds of applause from the audience . A beat set at 138 BPM begins , and Stefani repeats the phrase " tick @-@ tock " , commonly interpreted as a reference to her maternal clock and the pressures she felt about producing the album . 
 Stefani creates an argument between lyrical personas by alternating her vocal range and point of view . Stefani 's vocal range spans two octaves in the song , from G3 to G5 . In a melody similar to that of Weezer 's " Hash Pipe " , one side of Stefani 's personality sings in a higher range in the first person , and the other , more confident personality sings lower in the second person . During the verses , the more nervous personality discusses her concerns about leaving No Doubt for a solo career as well as the ephemeral success of female singers in the music industry . The chorus is a boost of confidence for her and continues the song 's time motif with the lines " Look at your watch now / You 're still a super hot female " . Backed by perfect octave dyads , Stefani sings a verse about her excitement for her future , and the two personalities merge into one during the coda . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " What You Waiting For ? " received positive reviews from critics . Nick Sylvester of Pitchfork Media gave the song a strong review , rating it four and a half stars , and labeled it " fucking great " . The website went on to rank the song 16th on its list of the Top 50 Singles of 2004 . RJ Smith of Blender noted the song 's new wave influence by stating that it could start a revival of Missing Persons , and Amy Linden of The Village Voice compared the " giddy , yodeling vocals " to those of Lene <unk> 's 1981 song " New Toy " . Jason Damas from PopMatters was mixed on the song , calling the opening " awkward " and the refrain " ridiculously dumb " , but arguing that the song " is so frivolous and stupid that it winds up being brilliant ; it pretends to be nothing more than party bubblegum and achieves its artistic criteria beautifully . " Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani agreed , stating that " it 's this impishness that helps make ' What You Waiting For ' one of the hottest ' arrival ' songs of all time " . Richard Smirke of Playlouder found the track 's production " crisp " and " edgy " , and Jennifer Nine of Yahoo ! Music called the song " <unk> irresistible " . Jemma <unk> @-@ Fletcher , writing for Contactmusic.com , rated the song nine out of 10 , commenting that it has " irresistible commercial pull and a melody to die for " and that the track " makes the most of her unmistakable vocal and reflects that off @-@ the @-@ wall Stefani personality perfectly . " Natasha <unk> from musicOMH gave the song a negative review , stating that " it 'll become one of those tracks that 's irritatingly catchy — but on this initial listening , Ms Stefani 's debut solo effort is just plain irritating . " 
 Many reviewers considered the track one of the album 's highlights . Entertainment Weekly critic David Browne gave Love . Angel . Music . Baby. a C + rating but called the track " one of the album 's undeniable highs " . In its review of the album , Nick Sylvester of Pitchfork Media believed that " we can 't expect 12 more cuts as personal or urgent as debut single ' What You Waiting For ' " , while naming it " one of the best electro songs this year " . Lisa Haines of BBC Music stated that it " stands out as the best track on the album for the way it pits storming beats against enthusiastic lyrics " and compared the song to Goldfrapp 's 2003 single " Strict Machine " . Eric Greenwood of Drawer B , who felt that the album " fails on every level " , also commented that " if this album had even two more songs this immediate and catchy , then I 'd stick my neck out for it , but , sadly , it 's the only song worth listening to . " In 2009 , The Daily Telegraph listed the song at number 82 on their list " 100 songs that defined the Noughties . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , " What You Waiting For ? " debuted at number 93 on the Billboard Hot 100 on the issue dated October 16 , 2004 . It reached a peak of number 47 on November 27 , 2004 and remained on the chart for a total of 20 weeks . The song topped the Hot Dance Club Play chart , but only had moderate success on the pop charts , reaching number 17 on the Mainstream Top 40 and number 24 on the Adult Top 40 . The song was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on February 25 , 2005 . Additionally , it was nominated for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance at the 2005 Grammy Awards , but lost to Norah Jones ' " Sunrise " . 
 Elsewhere , the song 's reception was stronger . In Canada , it debuted in the top 40 on the Canadian Singles Chart before reaching number 24 in late January 2005 . In the United Kingdom , " What You Waiting For ? " debuted and peaked at number four on the UK Singles Chart and remained on the chart for 15 weeks . The single performed well across most of the rest of Europe , reaching the top five in Belgium , Denmark , Finland , France , Ireland , Italy , and Norway , and the top 10 in Austria , Hungary , the Netherlands , and Sweden . 
 In Australia , " What You Waiting For ? " debuted atop the ARIA Singles Chart on November 14 , 2004 and stayed there for two weeks . It remained within the top three through January 17 , 2005 and dropped off the chart after 15 weeks . In 2014 , the single was certified double platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . The song reached number three on New Zealand 's RIANZ Singles Chart and spent four months on the chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The song 's music video was directed by Francis Lawrence and produced by Caleb Dewart of DNA Inc . The video deals directly with the lyrics ' theme of Stefani 's search for inspiration in songwriting . It opens with a lengthy non @-@ musical section in which Stefani arrives in Los Angeles off of No Doubt 's Rock Steady Tour . She receives several calls from Interscope label head Jimmy Iovine , who attempts to push her forward with her solo debut project , but she replies that she is tired and uninspired . After a failed studio attempt , Stefani sees a flyer advertising help for writer 's block . Upon arrival she is asked to fill out a suspicious questionnaire , where the camera pans to the questions which will be important . She is then told that she will be billed when she is finished . She asks for clarification only to discover that she is already back in the studio by herself . When Stefani picks up an oversized pocket watch from the piano , a rabbit knick @-@ knack that she had previously seen jumps across the room . She throws the watch at the knick @-@ knack , causing her to fall back on her chair and find herself transported to a fantasy world based on Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland and Through the Looking @-@ Glass . 
 Stefani portrays several characters from the books , including Alice , the White Queen , and the Red Queen , in dresses by British @-@ Gibraltarian fashion designer John Galliano . The video frequently cuts to Stefani back in the studio to show her singing and performing in semi @-@ synchronization with her actions within her fantasy world . As this transpires the song is recording itself . Stefani ultimately rediscovers her confidence , and her full awareness is transported back to the ordinary reality of the studio just as she dances in front of her four giggling Harajuku Girls . She then is presented with her bill by the consultant as a wooden chair topples to the floor . 
 There are four versions of the video . The full , long version is one minute longer than the Making the Video version , while the cut version omits the scenes in which she leaves the airport and is sleepy and in which she fills out the questionnaire . The short version begins with Stefani practicing on the piano and her finding the watch just seconds after that . Her being billed is not shown in this version , so the video ends with the Harajuku Girls laughing at her performance . 
 The music video was well received by many reviewers . Sam Bloch from Stylus Magazine referred to it as a short film , comparing it to Michael Jackson 's Thriller , and commented , " I sigh with admiration and wish every video was this alive . " The video debuted on MTV 's Total Request Live on October 19 , 2004 at number 11 . The following month it reached the top of the chart and was there for three non @-@ consecutive days , remaining over five weeks on the program . At the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards , the video won the award for Best Art Direction and was nominated for Best Editing . In Canada , it only reached number 11 on the MuchMusic 's Countdown , though it remained on the chart for eight weeks . At the 2005 MuchMusic Video Awards , the video was nominated for Best International Video but lost to Usher 's " Caught Up " . It won the award for Best Dressed Video at the first MTV Australia Video Music Awards , and was also nominated for Video of the Year and Best Pop Video . 
 = = Alternative versions = = 
 Stuart Price ( also known as Jacques Lu Cont ) made the most well @-@ known remix of the song , titled the Thin White Duke Mix , which was included on the CD single . The track , over eight minutes long , is carried by a guitar riff and occasional chimes . The remix received positive reviews from music critics . Aaron Mandel of Pitchfork Media labeled it " outstanding " , and John M. Cunningham of Stylus Magazine stated that it " endowed [ the song ] with a sense of grandeur " . DJ <unk> from About.com viewed the remix as " moody and a bit hypnotic " , commenting that it is " best suited for early @-@ evening sets . " Armand Van Helden created two remixes , the Armand Van Helden Remix and the Armand Van Helden Dub , which use only some of the original vocals and a new bassline constructed with synthesizers and some electric guitar . Felix da Housecat created the Rude Ho Mix , which uses more bass guitar and leaves out the original background vocals by Mimi Parker until the final verse . 
 Alex Kapranos , guitarist and lead singer of Scottish indie rock band Franz Ferdinand , wore a Gwen Stefani pin on a Members Only jacket as a tribute to " What You Waiting For ? " . In December 2005 , the band performed a cover version of the song on Live Lounge , a segment of The Jo Whiley Show on BBC Radio 1 . The cover includes the chorus from Billy Idol 's 1983 song " White Wedding " . In October 2006 , the song was released as a part of the Radio 1 's Live Lounge compilation , and the cover received mixed reviews . Jack Foley from IndieLondon called the track " completely insane " , stating that it " really has to be heard to be believed . " The Guardian 's Dorian Lynskey found the cover smug , adding that " one of Alex Kapranos 's eyebrows [ is ] raised so high that it practically vacates his head . " 
 Welsh indie pop singer Marina and the Diamonds covered " What You Waiting For ? " during some of her early live performances in 2009 . Mary Bellamy of Drowned in Sound referred to her debut album The Family Jewels ( 2010 ) as " an extended album length re @-@ write " of " What You Waiting For ? " . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Love . Angel . Music . Baby . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = The Governor 's Daughter = 
 The Governor 's Daughter is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The story details a convict who is being sent to prison when the train is wrecked and the sheriff escorting him is killed . The convict frees himself , but halts his escape to save the life of a little girl . As he returns the girl to her nurse , a policeman identifies and recaptures him . Later the little girl accompanies her father , the governor , on a tour of the prison and the father pardons the hero @-@ convict . The film included scenes of a real train wreck and the scenario was written around the filming of the disaster . The film received praise for the before and after scenes which were described as shocking to The Moving Picture World 's reviewer . The film was released on June 24 , 1910 , and was shown as far away as Australia . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from June 25 , 1910 . It states : " Bill Raymond , a convict , sentenced to a long term , is on his way to prison , in custody of the sheriff . A little girl [ Nell ] is a passenger in the same train . She shows that she feels sorry for the man . He in turn appreciates her sympathy . The train is wrecked , and the sheriff , who is handcuffed to Bill , is killed . Bill takes the key of the handcuffs from the pocket of the dead man , frees himself , and is about to escape , when he notices that the little girl , abandoned by her nurse , is lying unconscious in the car , which is now on fire . The convict risks his life to save the child , and carries her out in his arms . He takes her to her nurse and is recognized by a policeman and taken in custody , his chance for freedom lost . The child , who is the daughter of the governor , although Bill does not know it , is restored to her parent . The nurse fears to mention the incident , and the governor does not know how his darling 's life was saved . Later the governor goes to the state prison on a tour of inspection , and Nell accompanies him . She has some flowers which she wants to give to the prisoners . In her tour of the prison , she recognizes Bill . She tells her father about it , and he pardons the hero @-@ convict on the spot .... " 
 = = Production = = 
 The impetus to produce this film appears to have been the ability of the Thanhouser crew to capture a disaster on film . Film historian Q. David Bowers writes , " What was one company 's misfortune was another 's gain , and from time to time during the next few years Thanhouser cameramen hurried to film scenes of disasters so that they could be featured as film episodes in scenarios which were written after the fact . " It is unknown what particular rail disaster was filmed , but a possible that the accident depicted was in the Bronx on the night of June 1 , 1910 . That night one stalled train , concealed in smoke from a fire , was struck by another train near the Mott Avenue subway station . One of the composite cars was shredded by the steel cars behind it ; there were no fatalities in the accident . Other accidents prior to the film debut occurred in January and February . 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . Lonergan was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . He was the most important script writer for Thanhouser , averaging 200 scripts a year from 1910 to 1915 . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil . Bowers does not attribute a cameraman for this production , but two possible candidates exist . Blair Smith was the first cameraman of the Thanhouser company , but he was soon joined by Carl Louis Gregory who had years of experience as a still and motion picture photographer . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . The only credit known for the cast is that of Marie Eline as Nell . Other members cast may have included the leading players of the Thanhouser productions , Anna Rosemond and Frank H. Crane . Rosemond was one of two leading ladies for the first year of the company . Crane was also involved in the very beginnings of the Thanhouser Company and acted in numerous productions before becoming a director at Thanhouser . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 985 feet long , was released on June 24 , 1910 . Advertisements played up the wreck of the $ 40 @,@ 000 train car while a positive review in The Moving Picture World praised the well @-@ managed production 's prison and track wreck scenes , but remarked that the improbable story was purely fantastical . One of the more dramatic articles to appear in The Moving Picture World included reference to the film while playing up the dramatic element describe the footage and the filming of the wreck . It states : " ... The scenes were portrayals of a train crash and they give you startling before @-@ and @-@ after wreck views . They made you shiver when they showed you the fate that came to a car full of passengers - sudden , cruel and without warning . They made you shiver ; ... And you thanked God that the thing before you was only a picture on the screen ! " Known advertisements for the film included theaters in Rhode Island and Indiana . Records show that film made it to Australia , with one Launceston , Tasmania newspaper showing an advertisement on January 30 , 1911 . 
 The film was still in circulation years after its production , with the Pennsylvania State Board of Censors of Moving Pictures approving this film for viewing without censorship in a May 21 , 1915 decision . This list also records the existence of two films bearing the same name , one from Selig Polyscope and the other from the Éclair American Company . 
 = Impala = 
 The impala ( pronounced / <unk> , <unk> / ) ( Aepyceros melampus ) is a medium @-@ sized antelope in eastern and southern Africa . The sole member of the genus Aepyceros , it was first described by German zoologist Martin Hinrich Carl Lichtenstein in 1812 . Two subspecies are recognised – the common impala , and the larger and darker black @-@ faced impala . The impala reaches 70 – 92 centimetres ( 28 – 36 inches ) at the shoulder and weighs 40 – 76 kilograms ( 88 – 168 pounds ) . It features a glossy , reddish brown coat . The male 's slender , lyre @-@ shaped horns are 45 – 92 centimetres ( 18 – 36 in ) long . 
 Active mainly during the day , the impala may be gregarious or territorial depending upon the climate and geography . Three distinct social groups can be observed – the territorial males , bachelor herds and female herds . The impala is known for two characteristic leaps that constitute an anti @-@ predator strategy . Browsers as well as grazers , impala feed on monocots , dicots , forbs , fruits and acacia pods ( whenever available ) . An annual , three @-@ week @-@ long rut takes place toward the end of the wet season , typically in May . Rutting males fight over dominance , and the victorious male starts an elaborate courtship with a female in oestrus . Gestation lasts six to seven months , following which a single calf is born and immediately concealed in cover . Calves are suckled for four to six months ; young males , forced out of the group , join bachelor herds , while females may stay back . 
 The impala occurs in woodlands and sometimes on the interface ( ecotone ) between woodlands and savannahs ; it inhabits places close to water . While the black @-@ faced impala is confined to southwestern Angola and Kaokoland in northwestern Namibia , the common impala is widespread across its range and has been reintroduced in Gabon and southern Africa . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) classifies the impala as a species of least concern ; the black @-@ faced subspecies , however , has been classified as a vulnerable species ; as of 2008 , less than 1 @,@ 000 individuals remain in the wild . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The common name " impala " comes from the Zulu name for the animal ; the first recorded use of the name dates back to 1885 . " <unk> " is its Afrikaans name , and the scientific name is Aepyceros melampus ; Aepyceros comes from the Greek words <unk> <unk> ( " high " ) and <unk> <unk> ( " horn " ) . The specific epithet melampus derives from the Greek words <unk> melas ( " black " ) and πούς pous ( " foot " ) . 
 = = Taxonomy and evolution = = 
 The impala is the sole member of the genus Aepyceros and belongs to the family Bovidae . It was first described by German zoologist Martin Hinrich Carl Lichtenstein in 1812 . In 1984 , palaeontologist Elisabeth Vrba opined that the impala is a sister taxon to the <unk> given its resemblance to the hartebeest . A 1999 phylogenetic study by Alexandre <unk> ( of the National Centre for Scientific Research , Paris ) and colleagues , based on mitochondrial and nuclear analyses , showed that the impala forms a clade with the suni ( Neotragus moschatus ) . This clade is sister to another formed by the bay duiker ( Cephalophus dorsalis ) and the klipspringer ( Oreotragus oreotragus ) . An rRNA and β @-@ <unk> nuclear sequence analysis in 2003 also supported an association between Aepyceros and Neotragus . The following cladogram is based on the 1999 study : 
 Up to six subspecies have been described , although only two are generally recognised on the basis of mitochondrial data . Though morphologically similar , the subspecies show a significant genetic distance between them , and no hybrids between them have been reported . 
 A. m. melampus Lichtenstein , 1812 : Known as the common impala , it occurs across eastern and southern Africa . The range extends from central Kenya to South Africa and westward into southeastern Angola . 
 A. m. <unk> Bocage , 1879 : Known as the black @-@ faced impala , it is restricted to southwestern Africa , occurring in northwestern Namibia and southwestern Angola . 
 According to Vrba , the impala evolved from an <unk> ancestor . She noted that while this ancestor has diverged at least 18 times into various morphologically different forms , the impala has continued in its basic form for at least five million years . Several fossil species have been discovered , including A. <unk> from the Pliocene of Ethiopia . The oldest fossil discovered suggests its ancient ancestors were slightly smaller than the modern form , but otherwise similar in all aspects to the latter . This implies that the impala has efficiently adapted to its environment since prehistoric times . Its gregarious nature , variety in diet , positive population trend , defence against ticks and symbiotic relationship with the tick @-@ feeding oxpeckers could have played a role in preventing major changes in morphology and behaviour . 
 = = Description = = 
 The impala is a medium @-@ sized , slender antelope similar to the kob or Grant 's gazelle in build . The head @-@ and @-@ body length is around 130 centimetres ( 51 in ) . Males reach approximately 75 – 92 centimetres ( 30 – 36 in ) at the shoulder , while females are 70 – 85 centimetres ( 28 – 33 in ) tall . Males typically weigh 53 – 76 kilograms ( 117 – 168 lb ) and females 40 – 53 kilograms ( 88 – 117 lb ) . Sexually dimorphic , females are hornless and notably smaller than males . Males grow slender , lyre @-@ shaped horns 45 – 92 centimetres ( 18 – 36 in ) long . The horns , strongly ridged and divergent , are circular in section and hollow at the base . Their arch @-@ like structure allows interlocking of horns , which helps a male throw off his opponent during fights ; horns also protect the skull from damage . 
 The glossy coat of the impala shows two @-@ tone colouration – the reddish brown back and the tan flanks ; these are in sharp contrast to the white underbelly . Facial features include white rings around the eyes and a light chin and snout . The ears , 1 @.@ 7 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 67 in ) long , are tipped with black . Black streaks run from the buttocks to the upper hindlegs . The bushy white tail , 30 centimetres ( 12 in ) long , features a solid black stripe along the midline . The impala 's colouration bears a strong resemblance to the gerenuk , which has shorter horns and lacks the black thigh stripes of the impala . The impala has scent glands covered by a black tuft of hair on the hindlegs . Sebaceous glands concentrated on the forehead and dispersed on the torso of dominant males are most active during the mating season , while those of females are only partially developed and do not undergo seasonal changes . There are four nipples . 
 Of the subspecies , the black @-@ faced impala is significantly larger and darker than the common impala ; a recessive gene is responsible for the black colouration . Distinctive of the black @-@ faced impala is a dark stripe , on either side of the nose , that runs upward to the eyes and thins as it reaches the forehead . Other differences include the larger black tip on the ear , and a bushier and nearly 30 % longer tail in the black @-@ faced impala . 
 The impala has a special dental arrangement on the front lower jaw similar to the toothcomb seen in strepsirrhine primates , which is used during allogrooming to comb the fur on the head and the neck and remove ectoparasites . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 The impala is diurnal ( active mainly during the day ) , though activity tends to cease during the hot midday hours ; they feed and rest at night . Three distinct social groups can be observed – the territorial males , bachelor herds and female herds . The territorial males hold territories where they may form harems of females ; territories are demarcated with urine and faeces and defended against juvenile or male intruders . Bachelor herds tend to be small , with less than 30 members . Individuals maintain distances of 2 @.@ 5 – 3 metres ( 8 @.@ 2 – 9 @.@ 8 ft ) from one another ; while young and old males may interact , middle @-@ aged males generally avoid one another . The membership of female herds varies from 6 to 100 ; herds occupy home ranges of 80 – 180 hectares ( 200 – 440 acres ; 0 @.@ 31 – 0 @.@ 69 sq mi ) . The mother @-@ calf bond is weak , and breaks soon after weaning ; juveniles leave the herds of their mothers to join other herds . Female herds tend to be loose and have no distinct leadership . Allogrooming is an important means of social interaction in bachelor and female herds ; in fact , the impala appears to be the only ungulate to display self @-@ grooming as well as allogrooming . In allogrooming , females typically groom related individuals , while males associate with unrelated individuals . Each partner grooms the other six to twelve times . 
 Social behaviour is influenced by the climate and geography ; as such , the impala are territorial at certain times of the year and gregarious at other times , and the length of these periods can vary broadly among populations . For instance , populations in southern Africa display territorial behaviour only during the few months of the rut , whereas in eastern African populations , territoriality is relatively minimal despite a protracted mating season . Moreover , territorial males often tolerate bachelors , and may even alternate between bachelorhood and territoriality at different times of the year . A study of impala in the Serengeti National Park showed that in 94 % of the males , territoriality was observed for less than four months . 
 The impala is an important prey for several carnivores , such as cheetahs , leopards and lions . The antelope displays two characteristic leaps – it can jump up to 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) , over vegetation and even other impala , covering distances of up to 10 metres ( 33 ft ) ; the other type of leap involves a series of jumps in which the animal lands on its forelegs , moves its hindlegs mid @-@ air in a kicking fashion , lands on all fours and then rebounds . It leaps in either manner in different directions , probably to confuse predators . At times , the impala may also conceal itself in vegetation to escape the eye of the predator . The most prominent vocalisation is the loud roar , delivered through one to three loud snorts with the mouth closed , followed by two to ten deep grunts with the mouth open and the chin and tail raised ; a typical roar can be heard up to 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) away . Scent gland secretions identify a territorial male . A notable feature of impala is their sedentary nature ; adult and middle @-@ aged males , in particular , can hold their territories for years . 
 = = = Parasites = = = 
 Common ixodid ticks collected from impala include Amblyomma <unk> , Boophilus decoloratus , Hyalomma marginatum , Ixodes <unk> , Rhipicephalus appendiculatus and R. evertsi . In Zimbabwe , heavy infestation by ticks such as R. appendiculatus has proved to be a major cause behind the high mortality of ungulates , as they can lead to tick paralysis . Impala have special adaptations for grooming , such as their characteristic dental arrangement , to manage ticks before they engorge ; however , the extensive grooming needed to keep the tick load under control involves the risk of dehydration during summer , lower vigilance against predators and gradual wearing out of the teeth . A study showed that impala adjust the time devoted to grooming and the number of grooming bouts according to the seasonal prevalence of ticks . 
 Impala are symbiotically related to oxpeckers , which feed on ticks from those parts of the antelope 's body which the animal cannot access by itself ( such as the ears , neck , eyelids , forehead and underbelly ) . The impala is the smallest ungulate that oxpeckers are associated with . In a study it was observed that oxpeckers selectively attended to impala despite the presence of other animals such as Coke 's hartebeest , Grant 's gazelle , Thompson 's gazelle and topi . A possible explanation for this could be that because the impala inhabits woodlands ( which can have a high density of ticks ) , the impala could have greater mass of ticks per unit area of the body surface . Another study showed that the oxpeckers prefer the ears over other parts of the body , probably because these parts show maximum tick infestation . 
 Lice recorded from impala include Damalinia <unk> , D. <unk> , Linognathus <unk> and L. <unk> ; in a study , <unk> ( a medication against parasites ) was found to have an effect on Boophilus decoloratus and Linognathus species , though not on Damalinia species . In a study of impala in South Africa , the number of worms in juveniles showed an increase with age , reaching a peak when impala turned a year old . This study recorded worms of genera such as Cooperia , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> . Haemonchus , <unk> , Longistrongylus and Trichostrongylus ; some of these showed seasonal variations in density . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Impala browse as well as graze ; either may predominate , depending upon the availability of resources . The diet comprises monocots , dicots , forbs , fruits and acacia pods ( whenever available ) . Impala prefer places close to water sources , and resort to succulent vegetation if water is scarce . An analysis showed that the diet of impala is composed of 45 % monocots , 45 % dicots and 10 % fruits ; the proportion of grasses in the diet increases significantly ( to as high as 90 % ) after the first rains , but declines in the dry season . <unk> predominates in the late wet and dry season , and diets are nutritionally poor in the mid @-@ dry season , when impala feed mostly on woody dicots . Another study showed that the <unk> proportion in the diet is much higher in bachelors and females than in territorial males . 
 Impala feed on soft and nutritious grasses such as Digitaria <unk> ; tough , tall grasses , such as Heteropogon contortus and Themeda triandra , are typically avoided . Impala on the periphery of the herds are generally more vigilant against predators than those feeding in the centre ; a foraging individual will try to defend the patch it is feeding on by lowering its head . A study revealed that time spent in foraging reaches a maximum of 75 @.@ 5 % of the day in the late dry season , decreases through the rainy season , and is minimal in the early dry season ( 57 @.@ 8 % ) . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Males are sexually mature by the time they are a year old , though successful mating generally occurs only after four years . Mature males start establishing territories and try to gain access to females . Females can conceive after they are a year and a half old ; oestrous lasts for 24 to 48 hours , and occurs every 12 – 29 days in non @-@ pregnant females . The annual three @-@ week @-@ long rut ( breeding season ) begins toward the end of the wet season , typically in May . <unk> growth and hormone production in males begin a few months before the breeding season , resulting in greater aggressiveness and territoriality . The <unk> glands are heavier , testosterone levels are nearly twice as high in territorial males as in bachelors , and the neck of a territorial male tends to be thicker than that of a bachelor during the rut . Mating tends to take place between full moons . 
 Rutting males fight over dominance , often giving out noisy roars and chasing one another ; they walk stiffly and display their neck and horns . Males desist from feeding and allogrooming during the rut , probably to devote more time to garnering females in oestrus ; the male checks the female 's urine to ensure that she is in oestrus . On coming across such a female , the excited male begins the courtship by pursuing her , keeping a distance of 3 – 5 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 – 16 @.@ 4 ft ) from her . The male flicks his tongue and may nod vigorously ; the female allows him to lick her vulva , and holds her tail to one side . The male tries mounting the female , holding his head high and clasping her sides with his forelegs . Mounting attempts may be repeated every few seconds to every minute or two . The male loses interest in the female after the first copulation , though she is still active and can mate with other males . 
 Gestation lasts six to seven months ; the mother may even delay giving birth for an additional month if conditions are harsh . Births generally occur in the midday ; the female will isolate herself from the herd when labour pain begins . A single calf is born , and is immediately concealed in cover for the first few weeks of its birth . The fawn then joins a nursery group within its mother 's herd . Calves are suckled for four to six months ; young males , forced out of the group , join bachelor herds , while females may stay back . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The impala inhabits woodlands due to its preference for shade ; it can also occur on the interface ( ecotone ) between woodlands and savannahs . Places close to water sources are preferred . In southern Africa , populations tend to be associated with <unk> <unk> and Acacia woodlands . Habitat choices differ seasonally – Acacia <unk> woodlands are preferred in the wet season , and A. <unk> savannahs in the dry season . Another factor that could influence habitat choice is vulnerability to predators ; impala tend to keep away from areas with tall grasses as predators could be concealed there . A study found that the reduction of woodland cover and creation of shrublands by the African bush elephants has favoured impala population by increasing the availability of more dry season browse . Earlier , the <unk> woodland , which has now declined due to elephants , provided minimum browsing for impala . The newly formed Capparis shrubland , on the other hand , could be a key browsing habitat . Impala are generally not associated with montane habitats ; however , in KwaZulu @-@ Natal , impala have been recorded at altitudes of up to 1 @,@ 400 metres ( 4 @,@ 600 ft ) above sea level . 
 The historical range of the impala , spanning across southern and eastern Africa , has remained intact to a great extent , although it has disappeared from a few places such as Burundi . The range extends from central and southern Kenya and northeastern Uganda in the east to northern KwaZulu @-@ Natal in the south , and westward up to Namibia and southern Angola . The black @-@ faced impala is confined to southwestern Angola and Kaokoland in northwestern Namibia ; the status of this subspecies has not been monitored since the 2000s . The common impala has a wider distribution , and has been introduced in protected areas in Gabon and across southern Africa . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 The International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) classifies the impala as a species of least concern overall ; the black @-@ faced impala , however , is classified as a vulnerable species ; as of 2008 , fewer than 1 @,@ 000 individuals are estimated in the wild . Though there are no major threats to the survival of the common impala , poaching and natural calamities have significantly contributed to the decline of the black @-@ faced impala . As of 2008 , the population of the common impala has been estimated at around two million . According to some studies , translocation of the black @-@ faced impala can be highly beneficial in its conservation . 
 Around a quarter of the common impala populations occur in protected areas , such as the Okavango Delta ( Botswana ) ; Masai Mara and <unk> ( Kenya ) ; Kruger National Park ( South Africa ) ; the Ruaha and Serengeti National Parks and Selous Game Reserve ( Tanzania ) ; Luangwa Valley ( Zambia ) ; Hwange , <unk> and Zambezi Valley ( Zimbabwe ) . The rare black @-@ faced impala has been introduced into private farms in Namibia and the Etosha National Park . Population densities vary largely from place to place ; from less than one individual per square kilometre in <unk> National Park ( Tanzania ) to as high as 135 individuals per square kilometre near Lake Kariba ( Zimbabwe ) . 
 = HMS Alceste ( 1806 ) = 
 HMS Alceste was a 38 @-@ gun frigate of the Royal Navy . She was built at Rochefort in 1804 for the French Navy as the Minerve , an Armide @-@ class frigate . As part of a French squadron , anchored in the roads of the Île @-@ d 'Aix , in the spring of 1806 , she engaged HMS Pallas , then under Lord Cochrane . During the duel , the ships became entangled and ran aground but Cochrane , having spotted French reinforcements arriving , managed to free his ship and take off . 
 On 25 September 1806 , she was captured by the British and in March 1807 , brought into Royal Navy service as HMS Alceste . She continued to serve throughout the Napoleonic Wars and on 29 November 1811 , she led a British squadron that captured a French military convoy bound for Trieste , and in doing so , possibly changed the course of the war . In 1814 she was converted to a troopship and used to transport British soldiers to North America during the War of 1812 . 
 Following the Treaty of Vienna in 1815 , Alceste was chosen to carry Lord Amherst on his 1816 diplomatic mission to China , then on the return journey , she foundered on a reef in the Java Sea where , after the evacuation of her passengers and crew , she was plundered and burned by Malayan pirates . 
 = = Construction and armament = = 
 Alceste was built for the French Navy as the Minerve , an Armide @-@ Class 18 @-@ pounder / 40 @-@ gun frigate to a design by Pierre Rolland . She was built at Rochefort with construction starting in May 1804 . She was launched in September 1805 and finished in November . She was 152 feet 5 inches ( 46 @.@ 46 m ) along her gundeck with a 40 feet ( 12 m ) beam . With a depth in the hold of 12 feet 8 inches ( 3 @.@ 86 m ) , she had a capacity of just over 1 @,@ 097 tons BM . When first fitted out , Minerve carried twenty @-@ eight 18 pounders ( 8 @.@ 2 kg ) as her main battery , fourteen 32 pounders ( 15 kg ) carronades on her quarter @-@ deck , while her forecastle had two 9 pounders ( 4 @.@ 1 kg ) long guns and two 32 pounders ( 15 kg ) carronades . 
 = = French service = = 
 In April 1806 Minerve was commanded by Capitaine Jaques Collet and formed part of a squadron under Contre @-@ Amiral Zacharie Allemand . This French squadron comprised five ship @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line , five frigates and four smaller vessels , and was anchored under the shore batteries of the Île @-@ d 'Aix On the 25 April , HMS Pallas arrived . Pallas , under the command of Thomas Cochrane , had been sent by Sir Edward Thornbrough to count the enemy ships in the roadstead behind the island , and Minerve and three corvettes , were ordered to weigh anchor and meet the British frigate . As the French approached , Pallas discharged her guns and a small engagement followed in which none of the ships incurred much damage . Collet then spotted the frigate HMS Isis , the 16 @-@ gun Hazard and a cutter , and decided to seek shelter beneath the island 's guns . The British then left . 
 Pallas returned on 12 May with HMS Indefatigable and a 16 @-@ gun ship @-@ sloop , Kingfisher . The unfavourable winds , and the two large frigates and three brigs , Allemande had despatched , caused the British to withdraw . On 14 May Pallas was once more sighted and Allemande again ordered Minerve and three corvettes , the Lynx , Sylphe and <unk> to chase Cochrane off . Collett ordered all sail in the hope of catching Pallas before she could escape , but Cochrane was in no hurry to leave and even attempted to draw Minerve on by backing his topsails . Once in range , Pallas fired into the enemy , bringing down the main topsail yard of one of the smaller vessels , before making off among the shoals with Minerve in pursuit . By 1300 hrs , Minerve had come up on the leeward side of Pallas , whereupon Pallas fired into her and closed with the intention of boarding . Just at that moment , Minerve hit a sandbank and Pallas crashed into her with such force that her guns were jolted from their positions . Pallas then unleashed a devastating broadside . 
 Both ships were badly damaged in the collision but Pallas , drawing less water than Minerve , was able to free herself and take off , having spotted two forty @-@ gun French frigates , Armide and Infatigable , approaching . Kingfisher , disobeyed her orders to keep offshore , and sailed in to take Pallas in tow , which had lost her jib @-@ boom , spritsail and <unk> yards , main topsail yard and fore topmast . The damage to Minerve was relatively minor , she was later re @-@ floated and taken to Rochefort for repair . The engagement on 14 May cost the lives of seven seamen aboard Minerve , with a further fourteen injured . The casualties aboard Pallas were light : one dead and five wounded . On 25 September 1806 , Minerve , Armide , Gloire and Infatigable were captured by a heavily armed , six @-@ ship squadron under Samuel Hood . Minerve surrendered to the 74 @-@ gun HMS Monarch . The French frigate <unk> and two French brigs managed to escape . 
 = = British service = = 
 The captured Minerve arrived at Plymouth on 26 October 1806 , and after languishing there for some months , was taken into service as HMS Alceste , and commissioned in March 1807 under Captain Murray Maxwell . She was refitted at Plymouth for British naval service from April to August 1807 , then in December that year she was sent to the Mediterranean . In the Action of 4 April 1808 Alceste , in company with HMS Mercury and HMS Grasshopper attacked a Spanish convoy off Rota , destroying two of the escorts and driving many of the merchants ashore . Seven were subsequently captured and sailed back out to sea by marines and sailors of the British ships . 
 On 22 May , Alceste encountered some French <unk> that were forced to seek refuge under the guns of the bay of <unk> . Under cover of darkness , two boats from Alceste , one under Lieutenant Andrew Wilson , the other led by the ship 's master , Henry Bell , were sent in to attack the shore batteries . This was only partially successful ; Wilson was unable to achieve his objective , while Bell 's section managed to spike the guns of the second battery but only after taking heavy fire . Alceste stood out to sea for three days , and on the night of 25 May , Maxwell sent two armed boats to lay in wait in a rocky cove . The following morning Alceste set sail . The French , assuming Alceste had gone to attend to some other business , attempted to leave , but the two British boats lying in ambush attacked . Despite fierce resistance and fire from the guns on shore , four ships of the French convoy were captured . 
 On 21 June 1810 , the boats of Alceste and Topaze captured two vessels in the bay of Martino in Corsica . A landing party captured a battery of three guns that protected the entrance to the bay . They were able to capture and render the guns unserviceable , and kill or wound a number of the garrison . The British lost one man killed and two wounded in the action . 
 In 1811 , Alceste entered the Adriatic . On 4 – 5 May , she and Belle Poule participated in a raid at Parenza ( Istria ) that destroyed a French 18 @-@ gun brig . They chased the brig into the harbour but could not get the ships close enough to bombard her . Instead , the two vessels landed 200 seamen and all their marines on an island nearby and brought on to it two 9 @-@ pounders and two howitzers , which they placed in one battery , and a field piece that they placed further away . Eventually , they and the French in Parenza engaged in five hours of mutual bombardment , during which the British were able to sink the brig . They then returned men and cannons to their ships . In the action , Belle Poule had one man killed and three wounded and Alceste had two men killed ; all casualties occurred onshore . 
 Alceste raided Ragusa , and at the Action of 29 November 1811 , Alceste led the British frigate squadron that outran and defeated a French military convoy carrying cannon . Alceste was stationed at the island of Lissa ( now Vis ) , together with the frigates Unité and Active , when word was received of a similar size French squadron heading north . The three British frigates immediately set sail , caught up with and engaged the French , capturing two of their frigates . The frigates contained more than 200 cannon , which were being transported to Trieste , a city in north @-@ east Italy on the border of the Balkan States . It has been suggested by British historian James Henderson that this action was a factor in Napoleon 's decision to change the direction of his planned eastward expansion in 1812 from the Balkans to Russia . 
 In late 1812 , Alceste was decommissioned and placed in ordinary at Deptford . Between February and July 1814 she was converted at Deptford into a troopship ; in this role , she was recommissioned in May 1814 under Commander <unk> Lawrence , and sailed with troops to North America . Alceste left Pensacola on 8 December 1814 , in tandem with the 50 other vessels in Admiral Alexander Cochrane 's convoy . 
 = = = Diplomatic mission to China = = = 
 With the end of the war came a peace settlement which redefined Europe . It was the British government ’ s desire to strengthen ties with China and to that end planned to send an envoy to inform the emperor of the settlement and to profess Britain 's friendship . William Amherst was the able diplomat chosen for the job and Amherst , in turn , specifically requested Maxwell and the frigate Alceste . Therefore , in 1816 , Alceste was recommissioned under Captain Maxwell again , whose previous ship HMS Daedalus had been wrecked in 1813 . The journey out was uneventful ; Alceste left Spithead for China on 9 February 1816 with Amherst aboard , and after stopping at Madeira , Rio de Janeiro , the Cape of Good Hope , <unk> and Batavia , sailed through the Bangka Strait into the South China Sea . After a short stop to pay respects at Canton , Alceste passed the Straits of Formosa and hove @-@ to in the Bohai Sea on 28 July . There she met with the 10 @-@ gun brig @-@ sloop , Lyra , despatched earlier to herald the arrival of Britain 's ambassador . 
 = = = = Exploration of Korea and Ryukyu Islands = = = = 
 Having previously arranged to travel back overland from Peking and rendezvous with Alceste at Canton , Amherst was ferried to the mouth of the Hai River on 9 August . Amherst 's mission and return journey would take several weeks , thus providing Maxwell an opportunity to explore the area . Alceste headed north while Lyra , under the command of Lieutenant Basil Hall , was ordered to explore the south . The General Hewitt , an Indiaman chartered to carry gifts for the Emperor of China , was to take the centre channel . Alceste first undertook a survey of the Gulf of Liaodong , at that time virtually unknown to Europeans and after spending some time exploring the Liaodong Peninsula , Alceste proceeded southward to Jiaozhou Bay on the coast of Shandong , where she encountered the General Hewitt , and was later joined by Hall in the Lyra . Alceste and Lyra left the bay on 29 August and proceeded eastward toward the west coast of Korea , an area that had not been surveyed since the Jesuit missionaries visited in the 16th and 17th centuries . Maxwell hence found the coast to be some 130 miles further east than expected and while there also discovered the archipelago that forms the south @-@ western tip of the Korean peninsula . Maxwell then turned his attention the Loo Choo Islands , now known as the Ryukyu archipelago , dropping anchor in the <unk> roads on the south @-@ west side of Okinawa on 16 September 1816 . After a six @-@ week stay , Alceste returned to China , via the southern end of the island of Taiwan , arriving at the mouth of the Pearl River on 2 November . 
 = = = = Return to Whampoa = = = = 
 Alceste required some repairs after an arduous journey in less than clement weather so Maxwell wasted no time in petitioning the viceroy of Canton for permission to travel up the Tigris to a secure anchorage , unaware that Amherst 's mission had been less than successful . The emperor 's reception towards the British had been tepid at best , having showed little interest in the affairs of Europe , so far away , and refusing to accept a gift from King George which he had thought less than sufficient . Having received an insulting message in response to his request , Maxwell decided to enter the river anyway but had not gone far when he was hailed by a local mandarin who threatened to have the batteries guarding the entrance sink Alceste if she went any further . Still in need of repairs and requiring navigation of the river to Whampoa to pick up Amherst , Maxwell told the mandarin that he would proceed in any event . Alceste made short work of the shore defences and 17 or so war @-@ junks sent to stop her , and continued up the river to Whampoa where she anchored and awaited the arrival of Lord Amherst and his suite . Having completed as much of the mission as possible , Amherst repaired on board Alceste which left Whampoa , on 21 January 1817 . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Alceste was a little undermanned , carrying a complement of 257 , including Lord Amherst and his entourage . It would have been usual practice to remove some of the guns in order to create more space for distinguished guests , and it is likely that this had been done . Fewer guns allowed for a smaller crew and this may have been a contributing factor . With waters that remain uncharted even today and the many shoals and reefs which rise so steeply that even modern equipment could fail to spot them , the South China Seas , with its frequent storms and typhoons remain some of the most dangerous waters in the world . Despite the continual use of a sounding lead , on 18 February 1817 , Alceste grounded on one of the many hidden reefs in the Java Sea . Maxwell ordered the anchor dropped to prevent the ship from slipping into deeper water , an undesirable situation if the hull had been breached , which indeed turned out to be the case . The pumps were unable to cope with the influx of water and the ship 's carpenter , <unk> , reported that Alceste was beyond repair . 
 Three miles away was an island , known today as Pulau Liat , and Maxwell ordered the first lieutenant , Henry <unk> Hoppner , to take Lord Amherst and his party off in two of the boats . The island 's thick vegetation prevented an accurate assessment of whether it was inhabited or not , and forced the crews to row a further three miles before finding a suitable landing spot between the mangroves . The rest of the ships company were evacuated in the remaining boats and a large raft . Because of the lack of provisions , and in particular , drinking water , it was decided that Hoppner would take Amherst and his embassy in two of the boats to Java , 200 miles to the south . Once there , a rescue could be initiated . A return journey to Java could not be accomplished in less than nine days and so further supplies would be required for the 200 remaining . 
 An expedition back to Alceste to see what could be salvaged was interrupted by the arrival of pirates in the form of Malay <unk> . The unarmed expedition was obliged to return to the shore , and leave the pirates to plunder the wreck . Maxwell ordered the construction of a stockade and the improvisation of additional weapons to counter the threat of an attack . On 22 February , an armed party was sent out to reclaim the ship but before they could do so , the pirates set light to Alceste and made off . The wreck was completely destroyed by the fire which lasted throughout the night but , because the marooned had since managed to construct a well on the island , the impact was minimal . Even so , the following morning , Maxwell sent out a boat which managed to retrieve some barrels of flour , cases of wine and a cask of ale . At dawn on 26 February two proas and two canoes entered the cove but the second lieutenant , Hay , led a sortie in which one of the proas was boarded , four pirates were killed , five jumped into the sea and two were captured . The boat could not be brought in however as she was scuttled beforehand and sank quickly . Later that day the pirates returned in force and the following day further reinforcements arrived . The pirates did not attempt to land but behaved aggressively , firing their swivel guns towards the shore . Fourteen more proas arrived during the day , on 1 March , and several more during the night . With the provisions running low , the build @-@ up of pirates , and a rescue now overdue , Maxwell formulated a plan to capture sufficient proas to escape from the island . While the plan was being proposed , a sail was spotted on the horizon , heading toward the island . The appearance of this vessel , coupled with a sudden attack spearheaded by Alceste 's marines , caused the pirates to flee . 
 The rescue ship turned out to be the Ternate , an East Indiaman , despatched by Lord Amherst , on the day of his arrival in Batavia . The Ternate returned to Batavia with the castaways , where Amherst chartered another ship , <unk> , for the journey to England . During a stop at St Helena , Maxwell met Napoleon , who remembered the action on the 29 November 1811 , when Alceste had captured La Pomone , and remarked , " ... your government must not blame you for the loss of Alceste , for you have taken one of my frigates . " Later , at his court martial , Maxwell was exonerated of all blame for the loss of Alceste . 
 Maxwell received much praise for his actions , and the British East India Company awarded him £ 1500 . He was knighted in 1818 . 
 = Valston Hancock = 
 Air Marshal Sir Valston Eldridge ( Val ) Hancock , KBE , CB , DFC ( 31 May 1907 – 29 September 1998 ) was a senior commander in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . He served as Chief of the Air Staff from 1961 to 1965 . A graduate of the Royal Military College , Duntroon , Hancock transferred to the RAAF in 1929 and qualified as a pilot . His administrative training at Duntroon saw him primarily occupy staff posts , including Deputy Director of Operations and Intelligence at RAAF Headquarters from 1931 to 1935 , and Director of Works and Buildings from 1937 to 1939 . During the early years of World War II , he commanded No. 1 Bombing and Gunnery School , and held senior planning and administrative positions . He eventually saw combat in the Aitape – Wewak campaign of the Pacific War during 1945 . Flying Bristol Beaufort light bombers , he led first No. 100 Squadron , and later No. 71 Wing . His actions earned him the Distinguished Flying Cross . 
 After the war , Hancock became the inaugural commandant of RAAF College . His subsequent positions included Deputy Chief of the Air Staff from 1951 to 1953 , Air Member for Personnel from 1953 to 1955 , and Air Officer Commanding ( AOC ) No. 224 Group RAF in Malaya , responsible for all Commonwealth air forces in the region , from 1957 to 1959 . Appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath in 1958 , he served as AOC RAAF Operational Command from 1959 to 1961 , before being promoted to air marshal and commencing his term as Chief of the Air Staff . He was knighted in 1962 . In his role as the Air Force 's senior officer , Hancock initiated redevelopment of RAAF Base Learmonth in north Western Australia , as part of a chain of forward airfields for the defence of the continent . He also evaluated potential replacements for the RAAF 's English Electric Canberra bomber , selecting the American " TFX " ( later the General Dynamics F @-@ 111 ) as the most suitable for Australia 's needs , though he did not recommend its immediate purchase due to its early stage of development . After his retirement from the military in May 1965 , Hancock co @-@ founded the Australia Defence Association . He died in 1998 , aged 91 . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Hancock was born on 31 May 1907 in Perth , Western Australia , and educated at Hale School in Wembley Downs . He was the elder cousin of future mining magnate Lang Hancock . Val Hancock entered the Royal Military College , Duntroon , in 1925 and graduated as senior cadet in 1928 , earning the Sword of Honour . His preferred career path in the military was engineering , and it was only when he found that there was no vacancy in his corps of choice , and that he had instead been earmarked for the artillery , that he put his name forward for transfer to the Royal Australian Air Force . He enlisted in the RAAF on 1 February 1929 , and undertook flying instruction at RAAF Point Cook , Victoria , later that year . 
 Hancock 's initial postings after qualifying as a pilot were to Nos. 1 and 3 Squadrons . It was , however , common practice for Duntroon graduates to be given staff positions in the Air Force because of their training in administration , and Hancock was no exception . He spent most of the 1930s in a succession of posts at RAAF Headquarters in Melbourne . From 1931 to 1935 , he served as Deputy Director of Operations and Intelligence . He married Joan Butler on 26 May 1932 ; the couple had two sons and a daughter . By 1935 , Hancock had been promoted to flight lieutenant and appointed Staff Officer to the Chief of the Air Staff . In 1937 he was posted to Britain to attend the RAF Staff College , Andover . Like other Commonwealth air forces , the RAAF maintained close technological and educational ties with the Royal Air Force , and Hancock was one of 30 Australian officers to pass through Andover before the outbreak of World War II . Returning to Australia in 1938 , he was promoted to squadron leader and became Director of Works and Buildings , commonly known as " Works and Bricks " , at RAAF Headquarters . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In March 1940 , Hancock 's Directorate of Works and Buildings was transferred from the office of the Chief of the Air Staff to the newly formed Organisation and Equipment Branch under Air Marshal Richard Williams . Considered a key part of the Air Force 's expansion during the early part of World War II , " Works and Bricks " quickly absorbed all staff with civil engineering and building experience in the RAAF active reserve . As Director , Hancock was responsible for surveying and developing a military aerodrome at Evans Head , near the Queensland and New South Wales border , which became home to No. 1 Bombing and Gunnery School ( No. 1 <unk> ) . Promoted to wing commander , he held command of No. 1 <unk> , operating Fairey Battle single @-@ engined bombers , from August 1940 until November 1941 . He was promoted to acting group captain in April 1941 . Appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) on 1 January 1942 , Hancock became Assistant Director of Plans at Allied Air Forces Headquarters , South West Pacific Area , that April . He was made Director of Plans at the Air Force 's main operational formation , RAAF Command , when it was established in September . In 1943 – 44 , he served as Staff Officer Administration for Western Area Command , which maintained two bomber squadrons for anti @-@ submarine patrols and two fighter squadrons to guard against possible attack on the mainland by Japanese carrier @-@ borne aircraft . 
 Hancock finally achieved a combat command in January 1945 , when he took charge of No. 100 Squadron , flying Bristol Beaufort light bombers during the Aitape @-@ Wewak campaign in New Guinea . That month , the unit attacked Japanese positions at Maprik , below the Prince Alexander Ranges , and Cape <unk> , near Wewak . On 1 April , Hancock took over No. 71 Wing , which came under overall control of RAAF Northern Command and nominally comprised Nos. 7 , 8 and 100 Beaufort Squadrons , as well as a flight of CAC Boomerang fighter @-@ bombers from No. 4 ( Army Cooperation ) Squadron . It was soon augmented by two more Beaufort units , Nos. 6 and 15 Squadrons . Providing close air support to Australian ground troops in the lead @-@ up to the final assault on Wewak , the wing flew over 1 @,@ 400 sorties and dropped more than 1 @,@ 200 tons of bombs in May alone . By mid @-@ year , Hancock 's forces were acutely short of fuel and ordnance , to the extent that his squadrons took to arming their Beauforts with captured Japanese bombs . In July , enough supplies arrived to enable the wing to continue operating at normal strength . No. 71 Wing was active to the very last day of the Pacific War , flying its final combat mission involving 30 Beauforts only hours before news of victory arrived on 15 August 1945 . Hancock 's " distinguished flying on operations in Northern Command " earned him the Distinguished Flying Cross ; the award was published in the London Gazette on 22 February 1946 . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 Among a small coterie of wartime RAAF commanders considered suitable for future senior roles , Hancock retained his rank of group captain following the end of hostilities . As Director of Personnel Services during 1946 , he was involved in restructuring the Air Force into a dramatically smaller peacetime service . He recalled this time as a " twilight period " when " no @-@ one wanted to know about us " and many good people were let go due to the government 's parsimonious retention policies . In 1947 , Hancock was promoted to air commodore and appointed inaugural commandant of the newly formed RAAF College , Point Cook , the Air Force 's equivalent of Duntroon and the Royal Australian Naval College . He also drafted the institution 's charter . Departing in late 1949 , he spent the following year in Britain , where he attended the Imperial Defence College . On his return to Australia in 1951 , he was promoted to acting air vice marshal and made Deputy Chief of the Air Staff . He was raised to a Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) in the 1953 New Years Honours . In October that year , Hancock took over from Air Vice Marshal Frank Bladin as Air Member for Personnel ( AMP ) . As AMP , he occupied a seat on the Air Board , the service 's controlling body that consisted of its most senior officers and which was chaired by the Chief of the Air Staff . Completing his term in January 1955 , Hancock was posted to Britain as Head of the Australian Joint Services Staff in London . He spent much of the latter half of 1955 and early 1956 laid low by a stomach ailment that was initially diagnosed as amoebic dysentery but was later thought to be Malta fever or malaria . 
 In March 1957 , Hancock was one of three candidates , along with Air Vice Marshals Frederick Scherger and Allan Walters , touted as possible successors to Air Marshal Sir John McCauley as Chief of the Air Staff ( CAS ) , the RAAF 's senior position . Scherger gained selection , and Hancock was posted in June to Malaya as Air Officer Commanding ( AOC ) No. 224 Group RAF , responsible for all Commonwealth air forces in the region . Though fastidious in appearance and a strict teetotaller , he was known for his enthusiasm in meeting staff and as " an indefatigable participant in mess functions and games " . He also made a point of getting out to units in the field , taking every opportunity to fly himself around his command . For his " distinguished service in Malaya " , Hancock was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath ( CB ) on 9 December 1958 . He returned to Australia in July 1959 to serve as AOC Operational Command ( now Air Command ) . When Scherger 's term as CAS was due to complete , Hancock and Walters were once more put forward to the Minister for Air as potential replacements . His " professional ability , operational experience and personal qualities " being deemed more appropriate for the role , Hancock was promoted to air marshal and took over as CAS in May 1961 . In June , he met with his opposite numbers in the Army and Navy at a Chiefs of Staff Committee conference to discuss the necessity of Australia acquiring nuclear weapons ; the chiefs agreed that the probability such a capability would be required was remote but that it should remain an option under certain circumstances , a position the defence forces maintained during the ensuing decade . He was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( KBE ) in the 1962 Queen 's Birthday Honours , gazetted on 2 June . 
 As CAS , Hancock worked to enhance the RAAF 's deterrent capability in the Pacific region , particularly in light of heightened tensions with Indonesia during its period of Konfrontasi with Malaysia . In June 1963 , Hancock undertook a mission to Britain , France and the United States to consider potential replacements for the English Electric Canberra bomber as Australia 's prime aerial strike platform . After investigating the US " TFX " , North American A @-@ 5 Vigilante and McDonnell Douglas F @-@ 4 Phantom II , the British BAC TSR @-@ 2 , and the French Dassault Mirage IV , Hancock decided that the swing @-@ wing TFX , forerunner of the General Dynamics F @-@ 111 , would be the aircraft best suited for this role . However , as the TFX had not yet flown , he recommended purchase of the already operational Vigilante to counteract a perceived imminent threat from Indonesia . In the event , the Federal Government did not go ahead with an immediate replacement for the Canberra , and Hancock 's original choice of the TFX was taken up as a long @-@ term solution , leading to Australia 's agreement in October to purchase the F @-@ 111C . The same month , as Konfrontasi continued to simmer , Hancock approved simplification to the rules of engagement for Australian CAC Sabre fighters based at RAAF Butterworth to engage and destroy Indonesian aircraft violating Malay air space . The following month he urged using RAAF Canberras from Butterworth to make pre @-@ emptive strikes against Indonesian air bases , in retaliation for incursions into West Malaysia , but Britain , which had initially requested Australia 's involvement , held back on action . 
 Once the F @-@ 111 had been ordered , Hancock sought a suitable forward airfield from which they could operate . In this , he continued a policy initiated by his predecessor as CAS , Air Marshal Scherger , of developing a chain of so @-@ called " bare bases " in Northern Australia . Hancock recommended redeveloping RAAF Base Learmonth in the northern part of Western Australia , due to its proximity to Indonesia . Flying out of this airfield , the F @-@ 111s could destroy " vital centres in Java " ; just as importantly for deterrence purposes , Hancock contended , enhancing the base 's capability would send a clear message to Indonesia 's hierarchy . Though the project was delayed , in part due to thawing in relations between Australia and Indonesia , Learmonth 's upgrade was completed in 1973 , the same year that the F @-@ 111 finally entered RAAF service . The latter part of Hancock 's tour as CAS coincided with the beginning of large @-@ scale Australian involvement in the Vietnam War . By mid @-@ 1964 , the Commonwealth had already sent a small team of military advisors , plus a detachment of newly acquired DHC @-@ 4 Caribou cargo planes , to the region at the request of the South Vietnamese government . Under Hancock , the Caribou had itself only been reluctantly ordered by the Air Force following intense pressure from the Army and the Federal government for an STOL transport . Concerned at the potential drain on the RAAF 's resources , Hancock tried to resist calls for commitments to Vietnam . His negative views were in contrast to the hawkish attitudes of his deputy , Air Vice Marshal Colin Hannah , and Air Chief Marshal Scherger , now Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee and Australia 's senior soldier . In April 1965 , as part of American operations in Indochina , United States Air Force strike aircraft took up residence at Ubon Air Force Base , Thailand , which since 1962 had been home to No. 79 Squadron Sabres and run by the RAAF under SEATO arrangements . Hancock proposed that Australia continue to command the facility and provide local air defence , though this effectively made the Sabres a support unit in the war effort and therefore potential targets of North Vietnamese attack ; in the event , none occurred . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Hancock retired from the Air Force in May 1965 after completing his term as CAS , which the government had extended for twelve months beyond its original three years . Having followed two fellow Royal Military College graduates — McCauley and Scherger — in the role , he was succeeded by another former Duntroon cadet , Alister Murdoch . Hancock 's name was put forward as a successor to Scherger when the latter 's term as Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee completed in May 1966 , but Prime Minister Sir Robert Menzies preferred General Sir John Wilton for the position . Later the same year , Hancock took over as Commissioner @-@ General for Australia at Expo 67 in Montreal , Canada , following the sudden death of the previous appointee , Vice Admiral Sir Hastings Harrington . In 1975 , prompted in part by the fall of Saigon in April that year , Hancock co @-@ founded the Australia Defence Association as an independent think tank for defence matters , and chaired its Western Australian chapter . He was also active in the Royal Commonwealth Society , and published an autobiography , Challenge , in 1990 . Hancock continued to fly in retirement , joining his cousin Lang , also a pilot , in promoting the Pilbara mining district . Val Hancock died in Perth on 29 September 1998 , and was survived by his wife and three children . He is commemorated by Sir Valston Hancock Drive at Evans Head . 
 = Air India = 
 Air India is the flag carrier airline of India and the third largest airline in India in terms of passengers carried , after IndiGo and Jet Airways . It is owned by Air India Limited , a Government of India enterprise and operates a fleet of Airbus and Boeing aircraft serving 84 domestic and international destinations . It is headquartered in New Delhi . Air India has its main hub at Indira Gandhi International Airport , New Delhi and a secondary hub at Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport , Mumbai . Air India became the 27th member of Star Alliance on 11 July 2014 . 
 Founded in 1932 by J. R. D. Tata and later renamed as Tata Airlines , he flew its first single @-@ engine De Havilland Puss Moth , carrying air mail from Karachi to Bombay and later continuing to Madras ( currently Chennai ) . After World War II , it became a public limited company and was renamed to Air India . On 21 February 1960 , it included its first Boeing 707 – 420 named Gauri Shankar and became the first Asian airline to induct a jet aircraft in its fleet . In 2000 – 01 , attempts were made to privatize Air India and from 2006 onwards , it suffered losses after its merger with Indian . 
 Air India also operates flights to domestic and Asian destinations through its subsidiaries Air India Regional and Air India Express . Air India uses the Airbus A320 family and Boeing 787 aircraft for selected domestic routes while long distance services use the Boeing 777 @-@ 300ER , 747 and 787 aircraft . Air India 's mascot is the Maharajah ( Emperor ) and the logo consists of a flying Swan with the wheel of Konark inside it . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years ( 1932 – 1945 ) = = = 
 Air India had its origin in Tata Sons , founded by J. R. D. Tata , an Indian aviator and business tycoon . In April 1932 , Tata won a contract to carry mail for Imperial Airways and the aviation department of Tata Sons was formed with two single @-@ engine De Havilland Puss Moths . On 15 October 1932 , Tata flew a Puss Moth carrying air mail from Karachi to Bombay ( currently Mumbai ) and the aircraft continued to Madras ( currently Chennai ) piloted by Neville Vincent , a former Royal Air Force pilot and friend of Tata . The airline fleet consisted of a Puss Moth aircraft and a Leopard Moth . Initial service included weekly airmail service between Karachi and Madras via Ahmedabad and Bombay . In its first year of operation , the airline flew 160 @,@ 000 miles ( 260 @,@ 000 km ) , carrying 155 passengers and 9 @.@ 72 tonnes ( 10 @.@ 71 tons ) of mail and made a profit of ₹ 60 @,@ 000 ( US $ 890 ) . Later , the airline launched a domestic flight from Bombay to Trivandrum with a six @-@ seater Miles Merlin . In 1938 , it was re @-@ christened as Tata Air Services and later as Tata Airlines . Delhi and Colombo were added to the destinations in 1938 . During the Second World War , the airline helped the Royal Air Force with troop movements , shipping of supplies , rescue of refugees and maintenance of planes . 
 = = = Post Independence ( 1946 – 2000 ) = = = 
 After World War II , regular commercial service was restored in India and Tata Airlines became a public limited company on 29 July 1946 under the name Air India . After the Indian independence in 1947 , 49 % of the airline was acquired by the Government of India in 1948 . On 8 June 1948 , a Lockheed Constellation L @-@ <unk> named Malabar Princess ( registered VT @-@ <unk> ) took off from Bombay bound for London Heathrow marking the airline 's first international flight . In 1953 , the Government of India passed the Air Corporations Act and purchased a majority stake in the carrier . The company was renamed as Air India International Limited and the domestic services were transferred to Indian Airlines as a part of restructuring . From 1948 to 1950 , the airline introduced services to Nairobi in Africa and to major European destinations Rome , Paris and Düsseldorf . The airline took delivery of its first Lockheed Constellation L @-@ 1049 named Rani of Jhansi ( registered VT @-@ <unk> ) and inaugurated services to Bangkok , Hong Kong , Tokyo and Singapore . 
 On 21 February 1960 , Air India International inducted its first Boeing 707 – 420 named Gauri Shankar ( registered VT @-@ DJJ ) , thereby becoming the first Asian airline to induct a jet aircraft in its fleet . The airline inaugurated services to New York on 14 May 1960 . On 8 June 1962 , the airline 's name was officially truncated to Air India and on 11 June 1962 , Air India became the world 's first all @-@ jet airline . In 1971 , the airline took delivery of its first Boeing 747 @-@ 200B named Emperor Ashoka ( registered VT @-@ EBD ) and introduced a new Palace in the Sky livery and branding . In 1986 , Air India took delivery of its first Airbus A310 @-@ 300 . In 1993 , Air India took delivery of a Boeing 747 @-@ 400 named Konark ( registered VT @-@ ESM ) and operated the first non @-@ stop flight between New York and Delhi . 
 = = = Later years ( 2000 – ) = = = 
 In 2000 – 01 , attempts were made to privatize Air India . In 2000 , Air India introduced services to Shanghai , China . On 23 May 2001 , the Ministry of Civil Aviation charged Michael Mascarenhas , the then @-@ managing director , with corruption . According to the ministry reports , the airline lost approximately ₹ 570 million ( US $ 8 @.@ 5 million ) because of extra commissions that Mascarenhas sanctioned and he was later suspended from the airline . In May 2004 , Air India launched a wholly owned low cost subsidiary called Air @-@ India Express connecting cities in India with the Middle East and Southeast Asia . Until 2007 , Air India mainly operated on international long @-@ haul routes while Indian Airlines operated on domestic and international short @-@ haul routes . In 2007 , Air India and Indian Airlines were merged under Air India Limited and the airline took delivery of its first Boeing 777 aircraft . The airline was invited to be a part of the Star Alliance in 2007 . 
 The combined losses for Air India and Indian Airlines in 2006 – 07 were ₹ 7 @.@ 7 billion ( US $ 110 million ) and after the merger , it went up to ₹ 72 billion ( US $ 1 @.@ 1 billion ) by March 2009 . In July 2009 , State Bank of India was appointed to prepare a road map for the recovery of the airline . The carrier sold three Airbus A300 and one Boeing 747 – 300M in March 2009 for $ 18 @.@ 75 million to finance the debt . By March 2011 , Air India had accumulated a debt of ₹ 425 @.@ 7 billion ( US $ 6 @.@ 3 billion ) and an operating loss of ₹ 220 billion ( US $ 3 @.@ 3 billion ) , and was seeking ₹ 429 @.@ 2 billion ( US $ 6 @.@ 4 billion ) from the government . A report by the Comptroller and Auditor General blamed the decision to buy 111 new planes and the ill @-@ timed merger with Indian Airlines for the poor financial situation . In August 2011 , the invitation to join Star Alliance was suspended as a result of its failure to meet the minimum standards for the membership . The government pumped ₹ 32 billion ( US $ 480 million ) into Air India in March 2012 . 
 On 1 March 2009 , Air India made Frankfurt Airport its international hub for onward connections to the United States from India . However , the airline shut down the Frankfurt hub on 30 October 2010 because of high operating costs . In 2010 , financially less lucrative routes were terminated and the airline planned to open a new hub for its international flights at Dubai . In 2012 , a study commissioned by the Corporate Affairs Ministry recommended that Air India should be partly privatized . In May 2012 , the carrier invited offers from banks to raise up $ 800 million via external commercial borrowing and bridge financing . In May 2012 , the airline was fined $ 80 @,@ 000 by the U.S. Transportation Department for failing to post customer service and tarmac delay contingency plans on its website and adequately inform passengers about its optional fees . 
 In 2013 , the then @-@ Civil Aviation Minister Ajit Singh stated privatization was the key to the airline 's survival . However , the opposition led by the BJP and the CPI ( M ) slammed the government . In 2013 , the Indian government planned to delay equity infusion of ₹ 300 billion ( US $ 4 @.@ 5 billion ) that was slated to be infused into the airline slowly over a period of eight years . In January 2013 , Air India cleared a part of its pending dues through funds raised by selling and leasing back the newly acquired Boeing 787 Dreamliners . In March 2013 , the airline posted its first positive EBITDA after almost six years and 20 % growth in its operating revenue since the previous financial year . Air India Limited split its engineering and cargo businesses into two separate subsidiaries , Air India Engineering Services Limited ( <unk> ) and Air India Transport Services Limited ( <unk> ) in 2013 . In December 2013 , the airline appointed veteran pilot SPS Puri as its head of operations . The appointment was criticized by the Air India pilots union as Puri allegedly has multiple violations to his name . 
 Air India became the 27th member of Star Alliance on 11 July 2014 . In August 2015 , it signed an agreement with Citibank and State Bank of India to raise $ 300 million in external commercial borrowing to meet working capital requirements . For FY 2014 – 15 , its revenue , operating loss and net loss were ₹ 197 @.@ 81 billion ( US $ 2 @.@ 9 billion ) , ₹ 2 @.@ 171 billion ( US $ 32 million ) and ₹ 5 @.@ 41 billion ( US $ 80 million ) compared FY 2011 – 12 , which were ₹ 147 @.@ 13 billion ( US $ 2 @.@ 2 billion ) , ₹ 5 @.@ 138 billion ( US $ 76 million ) and ₹ 7 @.@ 55 billion ( US $ 110 million ) . As of February 2016 , Air India is the third largest carrier in India , after IndiGo and Jet Airways with a market share of 15 @.@ 4 % . 
 = = Corporate affairs and identity = = 
 = = = Headquarters = = = 
 Air India Limited is headquartered at the Indian Airlines House , New Delhi . Air India moved its headquarters from Air India Building , Mumbai to Delhi in 2013 . The former headquarters is a 23 @-@ storey tower on Marine Drive and was one of the targets of the 1993 Bombay bombings . 
 = = = Subsidiaries = = = 
 = = = = Current = = = = 
 Air India Regional was established as Alliance Air , a wholly owned subsidiary of Indian Airlines on 1 April 1996 and started operations on 21 June 1996 . It was renamed Air India Regional after the merger between Air India and Indian Airlines . Air India Express began operations on 29 April 2005 and was initially owned by Air India Charters . It operates flights from South India to the Middle East and Southeast Asia . 
 = = = = Defunct = = = = 
 Air India became the first Asian airline to operate freighters when Air India Cargo was set up in 1954 and started its freighter operations with a Douglas DC @-@ 3 aircraft . Air India Cargo ended freighter aircraft operations in early 2012 . 
 = = = Mascot = = = 
 Air India 's mascot is the Maharajah ( Emperor ) . It was created by Bobby <unk> , the then @-@ commercial director of Air India , and Umesh Rao , an artist with J. Walter Thompson Limited in 1946 . <unk> stated that , " We call him a Maharajah for want of a better description . But his blood isn 't blue . He may look like royalty , but he isn 't royal " . Air India adopted the Maharajah as its mascot in 1946 . It was used in promoting it although initially designed only for the airline 's memo @-@ pads . The Maharajah was given a makeover in 2015 and the brand is represented by a younger version . 
 = = = Logo and livery = = = 
 Air India 's colour scheme is red and white . The aircraft were painted in white with red palace style carvings on the outside of the windows and the airline 's name written in red . The name is written in Hindi on one side and in English on the other . The window scheme was designed in line with the slogan Your Palace in the Sky . The airplanes were earlier named after Indian kings and landmarks . In 1989 , to supplement its Flying Palace livery , Air India introduced a new livery that included a metallic gold spinning wheel on a deep red @-@ coloured tail and a Boeing 747 , Rajendra Chola , was the first aircraft to be painted in the new colours . 
 The first logo of Air India was a centaur , a stylised version of Sagittarius shooting an arrow in a circle representing the wheel of Konark . The logo chosen by founder J. R. D. Tata was introduced in 1948 and represented the airline until 2007 . On 22 May 2007 , Air India and Indian Airlines unveiled their new livery consisting of a Flying Swan with the wheel of Konark placed inside it . The flying swan was morphed from the centaur logo and the chakra was derived from Indian 's erstwhile logo . On 15 May 2007 , Air India refreshed its livery , making the Rajasthani arches along the windows slightly smaller , extending a stylised line from the tail of the aircraft to the nose and painting the underbelly red . The new logo features on the tail and the engine covers with red and orange lines running parallel to each other from the front door to the rear door . 
 = = Destinations = = 
 Air India flies to a total of 84 destinations including 48 domestic destinations and 36 international destinations in 24 countries across four continents around the world . Its primary hub is located at Indira Gandhi International Airport , New Delhi , and it has a secondary hub at Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport , Mumbai . 
 = = = Code @-@ share agreements = = = 
 Air India became the 27th member of Star Alliance on 11 July 2014 . Air India has code @-@ sharing agreements with the following airlines : 
 = = Fleet = = 
 = = = Current = = = 
 As of July 2016 , the Air India fleet consists of the following aircraft : 
 = = = Fleet information = = = 
 In 1932 , Air India started operations with De Havilland Puss Moth . It inducted its first Boeing 707 – 420 named Gauri Shankar ( registered VT @-@ DJJ ) , thereby becoming the first Asian airline to induct a jet aircraft in its fleet and on 4 August 1993 , Air India took the delivery of its first Boeing 747 – 400 named Konark ( registered VT @-@ ESM ) . The airline 's first Boeing 777 @-@ 200LR aircraft was delivered on 26 July 2007 , which was named Andhra Pradesh . Air India received its first Boeing 777 @-@ 300ER aircraft on 9 October 2007 and the aircraft was named as Bihar . Air India received its first Boeing 787 <unk> aircraft on 6 September 2012 and commenced flights on 19 September 2012 . 
 Apart from the Boeing aircraft , Air India also operates a wide range of Airbus aircraft . In 1989 , Indian Airlines introduced the Airbus A320 @-@ 200 aircraft , which Air India now uses to operate both domestic and international short haul flights . In 2005 , Indian Airlines introduced the smaller , A319 , which are now used mainly on domestic and regional routes . After the merger in 2007 , Air India inducted the biggest member of the A320 family , the A321 , to operate mainly on international short haul and medium haul routes . At the same time , Air India leased the Airbus A330s to operate on medium @-@ long haul international routes . As of February 2013 , Air India operates 62 Airbus A320 family aircraft . Air India One ( also referred to as AI @-@ 1 or <unk> ) is the call sign of any Air India aircraft carrying the Prime Minister , President or the Vice President . Air India One operates on one of the five Boeing 747 @-@ 400s that Air India currently owns as VIP flights . <unk> Embraer 135 and Boeing Business Jets are also used . 
 = = = New aircraft orders = = = 
 On 11 January 2006 , Air India announced an order for 68 jets – 8 Boeing 777 @-@ 200LR , 15 Boeing 777 @-@ 300ER , 18 Boeing 737 @-@ 800 and 27 Boeing 787 @-@ 8 Dreamliners . The eighteen Boeing 737s ordered were later transferred to Air India Express . Air India has taken the delivery of 20 Boeing 787 – 8s as of December 2015 and the remaining are expected to be delivered by 2016 . 
 = = = Fleet restructuring = = = 
 As a part of the financial restructuring , Air India sold five of its eight Boeing 777 @-@ 200LR aircraft to Etihad Airways in December 2013 . According to the airline , plans for introducing ultra @-@ long flights with service to Seattle , San Francisco and Los Angeles were cancelled due to factors like high fuel prices and weak demand . In April 2014 , the airline decided to sell its remaining three Boeing 777 @-@ <unk> as well , citing higher operating costs . On 24 April 2014 , Air India issued a tender for leasing 14 Airbus A320 aircraft for up to six years , to strengthen its domestic network . 
 = = = Aircraft operated = = = 
 Apart from the aircraft listed above , Air India operated several other aircraft . Air India operated the De Havilland Puss Moth , De Havilland Fox Moth , Waco <unk> @-@ 6 , de Havilland Dragon Rapide , Percival Petrel , Douglas DC @-@ 2 , DC @-@ 3 , Vickers <unk> Viking , Lockheed L @-@ 749 Constellation , Douglas DC @-@ 4 and the Lockheed L @-@ 1049 Super Constellation up @-@ to 1960 . Thereafter , Air India started operating the Boeing 707 and the De Havilland Comet . 
 = = Services = = 
 = = = Cabin = = = 
 The Boeing 777 @-@ 200LR / 777 @-@ 300ER aircraft operated on long haul flights can accommodate 342 passengers in a three class configuration viz. first ( 3 ) , business ( 35 ) and economy ( 303 ) . The Boeing 747 – 400 can accommodate 423 passengers in the same three class configuration in a 12 @-@ 26 @-@ 385 seating arrangement . Boeing 787 Dreamliner and Airbus A321 flights have a two class configuration and can accommodate 256 ( 18B / <unk> ) and 172 ( 20B / <unk> ) passengers . Airbus A320 aircraft operated on domestic and short haul international flights can accommodate either 168 in economy configuration or 140 ( 20B / <unk> ) in a two class configuration . Airbus A319 aircraft have a full economy 144 seat configuration . Air India serves meals on all international flights and domestic flights with a flight duration of over 90 minutes . 
 = = = In @-@ flight entertainment = = = 
 Air India aircraft are equipped with Thales <unk> in @-@ flight entertainment system . Passengers can choose from five channels airing Hindi and English content . Air India 's Boeing 777 series , 747 and 787 aircraft are also equipped with personal on demand in @-@ flight entertainment systems on which passengers can choose from available content . Showtime is the official entertainment guide published by Air India . Shubh Yatra ( meaning Happy Journey ) is a bilingual in @-@ flight magazine published in English and Hindi by Air India . 
 = = = Frequent flyer programme = = = 
 Flying Returns is Air India 's frequent @-@ flyer programme . It is India 's first frequent flyer programme and is shared by Air India and its subsidiaries . A member can earn mileage points and redeem them during future travel . On higher fares , passengers will earn bonus miles and clock mileage points . The points can be redeemed for awards travel on Lufthansa and Singapore Airlines . 
 = = = Premium lounges = = = 
 The Maharaja Lounge ( English : Emperor 's Lounge ) is available for the use of First and Business class passengers . Air India shares lounges with other international airlines at international airports that do not have a Maharaja Lounge available . There are eight Maharaja Lounges : 
 India 
 Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport , Mumbai 
 Indira Gandhi International Airport , Delhi 
 Chennai International Airport , Chennai 
 Kempegowda International Airport , Bangalore 
 Rajiv Gandhi International Airport , Hyderabad 
 Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel International Airport , Ahmedabad 
 International 
 John F. Kennedy International Airport , New York 
 Heathrow Airport , London 
 = = Awards and recognitions = = 
 Preferred International Airline for travel and hospitality from <unk> Consumer Awards ( 2006 ) 
 Best Corporate Social Responsibility Initiative by Galileo Express Travel World 
 Best Short @-@ Haul International Airline by Galileo Express Travel World ( 2008 ) 
 Amity Corporate Excellence Award by Amity University 
 Reader 's Digest Trusted Brand 
 Dun and Bradstreet Award ( D & B ) , first in terms of revenue out of the top airline companies out of India 
 Best South Asian Airline , Mice and business travel publications 
 Cargo Airline of the Year , 26th Cargo Airline of the Year Awards 
 The Montreal Protocol Public Awareness Award by the United Nations for environmental protection 
 It was named India 's most trusted airline by The Brand Trust Report 2015 . 
 Air India 's ground services became the first ground service provider to acquire ISO 9002 certification on 31 January 2001 . 
 = = = Gulf War evacuation = = = 
 The airline entered the Guinness Book of World Records for the most people evacuated by a civil airliner . Over 111 @,@ 000 people were evacuated from Amman to Mumbai , a distance of 4 @,@ 117 kilometres ( 2 @,@ 558 mi ) , by operating 488 flights from 13 August to 11 October 1990 – lasting 59 days . The operation was carried out during Persian Gulf War to evacuate Indian expatriates from Kuwait and Iraq . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 = = = 1940s = = = 
 On 27 December 1947 , an Air India DC @-@ 3 ( registered VT @-@ AUG ) carrying 23 people ( 19 passengers and four crew ) en route from Karachi to Bombay , lost control after take @-@ off from Karachi International Airport due to an instrument failure and crashed , killing all on board . This was the airline 's first fatal accident . 
 = = = 1950s = = = 
 On 3 November 1950 , Air India Flight 245 Malabar Princess , a Lockheed L @-@ 749 Constellation ( registered VT @-@ <unk> ) carrying 48 people ( 40 passengers and eight crew ) , flying on the Bombay @-@ Cairo @-@ Geneva @-@ London route , crashed on Mont Blanc in France killing all on board . 
 On 13 December 1950 , an Air India DC @-@ 3 ( registered VT @-@ <unk> ) carrying 21 people ( 17 passengers and four crew ) , en route from Bombay to Coimbatore , crashed into high ground near Kotagiri due to a navigational error , killing all on board . 
 On 15 September 1951 , an Air India Douglas C @-@ 47 Skytrain ( registered VT @-@ CCA ) carrying 27 people ( 23 passengers and four crew ) en route from Bangalore to Trivandrum , crashed on take @-@ off killing a crew member . 
 On 9 May 1953 , an Air India Douglas C @-@ 47 Skytrain ( registered VT @-@ AUD ) carrying 18 people ( 13 passengers and five crew ) crashed after take @-@ off from Delhi killing all on board . 
 On 11 April 1955 , Kashmir Princess , a Lockheed L @-@ <unk> Constellation ( registered VT @-@ DEP ) carrying 19 people ( 11 passengers and 8 crew ) was bombed in mid @-@ air , killing 16 of the 19 on board . 
 On 19 July 1959 Rani of <unk> , a Lockheed L @-@ <unk> Super Constellation ( registered VT @-@ DIN ) carrying 46 people ( 39 passengers and seven crew ) crashed on approach to Santacruz Airport in conditions of poor visibility due to rain . The aircraft suffered damage beyond repair and was written off . There were no fatalities . 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 On 24 January 1966 , Air India Flight 101 Kanchenjunga , a Boeing 707 – 420 ( registered VT @-@ <unk> ) carrying 117 people ( 106 passengers and 11 crew ) crashed on Mont Blanc , France killing all on board including the noted Indian scientist , Homi J. Bhabha . 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 On 1 January 1978 , Air India Flight 855 Emperor Ashoka , a Boeing 747 @-@ 237B ( registered VT @-@ EBD ) crashed into the Arabian Sea after take @-@ off from Mumbai killing everyone on board ( 213 persons ; 190 passengers , 23 crew ) . 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 On 21 June 1982 , Air India Flight 403 <unk> Shankar , a Boeing 707 – 420 ( registered VT @-@ DJJ ) carrying 99 passengers and 12 crew from Kuala Lumpur to Bombay via Madras crashed during landing at Sahar International Airport during a rainstorm . The fuselage exploded and 17 people including two crew members were killed . 
 On 23 June 1985 , Air India Flight 182 Emperor Kanishka , a Boeing 747 @-@ 237B ( registered VT @-@ <unk> ) was blown up in mid @-@ air by a suitcase @-@ bomb planted by Babbar Khalsa terrorists allegedly as revenge for the Indian Government 's operation on the Golden Temple in June 1984 . The flight was on the first leg on its Montreal @-@ London @-@ Delhi @-@ Bombay flight when it exploded off the coast of Cork , Ireland in the Atlantic Ocean . All 307 passengers and 22 crew on board died . 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 On 7 May 1990 , Air India Flight 132 Emperor Vikramaditya , a Boeing 747 @-@ 237B ( registered VT @-@ <unk> ) flying on the London @-@ Delhi @-@ Bombay route carrying 215 people ( 195 passengers and 20 crew ) caught fire on touch down at Delhi airport due to a failure of an engine pylon to wing attachment . There were no fatalities but the aircraft was damaged beyond repair and written off . 
 = Fantasy Black Channel = 
 Fantasy Black Channel is the debut studio album by British dance @-@ punk band Late of the Pier . It was released on 30 July 2008 in Japan through Toshiba EMI and on 4 August 2008 in the British Isles on Parlophone , the band 's primary label . Five tracks had already been released as singles in the United Kingdom : " Bathroom Gurgle " , " The Bears Are Coming " , " Space and the Woods " and " Focker " as a double A @-@ side , and " Heartbeat " . The record peaked at number 28 on the UK Albums Chart , but failed to chart in the United States . 
 The album was recorded in frontman Sam Eastgate 's bedroom in Castle Donington , England , and at several locations in London . It went through a fractured creative process that lasted for more than two years . It was eventually produced by Eastgate and DJ Erol Alkan between 2007 and 2008 . Fantasy Black Channel does not contain a unifying musical or lyrical theme ; rather , it is a collage of all the ideas , genres , and studio effects that fascinated the band members and Alkan , especially during live recording sessions . The record was very well received by critics . It was often treated as one of the best British albums of 2008 because of its eclecticism and spirit of invention . 
 = = Origins and recording = = 
 Having officially formed a band under the name Late of the Pier in 2004 , childhood friends Sam Eastgate , Andrew Faley , Sam Potter , and Ross Dawson initially developed the sound of their first album by listening to the alternative dance music of British ensemble The Prodigy and the grunge music of American band Nirvana . They soon branched out into listening to diverse genres from the last 40 years of music , including Motown and soul . Potter has treated their conception of Fantasy Black Channel as a reaction to " mediocre , complacent indie @-@ <unk> bands who find a sound and stick to it ; whose songs sound exactly the same " , while lead writer and composer Eastgate has pointed out that they wanted to " take people past their own limits " . The nascent recording stages took place in Eastgate 's bedroom , where unconventional time signatures and experimental chords were performed because , at the time , no band member could play an instrument properly . 
 Late of the Pier started using the album working title Interesting Adventure in 2006 after practising in Eastgate 's bedroom for about a year and previewed their new material at the Liars Club in Nottingham . After receiving contract offers from Parlophone and Atlantic Records , the band members signed to Parlophone because the label gave them total autonomy over the recording process without pressuring them to be commercially successful immediately . The record deal was followed by the recording of an EP titled <unk> Demo , from which a demo single , " Space and the Woods " , was released in March 2007 . Eastgate has claimed that the band members were influenced by the music of the 1980s during these formative stages of Fantasy Black Channel even though none of them were born before 1986 . 
 In late 2007 , Late of the Pier formally met renowned DJ Erol Alkan after seeing him play a set at the Liars Club . Alkan called them " THE most exciting band around " and offered the band members help in the recording process of Fantasy Black Channel . They accepted and made him producer for the album because of the immediate rapport that developed between the two parties . Dawson has explained the choice of producer by suggesting that Alkan is famous for playing broad genres of music and that he understands the properties and crossover of dance and guitar music . Alkan fully embraced the band members ' ideas and immediately understood what they were trying to achieve . " Bathroom Gurgle " was recorded by the new collaboration and was released as a limited edition single in September 2007 . 
 The production process for Fantasy Black Channel gathered pace around December 2007 . Late of the Pier usually proceeded by taking bedroom recordings into the studio , where they were refined by Alkan into " a more presentable package " . They tried unconventional techniques in the style of avant garde producer Joe Meek during the live studio recording sessions , including stamping in baths and <unk> guitars through air vents . When tracks were mixed after being recorded , the band members , Alkan , and engineer Jimmy Robertson worked in tandem and unanimously decided when a track had finished undergoing the studio effects process . No songs changed after this point , even when one of the parties had further ideas . At the time , in an interview with the band , Stuart Turnbull of the BBC Collective indicated that Alkan managed to " channel Late of the Pier 's sonic attack into something more focused yet still undeniably different " . 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 The record was nearly completed by the end of January 2008 . Late of the Pier stopped recording to embark on a headlining UK tour during the month of February , in which they previewed new material . " The Bears Are Coming " was released as a vinyl single in March 2008 . The band toured until the end of April 2008 to promote another single — a double A @-@ side containing a reworked " Space and the Woods " and " Focker " — from the as @-@ yet @-@ unreleased Fantasy Black Channel . Studio work with Alkan restarted in May 2008 to put the finishing touches on the album ; the final version was christened as " a compilation of hits " and " anti @-@ pop pop " . The album was recorded during six months in different studios and the band members have admitted that the variety in venues partially explains why it sounds disjointed . The idea of having a single 45 @-@ minute track instead of a track list of songs was mooted at the end of May 2008 , but was not followed through . 
 Fantasy Black Channel 's track listing and UK CD release date of 11 August 2008 were confirmed on 11 June . Faley has claimed that " the album fell into place itself , like the songs basically told us where they wanted to go on the album " . Late of the Pier picked the record 's name at random after first contemplating using Peggy Patch and Her Sequenced Dress . The cover art was designed by a friend of the band members from Brighton , Jon Bergman . A final EP containing material already released in 2007 and 2008 , <unk> <unk> , was released in July 2008 as part of the marketing campaign for the forthcoming album . Potter has summed the record 's conception by concluding , " I think in the three years to build up to the album , we never actually thought of a track list , and we never really kind of considered the fact that it should sound like an album . I think we recorded all the songs and then they were there and it was like , ' Oh , we have to kind of stitch this together and make it sound like one piece . ' " 
 = = Content = = 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 The writing process for Fantasy Black Channel was largely unplanned . The verses of " Broken " were conceived late at night and are inspired by insomnia . It took Eastgate a long time to describe how he was feeling " in a way that sounded original " for such a common theme in pop music . The lyrics in the chorus are about the first time Late of the Pier drove to London and got lost . " Space and the Woods " tries to weigh up what is more important : a person or an inanimate object , or an absence of anything , while " The Bears Are Coming " concerns " a silent threat " . The idea for the lyric " A heartbeat , a flicker , a line " in " Heartbeat " came to Eastgate while recording the song and hearing its time signature always changing . 
 The lyricist cannot remember writing " White Snake " and did not know there was a band of the same name in existence . " Focker " evolved out of a demo , called " 6 / 8 Focker " , Eastgate sang through a guitar amp with initially indecipherable lyrics . " The Enemy Are the Future " gets its name from a sentence in a promotional leaflet for the indie rock band The Enemy . Eastgate has explained that for " Mad Dogs and Englishmen " he randomly " shouted lots of short phrases " and then tried to make sense of what he said . The process led to stylised lines like " Falling over aeroplanes and wanting to be a derelict " . 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 Fantasy Black Channel is largely built on sonic experiments and the use of studio and computer techniques . The opening track , " Hot Tent Blues " , is an instrumental short which contains seven layers of electric guitar run through a Zoom 506 bass guitar pedal . " Broken " was conceived during a jam session between Eastgate 's guitar riffs and Dawson 's drumming , while a demo of " Space and the Woods " similar to the Nirvana song " All Apologies " was reworked and remixed in the studio . Eastgate credits Storm Mortimer , who used to drive Late of the Pier around London , as the muse for " The Bears Are Coming " . She often sang impromptu and the frontman eventually borrowed a page of her songs and added an afrobeat @-@ inspired rhythm to it . Eastgate and Dawson wanted to create a track that evoked the idea of " coming out of the jungle " and credit varied musical acts like <unk> , Prince , The Beatles , Mr Flash , <unk> , and <unk> McNeal as inspiration . 
 " Random <unk> " was one of Alkan 's favourites and he persuaded Late of the Pier to re @-@ record it like a classical piece of music rather than in a rock @-@ oriented way . The vocal harmonies at the end of the song were added during one of the last days of recording when the pressure to complete the album was high . " Heartbeat " is based on an old acid house demo track that Eastgate created during his childhood using a Roland TB @-@ 303 electronic synthesiser @-@ sequencer . The track features complex time signature progressions and a guitar solo played by Potter on the sampler at the end . " Whitesnake " was inspired by the music of Devo , Roxy Music , and Dandi Wind , while " VW " is based on a 2001 demo recorded in Eastgate 's attic . In the studio , Late of the Pier hired brass players to perform the horn sections and create new scales . Once the instrumentals were recorded , the band members purposefully decided to mix their own playing lower in certain sections of the song so that listeners could hear the horns more clearly . 
 " Focker " was created using a looped riff from " 6 / 8 Focker " . Eastgate then conceived a drum solo and remixed and rearranged the last 20 seconds of the song . " The Enemy Are the Future " was created during a hungover jam session , where all band members played individually and not in tandem . Dawson performed around 40 different beats one after another all in different timings . The session was recorded using a tape player and a track was moulded in the studio . Four different endings were recorded and three were spliced together at the end . " Mad Dogs and Englishmen " , whose riff is based on an old French samba song , was borne out of an interplay between Eastgate on the guitar and Faley on the bass . The last track on the album , " Bathroom Gurgle " , includes " a squelchy grind of the riff " purpose @-@ built for the Liars Club audience during the band 's first ever gigs . Eastgate has explained , " I had these two themes , which looped round on each other which I sang very exasperated Annie Lennox style vocals over . " The fast tempo of the first half of the song was juxtaposed against a section of " slow drama " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Media response to Fantasy Black Channel was highly favourable ; aggregating website Metacritic reports a normalised rating of 81 % based on 18 critical reviews . Allmusic 's K. Ross Hoffman described the album as " glorious and galvanising " and labelled it " a convoluted construction crammed with so many immediately gratifying moments that it takes multiple listens to extricate them all " . John Burgess of The Guardian explained that a new favourite song , riff , or wayward moment can be found every time that the album is listened to . Tim Chester of NME concluded , " It takes a certain kind of mind to make this . While others <unk> about living and dying in cul @-@ de @-@ sac towns shackled by cul @-@ de @-@ sac imaginations , <unk> 's vision is housed on Dubai 's ' The World ' island @-@ creation project . " 
 Some reviewers classified Fantasy Black Channel into the British New Rave genre and musical scene . Others claimed that they could hear impressions of Roxy Music frontman Bryan Ferry and musician Gary Numan in the recording . Pitchfork Media 's Adam Moerder commented that it contains several New Rave compositions which are aesthetically dubious . Chris Baynes of PopMatters claimed that the band members " wear their influences pretty much inked onto their sleeves " , but concluded that the album is exciting and excitable in equal measure . According to Late of the Pier , comparisons to Klaxons and New Rave are the results of lazy journalism , especially for a scene the band has never been in . Eastgate has explained that musical influences are often subconscious , even though the band members tried not to listen to anything but their own work while recording the album . Nick Mitchell of The Skinny pointed out that the record is " an unrestrained , unclassifiable , unexpectedly triumphant romp through blaring influences and genres , from the 70s camp rock of Queen and Bowie to the primitive electronics of Gary Numan , with echoes of 90s computer games and snatches of modern house " . 
 Fantasy Black Channel figured in several publications ' end @-@ of @-@ year best album lists for 2008 , notably , at number three by Clash , at number five by FACT , and at number 18 by NME . It was ranked at number 16 in HMV 's Poll of Polls for 2008 , which aggregates the votes of prominent British critics to decide the commercial group 's Album Of The Year . Earlier in 2008 , Rory Carroll of Artrocker claimed that the record would have been a late entrant for the Mercury Music Prize , and would have probably won the award , if nominations had been made in August rather than July 2008 . Because of their work on the album , Late of the Pier received a nomination for Best New Band at the 2009 NME Awards . Two tracks were also nominated : " Bathroom Gurgle " and " Heartbeat " , in the Best Dancefloor Filler and Best Video categories respectively . In 2009 , Clash placed Fantasy Black Channel at number 40 in its list of the 50 Greatest Albums , 2004 – 2009 , while FACT included it at number 99 in its editorial staff list of the 100 Best : Albums of the Decade . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and arranged by Sam Eastgate , unless otherwise stated . 
 A hidden track , " No Time " , begins at 4 : 50 of " Bathroom Gurgle " . 
 = = = Bonus tracks = = = 
 " Dose A " – 1 : 47 – track 13 on the iTunes version 
 " Very <unk> " – 4 : 44 – track 13 on the Japanese and U.S. editions 
 " Focker ( <unk> Remix ) " – 3 : 15 – track 14 on the Japanese edition 
 " The Bears Are Coming ( Emperor Machine Remix ) " – 9 : 22 – track 14 on U.S. edition and track 15 on the Japanese edition 
 = = = Vinyl = = = 
 The 2008 UK LP version of Fantasy Black Channel comprised a standard black vinyl copy in a gatefold picture sleeve . It was released a week earlier than the CD version and had the following track changes : 
 " Space and the Woods ( Cenzo Townsend Mix ) " instead of " Space and the Woods " 
 " The Bears Are Coming ( Original Version ) " instead of " The Bears Are Coming " 
 " Heartbeat ( Cenzo Townsend Version ) " instead of " Heartbeat " 
 The 2009 U.S. LP version was released concurrently with the CD version . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Recording and release details = = 
 Fantasy Black Channel was recorded between 2006 and 2008 in Sam Eastgate 's bedroom in Castle Donington and at the following studios in London . 
 The album 's release history is as follows : 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = George B. McClellan = 
 George Brinton McClellan ( December 3 , 1826 – October 29 , 1885 ) was an American soldier , civil engineer , railroad executive , and politician . A graduate of West Point , McClellan served with distinction during the Mexican @-@ American War , and later left the Army to work in railroads until the outbreak of the American Civil War . Early in the war , McClellan was appointed to the rank of major general and played an important role in raising a well @-@ trained and organized army , which would become the Army of the Potomac ; he served a brief period ( November 1861 to March 1862 ) as general @-@ in @-@ chief of the Union Army . Although McClellan was meticulous in his planning and preparations , these very characteristics hampered his ability to challenge aggressive opponents in a fast @-@ moving battlefield environment . He chronically overestimated the strength of enemy units and was reluctant to apply principles of mass , frequently leaving large portions of his army unengaged at decisive points . 
 McClellan organized and led the Union 's army in the Peninsula Campaign ( also known as the Peninsular Campaign ) in southeastern Virginia from March through July 1862 . It was the first large @-@ scale offensive in the Eastern Theater . Making an amphibious clockwise turning movement around the Confederate States Army in northern Virginia , McClellan 's forces turned west to move up the Virginia Peninsula , with the Confederate capital , Richmond , as their objective . Initially , McClellan was somewhat successful against the equally cautious General Joseph E. Johnston , but the emergence of General Robert E. Lee turned the subsequent Seven Days Battles into a Union defeat . 
 General McClellan failed to maintain the trust of President Abraham Lincoln . He was insubordinate to his commander @-@ in @-@ chief and privately derisive of him . He was removed from command in November after failing to decisively pursue Lee 's Army following the tactically inconclusive but strategic Union victory at the Battle of Antietam , and never received another field command . McClellan went on to become the unsuccessful Democratic Party nominee in the 1864 presidential election against Lincoln . The effectiveness of his campaign was damaged when he repudiated his party 's platform , which promised to end the war and negotiate with the Confederacy . He served as the 24th Governor of New Jersey from 1878 to 1881 . He eventually became a writer , and vigorously defended his Civil War conduct . 
 Most modern authorities have assessed McClellan as a poor battlefield general . A few historians view him as a highly capable commander whose reputation suffered unfairly at the hands of pro @-@ Lincoln partisans who made him a scapegoat for the Union 's military setbacks . After the war , Ulysses S. Grant was asked for his opinion of McClellan as a general . He replied , " McClellan is to me one of the mysteries of the war . " 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 George Brinton McClellan was born in Philadelphia , the son of a prominent surgeon , Dr. George McClellan , the founder of Jefferson Medical College . His father 's family was of Ulster Scots heritage . His mother was Elizabeth Sophia Steinmetz Brinton McClellan ( 1800 – 1889 ) , daughter of a leading Pennsylvania family , a woman noted for her " considerable grace and refinement " . The couple had five children : a daughter , Frederica ; then three sons , John , George , and Arthur ; and finally a second daughter , Mary . McClellan was the great @-@ grandson of Revolutionary War general Samuel McClellan , of Woodstock , Connecticut . He attended the University of Pennsylvania in 1840 at age 13 , resigning himself to the study of law . After two years , he changed his goal to military service . With the assistance of his father 's letter to President John Tyler , young George was accepted at the United States Military Academy in 1842 , the academy having waived its normal minimum age of 16 . 
 At West Point , he was an energetic and ambitious cadet , deeply interested in the teachings of Dennis Hart Mahan and the theoretical strategic principles of Antoine @-@ Henri Jomini . His closest friends were aristocratic Southerners such as James Stuart , Dabney Maury , Cadmus Wilcox , and A. P. Hill . These associations gave McClellan what he considered to be an appreciation of the Southern mind and an understanding of the political and military implications of the sectional differences in the United States that led to the Civil War . He graduated in 1846 , second in his class of 59 cadets , losing the top position to Charles Seaforth Stewart only because of poor drawing skills . He was commissioned a brevet second lieutenant in the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers . 
 = = = Mexican – American War = = = 
 McClellan 's first assignment was with a company of engineers formed at West Point , but he quickly received orders to sail for the Mexican – American War . He arrived near the mouth of the Rio Grande in October 1846 , well prepared for action with a double @-@ barreled shotgun , two pistols , a saber , a dress sword , and a Bowie knife . He complained that he had arrived too late to take any part in the American victory at Monterrey in September . During a temporary armistice in which the forces of Gen. Zachary Taylor awaited action , McClellan was stricken with dysentery and malaria , which kept him in the hospital for nearly a month . The malaria would recur in later years — he called it his " Mexican disease . " He served bravely as an engineering officer during the war , was frequently subject to enemy fire , and was appointed a brevet first lieutenant for Contreras and Churubusco and to captain for Chapultepec , He performed reconnaissance missions for Maj. Gen. Winfield Scott , a close friend of McClellan 's father . 
 McClellan 's experiences in the war would shape his military and political life . He learned that flanking movements ( used by Scott at Cerro Gordo ) are often better than frontal assaults , and the value of siege operations ( Veracruz ) . He witnessed Scott 's success in balancing political with military affairs , and his good relations with the civil population as he invaded , enforcing strict discipline on his soldiers to minimize damage to property . McClellan also developed a disdain for volunteer soldiers and officers , particularly politicians who cared nothing for discipline and training . 
 = = = Peacetime service = = = 
 McClellan returned to West Point to command his engineering company , which was attached to the academy for the purpose of training cadets in engineering activities . He chafed at the boredom of peacetime garrison service , although he greatly enjoyed the social life . In June 1851 he was ordered to Fort Delaware , a masonry work under construction on an island in the Delaware River , 40 miles ( 64 km ) downriver from Philadelphia . In March 1852 he was ordered to report to Capt. Randolph B. Marcy at Fort Smith , Arkansas , to serve as second @-@ in @-@ command on an expedition to discover the sources of the Red River . By June the expedition reached the source of the north fork of the river and Marcy named a small tributary McClellan 's Creek . Upon their return to civilization on July 28 , they were astonished to find that they had been given up for dead . A sensational story had reached the press that the expedition had been ambushed by 2 @,@ 000 Comanches and killed to the last man . McClellan blamed the story on " a set of scoundrels , who seek to keep up agitation on the frontier in order to get employment from the Govt. in one way or other . " 
 In the fall of 1852 , McClellan published a manual on bayonet tactics that he had translated from the original French . He also received an assignment to the Department of Texas , with orders to perform a survey of Texas rivers and harbors . In 1853 he participated in the Pacific Railroad surveys , ordered by Secretary of War Jefferson Davis , to select an appropriate route for the planned transcontinental railroad . McClellan surveyed the western portion of the northern corridor along the 47th and 49th parallels from St. Paul to the Puget Sound . In so doing he demonstrated a tendency for insubordination toward senior political figures . Isaac Stevens , governor of the Washington Territory , became dissatisfied with McClellan 's performance in scouting passes across the Cascade Range . McClellan selected Yakima Pass without a thorough reconnaissance and refused the governor 's order to lead a party through it in winter conditions , relying on faulty intelligence about the depth of snow pack in that area . In so doing , he missed three greatly superior passes in the near vicinity , which would be the ones eventually used for railroads and interstate highways . The governor ordered McClellan to turn over his expedition logbooks , but McClellan steadfastly refused , most likely because of embarrassing personal comments that he had made throughout . 
 Returning to the East , McClellan began courting his future wife , Mary Ellen Marcy ( 1836 – 1915 ) , the daughter of his former commander . Ellen , or Nelly , refused McClellan 's first proposal of marriage , one of nine that she received from a variety of suitors , including his West Point friend , A. P. Hill . Ellen accepted Hill 's proposal in 1856 , but her family did not approve and he withdrew . 
 In June 1854 , McClellan was sent on a secret reconnaissance mission to Santo Domingo at the behest of Jefferson Davis . McClellan assessed local defensive capabilities for the secretary . ( The information was not used until 1870 , when President Ulysses S. Grant unsuccessfully attempted to annex the Dominican Republic . ) Davis was beginning to treat McClellan almost as a protégé , and his next assignment was to assess the logistical readiness of various railroads in the United States , once again with an eye toward planning for the transcontinental railroad . In March 1855 , McClellan was promoted to captain and assigned to the 1st U.S. Cavalry regiment . 
 Because of his political connections and his mastery of French , McClellan received the assignment to be an official observer of the European armies in the Crimean War in 1855 . Traveling widely , and interacting with the highest military commands and royal families , McClellan observed the siege of Sevastopol . Upon his return to the United States in 1856 he requested assignment in Philadelphia to prepare his report , which contained a critical analysis of the siege and a lengthy description of the organization of the European armies . He also wrote a manual on cavalry tactics that was based on Russian cavalry regulations . Like other observers , though , McClellan did not appreciate the importance of the emergence of rifled muskets in the Crimean War , and the fundamental changes in warfare tactics it would require . 
 The Army adopted McClellan 's cavalry manual and also his design for a saddle , dubbed the McClellan Saddle , which he claimed to have seen used by Hussars in Prussia and Hungary . It became standard issue for as long as the U.S. horse cavalry existed and is still used for ceremonies . 
 = = = Civilian pursuits = = = 
 McClellan resigned his commission January 16 , 1857 , and , capitalizing on his experience with railroad assessment , became chief engineer and vice president of the Illinois Central Railroad , and then president of the Ohio and Mississippi Railroad in 1860 . He performed well in both jobs , expanding the Illinois Central toward New Orleans and helping the Ohio and Mississippi recover from the Panic of 1857 . Despite his successes and lucrative salary ( $ 10 @,@ 000 per year ) , he was frustrated with civilian employment and continued to study classical military strategy assiduously . During the Utah War against the Mormons , he considered rejoining the Army . He also considered service as a filibuster in support of Benito Juárez in Mexico . 
 Before the outbreak of the Civil War , McClellan became active in politics , supporting the presidential campaign of Democrat Stephen A. Douglas in the 1860 election . He claimed to have defeated an attempt at vote fraud by Republicans by ordering the delay of a train that was carrying men to vote illegally in another county , enabling Douglas to win the county . 
 In October 1859 McClellan was able to resume his courtship of Mary Ellen , and they were married in Calvary Church , New York City , on May 22 , 1860 . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 = = = Ohio and strategy = = = 
 At the start of the Civil War , McClellan 's knowledge of what was called " big war science " and his railroad experience suggested he might excel at military logistics . This placed him in great demand as the Union mobilized . The governors of Ohio , Pennsylvania , and New York , the three largest states of the Union , actively pursued him to command their states ' militia . Ohio Governor William Dennison was the most persistent , so McClellan was commissioned a major general of volunteers and took command of the Ohio militia on April 23 , 1861 . Unlike some of his fellow Union officers who came from abolitionist families , he was opposed to federal interference with slavery . So some of his Southern colleagues approached him informally about siding with the Confederacy , but he could not accept the concept of secession . 
 On May 3 McClellan re @-@ entered federal service as commander of the Department of the Ohio , responsible for the defense of the states of Ohio , Indiana , Illinois , and , later , western Pennsylvania , western Virginia , and Missouri . On May 14 , he was commissioned a major general in the regular army . At age 34 , he outranked everyone in the Army other than Lt. Gen. Winfield Scott , the general @-@ in @-@ chief . McClellan 's rapid promotion was partly due to his acquaintance with Salmon P. Chase , Treasury Secretary and former Ohio governor and senator . 
 As McClellan scrambled to process the thousands of men who were volunteering for service and to set up training camps , he also applied his mind to grand strategy . He wrote a letter to Gen. Scott on April 27 , four days after assuming command in Ohio , that presented the first proposal for a strategy for the war . It contained two alternatives , each envisioning a prominent role for himself as commander . The first would use 80 @,@ 000 men to invade Virginia through the Kanawha Valley toward Richmond . The second would use the same force to drive south instead , crossing the Ohio River into Kentucky and Tennessee . Scott rejected both plans as logistically infeasible . Although he complimented McClellan and expressed his " great confidence in your intelligence , zeal , science , and energy " , he replied by letter that the 80 @,@ 000 men would be better used on a river @-@ based expedition to control the Mississippi River and split the Confederacy , accompanied by a strong Union blockade of Southern ports . This plan , which would require considerable patience of the Northern public , was derided in newspapers as the Anaconda Plan , but eventually proved to be the outline of the successful prosecution of the war . Relations between the two generals became increasingly strained over the summer and fall . 
 = = = Western Virginia = = = 
 McClellan 's first military operations were to occupy the area of western Virginia that wanted to remain in the Union and subsequently became the state of West Virginia . He had received intelligence reports on May 26 that the critical Baltimore and Ohio Railroad bridges in that portion of the state were being burned . As he quickly implemented plans to invade the region , he triggered his first serious political controversy by proclaiming to the citizens there that his forces had no intentions of interfering with personal property — including slaves . " Notwithstanding all that has been said by the traitors to induce you to believe that our advent among you will be signalized by interference with your slaves , understand one thing clearly — not only will we abstain from all such interference but we will on the contrary with an iron hand , crush any attempted insurrection on their part . " He quickly realized that he had overstepped his bounds and apologized by letter to President Lincoln . The controversy was not that his proclamation was diametrically opposed to the administration 's policy at the time , but that he was so bold in stepping beyond his strictly military role . 
 His forces moved rapidly into the area through Grafton and were victorious at the tiny skirmish called the Battle of Philippi , arguably the first land conflict of the war . His first personal command in battle was at Rich Mountain , which he also won , but only after displaying a strong sense of caution and a reluctance to commit reserve forces that would be his hallmark for the rest of his career . His subordinate commander , William S. Rosecrans , bitterly complained that his attack was not reinforced as McClellan had agreed . Nevertheless , these two minor victories propelled McClellan to the status of national hero . The New York Herald entitled an article about him " Gen. McClellan , the Napoleon of the Present War . " 
 = = = Building an army = = = 
 After the defeat of the Union forces at Bull Run on July 21 , 1861 , Lincoln summoned McClellan from western Virginia , where McClellan had given the North the only engagements bearing a semblance of victory . He traveled by special train on the main Pennsylvania line from Wheeling through Pittsburgh , Philadelphia , and Baltimore , and on to Washington , D.C. , and was greeted by enthusiastic crowds that met his train along the way . 
 Carl Sandburg wrote , " McClellan was the man of the hour , pointed to by events , and chosen by an overwhelming weight of public and private opinion . " On July 26 , the day he reached the capital , McClellan was appointed commander of the Military Division of the Potomac , the main Union force responsible for the defense of Washington . On August 20 , several military units in Virginia were consolidated into his department and he immediately formed the Army of the Potomac , with himself as its first commander . He reveled in his newly acquired power and influence : 
 I find myself in a new and strange position here — <unk> , Cabinet , Genl Scott & all deferring to me — by some strange operation of magic I seem to have become the power of the land . ... I almost think that were I to win some small success now I could become Dictator or anything else that might please me — but nothing of that kind would please me — therefore I won 't be Dictator . Admirable self @-@ denial ! 
 During the summer and fall , McClellan brought a high degree of organization to his new army , and greatly improved its morale with frequent trips to review and encourage his units . It was a remarkable achievement , in which he came to personify the Army of the Potomac and reaped the adulation of his men . He created defenses for Washington that were almost impregnable , consisting of 48 forts and strong points , with 480 guns manned by 7 @,@ 200 artillerists . The Army of the Potomac grew in number from 50 @,@ 000 in July to 168 @,@ 000 in November , becoming the largest military force the United States had raised until that time . But this was also a time of tension in the high command , as he continued to quarrel frequently with the government and the general @-@ in @-@ chief , Lt. Gen. Scott , on matters of strategy . McClellan rejected the tenets of Scott 's Anaconda Plan , favoring instead an overwhelming grand battle , in the Napoleonic style . He proposed that his army should be expanded to 273 @,@ 000 men and 600 guns and " crush the rebels in one campaign . " He favored a war that would impose little impact on civilian populations and require no emancipation of slaves . 
 McClellan 's antipathy to emancipation added to the pressure on him , as he received bitter criticism from Radical Republicans in the government . He viewed slavery as an institution recognized in the Constitution , and entitled to federal protection wherever it existed ( Lincoln held the same public position until August 1862 ) . McClellan 's writings after the war were typical of many Northerners : " I confess to a prejudice in favor of my own race , & can 't learn to like the odor of either Billy goats or niggers . " But in November 1861 , he wrote to his wife , " I will , if successful , throw my sword onto the scale to force an improvement in the condition of those poor blacks . " He later wrote that had it been his place to arrange the terms of peace , he would have insisted on gradual emancipation , guarding the rights of both slaves and masters , as part of any settlement . But he made no secret of his opposition to the radical Republicans . He told Ellen , " I will not fight for the abolitionists . " This put him in opposition with officials of the administration who believed he was attempting to implement the policies of the opposition party . 
 The immediate problem with McClellan 's war strategy was that he was convinced the Confederates were ready to attack him with overwhelming numbers . On August 8 , believing that the Confederacy had over 100 @,@ 000 troops facing him ( in contrast to the 35 @,@ 000 they actually deployed at Bull Run a few weeks earlier ) , he declared a state of emergency in the capital . By August 19 , he estimated 150 @,@ 000 rebel soldiers on his front . McClellan 's subsequent campaigns were strongly influenced by the overblown enemy strength estimates of his secret service chief , detective Allan Pinkerton , but in August 1861 , these estimates were entirely McClellan 's own . The result was a level of extreme caution that sapped the initiative of McClellan 's army and dismayed the government . Historian and biographer Stephen W. Sears observed that McClellan 's actions would have been " essentially sound " for a commander who was as outnumbered as McClellan thought he was , but McClellan in fact rarely had less than a two @-@ to @-@ one advantage over the armies that opposed him in 1861 and 1862 . That fall , for example , Confederate forces ranged from 35 @,@ 000 to 60 @,@ 000 , whereas the Army of the Potomac in September numbered 122 @,@ 000 men ; in early December 170 @,@ 000 ; by year end , 192 @,@ 000 . 
 The dispute with Scott became increasingly personal . Scott ( as well as many in the War Department ) was outraged that McClellan refused to divulge any details about his strategic planning , or even such basic information as the strengths and dispositions of his units . McClellan claimed he could not trust anyone in the administration to keep his plans secret from the press , and thus the enemy . In the course of a disagreement about defensive forces on the Potomac River , McClellan wrote to his wife on August 10 : " Genl Scott is the great obstacle — he will not comprehend the danger & is either a traitor , or an incompetent . I have to fight my way against him . " Scott became so disillusioned with the young general that he offered his resignation to President Lincoln , who initially refused to accept it . Rumors traveled through the capital that McClellan might resign , or instigate a military coup , if Scott were not removed . Lincoln 's Cabinet met on October 18 and agreed to accept Scott 's resignation for " reasons of health . " 
 = = = General @-@ in @-@ chief = = = 
 On November 1 , 1861 , Winfield Scott retired and McClellan became general @-@ in @-@ chief of all the Union armies . The president expressed his concern about the " vast labor " involved in the dual role of army commander and general @-@ in @-@ chief , but McClellan responded , " I can do it all . " 
 Lincoln , as well as many other leaders and citizens of the northern states , became increasingly impatient with McClellan 's slowness to attack the Confederate forces still massed near Washington . The Union defeat at the minor Battle of Ball 's Bluff near Leesburg in October added to the frustration and indirectly damaged McClellan . In December , the Congress formed a Joint Committee on the Conduct of the War , which became a thorn in the side of many generals throughout the war , accusing them of incompetence and , in some cases , treason . McClellan was called as the first witness on December 23 , but he contracted typhoid fever and could not attend . Instead , his subordinate officers testified , and their candid admissions that they had no knowledge of specific strategies for advancing against the Confederates raised many calls for McClellan 's dismissal . 
 McClellan further damaged his reputation by his insulting insubordination to his commander @-@ in @-@ chief . He privately referred to Lincoln , whom he had known before the war as a lawyer for the Illinois Central , as " nothing more than a well @-@ meaning baboon " , a " gorilla " , and " ever unworthy of ... his high position . " On November 13 , he snubbed the president , who had come to visit McClellan 's house , by making him wait for 30 minutes , only to be told that the general had gone to bed and could not receive him . 
 On January 10 , Lincoln met with top generals ( McClellan did not attend ) and directed them to formulate a plan of attack , expressing his exasperation with General McClellan with the following remark : " If General McClellan does not want to use the army , I would like to borrow it for a time . " On January 12 , 1862 , McClellan was summoned to the White House , where the Cabinet demanded to hear his war plans . For the first time , he revealed his intentions to transport the Army of the Potomac by ship to Urbanna , Virginia , on the Rappahannock River , outflanking the Confederate forces near Washington , and proceeding 50 miles ( 80 km ) overland to capture Richmond . He refused to give any specific details of the proposed campaign , even to his friend , newly appointed War Secretary Edwin M. Stanton . On January 27 , Lincoln issued an order that required all of his armies to begin offensive operations by February 22 , Washington 's birthday . On January 31 , he issued a supplementary order for the Army of the Potomac to move overland to attack the Confederates at Manassas Junction and Centreville . McClellan immediately replied with a 22 @-@ page letter objecting in detail to the president 's plan and advocating instead his Urbanna plan , which was the first written instance of the plan 's details being presented to the president . Although Lincoln believed his plan was superior , he was relieved that McClellan finally agreed to begin moving , and reluctantly approved . On March 8 , doubting McClellan 's resolve , Lincoln again interfered with the army commander 's prerogatives . He called a council of war at the White House in which McClellan 's subordinates were asked about their confidence in the Urbanna plan . They expressed their confidence to varying degrees . After the meeting , Lincoln issued another order , naming specific officers as corps commanders to report to McClellan ( who had been reluctant to do so prior to assessing his division commanders ' effectiveness in combat , even though this would have meant his direct supervision of twelve divisions in the field ) . 
 Two more crises would confront McClellan before he could implement his plans . The Confederate forces under General Joseph E. Johnston withdrew from their positions before Washington , assuming new positions south of the Rappahannock , which completely nullified the Urbanna strategy . McClellan revised his plans to have his troops disembark at Fort Monroe , Virginia , and advance up the Virginia Peninsula to Richmond , an operation that would be known as the Peninsula Campaign . Then , however , McClellan came under extreme criticism in the press and Congress when it was learned that Johnston 's forces had not only slipped away unnoticed , but had for months fooled the Union Army with logs painted black to appear as cannons , nicknamed Quaker Guns . Congress 's joint committee visited the abandoned Confederate lines and radical Republicans introduced a resolution demanding the dismissal of McClellan , but it was narrowly defeated by a parliamentary maneuver . The second crisis was the emergence of the Confederate ironclad CSS Virginia , which threw Washington into a panic and made naval support operations on the James River seem problematic . 
 On March 11 , 1862 , Lincoln removed McClellan as general @-@ in @-@ chief , leaving him in command of only the Army of the Potomac , ostensibly so that McClellan would be free to devote all his attention to the move on Richmond . Lincoln 's order was ambiguous as to whether McClellan might be restored following a successful campaign . In fact , the general @-@ in @-@ chief position was left unfilled . Lincoln , Stanton , and a group of officers who formed the " War Board " directed the strategic actions of the Union armies that spring . Although McClellan was assuaged by supportive comments Lincoln made to him , in time he saw the change of command very differently , describing it as a part of an intrigue " to secure the failure of the approaching campaign . " 
 = = = Peninsula Campaign = = = 
 McClellan 's army began to sail from Alexandria on March 17 . It was an armada that dwarfed all previous American expeditions , transporting 121 @,@ 500 men , 44 artillery batteries , 1 @,@ 150 wagons , over 15 @,@ 000 horses , and tons of equipment and supplies . An English observer remarked that it was the " stride of a giant . " The army 's advance from Fort Monroe up the Virginia Peninsula proved to be slow . McClellan 's plan for a rapid seizure of Yorktown was foiled when he discovered that the Confederates had fortified a line across the Peninsula , causing him to decide on a siege of the city , which required considerable preparation . 
 McClellan continued to believe intelligence reports that credited the Confederates with two or three times the men they actually had . Early in the campaign , Confederate General John B. " Prince John " Magruder defended the Peninsula against McClellan 's advance with a vastly smaller force . He created a false impression of many troops behind the lines and of even more troops arriving . He accomplished this by marching small groups of men repeatedly past places where they could be observed at a distance or were just out of sight , accompanied by great noise and fanfare . During this time , General Johnston was able to provide Magruder with reinforcements , but even then there were far fewer troops than McClellan believed were opposite him . 
 After a month of preparation , just before he was to assault the Confederate works at Yorktown , McClellan learned that Johnston had withdrawn up the Peninsula towards Williamsburg . McClellan was thus required to give chase without any benefit of the heavy artillery so carefully amassed in front of Yorktown . The Battle of Williamsburg on May 5 is considered a Union victory — McClellan 's first — but the Confederate army was not destroyed and a bulk of their troops were successfully moved past Williamsburg to Richmond 's outer defenses while the battle was waged and for several days thereafter . 
 McClellan had also placed hopes on a simultaneous naval approach to Richmond via the James River . That approach failed following the Union Navy 's defeat at the Battle of Drewry 's Bluff , about 7 miles ( 11 km ) downstream from the Confederate capital , on May 15 . Basing artillery on a strategic bluff high above a bend in the river , and sinking boats to create an impassable series of obstacles in the river itself , the Confederates effectively blocked this potential approach to Richmond . 
 McClellan 's army cautiously inched towards Richmond over the next three weeks , coming to within four miles ( 6 km ) of it . He established a supply base on the Pamunkey River ( a navigable tributary of the York River ) at White House Landing where the Richmond and York River Railroad extending to Richmond crossed , and commandeered the railroad , transporting steam locomotives and rolling stock to the site by barge . 
 On May 31 , as McClellan planned an assault , his army was surprised by a Confederate attack . Johnston saw that the Union army was split in half by the rain @-@ swollen Chickahominy River and hoped to defeat it in detail at Seven Pines and Fair Oaks . McClellan was unable to command the army personally because of a recurrence of malarial fever , but his subordinates were able to repel the attacks . Nevertheless , McClellan received criticism from Washington for not counterattacking , which some believed could have opened the city of Richmond to capture . Johnston was wounded in the battle , and General Robert E. Lee assumed command of the Army of Northern Virginia . McClellan spent the next three weeks repositioning his troops and waiting for promised reinforcements , losing valuable time as Lee continued to strengthen Richmond 's defenses . 
 At the end of June , Lee began a series of attacks that became known as the Seven Days Battles . The first major battle , at Mechanicsville , was poorly coordinated by Lee and his subordinates and resulted in heavy casualties for little tactical gain . However the battle had a significant impact on McClellan 's nerve . The surprise appearance of Maj. Gen. Stonewall Jackson 's troops in the battle ( when they had last been reported to be many miles away in the Shenandoah Valley ) convinced McClellan that he was even more outnumbered than he had thought . He reported to Washington that he faced 200 @,@ 000 Confederates ( the actual number was 85 @,@ 000 . ) 
 As Lee continued his offensive at Gaines 's Mill to the east , McClellan played a passive role , taking no initiative and waiting for events to unfold . He kept two thirds of his army out of action , fooled again by Magruder 's theatrical diversionary tactics . That night , he decided to withdraw his army to a safer base , well below Richmond , on a portion of the James River that was under control of the Union Navy . In doing so , he may have unwittingly saved his army . Lee had assumed that the Union army would withdraw to the east toward its existing supply base and McClellan 's move to the south delayed Lee 's response for at least 24 hours . But McClellan was also tacitly acknowledging that he would no longer be able to invest Richmond , the object of his campaign ; the heavy siege artillery required would be almost impossible to transport without the railroad connections available from his original supply base on the York River . In a telegram to Secretary of War Edwin Stanton , reporting on these events , McClellan blamed the Lincoln administration for his reversals . " If I save this army now , I tell you plainly I owe no thanks to you or to any other persons in Washington . You have done your best to sacrifice this army . " Fortunately for McClellan , Lincoln never saw that inflammatory statement ( at least at that time ) because it was censored by the War Department telegrapher . 
 McClellan was also fortunate that the failure of the campaign left his army mostly intact , because he was generally absent from the fighting and neglected to name any second @-@ in @-@ command who might direct his retreat . Military historian Stephen W. Sears wrote , " When he deserted his army on the Glendale and Malvern Hill battlefields during the Seven Days , he was guilty of dereliction of duty . Had the Army of the Potomac been wrecked on either of these fields ( at Glendale the possibility had been real ) , that charge under the Articles of War would likely have been brought against him . " In the battle of Glendale , McClellan was five miles ( 8 km ) away behind Malvern Hill , without telegraph communications and too distant to command his army . In the battle of Malvern Hill , he was on a gunboat , the U.S.S. Galena , which at one point was ten miles ( 16 km ) away , down the James River . In both battles , effective command of the army fell to his friend and V Corps commander Brigadier General Fitz John Porter . When the public heard about the Galena , it was yet another great embarrassment , comparable to the Quaker Guns at Manassas . Editorial cartoons published in the course of the 1864 presidential campaign lampooned McClellan for having preferred the safety of a ship while a battle was fought in the distance . 
 McClellan was reunited with his army at Harrison 's Landing on the James . Debates were held as to whether the army should be evacuated or attempt to resume an offensive toward Richmond . McClellan maintained his estrangement from Abraham Lincoln with his repeated call for reinforcements and by writing a lengthy letter in which he proposed strategic and political guidance for the war , continuing his opposition to abolition or seizure of slaves as a tactic . He concluded by implying he should be restored as general @-@ in @-@ chief , but Lincoln responded by naming Maj. Gen. Henry W. Halleck to the post without consulting , or even informing , McClellan . Lincoln and Stanton also offered command of the Army of the Potomac to Maj. Gen. Ambrose Burnside , who refused the appointment . 
 Back in Washington , a reorganization of units created the Army of Virginia under Maj. Gen. John Pope , who was directed to advance toward Richmond from the northeast . McClellan resisted calls to reinforce Pope 's army and delayed return of the Army of the Potomac from the Peninsula enough so that the reinforcements arrived while the Northern Virginia Campaign was already underway . He wrote to his wife before the battle , " Pope will be thrashed ... & be disposed of [ by Lee ] . ... Such a villain as he is ought to bring defeat upon any cause that employs him . " Lee had assessed McClellan 's defensive nature and gambled on removing significant units from the Peninsula to attack Pope , who was beaten decisively at Second Bull Run in August . 
 = = = Maryland Campaign = = = 
 After the defeat of Pope at Second Bull Run , President Lincoln reluctantly returned to the man who had mended a broken army before . He realized that McClellan was a strong organizer and a skilled trainer of troops , able to recombine the units of Pope 's army with the Army of the Potomac faster than anyone . On September 2 , 1862 , Lincoln named McClellan to command " the fortifications of Washington , and all the troops for the defense of the capital . " The appointment was controversial in the Cabinet , a majority of whom signed a petition declaring to the president " our deliberate opinion that , at this time , it is not safe to entrust to Major General McClellan the command of any Army of the United States . " The president admitted that it was like " curing the bite with the hair of the dog . " But Lincoln told his secretary , John Hay , " We must use what tools we have . There is no man in the Army who can man these fortifications and lick these troops of ours into shape half as well as he . If he can 't fight himself , he excels in making others ready to fight . " 
 Northern fears of a continued offensive by Robert E. Lee were realized when he launched his Maryland Campaign on September 4 , hoping to arouse pro @-@ Southern sympathy in the slave state of Maryland . McClellan 's pursuit began on September 5 . He marched toward Maryland with six of his reorganized corps , about 84 @,@ 000 men , while leaving two corps behind to defend Washington . McClellan 's reception in Frederick , Maryland , as he marched towards Lee 's army , was described by the correspondent for Harper 's Magazine : 
 The General rode through the town on a trot , and the street was filled six or eight deep with his staff and guard riding on behind him . The General had his head uncovered , and received gracefully the <unk> of the people . Old ladies and men wept for joy , and scores of beautiful ladies waved flags from the balconies of houses upon the street , and their <unk> seemed to overcome every other emotion . When the General came to the corner of the principal street the ladies thronged around him . <unk> , beautiful and fragrant , in great numbers were thrown at him , and the ladies crowded around him with the warmest good wishes , and many of them were entirely overcome with emotion . I have never witnessed such a scene . The General took the gentle hands which were offered to him with many a kind and pleasing remark , and heard and answered the many remarks and compliments with which the people accosted him . It was a scene which no one could forget — an event of a lifetime . 
 Lee divided his forces into multiple columns , spread apart widely as he moved into Maryland and also maneuvered to capture the federal arsenal at Harpers Ferry . This was a risky move for a smaller army , but Lee was counting on his knowledge of McClellan 's temperament . He told one of his generals , " He is an able general but a very cautious one . His army is in a very demoralized and chaotic condition , and will not be prepared for offensive operations — or he will not think it so — for three or four weeks . Before that time I hope to be on the Susquehanna . " This was not a completely accurate assessment , but McClellan 's army was moving lethargically , averaging only 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) a day . 
 However , McClellan soon received a miraculous break of fortune . Union soldiers accidentally found a copy of Lee 's orders dividing his army , wrapped around a package of cigars in an abandoned camp . They delivered the order to McClellan 's headquarters in Frederick on September 13 . Upon realizing the intelligence value of this discovery , McClellan threw up his arms and exclaimed , " Now I know what to do ! " He waved the order at his old Army friend , Brig. Gen. John Gibbon , and said , " Here is a paper with which if I cannot whip Bobbie Lee , I will be willing to go home . " He telegraphed President Lincoln : " I have the whole rebel force in front of me , but I am confident , and no time shall be lost . I think Lee has made a gross mistake , and that he will be severely punished for it . I have all the plans of the rebels , and will catch them in their own trap if my men are equal to the emergency . ... Will send you trophies . " 
 = = = = Battle of South Mountain = = = = 
 Despite this show of bravado , McClellan continued his cautious line . After telegraphing to the president at noon on September 13 , rather than ordering his units to set out for the South Mountain passes immediately , he ordered them to depart the following morning . The 18 hours of delay allowed Lee time to react , because he received intelligence from a Confederate sympathizer that McClellan knew of his plans . ( The delay also doomed the federal garrison at Harpers Ferry because the relief column McClellan sent could not reach them before they surrendered to Stonewall Jackson . ) In the Battle of South Mountain , McClellan 's army was able to punch through the defended passes that separated them from Lee , but also gave Lee enough time to concentrate many of his men at Sharpsburg , Maryland . The Battle of South Mountain presented McClellan with an opportunity for one of the great theatrical moments of his career , as historian Sears describes : 
 The mountain ahead was wreathed in smoke eddies of battle smoke in which the gun flashes shone like brief hot sparks . The opposing battle lines on the heights were marked by heavier layers of smoke , and columns of Federal troops were visible winding their way up the mountainside , each column ... looking like a ' monstrous , crawling , blue @-@ black snake ' ... McClellan posed against this spectacular backdrop , sitting motionless astride his warhorse Dan Webster with his arm extended , pointing Hooker 's passing troops toward the battle . The men cheered him until they were hoarse ... and some broke ranks to swarm around the martial figure and indulge in the ' most extravagant demonstrations ' . 
 The Union army reached Antietam Creek , to the east of Sharpsburg , on the evening of September 15 . A planned attack on September 16 was put off because of early morning fog , allowing Lee to prepare his defenses with an army less than half the size of McClellan 's . 
 = = = = Battle of Antietam = = = = 
 The Battle of Antietam on September 17 , 1862 , was the single bloodiest day in American military history . The outnumbered Confederate forces fought desperately and well . Despite significant advantages in manpower , McClellan was unable to concentrate his forces effectively , which meant that Lee was able to shift his defenders to parry each of three Union thrusts , launched separately and sequentially against the Confederate left , center , and finally the right . McClellan was also unwilling to employ his ample reserve forces to capitalize on localized successes . Historian James M. McPherson has pointed out that the two corps McClellan kept in reserve were in fact larger than Lee 's entire force . The reason for McClellan 's reluctance was that , as in previous battles , he was convinced he was outnumbered . 
 The battle was tactically inconclusive , although Lee technically was defeated because he withdrew first from the battlefield and retreated back to Virginia . McClellan wired to Washington , " Our victory was complete . The enemy is driven back into Virginia . " Yet there was obvious disappointment that McClellan had not crushed Lee , who was fighting with a smaller army with its back to the Potomac River . Although McClellan 's subordinates can claim their share of responsibility for delays ( such as Ambrose Burnside 's misadventures at Burnside Bridge ) and blunders ( Edwin V. Sumner 's attack without reconnaissance ) , these were localized problems from which the full army could have recovered . As with the decisive battles in the Seven Days , McClellan 's headquarters were too far to the rear to allow his personal control over the battle . He made no use of his cavalry forces for reconnaissance . He did not share his overall battle plans with his corps commanders , which prevented them from using initiative outside of their sectors . And he was far too willing to accept cautious advice about saving his reserves , such as when a significant breakthrough in the center of the Confederate line could have been exploited , but Fitz John Porter is said to have told McClellan , " Remember , General , I command the last reserve of the last Army of the Republic . " 
 Despite being a tactical draw , Antietam is considered a turning point of the war and a victory for the Union because it ended Lee 's strategic campaign ( his first invasion of the North ) and it allowed President Lincoln to issue the Emancipation Proclamation on September 22 , taking effect on January 1 , 1863 . Although Lincoln had intended to issue the proclamation earlier , he was advised by his Cabinet to wait until a Union victory to avoid the perception that it was issued out of desperation . The Union victory and Lincoln 's proclamation played a considerable role in dissuading the governments of France and Britain from recognizing the Confederacy ; some suspected they were planning to do so in the aftermath of another Union defeat . McClellan had no prior knowledge that the plans for emancipation rested on his battle performance . 
 Because McClellan failed to pursue Lee aggressively after Antietam , Lincoln ordered that he be removed from command on November 5 , 1862 . Maj. Gen. Ambrose Burnside assumed command of the Army of the Potomac on November 9 , 1862 . McClellan wrote to his wife , " Those in whose judgment I rely tell me that I fought the battle splendidly and that it was a masterpiece of art . ... I feel I have done all that can be asked in twice saving the country . ... I feel some little pride in having , with a beaten & demoralized army , defeated Lee so utterly . ... Well , one of these days history will I trust do me justice . " 
 = = The 1864 Presidential election = = 
 Secretary Stanton ordered McClellan to report to Trenton , New Jersey , for further orders , although none were issued . As the war progressed , there were various calls to return McClellan to an important command , following the Union defeats at Fredericksburg and Chancellorsville , as Robert E. Lee moved north at the start of the Gettysburg Campaign , and as Jubal Early threatened Washington in 1864 . When Ulysses S. Grant became general @-@ in @-@ chief , he discussed returning McClellan to an unspecified position . But all of these opportunities were impossible , given the opposition within the administration and the knowledge that McClellan posed a potential political threat . McClellan worked for months on a lengthy report describing his two major campaigns and his successes in organizing the Army , replying to his critics and justifying his actions by accusing the administration of undercutting him and denying him necessary reinforcements . The War Department was reluctant to publish his report because , just after completing it in October 1863 , McClellan openly declared his entrance to the political stage as a Democrat . 
 McClellan was nominated by the Democrats to run against Abraham Lincoln in the 1864 U.S. presidential election . Following the example of Winfield Scott , he ran as a U.S. Army general still on active duty ; he did not resign his commission until election day , November 8 , 1864 . He supported continuation of the war and restoration of the Union ( though not the abolition of slavery ) , but the party platform , written by Copperhead Clement Vallandigham of Ohio , was opposed to this position . The platform called for an immediate cessation of hostilities and a negotiated settlement with the Confederacy . McClellan was forced to repudiate the platform , which made his campaign inconsistent and difficult . He also was not helped by the party 's choice for vice president , George H. Pendleton , a peace candidate from Ohio . 
 The deep division in the party , the unity of the Republicans ( running under the label " National Union Party " ) , and the military successes by Union forces in the fall of 1864 doomed McClellan 's candidacy . Lincoln won the election handily , with 212 Electoral College votes to 21 and a popular vote of 2 @,@ 218 @,@ 388 to 1 @,@ 812 @,@ 807 or 55 % to 45 % . For all his popularity with the troops , McClellan failed to secure their support and the military vote went to Lincoln nearly 3 – 1 . Lincoln 's share of the vote in the Army of the Potomac was 70 % . 
 = = Postbellum years = = 
 At the conclusion of the war , McClellan and his family went to Europe ( not returning until 1868 ) , during which he did not participate in politics . When he returned , the Democratic Party expressed some interest in nominating him for president again , but when it became clear that Ulysses S. Grant would be the Republican candidate , this interest died . McClellan worked on engineering projects in New York City and was offered the position of president of the newly formed University of California . 
 McClellan was appointed chief engineer of the New York City Department of Docks in 1870 . Evidently the position did not demand his full @-@ time attention because , starting in 1872 , he also served as the president of the Atlantic and Great Western Railroad . He and his family then embarked on another three @-@ year stay in Europe ( 1873 – 75 ) 
 In March 1877 , McClellan was nominated by Governor Lucius Robinson to be the first Superintendent of Public Works but was rejected by the New York State Senate as being " incompetent for the position . " 
 In 1877 , McClellan was nominated by the Democrats for Governor of New Jersey , an action that took him by surprise because he had not expressed an interest in the position . He accepted the nomination , was elected , and served a single term from 1878 to 1881 , a tenure marked by careful , conservative executive management and minimal political rancor . The concluding chapter of his political career was his strong support in 1884 for the election of Grover Cleveland . He sought the position of secretary of war in Cleveland 's cabinet , for which he was well qualified , but political rivals from New Jersey were able to block his nomination . 
 McClellan 's final years were devoted to traveling and writing , including his memoirs McClellan 's Own Story ( published posthumously in 1887 ) , in which he stridently defended his conduct during the war . He died unexpectedly of a heart attack at age 58 at West Orange , New Jersey , after suffering from chest pains for a few weeks . His final words , at 3 a.m. , October 29 , 1885 , were , " I feel easy now . Thank you . " He was buried at Riverview Cemetery , Trenton , New Jersey . 
 McClellan 's son , George B. McClellan , Jr . ( 1865 – 1940 ) , was born in Dresden , Kingdom of Saxony , during the family 's first trip to Europe . Known within the family as Max , he was also a politician , serving as a United States Representative from New York State and as Mayor of New York City from 1904 to 1909 . McClellan 's daughter , Mary ( " May " ) ( 1861 – 1945 ) , married a French diplomat and spent much of her life abroad . McClellan 's wife , Ellen , died in Nice , France , while visiting May at her home " Villa Antietam " . Neither Max nor May had any children of their own . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The New York Evening Post commented in McClellan 's obituary , " Probably no soldier who did so little fighting has ever had his qualities as a commander so minutely , and we may add , so fiercely discussed . " This fierce discussion has continued for over a century . McClellan is usually ranked in the lowest tier of Civil War generals . However , the debate over McClellan 's ability and talents remains the subject of much controversy among Civil War and military historians . He has been universally praised for his organizational abilities and for his very good relations with his troops . They referred to him affectionately as " Little Mac " ; others sometimes called him the " Young Napoleon " . It has been suggested that his reluctance to enter battle was caused in part by an intense desire to avoid spilling the blood of his men . Ironically , this led to failing to take the initiative against the enemy and therefore passing up good opportunities for decisive victories , which could have ended the war early , and thereby could have spared thousands of soldiers who died in those subsequent battles . Generals who proved successful in the war , such as Lee and Grant , tended to be more aggressive and more willing to risk a major battle even when all preparations were not perfect . McClellan himself summed up his cautious nature in a draft of his memoirs : 
 It has always been my opinion that the true course in conducting military operations , is to make no movement until the preparations are as complete as circumstances permit , & never to fight a battle without some definite object worth the probable loss . 
 McClellan 's reluctance to press his enemy aggressively was probably not a matter of personal courage , which he demonstrated well enough by his bravery under fire in the Mexican – American War . Stephen Sears wrote , 
 There is indeed ample evidence that the terrible stresses of commanding men in battle , especially the beloved men of his beloved Army of the Potomac , left his moral courage in tatters . Under the pressure of his ultimate soldier 's responsibility , the will to command deserted him . Glendale and Malvern Hill found him at the peak of his anguish during the Seven Days , and he fled those fields to escape the responsibility . At Antietam , where there was nowhere for him to flee to , he fell into a paralysis of indecision . Seen from a longer perspective , General McClellan could be both comfortable and successful performing as executive officer , and also , if somewhat less successfully , as grand strategist ; as battlefield commander , however , he was simply in the wrong profession . 
 One of the reasons that McClellan 's reputation has suffered is because of his own memoirs . Historian Allan Nevins wrote , " Students of history must always be grateful McClellan so frankly exposed his own weaknesses in this posthumous book . " Doris Kearns Goodwin claims that a review of his personal correspondence during the war reveals a tendency for self @-@ aggrandizement and unwarranted self @-@ congratulation . His original draft was completed in 1881 , but the only copy was destroyed by fire . He began to write another draft of what would be published posthumously , in 1887 , as McClellan 's Own Story . However , he died before it was half completed and his literary executor , William C. Prime , editor of the pro @-@ McClellan New York Journal of Commerce , included excerpts from some 250 of McClellan 's wartime letters to his wife , in which it had been his habit to reveal his innermost feelings and opinions in unbridled fashion . 
 Robert E. Lee , on being asked ( by his cousin , and recorded by his son ) who was the ablest general on the Union side during the late war , replied emphatically : " McClellan , by all odds ! " 
 While McClellan 's reputation has suffered over time , especially over the last 75 years , there is a small but intense cadre of American Civil War historians who believe that the general has been poorly served on at least four levels . First , McClellan proponents say that because the general was a conservative Democrat with great personal charisma , radical Republicans fearing his political potential deliberately undermined his field operations . Second , that as the radical Republicans were the true winners coming out of the American Civil War , they were able to write its history , placing their principal political rival of the time , McClellan , in the worst possible light . Third , that historians eager to jump on the bandwagon of Lincoln as America 's greatest political icon worked to outdo one another in shifting blame for early military failures from Lincoln and Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton to McClellan . And fourth , that Lincoln and Stanton deliberately undermined McClellan because of his conciliatory stance towards the South , which might have resulted in a less destructive end to the war had Richmond fallen as a result of the Peninsula Campaign . Proponents of this school claim that McClellan is criticized more for his admittedly abrasive personality than for his actual field performance . 
 Several geographic features and establishments have been named for George B. McClellan . These include Fort McClellan in Alabama , McClellan Butte in the Mount Baker @-@ Snoqualmie National Forest , where he traveled while conducting the Pacific Railroad Survey in 1853 , and a bronze equestrian statue honoring General McClellan in Washington , D.C. Another equestrian statue honors him in front of Philadelphia City Hall , while the McClellan Gate at Arlington National Cemetery is dedicated to him and displays his name . McClellan Park in <unk> , Maine , was donated to the town by the general 's son with the stipulation that it be named for the general . 
 The Fire Department of New York operated a fireboat named George B. McClellan from 1904 to 1954 . 
 = = Electoral history = = 
 1864 Democratic National Convention : 
 George B. McClellan – 174 ( 77 @.@ 33 % ) 
 Thomas H. Seymour – 38 ( 16 @.@ 89 % ) 
 Horatio Seymour – 12 ( 5 @.@ 33 % ) 
 Charles O 'Conor – 1 ( 0 @.@ 44 % ) 
 United States presidential election , 1864 
 Abraham Lincoln / Andrew Johnson ( National Union ) – 2 @,@ 218 @,@ 388 ( 55 @.@ 0 % ) and 212 electoral votes 
 George B. McClellan / George H. Pendleton ( Democratic ) – 1 @,@ 812 @,@ 807 ( 45 @.@ 0 % ) and 21 electoral votes ( 3 states carried ) 
 New Jersey gubernatorial election , 1877 : 
 George B. McClellan ( D ) – 97 @,@ 837 ( 51 @.@ 65 % ) 
 William Augustus Newell ( R ) – 85 @,@ 094 ( 44 @.@ 92 % ) 
 = = Selected works = = 
 The Mexican War Diary of George B. McClellan ( William Starr Myers , Editor ) . Princeton : Princeton University Press , 1917 . 
 Bayonet Exercise , or School of the Infantry Soldier , in the Use of the Musket in Hand @-@ to @-@ Hand Conflicts ( translated from the French of <unk> ) , 1852 . Reissued as Manual of Bayonet Exercise , Prepared for the Use of the Army of the United States . Philadelphia : J.B. Lippincott & Co . , 1862 . 
 The Report of Captain George B. McClellan , One of the Officers Sent to the Seat of War in Europe , in 1855 and 1856 , 1857 . Reissued as The Armies of Europe , Comprising Descriptions in Detail of the Military Systems of England , France , Russia , Prussia , Austria , and Sardinia . Philadelphia : J.B. Lippincott & Co . , 1861 . 
 European Cavalry , Including Details of the Organization of the Cavalry Service Among the Principal Nations of Europe . Philadelphia : J.B. Lippincott & Co . , 1861 . 
 Exploration of the Red River of Louisiana in the Year 1852 ( with Randolph B. Marcy ) . Washington : <unk> Nicholson , 1854 . 
 Regulations and Instructions for the Field Service of the United States Cavalry in Time of War , 1861 . Reissued as Regulations and Instructions for the Field Service of the U.S. Cavalry in Time of War . Philadelphia : J.B. Lippincott & Co . , 1862 . 
 McClellan 's Own Story : The War for the Union , The Soldiers Who Fought It , The Civilians Who Directed It and His Relations to It and to Them ( William C. Prime , Editor ) . New York : Charles L. Webster & Company , 1887 . 
 The Life , Campaigns , and Public Services of General George B McClellan . Philadelphia : T.B. Peterson & Brothers , 1864 . 
 The Democratic Platform , General McClellan 's Letter of Acceptance . New York : Democratic National Committee , 1864 . 
 The Army of the Potomac , General McClellan 's Report of Its Operations While Under His Command . New York : G.P. Putnam , 1864 . 
 Report of Major General George B McClellan , Upon the Organization of the Army of the Potomac and Its campaigns in Virginia and Maryland . Boston : Boston Courier , 1864 . 
 Letter of the Secretary of War by George Brinton McClellan . Washington : Government Printing Office , 1864 . 
 West Point Battle Monument , History of the Project to the Dedication of the Site ( Oration of Major @-@ General McClellan ) . New York : Sheldon & Co . , 1864 . 
 = Shin Megami Tensei : Devil Summoner = 
 Shin Megami Tensei : Devil Summoner ( Japanese : 真 ・ 女神転生 <unk> , Hepburn : Shin Megami Tensei Debiru <unk> ) is a role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Atlus . Forming part of the Megami Tensei series , it is the first title in the Devil Summoner subseries . It was first released for the Sega Saturn in December 1995 , and received a port to the PlayStation Portable in December 2005 . Despite reports of it being planned for localization , neither version has been released outside Japan . 
 Set in the city of Hirasaki in modern @-@ day Japan , the story follows a college student whose death at the hands of demons forces his soul into the body of Summoner <unk> Kuzunoha . Now in Kuzunoha 's body , the protagonist must investigate the appearance of demons in the town and the activities of Sid Davis , the Dark Summoner responsible for killing the protagonist and Kuzunoha . The gameplay carries over multiple classic elements from the Megami Tensei series , including first @-@ person dungeon navigation , turn @-@ based battles , and negotiation with demons to recruit them into the player 's party . 
 Devil Summoner began development after the positive reception of Shin Megami Tensei If .... Designed from the outset as a spin @-@ off from the main Megami Tensei series , it drew on elements of detective fiction . It was also the series ' first appearance on fifth @-@ generation home consoles . Regular Megami Tensei staff were involved with the project , including director Kouji Okada , writer Ryutaro Ito , and character designer Kazuma Kaneko . The music was composed by Toshiko Tasaki and Tsukasa Masuko . Upon its release in Japan , the original version garnered positive reviews from Japanese press and strong sales . It went on to spawn both a television series and multiple sequels . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Shin Megami Tensei : Devil Summoner is a role @-@ playing video game in which the player takes control of a silent protagonist that can be named and whose personality is determined by dialogue choices made in the game . Navigation is split into two types : standard navigation through the game 's three @-@ dimensional ( 3D ) dungeons in a first @-@ person view , and navigation around the protagonist 's home of Hirasaki City using a 3D overworld map . During dungeon navigation , the player 's route is automatically mapped , and the map can be viewed in the menu screen . Non @-@ playable characters ( NPCs ) are represented in first @-@ person navigation with 2D sprites , and their speech is represented with head @-@ and @-@ shoulder portraits above dialogue boxes . Quests are available at a location called the House of Divination , which the player can choose to accept in exchange for rewards . Various stores are scattered throughout Hirasaki City for buying items , weapons and armor , and healing the player 's party and reserves . A key currency in the game is Magnetite , which is used for summoning demons and as currency in some of the stores . 
 Enemies are confronted on the overworld map and in dungeons through both random encounters and staged battles . Battles are governed by a turn @-@ based system : the player 's and enemy 's parties each get a turn during which they can perform available actions . The player party is arranged in a three @-@ by @-@ two grid , with their positioning effecting how they can attack enemies : for instance , short @-@ ranged attacks are made less effective if the selected party member is in the back row . The player has access to multiple commands in battle : " Sword " , " Gun " , " Magic " and " Extra " . Items can also be used in battle , and the player can choose to escape from most encounters aside from key boss battles . An " Auto " option is also available , where the entire party is commanded using the game 's artificial intelligence . At the end of each successful battle , experience points are distributed among party members depending on the strength of the enemy , and the protagonist is given Ability Points to assign to six different attributes which affect his performance in battle . 
 Key elements in the game are negotiation with and the fusion and creation of demons . Encountered in battle , demons can be talked with and negotiated into running from the battle , giving money or items , or joining the player 's party . If the negotiation fails , the demon will attack . Once a demon is won over , they are given a loyalty meter which is influenced by the player 's actions . If the demon is treated well and performs actions in battle it approves of , its loyalty will increase . If the opposite occurs , the demon will begin to disobey the protagonist , then leave . Demons can be fused together at a special location in the game called the Hotel <unk> , where fusions are supervised by the NPC Dr. Victor . Demon fusion is governed by a comparability system , with more favorable fusions emerging from better demon compatibility . Demons can also be fused with weapons to grant stat boosts , and after a certain point in the game artificial demons called <unk> can be used and strengthened through repeated fusions . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Devil Summoner takes place in Hirasaki , a coastal Japanese city that has seen a recent rise in supernatural activity . The player character , an unnamed college student , is asked to accompany his girlfriend Kumiko Hatano to check out a book on the occult for her studies . Going to an amusement park to buy some concert <unk> at Kumiko 's request , the protagonist is attacked by demons and saved by <unk> Kuzunoha , a Summoner belonging to an ancient clan dedicated to protecting Japan from supernatural threats . Shortly after leaving him , Kuzunoha dies under mysterious circumstances . Shortly after this , the protagonist is attacked by a Dark Summoner named Sid Davis . Killed by Davis , he is returned to the land of the living by Charon . Upon waking , the protagonist finds himself in the body of Kuzunoha , who was also killed by Davis . Now trapped in Kuzunoha 's body , the protagonist is forced to work in his place to investigate the reasons behind Sid Davis ' activities alongside Kuzunoha 's partner Rei <unk> : he does this to both protect the city and return Kuzunoha and himself to their original bodies . 
 During his investigations , the protagonist and Rei learn of multiple demon @-@ run criminal organizations causing chaos in Hirasaki including factions of the Yakuza , all of them connected to Davis . The protagonist 's efforts against the demon threats are hindered by Hideo <unk> , who accuses the pair of being involved in the incidents until the police station is infested by demons and the police chief is revealed to be a demon in disguise . The protagonist also foils an attempt to Kumiko for unknown reasons . After taking down each of the five major demon factions , Davis reveals that the entire affair was orchestrated to break five seals holding prisoner the spirit of Inaruna : once a powerful regional priestess who was executed for resisting the forces of Emperor Jimmu with her magical powers during the unification of Japan , her spirit 's hatred for her conquerors has grown beyond control and she will destroy the city if released . Kumiko , the reincarnation of Inaruna , is successfully abducted by Davis and used as a host for Inaruna 's spirit . Although she is summoned , the protagonist and Rei rescue Kumiko and kill Davis . They then successfully defeat Inaruna . With the city returned to normal , the protagonist remains trapped in Kuzunoha 's body , and can choose either to use his own name or adopt the Kuzunoha title . 
 = = Development = = 
 Shin Megami Tensei : Devil Summoner is the first entry in the Devil Summoner series , which forms part of the larger Megami Tensei series : as with other entries , its narrative takes the form of a modern @-@ day detective story as opposed to the series ' more prevalent post @-@ apocalyptic settings . The concept for Devil Summoner originated during the development of Shin Megami Tensei II and Shin Megami Tensei If ... for the Super Famicom . During the development of II , series producer Kouji Okada considered creating a more imposing sequel , but instead created If ... as a smaller @-@ scale spin @-@ off title . The positive reaction to If ... gave Okada the freedom to realize long @-@ held concepts for a " parallel world " as an extension of the original concept for If .... <unk> was the game 's director , while the script was written by regular Megami Tensei writer Ryutaro Ito . The story and atmosphere drew on themes from detective fiction , particularly the melancholic and hardboiled fiction of Raymond Chandler . One of Ito 's favorite pieces of dialogue was the opening segment , where the protagonist is dragged about by Kumiko on her errands , during which the protagonist 's personality is determined by the player . The name of the game 's setting , Hirasaki City , was constructed using kanji taken from the names of places in Kanagawa Prefecture . The city 's name also served as a reference to Heijo City , a location in Patriotic Squadron Dai @-@ Nippon . 
 Devil Summoner was the first Megami Tensei title to be released on a 32 @-@ bit fifth @-@ generation home video game console , and the first Megami Tensei game to feature 3D graphics . The latter presented a new challenge for the development team : while they found adjusting to the new specifications a challenge , they also greatly enjoyed working with the Sega Saturn , the which was unlike anything previously experienced by the team . Among the design staff were Katsura Hashino , who focused on combat , and Shogo Isogai , who focused on coordination between gameplay events . The demon conversation system was conceived by Okada based on experiences with the multiple accents encountered in the Kansai region of Japan . Using this as a base , he created the response system to give demon negotiation a more realistic feeling than previous Megami Tensei games . It was also a means of equalizing the relationship between demons and the player party , which had previously been more akin to master and servant than equal partners . The Zoma demons , which could be freely tailored into different demon types , was created while the team was balancing out the game 's difficulty . The gameplay difficulty , which by later standards would be considered quite high , was toned down from the difficulty of earlier Megami Tensei titles to appeal to a wider audience . This necessitated balancing a more forgiving difficulty with keeping traditional Megami Tensei gameplay elements . 
 The character designs were created by Kazuma Kaneko . In keeping with the " MegaTen Detective " theme , Kaneko emulated the genre 's hard @-@ boiled elements in his character designs . Kuzunoha 's character design was inspired by the first animated version of Japanese character Lupin III , the main protagonists of Tantei Monogatari and Ace Ventura : Pet Detective , and the titular character from The Adventures of Ford Fairlane . Rei <unk> , who Kaneko later referred to as his favorite female character design , was created to be the main character 's sidekick and consequently was portrayed as a strong character . Her appearance was influenced by Japanese model Kitaura Tomoe . Her choker necklace , which was hung with coins needed to cross the <unk> River after death , was part of how Kaneko expressed the story 's hard @-@ boiled elements . The character Sid Davis was created as Ito wanted a black character in the game : the star mark on his forehead represented a pentagram , which resulted in him getting the production nickname " shooting star " . The name of true antagonist Inaruna was influenced by Sumerian mythology . She was originally going to be Princess <unk> , the legendary daughter of Taira no Masakado : while the explicit details were changed , Inaruna 's character was still influenced by the tales surrounding <unk> . Her reincarnation in the form of Kumiko was a conscious reference to the Megami Tensei series ' titular concept of reincarnation . Kumiko 's early portrayal was far gentler than she was in the final game : given a high @-@ class background , she would come across as a Yamato <unk> . Supporting character Dr. Victor was based on the titular protagonist of Mary Shelley 's novel Frankenstein . Future character designer Shigenori Soejima worked on the game a sprite designer . Devil Summoner would be his very first work within the Megami Tensei franchise . 
 The music was composed by Toshiko Tasaki and Tsukasa Masuko , with additional arrangements by Tasaki , Masuko , Taku Iwasaki , <unk> Takemori and Don <unk> . In their commentary on the game 's music , the two main composers noted that tracks such as " Conduct Record " and " Sid Davis " were composed quite quickly : the latter track was rewritten , but circumstances led to the original version being used in the final game . " Kuzunoha Detective Agency " was Tasaki 's favorite composition . Several environmental tracks were themed after their respective locations . The theme for Dr. Victor 's location , the <unk> Hotel , made heavy use of the organ despite Toshiko 's original decision against this . The theme for 3D dungeons was re @-@ purposed during debugging into the " level up " theme . The normal battle theme was originally intended to be a sub @-@ boss theme , while the first battle theme to be composed was the main boss theme . The boss battle theme used in the game is a toned @-@ down version of Tsukasa 's original version , which was too large for comfortable use within the game . The final boss theme was divided into two parts : in the first part , Tsukasa made the guitar solo " jerky " , but brought it back to normal for the second half . The staff roll music was composed by Masuko with a strong guitar element . For some tracks , the team were restricted by the available disc space . 
 = = Release = = 
 Devil Summoner was released by Atlus for the Sega Saturn on December 25 , 1995 . A supplementary release containing bonus material such as the ability to view the game 's demon collection , titled Shin Megami Tensei : Devil Summoner - Akuma <unk> , was released on April 26 , 1996 . In 2005 , it was announced that a port to the PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) was in development as part of the Devil Summoner subseries ' tenth anniversary celebrations . The port included a demon compendium , adjustable difficulty levels , a save @-@ anywhere option , adjustable screen ratio , and additional bosses and interface alterations for user convenience . Hashino and Isogai returned to the project , this time taking up the respective roles of producer and director . The port was decided upon when it was decided to begin development on the third Devil Summoner game so players who had missed the Saturn original could experience it again . An important element of the port was ensuring short loading times , an issue plaguing other PSP ports of the time . The port was released in Japan on December 20 , 2005 . 
 = = = Localization efforts = = = 
 In March 1996 , it was reported by GameFan that Devil Summoner was being localized for a North American release in June of that year . For unknown reasons , it remained exclusive to Japan . During the run @-@ up towards its release , it was rumored that the PSP port would be picked for a western release in 2006 . Ultimately , the port was not localized . It was speculated that the reason for its continuing exclusivity was that Sony had blocked a localization attempt due to a lack of new content . As part of staff interviews in 2006 relating to the third Devil Summoner game , Atlus confirmed that they had no plans to localize the title for the West , preferring to prioritize new entries in the franchise . It was also said that the " top @-@ secret reasons " for this were unrelated to the game 's content or censorship issues . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its first week of release , the Sega Saturn version of Devil Summoner sold 264 @,@ 822 copies . As of 2007 , it sold 355 @,@ 656 , becoming the 14th best @-@ selling game for the system in Japan . In contrast , the PSP remake did not appear in the top 500 best @-@ selling titles either for 2005 or 2006 . 
 Famitsu gave the original version a positive review , with it scoring 35 out of 40 points : the four reviews gave it scores of 9 , 9 , 9 and 8 out of 10 . SoftBank Creative 's magazine publication Sega Saturn Magazine gave it a score of 24 / 30 points , with the three reviewers giving it respective scores of 8 , 9 and 7 out of 10 . In a feature on the game for GameFan , Casey Loe noted the game 's " clean and crisp " 3D visuals , called the enemy design excellent , and thought the full @-@ motion video sequences were the best to be found on the Saturn system . She ended by praising Atlus ' plans for releasing a title so deep and mature for the Western market . Fellow gaming magazine Game Players , in a feature on upcoming role @-@ playing game releases in North America , thought that the premise and previewed gameplay showed it to be a promising title after its positive Japanese reception . Kurt Kalata and Christopher J. Snelgrove , writing for gaming website Hardcore Gaming 101 , called the game decent despite its slow pacing , an unpolished look , and some aggravating aspects to the demon loyalty system . In a 2015 feature on recommended software produced for the Saturn , Dengeki Online highlighted Devil Summoner as one of the system 's most notable games . The writer ranked it among the best early Megami Tensei titles despite its high difficulty . 
 Famitsu 's writers expressed disappointment over how the PSP version 's graphics and screen size had not been changed in comparison to the Sega Saturn version , and of how few adjustments had been made . Despite this , the reviewers positively noted the easier gameplay experience and praised the battle system . Kalata and Snelgrove appreciated the graphics used in the game 's dungeons , which they found to be detailed and better @-@ looking than ones in previous games in the series ; they also appreciated the battle transitions . On the other hand , they found the graphics for the game 's maps to be " not particularly impressive looking " , and the graphics for the enemies to be lacking and " barely animated " . 
