 = = = Commission and early service = = = 
 Morris 's tenure as an instructor in Litchfield was cut short when , within months of arriving , he received an unsolicited ensign 's commission in the Connecticut militia , which he accepted . While in the service of the Connecticut militia Morris saw his first action , fighting battles in both Long Island and White Plains . In his memoirs , Morris wrote of this time , stating that " The soldiers universally manifested a great respect for me , for my care of the sick and my attention to their wants , and for my sympathies in their distresses . " 
 In late December 1776 , Morris completed his commitment to the Connecticut militia and immediately accepted a commission in the Continental Army as a first lieutenant . After serving as a recruiting officer in Litchfield , Morris joined General George Washington and the army at Peekskill . On October 3 , 1776 , General Washington commanded this army in the Battle of Germantown . The American forces were ultimately unsuccessful in this battle and Morris was taken as a prisoner of war on October 4 , 1776 . 
 = = = Captivity = = = 
 The early part of Morris 's confinement were the most trying . He was taken to the " New Jail " in Philadelphia where he " was locked in a cold room ... destitute of everything by cold stone walls and bare floors — no kind of a seat to sit on — all total darkness , no water to drink or a morsel to eat ; without a blanket to cover [ him ] . " 
 Despite his meager accommodations , Morris decided to make the best of his imprisonment in Philadelphia by negotiating with his <unk> to borrow books from the so @-@ called circulating library recently established by Benjamin Franklin in that city . One historian points to this time as when Morris was exposed to the philosophers that would be so influential in his later life as an educator : " From Milton , James Morris absorbed ideas in favor of healthy exercises to develop both body and mind at the same time ; from Rollin , the danger of following custom blindly rather than reason ; and form Locke , the novel idea that the English language was as important as Latin and Greek . " 
 In May 1778 , Morris convinced his captors to admit him to parole and was sent to Flatbush , Long Island , where he stayed with a Mr. Clarkson . In his memoir , Morris noted that Clarkson was " a man of science and large property , ... who owned the most extensive private library that [ Morris ] had ever known in the United States . " While still in captivity Morris found this situation rather comfortable and took every advantage of the library he so admired . 
 On January 3 , 1781 , Morris was freed as part of a prisoner exchange . 
 = = = Post @-@ release = = = 
 Upon his release , Morris returned to Peekskill where he discovered that he had been promoted to the rank of captain while in the custody of the British . Morris commanded a company back to White Plains until he received orders to head south to Virginia . Upon arrival , Morris 's company , under the overall command of General George Washington , aided in Siege of Yorktown , the last major battle of the American Revolution . Specifically , Morris 's company of light infantry provided support to the forlorn hope commanded by Colonel Alexander Hamilton . 
 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 James Morris returned to South Farms in December 1781 . Days after his return , on December 20 , he married Elizabeth Hubbard . Shortly thereafter , the people of South Farms made Morris both the Justice of the Peace and a Selectman . In the summer of 1782 Morris briefly returned to service , but was ultimately released from service in November of that year . 
 In the following years James and <unk> had five children : 
 Abigail Morris ( b . 8 / 2 / 1783 ) 
 James Morris , IV ( b . 12 / 4 / 1784 ) : 1803 Yale graduate , Tutor of the University of Georgia , Head of the Academy in <unk> , <unk> . 
 Reuben Smith Morris ( b . 5 / 24 / 1786 ) : 1804 Yale graduate , attorney in Cayuga , New York . 
 Samuel Hubbard Morris ( b . 2 / 6 / 1788 ) ( d . 12 / 22 / 1793 ) 
 Robert Hubbard Morris ( b . 7 / 25 / 1789 ) : " endowed with ' good academic education , ' " settled at Cayuga . " 
 In between the birth of James and Reuben , Morris became severely ill . During his illness , a man named Gad Farnam moved into the Morris 's home to care for him day and night . The two families became very close and Gad 's daughter Rhoda , only five years old at the time of the illness , later became Morris 's second wife . It was at this point in Morris 's life that he accepted that he would never realize his early dream of becoming a minister . 
 = = The Morris Academy = = 
 By 1790 , it had become common for children to come to Morris 's house for instruction and access to his library . Morris welcomed all of these students , both male and female . Morris 's coeducation caused some stir within the community when some claimed that his education of women was " ' blowing up their pride ' so that ' they would feel themselves above their mates and they would feel above labour . ' " In 1794 , these frustrations were brought to fruition when a hearing was held in the church . The charges were dismissed and the publicity from the controversy brought so much attention , that , by 1803 , he had instructed students " from all the New England States except Rhode Island , and from the States of New York , New Jersey , Pennsylvania , Maryland , Virginia , South Carolina and Georgia . Also from the Island of St. Thomas in the West Indies , and from the Island of Bermuda . " 
 By the turn of the century , Morris found it necessary to formalize his instruction and construct a proper Academy building . The estimated cost was $ 1200 , so Morris enlisted wealthy residents of Litchfield and South Farms . 
 On November 28 , 1803 , The Morris Academy moved out of James Morris 's home and into the brand new building . For the period from 1803 to 1812 , the Morris Academy grew to an average of 50 @-@ 75 students . 
 The Academy was handed to several other heads of school , until , on April 12 , 1888 , the Morris Academy was closed for good . 
 In the introduction to her book on the academy , Barbara Nolen Strong noted : 
 The Morris Academy is entitled to be called a pioneer institution because of its ' open door ' policy in coeducation . It was not the first in the United States , not even in Connecticut , but none of the other early academies opened their doors as wide and kept them open as long . No other coeducational academy spread its influence so far . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In September 1814 Morris 's wife Elizabeth died . The following March , Morris married Rhonda Farnam and the marriage bore two children . 
 Jane Elizabeth Morris ( b . 1 / 30 / 1816 ) 
 Timothy Dwight Morris ( b . 11 / 22 / 1817 ) 
 During the " second war with Great Britain " , at the age of 61 , Morris was commissioned as a First Major of the Second Regiment of Volunteers in the State of Connecticut . 
 Toward the end of his life , Morris compiled his memoirs , which were subsequently published as Memoirs of James Morris of South Farms In Litchfield . 
 James Morris died on April 20 , 1820 and was buried in the graveyard at what is now commonly referred to as the East Morris cemetery . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In June , 1859 , South Farms was incorporated as Morris , Connecticut in his honor . 
 The James Morris Museum is located in the center of the town of Morris and contains original artifacts and writings of James Morris . 
 The foundation of The Morris Academy remains intact on the grounds of James Morris Elementary School , in Morris . 
 = William T. Porter = 
 William Trotter Porter ( December 24 , 1809 – July 19 , 1858 ) was an American journalist and newspaper editor who founded an early American newspaper devoted to sports . After working at a number of small newspapers , Porter moved to New York City in the 1830s . After employment at a newspaper in the city , he founded the Spirit of the Times , a newspaper modeled on a London paper called Bell 's Life in London . The Spirit , which went through a number of names and incarnations over the years , was devoted to sports and other recreational pursuits . One of Porter 's main interests involved horse racing , and he was involved in attempts to create the first stud book in the United States , which did not bear fruit . He was also instrumental in the development of American literature , as the Spirit published a number of short stories by American tall tale writers , and Porter edited two collections of short stories by American writers . After publishing the Spirit through the 1830s , he sold it to another printer but continued as the editor into the 1850s . He left the original Spirit in 1855 and in 1856 was hired as editor for another sporting newspaper , Porter 's Spirit of the Times , published by George Wilkes . Porter died in 1858 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Porter was born on December 24 , 1809 , the son of Benjamin Porter and Martha Olcott in Newbury , Vermont . He was one of five boys born to his parents . His father was a lawyer , but died suddenly in 1818 , leaving the family in difficult financial circumstances . He attended a charity school in Hanover , New Hampshire after the family moved there , but left school to work in a print shop . He also attended Dartmouth College . His mother died in 1825 , which meant the family was broken up and Porter worked at a number of small newspapers before arriving in New York City in the early 1830s . While in New York , Porter gained the nickname of " York 's Tall Son " . 
 = = Editorial work = = 
 Porter edited the Constellation , a newspaper in New York City that published humorous stories . Porter became interested in sports , and concentrated on the emerging sports journalism field . In December 1831 , Porter published the first issue of a new newspaper devoted to covering sports and other recreational activities , which he called The Spirit of the Times . Porter imitated Bell 's Life in London , a contemporary English publication covering the same subjects . The first attempt at Spirit of the Times failed quickly , and Porter sold the magazine to C. J. B. Fisher , who merged it into Fisher 's publication of the Traveller , and the Spirit was combined with the Traveller as the Traveller and Spirit of the Times . During the brief period that Porter operated the Spirit , he employed Horace Greeley as a typesetter . When Porter sold the Spirit , he then went to work at the New @-@ Yorker , which was edited at the time by Horace Greeley . In January 1835 Porter purchased the Traveller and Spirit of the Times and renamed the newspaper back to Spirit of the Times , returning to editing it . This version of the Spirit managed to survive , although with some initial financial difficulties . Porter focused on selling his paper in the south and west of the United States , and emphasized subjects of use to his readers , such as cattle breeding , farm methods , books of interest , as well as sports . The newspaper was published weekly . 
 Porter was interested in reforming the sport of horse racing , and expended much effort in the newspaper trying to bring together horsemen in the various parts of the country . Although the effort did not bear fruit , the Spirit became a repository for information of interest to those involved in horse racing , printing statistics and results of races . Porter was also involved in attempts to publish an American stud book for race horses in the United States , similar to the General Stud Book that was published in England documenting the pedigrees of Thoroughbred horses . In February 1837 , Porter announced in the Spirit the projected coverage of the project , which was to be edited by Wiley Jones Stratton , who was secretary to the National Jockey Club in Washington , D. C. But this project never materialized , and Porter turned to Patrick Nesbitt Edgar in January 1838 to take over the project . But Edgar did not finish the work , and by 1842 , the project was abandoned . 
 Porter also served as an arbiter of disputes about sports rules and sports betting . Porter also encouraged new authors from the south and the west to write in his newspaper and helped them get books published . He also edited two collections of short stories from the frontier , The Big Bear of Arkansas in 1846 and A Quarter Race in Kentucky and Other Sketches in 1847 . 
 Besides the sporting interests , the Spirit was involved in the emergence of American literature , especially the " tall tale " form of humor . Porter encouraged Southwestern authors to write and publish their short stories in the Spirit , and was involved in getting their works published in book form . He was the editor for two of these collections : The Big Bear of Arkansas , published in 1846 , and A Quarter Race in Kentucky and Other Sketches , published in 1847 . Porter was instrumental in encouraging the career of Johnson Hooper . Another writer who contributed to the Spirit was Henry William Herbert , who wrote under the pen name " Frank Forester " . 
 The Panic of 1837 hurt the Spirit 's circulation , but Porter responded by buying out his main competition , the American Turf Register and Sporting Magazine and moved it to New York City . Porter edited the Turf Register until the paper stopped being published in 1844 . Porter continued the publication of annual stallion lists and the publication of lists of horses owned by breeders . However , the purchase of the American Turf Register strained Porter 's finances , and he sold the Spirit to another printer , John Richards , who retained Porter as editor . The 1840s were prosperous , but in the 1850s the magazine again encountered difficulties . Around 1855 , Porter left Richards ' paper , and in 1856 , another printer , George Wilkes , began a new sporting newspaper , which he called Porter 's Spirit of the Times , and employed Porter as editor . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In 1845 , Porter served as secretary for the New York Jockey Club , during the famous match race between the fillies Fashion and <unk> at the Union Course on May 15 , 1845 . Although the Spirit and the American Turf Register were known for their coverage of horse racing , Porter 's main sporting interest for himself was fishing . 
 Porter never married , and three of his brothers died before Porter himself caught a cold and died of consumption on July 19 , 1858 , in his house in New York City . He left unfinished a biography of his friend Wiliam Herbert . The journalist and historian Frank Luther Mott wrote that " Porter undoubtedly did much to give American sports a respectable standing . " 
 = Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. ( season 1 ) = 
 The first season of the American television series Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , which is based on the Marvel Comics organization S.H.I.E.L.D. ( Strategic Homeland Intervention , Enforcement and Logistics Division ) , revolves around the character of Phil Coulson and his team of S.H.I.E.L.D. agents , who are assigned to several dangerous cases . The cases are centered on Project Centipede and its leader , The Clairvoyant , while Coulson also searches for answers concerning his mysterious resurrection after dying in The Avengers . It is set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) , sharing continuity with the films of the franchise . The season , which aired on ABC from September 24 , 2013 , through May 13 , 2014 , over 22 episodes , was produced by ABC Studios , Marvel Television , and Mutant Enemy Productions , with Jed Whedon , Maurissa Tancharoen , and Jeffrey Bell serving as showrunners . 
 Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. was picked up for a full season by ABC in May 2013 , and filming took place primarily in Los Angeles . Clark Gregg reprises his role as Coulson from the film series , and is joined by principal cast members Ming @-@ Na Wen , Brett Dalton , Chloe Bennet , Iain De Caestecker , and Elizabeth Henstridge , while several other characters from MCU films and Marvel One @-@ Shots also appear throughout the season . Some episodes directly crossover with the films Thor : The Dark World and Captain America : The Winter Soldier , with the Winter Soldier crossover causing a retooling of the season for its final six episodes . 
 The series premiere was watched by 12 @.@ 12 million viewers , the highest ratings received by the first episode of a drama series in the United States since the pilot episode of V in 2009 . The season initially received a mixed reception , which also mirrored a decrease in ratings as the season progressed . However , reception grew more positive as the season progressed into its second half , which led to more consistent ratings . The series was renewed for a second season on May 8 , 2014 . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In August 2012 , it was announced that Marvel 's The Avengers director Joss Whedon would be involved in an upcoming project for ABC , set within the Marvel Cinematic Universe . A few weeks later , ABC ordered a pilot for a show called S.H.I.E.L.D. , to be written by Joss Whedon , Jed Whedon and Maurissa Tancharoen , directed by Joss Whedon , and executive produced by Joss Whedon , Jed Whedon , Tancharoen , Jeffrey Bell and Jeph Loeb . Jed Whedon , Tancharoen and Bell were slated to serve as the series ' showrunners . Additional executive producers on the series were Joe Quesada , Alan Fine , and Stan Lee . In April 2013 , ABC announced that the show would be titled Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , and it was officially picked up to series in May . On October 10 , 2013 , ABC announced that it had ordered a full season of 22 episodes . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 In July 2013 , Maurissa Tancharoen revealed that Joss Whedon , Jed Whedon , Jeff Bell , Paul Zbyszewski , Monica Owusu @-@ Breen , Brent Fletcher , Lauren LeFranc , Rafe Judkins , and <unk> Francis would be the writers for the season . 
 All the episodes were written with the knowledge that S.H.I.E.L.D. would be destroyed in Captain America : The Winter Soldier , with Jed Whedon saying " It 's the kind of thing that if someone told you that concept , you 'd think it was a great thing to have happen at the beginning of the show or the end of Season 3 . To have it happen in the middle of your first season is an interesting kind of riddle because we had to quickly establish what a regular day at S.H.I.E.L.D. looks like , what [ is ] it like to go on a mission , say here 's the team , and that there are also different teams all over the world . Then to blow that up , we knew the way to best illustrate that was by putting it on a personal level with our main man Coulson and to put him through the paces as a man dedicated to an organization . " Tancharoen elaborated that " We see what it actually looks like for S.H.I.E.L.D. to crumble in Captain America 2 , we see the Helicarriers literally <unk> through the Triskelion , we see the massive destruction throughout the city , but the benefit of our show is we get to dive into the emotional toll of that . To build our characters up to a point where they have established a bond , and they are working together in a way they 've never worked together before , and to strip away the foundation that they 've dedicated their lives to and the trust they 've now laid with one another , it 's a really fun thing to play . " 
 From the beginning it was decided that one of the main characters would be a traitor , with Jed Whedon saying " When we started conceptualizing the show with Joss , knowing [ Captain America : The Winter Soldier ] was coming , we knew there would have to be some sort of personal toll , and there 's the version of it where someone gets injured , but since this is an infiltration based on betrayal on a massive scale , we wanted to have it on the small scale , and have it be a really personal dagger to the heart . " The individual character arcs were laid out by the series ' creative team , with Marvel 's only initial guidelines being to work around Captain America : The Winter Soldier . 
 On whether it was Marvel 's idea or the showrunner 's idea to have Coulson promoted to Director and tasked with rebuilding S.H.I.E.L.D. at the end of the season , Jed Whedon said " They 're one in the same . They have plans for films , and we have plans to intermingle with them , and it 's the name of our show . The second to last episode is called " Ragtag " , and that 's a term we 've used ; we wanted to create this ragtag group , but within this giant organization with billions of dollars and support all over the globe and satellite feeds on their luxurious plane . Now we have a chance to start them over and figure out what it 's like to really be a secret again . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The main cast for the season includes Clark Gregg as Phil Coulson , reprising his role from the film series , Ming @-@ Na Wen as Melinda May , Brett Dalton as Grant Ward , Chloe Bennet as Skye , Iain De Caestecker as Leo Fitz , and Elizabeth Henstridge as Jemma Simmons . 
 In April 2013 , J. August Richards , one of the stars of an earlier Joss Whedon series , Angel , was also cast in the pilot in an unspecified role , later revealed to be Mike Peterson , the first live @-@ action portrayal of Deathlok , and a recurring character throughout the season . Buffy the Vampire Slayer actor Nicholas Brendon , another Whedon collaborator , was also reportedly considered for Richards ' role . In December 2013 , two recurring characters were set to be added to the series , starting with the episode " T.A.H.I.T.I. " They were described as " an African @-@ American agent who specializes in combat / weapons , and a high @-@ level S.H.I.E.L.D. agent / munitions expert who has past ties to both Coulson and Ward . " On January 13 , 2013 , Bill Paxton was cast as Agent John Garrett , " a rough @-@ and @-@ tumble former cohort of Agent Coulson with a little bit of attitude and cigar @-@ smoking swagger " , for at least four episodes of the season . Jed Whedon said that " We actually discussed Bill Paxton in the room , when we were talking about the character ... Then when he came up as an actual possibility , we couldn 't believe it . " In February , B.J. Britt was cast as Agent Triplett , described as being an associate of Garrett . Saffron Burrows , David Conrad , and Ruth Negga recur as Victoria Hand , Ian Quinn , and Raina , respectively , throughout the season . 
 In January 2013 , Cobie Smulders , who played agent Maria Hill in The Avengers , said that her character may make an appearance in the show and that her commitment to How I Met Your Mother would not prevent her from participating . Smulders reprised her role as Maria Hill in the pilot , with Joss Whedon saying , " I wanted very much to have Cobie in the pilot because as much as anyone else , she is S.H.I.E.L.D. She 's cool and commanding , and has the dry humor that plays so well with Clark 's . " Smulders returned once again in the role in the episode " Nothing Personal " . In June 2013 , Samuel L. Jackson expressed interest in guest starring as S.H.I.E.L.D. director Nick Fury , and subsequently appeared in the second episode " 0 @-@ 8 @-@ 4 " . Jackson makes a second appearance in the season finale . During the episode " The Well " , Chris Hemsworth appears as Thor via archival footage from Thor : The Dark World . Maximiliano Hernández , Titus Welliver , and Jaimie Alexander reprised their roles as Jasper Sitwell , Felix Blake , and Sif , respectively , from previous MCU films and Marvel One @-@ Shots during the season . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Storyboards were used throughout the season , to " put the director , stunts , camera , FX and the crew on the same page " , though Joss Whedon did not use them for the pilot . One of the storyboard artists , Warren Drummond , noted the process was different to that on films , because there was limited time to complete the work , and because the storyboard artists were often working with different directors for each episode . Most of the sequences storyboarded were action or science fiction sequences . The main recurring setting for the season is the Bus , a retrofitted Boeing C @-@ 17 , that serves as both the transportation and headquarters of the titular team . The Bus includes such features as a soundproof interrogation room , a forensics and research lab located on the lower deck , where Fitz and Simmons work , and a cargo hold directly outside the lab where the team parks its SUV and Lola , Coulson 's prized 1962 Corvette . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The pilot was produced almost entirely in Los Angeles to accommodate Joss Whedon 's busy schedule . Subsequent episodes were also produced in Los Angeles , as well as Culver City , California , though additional filming took place around the world , including in Paris , France , for " Pilot " , and in Stockholm , Sweden , for " Eye Spy " . 
 The stunt coordinator for the season was Tanner Gill . In September 2013 , Ming @-@ Na Wen talked about stunts and action scenes on the series , saying " I train . I work out and I have great stunt coordinators and choreographers to help me through every step and with the magic of filmmaking and editing , it all brings about her skills , to another level . That has to be very believable ... I think the hardest part is doing the actual stunts , the stunt @-@ fighting . That 's a whole other thing . I 'm not really punching out the stunt guy , nor are they hitting me , so it 's learning this dance , really , within the fight . It 's how to pull back , how to take a hit and make it look real . 
 As with many Marvel projects , secrecy was a big issue . For instance , it was a challenge keeping Samuel L. Jackson 's cameo in " 0 @-@ 8 @-@ 4 " a surprise due to " this age of tweets and spoilers " . The showrunners had been exposed to this while working on The Avengers , but with their own series they were able to see " all the details that go into keeping everything under lock and key " . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 The visual effects supervisor for the season was Mark <unk> , with Los Angeles @-@ based visual effects company FuseFX the main visual effects vendor . Kevin <unk> started the season focused on 2D supervising , but took over as lead in @-@ house visual effects supervisor after episode eight from David Altenau . Two separate production management and creative teams were established to work on the show , with most of the episodes being worked on concurrently , either two or three at a time . 
 For the Bus , Altenau explained that it " has all kinds of S.H.I.E.L.D. technology that is revealed over time as the series progresses . This includes an extra wing and engines in the rear giving the plane the ability to operate vertically for take @-@ offs and landings , and even mid @-@ flight u @-@ turns ... FuseFX was given the opportunity to design the Bus . The design included many features from the start , such as the ability to do vertical take @-@ offs and landing " . FuseFX designed the Bus , and " Extreme attention was paid when designing the textures and rigging for this asset . Half a dozen 8k maps make up the details on the plane which allows the camera to get right up to the surface of the plane without any loss of detail . A very complex rig controls every aspect of the plane from the landing gear , engine transformation , doors opening , lighting and even the wings have flex controls for the animators to sell the weight of this massive aircraft . When the engines are in vertical flight mode they have several degrees of rotation which gives the jet a lot of maneuvering ability . " 
 FuseFX also worked on Lola , Coulson 's " vintage 1962 Corvette " which was described as " a classic car and beautiful in its own right , but through digital effects , Fuse has added hovercraft capabilities . When Coulson needs it , the wheel 's rotate into a horizontal position , exposing hidden jet engine ducts that create lifting thrust through the rims of the tires , which double as turbo @-@ fan blades . We worked closely with production to help design the mechanism and the look of the hovercraft engines . It 's Stark technology designed to be consistent with the period aspect of the car . " When the real Corvette is shown transitioning to its hover mode , volumetric dust , exhaust , and particle effects are added . Occasionally , FuseFX was required to use a fully digital model of the car , which matches the real vehicle precisely . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 In addition to the series ' main theme for Coulson , Bear McCreary composed several other themes that he used throughout the season : themes for Mike Peterson and Project : Centipede were introduced in " Pilot " ; a theme for the Agents as a team was introduced in " 0 @-@ 8 @-@ 4 " ; the Skye theme was introduced in " The Asset " ; a theme for both Fitz and Simmons together was introduced in " <unk> " ; a theme for Victoria Hand and The Hub , which served as the theme for ' Big S.H.I.E.L.D. ' , as opposed to Coulson 's ' little S.H.I.E.L.D. ' team , was introduced in " The Hub " . McCreary opted not to reprise any themes from the films during the season , notably composing his own themes for the Tesseract and Asgard , which he acknowledged had already appeared in several films . A soundtrack featuring music from the first and second seasons , was released by Marvel Music digitally on September 4 , 2015 , and will be released on CD in October 2015 . 
 = = = Marvel Cinematic Universe tie @-@ ins = = = 
 In June 2013 , Clark Gregg explained how the series would tie into the Marvel Cinematic Universe films : " ... the exciting part is going to be seeing the way that Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. interacts with the S.H.I.E.L.D. component in Captain America 2 , and the other movies , and whether those movies will then affect our show . " Joss Whedon did state that the show would be autonomous from The Avengers , saying " It 's gotta be a show that works for people who haven 't seen the Marvel movies . It will please Marvel fans , I think . " He reiterated that sentiment in an interview at the 2012 Toronto International Film Festival , explaining " It 's new characters . It needs to be its own thing . It needs to be adjacent [ to The Avengers ] ... What does S.H.I.E.L.D. have that the other superheroes don 't ? And that , to me , is that they 're not superheroes , but they live in that universe . Even though they 're a big organization , that [ lack of powers ] makes them underdogs , and that 's interesting to me . " 
 Ultimately , the season featured several tie @-@ in episodes with Marvel Cinematic Universe films : the episode " The Well " takes place directly after the events of Thor : The Dark World ; the episode " T.A.H.I.T.I. " introduces the alien race the Kree to the MCU ( confirmed as such in the second season ) , members of which play a significant role in Guardians of the Galaxy ; and the episodes " End of the Beginning " and " Turn , Turn , Turn " revolve around the events of Captain America : The Winter Soldier . Due to Captain America : The Winter Soldier revealing that Hydra had infiltrated S.H.I.E.L.D. with sleeper agents , the season sees a retooling for the final six episodes . Regarding the synergy the show has with addressing events from the films , Loeb said " It 's an extremely unique experience that doesn 't exist anywhere else out there in the entertainment business " . The characters face the Hydra issue head on , while experiencing trust issues within themselves . Jed Whedon added that the Hydra element , which the show could not mention until after the release of The Winter Soldier in order to avoid spoiling the film , also attempts to address the lack of characters from the comics , a complaint fans had throughout the season , while also tying established threats such as the Clairvoyant , Project Centipede , and Deathlok , back into Hydra . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 Along with the premiere in the United States on ABC , the season began airing in Canada on CTV on September 24 , 2013 . In the United Kingdom , the season debuted three days later on Channel 4 , while it began airing on the Seven Network in Australia on October 2 , 2013 , and in New Zealand on TV2 on February 16 , 2014 . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Three episodes were screened before their initial air dates : " Pilot " at San Diego Comic @-@ Con International on July 19 , 2013 , " Eye Spy " at New York Comic Con on October 12 , 2013 , and " End of the Beginning " at Marvel 's PaleyFest panel for the series on March 23 , 2014 . Beginning with " T.A.H.I.T.I. " , all episodes leading up to The Winter Soldier crossover were marketed as Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. : Uprising . On March 18 , 2014 , ABC aired a one @-@ hour television special titled Marvel Studios : Assembling a Universe in the place of an Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. episode . The special included promotional footage for then unaired episodes of the season . 
 = = = = " The Art of Level Seven " = = = = 
 For the final six episodes , Marvel began the " Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. : The Art of Level Seven " initiative , in which a different image was released each Thursday before a new episode , depicting a first look at a key event from the upcoming episode . Bell stated that the initiative was a way to tie the series back to its comics roots , and was thought of at the beginning of the season . The production team tried to pair specific artists to the teaser posters based on their previous work and how it connected to the themes and emotion of the intended episode . The art also appeared as variant covers to select titles published by Marvel Comics in August 2014 . Jeph Loeb stated , " It 's exciting to bring this art to life once more , exclusively at comic book stores , and to give fans a chance to own the Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. art in a different format . " 
 The poster for " Turn , Turn , Turn " , created by Mike Del Mundo , depicts a maze forming the S.H.I.E.L.D. logo and show title , with a rat inside , hinting ominously at S.H.I.E.L.D. ' s corruption and a possible traitor . The poster for " Providence " , created by Paolo Rivera , highlights the rise of Hydra by showing a melded Hydra and S.H.I.E.L.D. logo , and depicts the team divided by Coulson , Raina , and Ward . The poster for " The Only Light in The Darkness " , created by Pascal Campion , focuses on Coulson and his cellist lover , Audrey , while also hinting at the villain for the episode , Marcus Daniels . The poster for " Nothing Personal " , created by Stephanie Hans , highlights Skye and Ward in a depiction of a moment from the episode , with Deathlok looming over them , and the S.H.I.E.L.D. logo in the background . The poster for " Ragtag " , created by Emma Ríos , depicts significant moments in Ward 's life , as well as Fitz – Simmons in danger , and Skye looming behind the S.H.I.E.L.D. logo , as if she is a presence that Ward cannot seem to shake . The poster for " Beginning of the End " , created by Phantom City Creative , is reminiscent of the first official poster released , with differences including the characters ' order and clothing , the poster 's coloring , a broken S.H.I.E.L.D. logo over Hydra 's , and Ward being tinted by Hydra . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The season was released on September 9 , 2014 , on Blu @-@ ray and DVD . Bonus features included behind @-@ the @-@ scenes featurettes , audio commentary , deleted scenes , a blooper reel , as well as the television special , Marvel Studios : Assembling a Universe . On November 20 , 2014 , the season became available for streaming on Netflix . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 As of September 30 , 2013 , an estimated 22 @.@ 1 million viewers have watched the premiere episode in the US through live , DVR , encore , and online viewing . In Canada , the premiere saw 2 @.@ 706 million viewers , the third highest viewership for the week on the network . In the United Kingdom , the episode debuted as the highest rated drama launch of the year , averaging 3 @.@ 23 million viewers including the + 1 channel and recordings viewed the same night , a share of 14 @.@ 8 percent of people watching TV in the UK at the time . The premiere in Australia was watched by 1 @.@ 3 million viewers , the top show of the night . In New Zealand , the episode premiered to 326 @,@ 790 viewers , the fourth highest show of the night , and the most watched show on TV2 . By the time the full season was picked up by ABC it ranked as the number one new series of the 2013 – 14 television season among adults 18 – 49 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an 86 % approval rating with an average rating of 8 / 10 based on 43 reviews . The website 's consensus reads , " Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. is sure to please comic book fans , but the strong ensemble and brisk pacing help to make this better @-@ than @-@ average superhero show accessible to non @-@ fanboys as well . " Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned a score of 74 out of 100 based on 33 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews . " 
 The early screening of the pilot at San Diego Comic @-@ Con International was met with a very positive reaction from the crowd . Critically , the initial screening of the pilot was met with mostly positive reviews , though The New York Times ' Brooks Barnes noted that " what goes over well at Comic @-@ Con does not necessarily work in the real world , " especially on a network with " Scandal moms and Dancing with the Stars grandparents " . Entertainment Weekly 's initial reactions were that if everything that made the show appealing — its continuity with the Marvel Cinematic Universe , its continuance of The Avengers storyline , and Whedon 's return to television , were stripped from it , the show would still work . However , they also questioned whether the show was accessible enough to attract a wider audience . 
 Evan Valentine , writing for Collider , divided the season into highs and lows : highs included the Captain America : The Winter Soldier crossover , with Valentine noting that " The creators had clearly known this moment was coming ... and did a great job of capitalizing [ on ] it , " as well as other tie @-@ ins with the Marvel Cinematic Universe , and he praised Gregg 's performance , stating " What made us fall in love with the character from the first Iron Man to his death in The Avengers is still alive and kicking " ; lows of the season included the episodes before the Winter Soldier tie @-@ in , with Valentine feeling that the series " became the show that had to stall its developments and character building to make way for the [ tie @-@ in ] . " He also criticized the rest of the main cast , though he did approve of the guest and supporting cast members , and he criticized the series ' use of minor comic book characters and concepts , singling out the costume design for Deathlok as " horrid " and not scary . 
 Eric Goldman of IGN gave the season a 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 , calling it " a fun , lighthearted , but fairly disposable piece of entertainment " , noting that it improved through the season , especially following the Captain America : The Winter Soldier tie @-@ in , and that by the end of the season , the series " was starting to come into its own " . Though he found the main cast 's performances to all be good , and praised the strong guest and recurring stars , Goldman found the main characterizations to be weak during the first half of the season , and he also criticized the pacing of certain overarching plotlines , noting " the mystery of Coulson 's return , Skye 's parentage , etc . – moved far too slow , with relatively minor revelations treated as though they were big reveals " . 
 Jim Steranko , an artist and writer who worked on 18 of the Nick Fury : Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D. comic books between 1966 and 1968 , was critical of the pilot episode , lamenting that " the show had no menace , no tension . " For the second episode , Steranko said that it was " too unfocused to be satisfying , " but praised Jackson 's cameo as Nick Fury as " an electrifying reminder of what the series could and should be . " In contrast , Steranko 's opinion of some later episodes in the first season were more positive , congratulating the writer and director of " The End of the Beginning " for " finding an entertaining , bravura groove that finally brings the concept to life " , and saying of the next episode " I was concerned that last week 's bravura transformation was only a fluke , but it was apparent from the opening moments that the exec lineup 's new image @-@ and @-@ edit policy was in play . " Overall , however , he found season one to be " 22 episodes of ' sanctified ' plot and character crumbs being salted with terminally @-@ sluggish velocity ( into anemic ' standalone ' stories ) " . 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 Both the way the series was affected by the destruction of S.H.I.E.L.D. in Captain America : The Winter Soldier and the way its characters are depicted rebuilding the organization have been noted by some : 
 Terri Schwartz , writing for Zap2it following the airing of " Nothing Personal " , called the series " incredible " , stating that it " got off to a rocky start " , but that changed once the Winter Soldier tie @-@ in took place . Schwartz felt that the season earned many of its early criticisms from having to " bide time " until the crossover , but " Now that it has the freedom to be the series it was always intended to , Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. has turned into a fantastic show . Its connection to Marvel 's Cinematic Universe is clear : This is where viewers get to see the fallout of Hydra 's S.H.I.E.L.D. infiltration . And the fact that the movie so influenced the show is game @-@ changing in terms of how the mediums of film and television can be interwoven . " 
 Merrill Barr , reviewing " Beginning of the End " for Forbes , reiterated this sentiment , stating that " the series finally stands its ground and stakes its claim as a member of the Marvel Cinematic Universe ... By establishing world changing consequences that don 't just affect one MCU franchise , but all of them . " He continues saying that " what Marvel 's daring to say with this season finale is " everything we do matters , and you need to pay attention to all of it . " ... It 's been a long journey , and there 's no question many viewers ' patience wore thin toward the end , but that never stopped Marvel from pushing forward to one of the most entertaining hours of television this season and finally cementing a deserved place on the small screen . " 
 Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times felt that the series " created a whole new sort of television show : One that must support , and change with , the plot twists of its film family ... never before has television been literally married to film , charged with filling in the back story and creating the connective tissue of an ongoing film franchise . " She stated that the Captain America : The Winter Soldier crossover " infused S.H.I.E.L.D. with a new energy , and helped explain , perhaps , why the show took so long to find its footing — in the writers ' room at least ... That Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. was able to succeed as a story both independent and ancillary is all but miraculous . " She concluded that the series " is now not only a very good show in its own right , it 's part of Marvel 's multiplatform city @-@ state . It faces a future of perpetual re @-@ invention , and that puts it in the exhilarating first car of television 's roller @-@ coaster ride toward possible world domination . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = Value — Beyond Price = 
 Value — Beyond Price is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film focuses on a family beset by tragedy when the father is presumed dead after his ship is lost at sea . The mother struggles to support her child and sells her possessions to a pawnbroker . When she has nothing left , save her wedding ring , the pawnbroker asks to take care of the child and the mother consents . The pawn broker gives her a pawn ticket for the girl stating " a precious jewel , a value beyond price " and tells her she can redeem it at any time . Before her death , she entrusts the ticket to a friend . Ten years pass , the shipwrecked father has discovered a great fortune on the island and is rescued by a passing steamship . The father soon realizes his wife is dead and his child is missing , but he receives the pawn ticket and decides to claim this jewel his wife had left for him . He redeems it at the pawn shop and finds it is his lost daughter . The film was released on November 29 , 1910 and it was met with positive reviews . The film survives in the Library of Congress archives . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though a modern synopsis has not been published , the original synopsis was published in The Moving Picture World on December 3 , 1910 . It states : " Captain Smith sails away on his vessel for a trip around South America , through the Pacific , leaving behind him his wife and little girl , whom he dearly loves . The ship is reported lost with all on board , with the exception of a cabin boy who is picked up in mid ocean . The captain 's wife struggles to support her child , but owing to a rapidly failing health she fights a losing battle with poverty . One by one her valued possessions find their way to the pawnshop , where the kind @-@ hearted old pawnbroker , Levy , becomes interested in the sad @-@ faced woman and pretty child , who never seem able to redeem any of their possessions . The last article of value left in Mrs. Smith 's possession is her wedding ring , and Levy refuses to take this . Instead he offers her help , which the widow proudly refuses . She insists that she can go out and get work . Levy , seeing that he can help in no other way , offers to care for little Marie , and to this the mother finally gives her consent . Half in jest , Levy gives the mother a pawn ticket for the little girl , which he fills out to read that ' a precious jewel , a value beyond price , ' has been left with him and can be redeemed ' at any time . ' The mother leaves the little one in Levy 's care and upon reaching home and finding herself mortally stricken , she puts the pawn ticket he has given her in an envelope which she entrusts to a friendly <unk> , to be given into no other hands than those of her husband should it be that he is not dead . 
 " And he is not . He has been cast up on a fertile island in the South Seas , where he lives a Crusoe @-@ like existence for 10 years , and incidentally finds buried treasure which makes him rich . He was finally rescued by a passing steamer and brought back to his own country , only to find that in his absence his wife has died , no one knows the fate of his child . He only finds , in an envelope addressed to him in the hand of his dying wife , a pawn ticket for a ' precious jewel ' which she has pledged . Thinking the jewel to be some gift of his to his wife , which she desired him to have as a remembrance , he goes to the pawnshop and is there waited upon by a sweet @-@ faced girl of 15 to whom he is at once attracted . The girl is unable to find any article in the shop with a ticket corresponding to the number on the ticket which the captain carries , and appeals to her foster father , Levy , to help her find the gentleman 's goods . Levy at once recognizes the ticket as the one he gave for his little adopted daughter . Although he dislikes to surrender the one joy of his life , he finally decides to reunite father and daughter . The latter have the old pawnbroker make his home with them , so the reunion brings happiness to all . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil or Lucius J. Henderson . Cameramen employed by the company during this era included Blair Smith , Carl Louis Gregory , and Alfred H. Moses , Jr. though none are specifically credited . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . The only known cast credit is for Marie Eline having been in the film as the young child who is pawned . The other cast credits are unknown , but many 1910 Thanhouser productions are fragmentary . In late 1910 , the Thanhouser company released a list of the important personalities in their films . The list includes G.W. Abbe , Justus D. Barnes , Frank H. Crane , Irene Crane , Marie Eline , Violet Heming , Martin J. Faust , Thomas Fortune , George Middleton , Grace Moore , John W. Noble , Anna Rosemond , Mrs. George Walters . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on November 29 , 1910 . One advertisement stated that an alternate title for the film was The Castaway Finds the Hidden Treasure , but this may be in error . The film had a wide national release , advertising theaters are known in Kansas , Texas , South Dakota , Vermont , and Missouri . The film was met with positive reviews by <unk> Moving Picture World and The New York Dramatic Mirror . The reviewer for the World highlighted that novelty of the subject , having the child being pawned only to be reclaimed by the father . Despite the novelty of the plot , the reviewer stated , " While the play attracts because of this novelty , it still has dramatic interest , dramatic because it tells a life story in a simple way . Such stories are the most interesting since there are numerous persons who see it that can duplicate it either in their own experience or the experience of some of their friends or acquaintances . " The reviewer for the Mirror was critical of the film , stating the plot was improbable , but it was well @-@ acted . The only fault identified by the reviewer was the improper depiction of the poor , for the mother could not keep her child , but kept her maid . The reviewer also noted that the maid also did not age after the apparent ten year time @-@ skip . 
 In 2001 , the Thanhouser Company Film Preservation acquired an original 35 mm nitrate film print from John Conning . The intention was to deposit the film in the Library of Congress . The surviving print is 925 feet in length , but it is not listed as being a whole or partial print . 
 = Meteorological history of Hurricane Luis = 
 The meteorological history of Hurricane Luis spanned sixteen days between August 27 to September 11 , 1995 . The storm originated from an area of low pressure associated with a tropical wave on August 26 . The following day , the low became sufficiently organized to be classified as a tropical depression , while tracking general westward . By August 29 , the depression intensified into a tropical storm and was given the name Luis by the National Hurricane Center . Luis attained hurricane status the following day as an eye began to develop . On September 1 the cyclone intensified into a major hurricane — a storm with winds of 111 mph ( 178 km / h ) or higher — and further strengthened to a Category 4 hurricane later that day . 
 Hurricane Luis maintained wind speeds of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) for nearly two days and developed a symmetrical structure with a well @-@ defined 46 mi ( 74 km ) wide eye . Early on September 3 , winds within the eyewall reached 140 mph ( 225 km / h ) . Luis maintained this intensity until September 5 , shortly before passing through the Leeward Islands with 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) winds . The hurricane maintained Category 4 status until September 7 as it tracked towards the northwest . Gradual weakening took place for several days and by September 9 , the hurricane passed about 200 mi ( 320 km ) west of Bermuda . The next day , Luis began to undergo an extratropical transition and the storm 's forward motion rapidly increased . Early on September 11 , Luis made landfall on the Avalon Peninsula as a strong Category 1 hurricane with winds of 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) . The same day , a 30 metres ( 98 ft ) wave produced by Luis struck an ocean liner . This wave is the largest ever recorded , Several hours later , the storm completed its extratropical transition as it began to be absorbed into an approaching trough . The following day , the remnants of Luis were fully absorbed into the trough near the southern coast of Greenland . 
 = = Formation and intensification = = 
 On August 26 , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) began monitoring a tropical wave between the western coast of Africa and the Cape Verde Islands . Later that day , a low @-@ level circulation center formed beneath the wave and began strengthening . Convective activity associated with the low became increasingly organized , and at around 1200 UTC on August 27 , the NHC classified the system as Tropical Depression Thirteen ; at the time , it was located approximately 255 miles ( 410 kilometres ) south @-@ southeast of Praia , Cape Verde . Operationally , the NHC did not begin to issue advisories on the depression until 2100 UTC on August 28 . Tracking nearly due west in response to an anticyclone to the north and an area of moderate wind shear , the depression was forecast to slowly strengthen over the next several days . Early on August 29 , satellite intensity estimates of maximum sustained winds within the depression reached 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) , indicating that it had intensified into a tropical storm . At this time , the NHC assigned the name Luis to the system . Gradual strengthening took place throughout August 29 as Luis tracked towards the west @-@ northwest . Increased wind shear displaced convection from the center of circulation , preventing further intensification . 
 By August 30 , strong outflow developed around Luis despite convection remaining displaced from the low pressure center . Once the shear began to relent , shower and thunderstorm activity redeveloped around the center , allowing the storm to intensify . Around 1800 UTC that day , Luis attained Category 1 hurricane status on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale ; however , operationally Luis was not upgraded to a hurricane until 0900 UTC on August 31 . The newly upgraded hurricane steadily intensified as banding features developed around the periphery of the cyclone . By the morning of August 31 , cold cloud tops surrounded a developing eye . Around this time , Luis was located due south of the area of high pressure and tracking steadily towards the west @-@ northwest . Further development resulted in the appearance of a ragged eye appearing on visible satellite images . Winds within the eyewall were estimated at 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) , making Luis a low @-@ end Category 2 hurricane . Later that day , the storm became increasingly organized , with a symmetrical structure and a well @-@ defined center . The NHC forecast the hurricane to peak as a Category 3 hurricane in 36 hours before interacting with Hurricane Iris and Tropical Storm Karen . 
 = = Peak intensity and the Leeward Islands = = 
 Early on September 1 , Hurricane Luis strengthened into a Category 3 hurricane with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) ; upper @-@ level outflow continued to improve throughout the day , allowing further intensification . Maintaining its structure , Luis further intensified to a Category 4 hurricane with winds of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) . Subsequent to doing so , its intensity remained steady for 42 hours while it tracked nearly due west . Early on September 3 , satellite intensity estimates indicated that the storm strengthened slightly , attaining its peak winds of 140 mph ( 225 km / h ) at around 0600 UTC . Continuing on a westward track , the forward motion of the hurricane decreased to 13 mph ( 20 km / h ) later on September 3 . When Luis was about 690 mi ( 1 @,@ 110 km ) east of the Lesser Antilles , a Hurricane Hunter reconnaissance flight into the storm confirmed satellite intensity estimates . Flight level winds around the eye of Luis were recorded at 165 mph ( 265 km / h ) , which corresponds to surface winds of 140 mph ( 225 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 944 mbar ( 27 @.@ 87 inHg ) . 
 With a Category 4 hurricane forecast to track directly over the Leeward Islands , hurricane warnings were issued for several islands by September 4 . The ridge located north of Luis began to weaken by this time , leading to slower forward movement to 12 mph ( 19 km / h ) . Outflow to the north of the hurricane weakened slightly as a distinct area of dry air developed around the weakening ridge . Late on September 4 , the hurricane 's eye began to shrink , a possible indication of strengthening . An area of low pressure over Florida cut off from a trough would eventually cause Luis to slow significantly and cause a northward turn . On September 5 , Hurricane Luis weakened slightly , with winds decreasing to 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) , before tracking directly over Barbuda . The eyewall of the storm brushed Antigua , St. Barthelemy , St. Martin and Anguilla . Sustained winds on these islands were recorded up to 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) with gusts up to 155 mph ( 250 km / h ) . The eye of Luis was estimated to be 46 mi ( 74 km ) in diameter at this time . Operationally , the NHC briefly downgraded Luis to a Category 3 hurricane as it passed through the islands due to the formation of concentric eyewalls ; however , in post @-@ season analysis , it was determined that the storm never weakened below Category 4 status while passing through the Leeward Islands . 
 = = Bermuda and dissipation = = 
 Tracking away from the Leeward Islands on September 6 , Luis maintained Category 4 status for another 24 hours before downgrading to a Category 3 hurricane . A strong mid- to upper @-@ level low located over the Gulf of Mexico was forecast to steer the hurricane in a general northeastern direction . From September 6 to 7 , a ship named the Teal Arrow sailed directly into the center , encountering wind gusts of up to 145 mph ( 235 km / h ) and seas to 50 feet ( 15 m ) . The storm 's eye further shrank to a diameter of 23 mi ( 37 km ) . The NHC anticipated re @-@ strengthening as the central pressure decreased . The winds failed to intensity ; however , the central pressure continued to decrease until 0000 UTC on September 8 , when it fell to 935 mbar ( 27 @.@ 61 inHg ) , the lowest recorded during the storm 's existence . Tracking around the periphery of the ridge of high pressure , Luis began to slow . Late on September 7 , a double eye featured developed , indicating an eyewall replacement cycle , with the strongest winds being recorded in the outer eyewall . By the afternoon of September 8 , the eye became cloud filled , indicating weakening ; however , the inner eyewall dissipated later that day , leaving a large , 52 mi ( 84 km ) wide eye in its place . Tracking towards the north @-@ northwest , Luis was forecast to move over an area of cooler waters upwelled by Hurricane Felix . 
 Early on September 9 , Luis turned towards the north and weakened to a Category 2 hurricane , with winds of 110 mph ( 165 km / h ) . Several hours later , the hurricane made its closest approach to Bermuda , passing about 200 mi ( 320 km ) west of the island . Later that day , the storm began to accelerate as it traveled northeast ahead of a strong trough located to the northwest of Luis . During the afternoon of September 10 , Hurricane Luis began to undergo an extratropical transition as it rapidly approached the Canadian coastline . Due to the rapid movement of the storm , significant weakening did not occur until Luis was at an unusually high latitude . 
 During the afternoon of September 10 , the central pressure of the storm decreased to 961 mbar ( 28 @.@ 38 inHg ) but sustained winds did not exceed 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) according to the NHC . Luis maintained this intensity until it made landfall on the Avalon Peninsula in eastern Newfoundland early on September 11 . While tracking over Newfoundland , cold , dry air became entrenched in Luis 's circulation and the system began to merge with the approaching trough . The NHC issued their final advisory on Hurricane Luis at 0900 UTC on September 11 as it tracked nearly 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) to the northeast and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . The extratropical remnants persisted for 30 more hours over the North Atlantic Ocean before being absorbed by the trough near the southern coast of Greenland late on September 12 . 
 = = Records = = 
 When Tropical Depression Thirteen strengthened into Tropical Storm Luis on August 29 , it marked the earliest date on which the twelfth named storm of any season formed , surpassing the previous record set by Tropical Storm Twelve of the 1933 season . Shortly before becoming extratropical , Hurricane Luis was moving at 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) , becoming among the fastest Atlantic hurricanes in recorded history . On September 11 , a 30 metres ( 98 ft ) wave struck an ocean liner . This wave is the largest ever recorded , though Hurricane Ivan in 2004 may have produced a wave up to 40 metres ( 130 ft ) high off the coast of Mexico . 
 = Brookville Tunnel = 
 The Brookville Tunnel ( also Brooksville Tunnel ) was a historic railroad tunnel engineered by Claudius Crozet during the construction of the Blue Ridge Railroad in the 1850s . The tunnel was part of a series of four tunnels used to cross the Blue Ridge Mountains of Virginia for the Virginia Central Railroad of the United States . The Brookville Tunnel was the second tunnel used to cross the mountains from the east ( the easternmost being the Greenwood Tunnel ) , and was located approximately 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) west of the village of Greenwood , Virginia . 
 During its construction , numerous cave @-@ ins and landslides occurred because of the fragile and weak rock the tunnel passed through , and at one point , an outbreak of cholera forced work to stop . By October 1856 the tunnel was completed at a cost of $ 114 @,@ 600 , having been lined with a thick elliptical brick arch to hold back the earth . The Brookville Tunnel was used by the Virginia Central Railroad , and after 1868 , the line 's successor , the Chesapeake and Ohio Railroad . After the reorganization of the line in 1878 as the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway , the tunnel continued to be used until it was demolished and replaced by a cut during the construction of Interstate 64 in the 1960s and 1970s , at which point it was one of only two of Crozet 's original four tunnels still in use . 
 = = History = = 
 On March 5 , 1849 , the Virginia General Assembly passed an act to incorporate the Blue Ridge Railroad . This railroad was to construct a rail line over the Blue Ridge Mountains for the Louisa railroad ( renamed as the Virginia Central Railroad in February 1850 ) from a point near Blair Park at the eastern base of the mountains to Waynesboro in the Shenandoah Valley via Rockfish Gap . Claudius Crozet was appointed as chief engineer of the Blue Ridge Railroad and developed a plan to cross the mountains using a series of four tunnels . The first tunnel from the east was the Greenwood Tunnel , built through a difficult and insecure ridge near Greenwood . Brookville tunnel was located 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) west of the Greenwood Tunnel , also built through a small offshoot spur of the Blue Ridge Mountains . 
 Construction on the Brookville Tunnel , or the " middle " or " second tunnel " as it was then called , was begun sometime between 1849 and 1851 . The earth encountered at Brookville was of a much weaker quality than at the Greenwood Tunnel , rendering the digging of the tunnel both an extremely dangerous and difficult task . Although the eastern section of the ridge was composed of firm and sturdy rock , the majority of the tunnel passed through a mixture of frail slate that was formed at a steep angle , soapstone , and clay . When exposed to air , this mixture would often disintegrate causing large amounts of earth to fall into the tunnel bore . On two occasions during the tunnel 's construction , though great care was taken to provide temporary support , major cave @-@ ins occurred forming craters on top of the ridge , as much as 150 feet ( 46 m ) above the tunnel . Another slide occurred on the outside of the western portal that blocked the entrance to the tunnel and prevented workers from repairing the damage from the two internal cave @-@ ins . Rocks often fell down upon the timbers under which the men worked , creating sounds described as " resembling that of distant thunder " . The weakness of the earth , especially in the western sections , necessitated the implementation of a strong arch throughout approximately 500 feet ( 150 m ) of the tunnel and a durable brick lining . Crozet described the nature of the work on the tunnel in an 1854 letter : 
 The Brooksville Tunnel is the most difficult work of the kind , I have seen any record of : at the Western entrance , the pressure of the big slides actually causes the bottom to surge up , as is sometime the case in coal mines ; in view of the sliding tendency and immense pressure of this ground , it will be advisable to enter on that side with an invested arch to prevent a collapse ... This work is vastly more difficult than the Greenwood Tunnel was , though it was not , by any means , an easy safe job . 
 By this time , the tunnel had come to be known as the " Brooksville Tunnel , " after a small stagecoach stop and inn nearby where Crozet 's headquarters was located ; in later years , the " s " was dropped and the tunnel was simply referred to as the " Brookville Tunnel . " In late summer of 1854 , an epidemic of cholera broke out among the Irish workers at the tunnel . In a letter to the Virginia Board of Public Works , Crozet states that the epidemic began at the eastern end of the tunnel where around 25 of the total 150 workers perished from the disease . The disease then spread to the western end where another eight workers died before work ceased . During this outbreak , little work could be done on the tunnel , adding yet another delay to the difficult work the Brookville Tunnel posed . 
 While work on the tunnels continued , the Virginia Central Railroad , eager to connect its eastern division to the line under construction in the Shenandoah Valley , developed plans to use temporary tracks to bypass the incomplete Blue Ridge Railroad . As was done over Rockfish Gap to the west , a temporary track approximately 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) long was proposed by the Virginia Central Railroad 's Chief Engineer , Charles Ellet , Jr . , and constructed around the Brookville Tunnel as the digging continued . Due to the many setbacks and difficulties encountered , the tunnel was not completed until October 1856 , just two months prior to the hole @-@ through of the 4 @,@ 273 @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 302 m ) Blue Ridge Tunnel at the top of Rockfish Gap . Remarkably , with the exception of the cholera outbreak , no one was injured during the dangerous work completing the Brookville tunnel . The Virginia Central soon after began routing trains through the Brookville tunnel , avoiding the short temporary track . 
 During the American Civil War ( 1861 – 1865 ) , a large crack was found within the tunnel 's arch , being in some locations as much as 4 inches ( 10 cm ) wide . Upon examination of the earth above the tunnel , it was found that a section of the earth had slipped , and was resting on the tunnel walls . With the tunnel in danger of collapsing , a plan to address the tunnel 's structural issues was developed that put in place a second arch below the original . The new arch was started 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) above the rails and rose to a peak just above what was necessary to clear a brakeman riding atop a railroad car ( at that time , 17 feet or 5 @.@ 2 metres ) , around 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) below the original arch . Because of the ongoing war and the lack of funds and resources , the new arching could only be completed in 10 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) segments . It was deemed necessary to re @-@ arch a total of 450 feet ( 140 m ) of the tunnel , and as of 1864 , 260 feet ( 79 m ) had been completed at a cost of $ 23 @,@ 390 @.@ 73 ( Confederate dollars ) . 
 After the war , the tunnel continued to be used by the Virginia Central Railroad , and after 1868 , the Chesapeake and Ohio Railroad . The Chesapeake and Ohio Railroad was reorganized as the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway in 1878 , and continued to route trains through the tunnel up until the tunnel 's demolition with the construction of Interstate 64 in the 1960s and 1970s . At the time of the tunnel 's demolition , it was one of only two of Crozet 's original four tunnels of the Blue Ridge Railroad still in operation ( the other , which as of 2013 is still in use , was the 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) Little Rock Tunnel ) . Today , Interstate 64 passes over the cut that replaced the Brookville Tunnel . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The Brookville Tunnel was constructed in an elliptical form , a design typical of tunnel construction during the 1800s and also used on the Blue Ridge and Greenwood Tunnels . In a November 1849 report , Crozet describes the design to be used on the tunnels : 
 The shape I have adopted is that of an ellipse , formed by bisecting , on each side , the horizontal ordinates of a circle of 32 feet diameter , down to its center , below which the sides are to be made vertical , if no arch is necessary lower down ; otherwise , the ellipse is to continue down to the bottom and to be shaped all round with bricks , stones , or iron , as may appear most eligible . This shape leaves ample room for the cars , and , by contracting the roof , is more secure than a semicircle of 16 feet diameter . 
 Portions of the Brookville tunnel were lined with brick for added strength , with the brickwork originally contracted to Joseph <unk> , a local brickmaker . Because of the poor quality of <unk> 's bricks , Crozet decided to use these bricks on the Greenwood Tunnel to the east , which was a stronger bore than Brookville . Crozet estimated in 1854 that the total number of bricks required for the entire tunnel would be upwards of 750 @,@ 000 . After examining the offers of multiple brickmakers , the Virginia Board of Public Works contracted Robert Harris to provide the bricks for the Brookville Tunnel . The resulting arch was between 3 – 4 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 – 1 @.@ 2 m ) in thickness over the entire length of the tunnel , and formed an opening approximately 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) high and , at the extreme , 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) wide . 
 During the construction , the timbers that were used to support the fragile sections of the tunnel to be arched were left in place after the arch was completed , as it was thought too hazardous to remove them . When the earth slip occurred during the Civil War , these remaining timbers acted as levers , furthering the cracking and structural instability of the tunnel . As the new arch was constructed , the old timbers were removed , and the space in between the new and old walls was filled with brick and cement . 
 The original brick portals were replaced by the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway in 1928 with concrete portals , as part of a series of tunnel upgrades across the line beginning in the 1920s . The new portals no longer bore the distinctive elliptical design of Crozet 's original , but had vertical sides and a semi @-@ circular arch . 
 = = Construction Costs = = 
 The total cost to complete the Brookville Tunnel amounted to $ 114 @,@ 600 , with a cost per foot , at a length of 869 feet ( 265 m ) , of $ 131 @.@ 90 . By comparison , the cost per foot of the 538 @-@ foot ( 164 m ) Greenwood Tunnel was $ 138 @.@ 30 , the 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) Little Rock Tunnel was $ 123 @.@ 90 , and the 4 @,@ 273 @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 302 m ) Blue Ridge Tunnel was $ 108 @.@ 60 . Costs at the Brookville Tunnel were greatly increased from the expected by the frail and insecure earth encountered , contrary to what originally appeared to be solid rock . Workers , both inside and outside laborers , were paid approximately $ 1 @.@ 12 per day , while miners were paid $ 1 @.@ 37 per day , equivalent to $ 29 @.@ 5 and $ 36 @.@ 08 , respectively , today . 
 = Menominee Tribe v. United States = 
 Menominee Tribe v. United States , 391 U.S. 404 ( 1968 ) , is a case in which the Supreme Court ruled that the Menominee Indian Tribe kept their historical hunting and fishing rights even after the federal government ceased to recognize the tribe . It was a landmark decision in Native American case law . 
 The Menominee Indian Tribe had entered into a series of treaties with the United States which did not specifically state that they had hunting and fishing rights . In 1961 , Congress terminated the tribe 's federal recognition , ending its right to govern itself , federal support of health care and education programs , police and fire protection , and tribal rights to land . In 1963 , three members of the tribe were charged with violating Wisconsin 's hunting and fishing laws on land which had been a reservation for over 100 years . The tribe members were acquitted , but when the state appealed , the Wisconsin Supreme Court held that the Menominee tribe no longer had hunting and fishing rights due to the termination action by Congress . 
 The tribe sued the United States for compensation in the U.S. Court of Claims , which ruled that tribal members still had hunting and fishing rights and that Congress had not abrogated those rights . The opposite rulings by the state and federal courts brought the issue to the Supreme Court . In 1968 , the Supreme Court held that the tribe retained its hunting and fishing rights under the treaties involved and the rights were not lost after federal recognition was ended by the Menominee Indian Termination Act without a clear and unequivocal statement by Congress removing those rights . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Early treaties = = = 
 Ancestors of the Menominee Indian Tribe may have lived in the states of Wisconsin and Michigan for the last 10 @,@ 000 years . Their traditional territory was about 10 million acres ( 4 million hectares ) . They first acknowledged that they were under the protection of the United States in 1817 in the Treaty of St. Louis . In 1825 and 1827 , the treaties of Prairie du Chien and Butte des Morts answered boundary questions . None of the early treaties addressed hunting and fishing rights . In 1831 , the tribe entered into the Treaty of Washington , which ceded about 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 ha ) to the federal government . These two treaties reserved hunting and fishing rights for the tribe on the ceded land until the President of the United States ordered the land surveyed and sold to settlers . In 1836 , the tribe entered into the Treaty of Cedar Point , under which 4 @,@ 184 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 693 @,@ 000 ha ) were ceded to the federal government . The treaty did not mention hunting or fishing rights . 
 In 1848 , the tribe entered into another treaty with the United States , the Treaty of Lake <unk> , which ceded the tribe 's remaining approximately 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 ha ) in exchange for 600 @,@ 000 acres ( 240 @,@ 000 ha ) west of the Mississippi River in present @-@ day Minnesota . This treaty was contingent on the tribe examining the land proposed for them and accepting it as suitable . In 1850 , Chief Oshkosh led a delegation to the Crow Wing area and determined that the land was not suitable for the tribe , mainly because the proposed reservation was located between two warring tribes , the Dakota and Ojibwe . Oshkosh then pressed for a new treaty , stating that he " preferred a home somewhere in Wisconsin , for the poorest region in Wisconsin was better than the Crow Wing . " 
 = = = Treaty of 1854 = = = 
 The tribe had been living in an area near the Wolf River . They entered into the Treaty of Wolf River with the United States in 1854 . The United States set aside 276 @,@ 480 acres ( 111 @,@ 890 ha ) of land for a reservation in present @-@ day Menominee County , Wisconsin . In return , the tribe ceded the land in Minnesota back to the federal government . None of the previous treaties except the Treaty of Washington addressed the tribe 's retained hunting and fishing rights , but stated that the reservation was " to be held as Indian lands are held " . 
 Since the Treaty of Wolf River , this area has been the tribe 's home , and they were free from state taxation , regulation and court jurisdiction . Of the original land , 230 @,@ 000 acres ( 93 @,@ 000 ha ) of prime timberland remained under the tribe 's control , while the remaining land was transferred to the Mahican and Lenape ( the latter also known as the Delaware or Munsee ) tribes . During this period , the Menominee enjoyed complete freedom to regulate hunting and fishing on the reservation , with the acquiescence of Wisconsin . 
 = = = Tribal termination = = = 
 In the mid- to late @-@ 1940s , the Menominee tribe was considered by a government survey to identify tribes for termination , a process in which federal recognition of the tribe would be withdrawn and the tribe would no longer be dependent on the Bureau of Indian Affairs ( BIA ) to support them . The Menominee were thought to be a tribe that could be terminated because they were one of the richest tribes in the nation . The federal government thought that termination would allow the tribal members to be assimilated into mainstream American culture , becoming hard @-@ working , tax @-@ paying , productive citizens . In 1954 , Congress terminated the federally recognized status of the tribe with the Menominee Indian Termination Act . According to the terms of the Termination Act , the federally recognized status was to end in 1958 . The tribe and the state of Wisconsin successfully lobbied for a delay in the implementation of termination until 1961 . The tribe was opposed to termination for a number of reasons ; their concerns included the loss of tribal culture , the loss of land due to tax liens , the possibility of bankruptcy and loss of the tribal timber industry , and the lack of tribal members who were trained to run a county government . The state of Wisconsin was concerned that with no industry for the tribe to tax , the state would be responsible for the large financial outlay that would be required to maintain governmental operations for the former reservation . 
 On termination , the Menominee , which was one of the wealthiest tribes prior to termination , became one of the poorest . In 1954 , the tribe 's timber operations allowed it to be self @-@ sufficient . The tribe , which owned utility companies , paid for a hospital , BIA salaries , local schools , and a stipend to tribal members . The tribe was forced to use its reserve funds to develop a termination plan that they did not want and instead of having a reserve , they entered into termination with a $ 300 @,@ 000 deficit . Menominee County was created out of the old reservation boundaries and the tribe immediately had to finance its own police and fire protection . Without federal support and with no tax base , the situation became dire . The tribe closed the hospital , sold its utility company , and contracted those services to neighboring counties . The Menominee Enterprises , Inc . , formed to care for the tribe 's needs after termination , was unable to pay property taxes and began to consider selling off tribal property . Many Menominee tribal members believed that the sponsor of the termination bill , Senator Arthur Wilkins of Utah , intended to force the loss of rich tribal lands to non @-@ Indians . In 1962 , the state of Wisconsin took the position that the hunting and fishing rights were abrogated by the termination act and that the tribal members were subject to state hunting and fishing regulations . With the poverty in the former reservation , the loss of hunting rights meant the loss of one of their last remaining means of survival . 
 = = = State enforcement actions = = = 
 In 1962 , tribal members Joseph L. <unk> , William J. <unk> , and Francis <unk> were charged with violating state hunting and fishing regulations . All three admitted to the acts in open court , but claimed that the Wolf River Treaty gave them the right to hunt . The state trial court agreed and acquitted the three . The state was given leave to pursue a writ of error and appealed to the Wisconsin Supreme Court to answer whether the Termination Act canceled those rights retained by treaty . 
 The Wisconsin Supreme Court in State v. <unk> held that the treaty rights were terminated by Congress . In analyzing the case , the Wisconsin Supreme Court first had to determine whether the tribe had hunting and fishing rights under treaties with the United States . It found that although the Wolf River Treaty did not specifically mention hunting and fishing rights , the term " to be held as Indian lands are held " was clear . Indians have always been able to hunt and fish on their own land , and if a term in a treaty with Indians is ambiguous , the Wisconsin Supreme Court found that it must be resolved in favor of the tribe . Since the tribe originally had hunting and fishing rights under the treaty , the Wisconsin Supreme Court then looked to determine whether Congress had removed those rights by enacting the Menominee Termination Act . The Wisconsin Supreme Court held that Congress had used its plenary power to abrogate those rights . 
 The Wisconsin Supreme Court placed special emphasis on the phrase " all statutes of the United States which affect Indians because of their status as Indians shall no longer be applicable to the members of the tribe , and the laws of the several States shall apply to the tribe and its members in the same manner as they apply to other citizens or persons within their jurisdiction . " The Wisconsin Supreme Court held that the latter section was controlling , despite the tribal members ' argument that hunting rights were retained by treaty rather than by statute . The Wisconsin Supreme Court held that the tribe had lost their hunting and fishing rights . The tribal members appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court , which declined to hear the appeal . 
 = = = Federal Court of Claims = = = 
 The Menominee sued in the U.S. Court of Claims to recover compensation for the loss of their hunting and fishing rights . The Court of Claims first clarified that the Menominee Termination Act did not abolish the tribe or its membership , but merely ended federal supervision of the tribe . Since the Menominee was still a tribe , although not one under federal trusteeship , the tribe had a right to assert a claim arising out of the Wolf River Treaty in accordance with the Indian Claims Commission Act and the Tucker Act . 
 The Court of Claims looked at whether the tribe had hunting and fishing rights and drew the same conclusion as the Wisconsin Supreme Court — that the terms of the treaty had to be resolved in the favor of the tribe , citing The Menominee Tribe of Indians v. United States , 95 <unk> 232 ( <unk> , 1941 ) . In that decision , the Court of Claims had observed that the reason the tribe had agreed to the site of the reservation was that it was well suited for hunting , with plenty of game . The hunting rights by treaty were therefore confirmed . 
 The Court of Claims had to determine whether the Menominee Termination Act had taken away that right . If it had , the tribe would have a valid claim for compensation ; but if not , then there would be no compensation . On April 14 , 1967 , the Court of Claims denied the claim , stating that the hunting and fishing rights had not been abrogated by the Termination Act . In arriving at this decision , it said that the legislative history included two witnesses who stated that the Act would not affect hunting and fishing rights acquired by treaty , but would abrogate any such rights acquired by statute . Additionally , the Court of Claims observed that Congress also amended Public Law 280 so that Indian hunting and fishing rights were protected in Wisconsin . The decision contradicted the decision of the Wisconsin Supreme Court . 
 On October 9 , 1967 , the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to hear the appeal and granted certiorari ( a writ to the lower court to send the case to them for review ) to resolve the conflict between the Wisconsin Supreme Court and the federal Court of Claims . 
 = = Supreme Court = = 
 = = = Argument = = = 
 In most appeals , the parties argue opposing positions . In this case , both the <unk> ( the Menominee ) and the appellant ( the United States ) argued that the decision of the Court of Claims should be affirmed . The State of Wisconsin , as amicus curiae , argued that the Court of Claims ruling should be reversed . 
 The tribe was represented by Charles A. Hobbs of Washington , D.C. The tribe argued that the Menominee Termination Act did not extinguish treaty rights , but instead had two purposes ; to terminate federal supervision of the tribe and to transfer to the state general criminal and civil jurisdiction — which had already been accomplished by Public Law 280 and that law expressly preserved hunting and fishing rights . In the event that the court would decide that the hunting and fishing rights were extinguished , then the tribe should receive compensation for the loss of the rights . 
 The United States was represented by Louis F. Claiborne , assistant to the U.S. Solicitor General . The United States also argued that the Menominee Termination Act did not extinguish hunting and fishing rights under the 1854 treaty and therefore the tribe was not due compensation from the United States . Claiborne also argued that whatever regulatory rights which were held by the federal government were transferred to the state of Wisconsin by the termination act . 
 The case was originally argued on January 22 , 1968 . During oral argument , some of the justices were concerned that the state of Wisconsin was not a party to the case . Following oral arguments , the court called for <unk> and requested that Wisconsin present an oral argument in addition to the brief it had filed with the court . Justice Marshall recused himself from the case , as he had been the U.S. Solicitor General the previous year and had participated in the government 's preparation of the case . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 On April 25 , 1968 , the case was <unk> . The tribe was again represented by Hobbs , who made the same basic argument that the hunting and fishing rights were not extinguished . The state of Wisconsin was represented by Bronson La Follette , the Attorney General of Wisconsin . La Follette argued that the plain language of the termination act not only ended federal supervision of the tribe , but extinguished the tribe and with it all treaty rights . He argued that the Court of Claims ruling was incorrect and should be reversed , and that the tribe was due compensation from the federal government . The United States was again represented by Claiborne , who reiterated his earlier argument . 
 = = = Opinion of the court = = = 
 Justice William O. Douglas delivered the opinion of the court . In a 6 @-@ 2 decision , the ruling of the U.S. Court of Claims was affirmed , ruling that the tribe retained its hunting and fishing rights under the treaty . Douglas noted that Public Law 280 had been enacted and was fully in force for approximately seven years before the Termination Act became effective . The section of that law that dealt with Wisconsin provided that hunting and fishing rights in " Indian Country " were protected from state regulation and action . Thus from 1954 until termination in 1961 , the Menominee 's hunting and fishing rights were not interfered with by Wisconsin . The Termination Act stated that all federal statutes dealing with the tribe were no longer in force , but Douglas noted that it was silent with regard to treaties . The act did not specifically address the hunting and fishing rights , and Douglas stated that the U.S. Supreme Court would " decline to construe the Termination Act as a backhanded way of abrogating the hunting and fishing rights of these Indians . " He noted that in a similar bill for the Klamath Tribe , there was a discussion on paying the tribe to buy out their hunting and fishing rights , a clear indication that Congress was aware of the implications . Douglas found it hard to believe that Congress would subject the United States to a claim for compensation without an explicit statement to that effect . He found that without a specific abrogation of those rights , the tribe retained those rights . 
 = = = Dissent = = = 
 Justice Potter Stewart , joined by Justice Hugo Black , dissented . Stewart acknowledged that the Wolf River Treaty unquestionably conferred hunting and fishing rights on the tribe and its members . He stated that the Termination Act subjected the members of the tribe to the same laws that all other citizens of Wisconsin were held to , including hunting and fishing regulations . In Stewart 's opinion , Public Law 280 had no bearing on the case and the rights were not protected by the Termination Act , so they were lost . Stewart did note that this would have also made the claim for compensation valid under Shoshone Tribe v. United States , regardless of whether Congress intended it or not . He would have reversed the decision of the Court of Claims . 
 = = Subsequent developments = = 
 Menominee Tribe v. United States is a landmark case in Native American law , primarily in the area of reserved tribal rights . It has been used in college courses to explain tribal sovereignty rights , and that tribes retain some rights even if the tribe has been terminated — as the Menominee tribe was . The decision in the case has affected subsequent legislation , such as the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act , in which Congress expressly extinguished all aboriginal rights . The case has been discussed internationally , for example in Australia regarding the relevance of indigenous or aboriginal title . 
 = = = Law reviews and journals = = = 
 The case has been cited in over 300 law review articles as of October 2013 . A consistent point made in numerous articles is that while Congress may terminate tribal and treaty rights , it must show a " specific intent to abrogate them " . It is repeatedly cited by cases and law reviews to show that the court will construe laws and treaties , where ambiguous , in favor of the tribes . Judges and legal experts have noted that hunting and fishing rights are valuable property rights , and if the government takes away those rights it must compensate those who hold the rights for their loss . Courts must also construe treaty rights and statutes liberally in favor of the Indians , even when the treaty does not specifically speak of hunting and fishing . 
 = = = Restoration of federal recognition = = = 
 In 1973 , Congress repealed termination and restored federal recognition of the Menominee tribe . The Menominee Restoration Act was signed by President Richard Nixon ; it repealed the Menominee Indian Termination Act , reopened the tribal rolls , re @-@ established the trust status and provided for the reformation of tribal government . The tribe was the first terminated tribe to be restored to trust and recognition status . The Restoration Act signaled the end of the termination era . 
 = Belgian Congo in World War II = 
 The involvement of the Belgian Congo ( the modern @-@ day Democratic Republic of Congo ) in World War II began with the German invasion of Belgium in May 1940 . Despite Belgium 's surrender , the Congo remained in the conflict on the Allied side , administered by the Belgian government in exile , and provided much @-@ needed raw materials , most notably gold and uranium , to Britain and the United States . 
 Congolese troops of the Force Publique fought alongside British forces in the East African Campaign , and a Congolese medical unit served in Madagascar and in the Burma Campaign . Congolese formations also acted as garrisons in Egypt , Nigeria and Palestine . 
 The increasing demands placed on the Congolese population by the colonial authorities during the war , however , provoked strikes , riots and other forms of resistance , particularly from the indigenous Congolese . These were repressed , often violently , by the Belgian colonial authorities . The Congo 's comparative prosperity during the conflict led to a wave of post @-@ war immigration from Belgium , bringing the white population to 100 @,@ 000 by 1950 , as well as a period of industrialisation that continued throughout the 1950s . The role played by Congolese uranium during the hostilities caused the country to be of interest to the Soviet Union during the Cold War . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following World War I , Belgium possessed two colonies in Africa — the Belgian Congo , which it had controlled since its annexation of the Congo Free State in 1908 , and Ruanda @-@ Urundi , a former German colony that had been mandated to Belgium in 1924 by the League of Nations . The Belgian colonial military numbered 18 @,@ 000 soldiers , making it one of the largest standing colonial armies in Africa at the time . 
 The Belgian government followed a policy of neutrality during the interwar years . Nazi Germany invaded on 10 May 1940 and , after 18 days of fighting , Belgium surrendered on 28 May and was occupied by German forces . King Leopold III , who had surrendered to the Germans , was kept a prisoner for the rest of the war . Just before the fall of Belgium , its government , including the Minister of the Colonies Albert de <unk> , fled first to Bordeaux in France , then to London , where it formed an official Belgian government in exile in October 1940 . 
 The Governor @-@ General of the Congo , Pierre <unk> , decided on the day of Belgium 's surrender that the colony would remain loyal to the Allies , in stark contrast to the French colonies that later pledged allegiance to the pro @-@ German Vichy government . The Congo was therefore administered from London by the Belgian government in exile during the war . 
 Despite this assurance , disruption broke out in the city of Stanleyville ( now Kisangani in the eastern Congo ) among the white population panicking about the future of the colony and the threat of an Italian invasion . 
 = = Economic contribution = = 
 Soon after the arrival of the Belgian government in exile in London , negotiations began between the Belgians and the British about the role which the Congo would play in the Allied war effort . The British were determined that the Congo should not fall into Axis hands , and planned to invade and occupy the colony if the Belgians did not come to an arrangement . This was particularly because , after the fall of Dutch and British colonies in the Far East to Japan , the Allies were desperate for raw materials like rubber which the Congo could produce in abundance . Eventually , the two parties came to an arrangement in which virtually all the British demands were accepted , including a 30 percent devaluation of the Congolese franc . 
 With the official agreement and the Congolese declaration of support for the Allies , the economy of the Congo and in particular its production of important raw materials , was placed at the disposal of Belgium 's Allies , particularly Britain and the United States . 
 The Congo had become increasingly centralised economically during the Great Depression of the 1930s , as the Belgian government encouraged the production there of cotton , which had value on the international market . The greatest economic demands on the Congo were related to raw materials . Between 1938 and 1944 , the number of workers employed in the mines of the Union Minière du Haut Katanga ( UMHK ) rose from 25 @,@ 000 to 49 @,@ 000 to cope with the increased demand . In order to increase production for the war effort , the colonial authorities increased the hours and the speed at which workers , both European and African , were expected to work . This led to increasing labour unrest across the colony . Discontent among the white population was also increased by the raising of a 40 percent " war tax " . High taxes and price controls were enforced from 1941 , limiting the amount of profit that could be made and curbing profiteering . 
 The vast majority of the Congolese @-@ produced raw resources were exported to other Allied countries . By 1942 , the entire colony 's output of copper , palm oil and industrial diamonds were being exported to the United Kingdom , while almost all the colony 's lumber was sent to South Africa . Exports to the United States also rose from $ 600 @,@ 000 in early 1940 to $ 2 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 by 1942 . 
 Tax revenue from the Belgian Congo enabled the Belgian government in exile and Free Belgian Forces to fund themselves , unlike most other states in exile , which operated through subsidies and donations from sympathetic governments . It also meant that the Belgian gold reserves , which had been moved to London in 1940 , were not needed to fund the war effort , and therefore were still available at the end of the war . 
 = = = Uranium = = = 
 The Congo possessed major uranium deposits and was one of the few sources of the material available to the Allies . Uranium extracted from the disused Shinkolobwe uranium mine , owned by the UMHK in Katanga in the southern Congo , was instrumental in the development of an atomic bomb during the American Manhattan Project . The director of UMHK , Edgar Sengier , secretly despatched half of its uranium stock to New York in 1940 ; in September 1942 , he sold it to the United States Army . 
 Sengier himself moved to New York , from where he directed the UMHK 's operations for the rest of the war . The U.S. government sent soldiers from the Army Corps of Engineers to Shinkolobwe in 1942 to restore the mine and improve its transport links by renovating the local aerodromes and port facilities . In 1944 , the Americans acquired a further 1 @,@ 720 long tons ( 1 @,@ 750 t ) of Uranium ore from the newly reopened mine . 
 = = Military involvement = = 
 The Force Publique ( or " Public Force " ) was the combined police and military force of both the Congo and Ruanda @-@ Urundi . During World War II , it constituted the bulk of the Free Belgian Forces , numbering some 40 @,@ 000 men . Like other colonial armies of the time , the Force Publique was racially segregated ; it was led by 280 white officers and NCOs , but otherwise comprised indigenous black Africans . The Force Publique had never received the more modern equipment supplied to the Belgian Armed Forces before the war , and so had to use outdated weapons and equipment like the Stokes mortar and the Saint Chamond 70 mm howitzer . 
 = = = East African Campaign = = = 
 Three brigades of the Force Publique were sent to Abyssinia alongside British forces to fight the Italians in June 1940 . This was done , in spite of the government in exile 's reservations , to demonstrate its allegiance to the Allied cause and in retaliation for the deployment of Italian bombers in bases on the channel coast within occupied Belgium . 
 The Belgian 1st Colonial Brigade operated in the Galla @-@ Sidamo area in the South @-@ West sector . In May 1941 , around 8 @,@ 000 men of the Force Publique , under Major @-@ General Auguste @-@ Édouard <unk> , successfully cut off the retreat of General Pietro <unk> 's Italians at <unk> , in the Ethiopian Highlands after marching over 1 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 620 mi ) from their bases in western Congo . The troops suffered from malaria and other tropical diseases , but successfully defeated the Italians in a number of engagements . <unk> subsequently accepted the surrender of <unk> and 7 @,@ 000 Italian troops in a number of small engagements . Over the course of the campaign in Abyssinia , the Force Publique received the surrender of nine Italian generals , 370 high @-@ ranking officers and 15 @,@ 000 Italian colonial troops before the end of 1941 . The Congolese forces in Abyssinia suffered about 500 fatalities . 
 After the Allied victory in Abyssinia the Force Publique moved to the British colony of Nigeria , which was being used as a staging ground for a planned invasion of Vichy @-@ controlled Dahomey which did not occur , was also garrisoned by 13 @,@ 000 Congolese troops . Then a part of the Force Publique went to Egypt and British Mandatory Palestine and was redesignated the 1st Belgian Congo Brigade Group during 1943 and 1944 . 
 = = = Medical support = = = 
 A medical unit from the Congo , the 10th ( Belgian Congo ) Casualty Clearing Station , was formed in 1943 , and served alongside British forces during the invasion of Madagascar and in the Far East during the Burma Campaign . The unit ( which had a small body of Force Publique troops for local defense of the station ) included 350 black and 20 white personnel , and continued to serve with the British until 1945 . 
 = = Life in the Belgian Congo = = 
 At the start of the war , the population of the Congo numbered approximately 12 million black people and 30 @,@ 000 whites . The colonial government segregated the population along racial lines and there was very little mixing between the colours . The white population was highly urbanized and , in Léopoldville , the capital , lived in a quarter of the city separated from the black majority . All blacks in the city had to adhere to a curfew . 
 Education was overwhelmingly controlled by Protestant and Catholic missions , which were also responsible for providing limited medical and welfare support to the rural Congolese . Food remained <unk> during the war , with only the sales of tyres and automobiles restricted by the government . One of the consequences of the Congo 's economic mobilisation during the war , particularly for the black population , was significant urbanisation . Just 9 % of the indigenous population lived in cities in 1938 ; by 1950 , the figure stood at close to 20 % . The colonial authorities arrested enemy aliens in the Congo and confiscated their property in 1940 . 
 = = Unrest = = 
 = = = Strikes = = = 
 The demands made by the colonial government on Congolese workers during the war provoked strikes and riots from the workforce . Whites in the colony were allowed to form trade unions for the first time during the war , and their demands for better pay and working conditions were often emulated by black workers . In October 1941 , white workers in the colony unsuccessfully attempted a general strike across the colony . 
 In December 1941 , black mine workers at various sites in Katanga Province , including Jadotville and Élisabethville , went on strike , demanding that their pay be increased from 1 @.@ 50 francs to 2 francs to compensate for rising living costs . The strike started on 3 December , and by the next day 1 @,@ 400 workers had downed tools . All UMHK sites were affected by 9 December . The strike was also fuelled by other grievances against the colonial order and segregation . 
 From the start , the colonial authorities attempted to persuade the strikers to disperse and go back to work . When they refused , they were fired on . In Jadotville , 15 strikers were shot dead by the military . In Élisabethville , the strikers , including their leader Léonard <unk> , were invited to negotiations at the town 's stadium , where they were offered various concessions , including a 30 % pay rise . 
 When the workers refused , the Governor of Katanga , Amour Maron , shot <unk> , killing him . The Governor then ordered his soldiers to fire on the other strikers in the stadium . Between 60 and 70 strikers were killed during the protest , although the official estimate was around 30 . The miners returned to work on 10 December . 
 Numerous smaller strikes occurred in the Congo later in the war , though not on the same scale as in 1941 . In 1944 strikes broke out in Katanga and Kasaï , provoked by the conscription of workers for the mines and deteriorating working conditions . In 1945 , riots and strikes occurred among the black dockworkers in the port city of Matadi . 
 = = = Luluabourg mutiny = = = 
 The colonial government in the Congo depended on its military to maintain civil order and , above all , it depended on the loyalty of the native troops who made up the bulk of the Force Publique . Black non @-@ commissioned Officers led by First Sergeant @-@ Major <unk> <unk> , a veteran of the East Africa Campaign , <unk> at Luluabourg in the central Congolese province of Kasaï in February 1944 ; the trigger for this was a plan to vaccinate troops who had served at the front , though the soldiers were also unhappy about the demands placed on them and their treatment by their white officers . 
 The mutineers broke into the base 's armoury on the morning of 20 February and pillaged the white quarter of the town . The town 's inhabitants fled , and a Belgian officer and two white civilians were killed . The mutineers attacked visible signs of the colonial authorities and proclaimed their desire for independence . The mutineers then dispersed to their home villages , pillaging on the way ; they failed to spread the insurrection to neighbouring garrisons . Two mutineers , including <unk> , were executed for their part in the insurrection . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 As a result of the Congo 's comparative prosperity during the conflict , the post @-@ war period saw a wave of immigration to the country from Belgium . By 1950 , 100 @,@ 000 whites were living in the Congo . Nevertheless , the war highlighted the precarious nature of the colonial administration , leading Governor <unk> to remark that " the days of colonialism are over " in 1946 . In the years after the war , the colonial government underwent extensive reform . Black people were granted significantly more rights and freedoms , leading to the growth of a so @-@ called <unk> ( " evolved " ) class . 
 Following the industrial unrest , trade unions for black workers were instituted in 1946 , though they lacked power and influence . Workers at the UMHK continued to demand higher wages , and strikes were common in the colony for the next decade . Nevertheless , both wages and living conditions improved significantly in the years after the war . The war began a second wave of industrialisation that lasted right up to Congolese independence in 1960 . 
 The 1941 Élisabethville massacre is a recurrent theme in Congolese art and folklore , and was later incorporated into the popular Congolese anti @-@ colonial narrative . The importance of Congolese uranium during the war caused the Soviet Union to become interested in the territory ; it was subsequently an area of Soviet interest during the Cold War . 
 = Invasion of Île Bonaparte = 
 The Invasion of Île Bonaparte was an amphibious operation in 1810 that formed an important part of the British campaign to blockade and capture the French Indian Ocean territories of Île Bonaparte ( now Réunion ) and Isle de France ( now Mauritius ) during the Napoleonic Wars . These islands formed a fortified base for a French frigate squadron under Commodore Jacques Hamelin to raid British convoys of East Indiamen travelling between Britain and British India . Hamelin 's ships had destroyed two convoys the previous year despite the attention of a squadron of Royal Navy ships under Commodore Josias Rowley . Rowley had responded by raiding the fortified anchorage of Saint Paul on Île Bonaparte and capturing one of Hamelin 's frigates and two captured East Indiamen . 
 The raid had an unforeseen consequence , when the commander of Île Bonaparte General Nicolas Des Bruslys , committed suicide rather than lead the garrison against the British landing parties . This encouraged Rowley to consider a larger operation to seize the whole island . Using the small British @-@ held island of Rodriguez as a base , Rowley and his British Army counterpart Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Henry Keating planned to land two forces either side of the island 's capital Saint Denis and force the governor to capitulate before the island 's militia could be mobilised against them . 
 The plan was launched on 7 July 1810 as two combined forces of British sailors , soldiers , sepoys and Royal Marines landed at separate beaches . Although a number of men were drowned in the heavy surf , the majority of the invasion force reached the beaches safely and marched inland , attacking French outposts as they approached the capital . Recognising that his demoralised garrison would be unable to defend Saint Denis and that the militia would take too long to mobilise , the French commander Colonel <unk> de Sainte @-@ Suzanne surrendered the island , its garrison and its stores to Rowley . 
 = = Background = = 
 The French Indian Ocean islands of Île Bonaparte and Isle de France had provided a secure base for French privateers and French Navy frigates to operate against British shipping in the region for the entire French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars . In 1808 , determined to capitalise on this poorly defended region of British trade , the French government ordered Commodore Jacques Hamelin in Vénus to sail to Isle de France where he would be joined by three other large and powerful frigates with specific orders to target British trade . <unk> his frigates into the Bay of Bengal , Hamelin had some success during 1809 : Caroline capturing two East Indiamen at the Action of 31 May 1809 and Hamelin himself seizing three at the Action of 18 November 1809 . The French squadron also captured a number of smaller British warships and the large Portuguese frigate Minerve . 
 To counteract Hamelin 's ships , the British commander in the region Admiral Albemarle Bertie had ordered Commodore Josias Rowley to operate off the islands with a squadron of Royal Navy frigates , with instructions to disrupt French movements and prepare for future invasion attempts . Rowley 's ships had some successes : one of the East Indiamen captured by Hamelin was retaken by a blockading frigate in December 1809 , but he was largely powerless to prevent the large French ships leaving their fortified anchorages at will . Rowley 's first action to address this problem was to request a British Army force from the government in Madras . This force , made up of British soldiers and Honourable East India Company ( HEIC ) sepoys , was used to capture the tiny island of Rodriguez . Rodriguez provided a secure harbour , at which Rowley 's ships could collect supplies and repair minor damage within a short sailing distance of the French islands : previously the British ships had been forced to return to Madras or the Cape of Good Hope , decreasing the time available for operations against the islands . Rodriguez also provided Rowley with a staging post from which he could prepare the planned invasions and , in September 1809 , he led an amphibious operation against the defences of the harbour of Saint Paul on Île Bonaparte . 
 The Raid on Saint Paul was an important demonstration of Rowley 's ability to strike at the French anchorages directly . Landing men at <unk> beaches , the British soldiers , sailors and Royal Marines of the landing party were able to storm the defences from the landward side and rout the defenders . This allowed Rowley 's squadron to enter the harbour and capture Caroline and a number of smaller ships that were docked there . The attack caused consternation on the island and its commander , Nicolas Des Bruslys , committed suicide rather than order his troops to attack the British positions . Unopposed , Rowley was able to destroy the defences and public works in the town before leaving with large quantities of captured supplies and ships . Colonel <unk> Sainte @-@ Suzanne replaced Des Bruslys but was unable to effectively defend the island with the remaining garrison in the event of a concerted invasion . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 In early 1810 , as the cyclone season came to an end , Hamelin ordered a squadron of frigates under Captain Guy @-@ Victor Duperré to attack British convoys in the Bay of Bengal . Duperré was initially unsuccessful , but after sailing to Madagascar for a brief refit he encountered and defeated a convoy in the Action of 3 July 1810 . The British response to the French depredations was already in progress : in late June , Rowley sailed with two frigates to Rodriguez , leaving Captain Samuel Pym off Isle de France with the remainder . On Rodriguez , Rowley and Lieutenant Colonel Henry Keating conferred on the best method of invading and rapidly subduing the island , determining that the best plan was to land soldiers either side of the island 's capital Saint Denis and defeat the garrison outside the town , forcing the new governor to surrender . 
 The government in Madras had augmented the garrison of Rodriguez over the previous year , so that by June 1810 it stood at over 3 @,@ 650 men : 1 @,@ 800 British Army regulars and 1 @,@ 850 HEIC Army sepoys under Keating 's overall command . To transport these troops , Rowley called up his own frigate HMS Boadicea and HMS Nereide under Captain Nesbit Willoughby , a veteran of the raid on Saint Paul who was still recovering from an accidental explosion two months before that had inflicted severe facial injuries . Among the passengers on Boadicea was Robert Townsend Farquhar , a diplomat and trader with the HEIC who had been sent from London to assume governorship of the islands once they had been captured . On 6 July , Rowley 's force rendezvoused with the squadron under Pym , consisting of his frigate HMS Sirius , HMS Iphigenia under Captain Henry Lambert and HMS Magicienne under Captain Lucius Curtis . 
 = = Invasion = = 
 Rowley 's squadron and a number of supporting transport ships reached Île Bonaparte on 7 July . The main body , under Rowley , approached Sainte @-@ Marie at 14 : 00 , to draw French forces away from Grande <unk> , where Sirius was secretly landing the first " brigade " under Lieutenant Colonel Frazier . This force of 950 soldiers , a small battery of howitzers and the supplies needed for the campaign was landed without loss under the direction of Navy Lieutenant John Wyatt Watling , who had landed first and secured the beach with a party of seamen , distributing the soldiers and supplies as they came ashore . Advancing rapidly to seize the heights over the beach , Frazier drove off French outposts and snipers and cut the main road between Saint Denis and Saint Paul , hampering French communications and the movement of reinforcements . 
 To the east , on the other side of Saint Denis , Rowley ordered his forces to land . The first ashore was intended to be Nesbit Willoughby in a schooner named <unk> , to secure the beach and organise the landing forces . However , as this boat approached the beach the wind strengthened and built up a powerful surf , which smashed the schooner ashore with enough force to break it apart : four of the 150 @-@ strong landing party were drowned . Realising that the smaller transports would be similarly overwhelmed by the waves , Keating ordered a small brig named <unk> driven on shore as a breakwater . This allowed a number of additional boats safely to reach the beach but did not provide enough cover for a full landing before nightfall . 
 By the morning of 8 July , the French had still failed to concentrate their forces , which consisted of 576 regular French Army soldiers and 2 @,@ 717 militia dispersed across the island . Seeing that a landing on the beach at Grande <unk> was still practical , Captains Rowley and Lambert successfully landed their contingents , providing Keating with sufficient force to march on Saint Denis . While Keating was landing , Frazier had advanced on the capital from the west , storming a French barricade on the road from Saint Paul and routing its defenders with minimal casualties . Brushing aside French resistance in a series of minor skirmishes , Keating and Frazier 's forces closed on Saint Denis . The advancing British were met at 18 : 00 by representatives of Sainte @-@ Suzanne , who later signed a capitulation that surrendered the entire island to Rowley , Keating and Farquhar with its garrison and supplies . 
 Offshore , Sirius had blockaded Saint Paul after landing her soldiers and , on 9 July , observed a ship attempting to break out of the harbour after hearing news of the surrender . Sirius sent her barge , under the command of Lieutenant George Norman , to pursue the fugitive . In an exhausting twelve @-@ hour chase , Norman was able to catch and board the ship , revealed to be a privateer named Edward carrying four guns and 30 men . Norman was able to defeat the crew in a brief struggle in which three men were wounded , and discovered that she was carrying despatches from the French government for the authorities on Isle de France , all of which fell into British hands . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The invasion cost the British a combined total of 22 dead and 79 wounded , including those drowned in the wreck of <unk> . Most of the other casualties had been incurred in the skirmishes on the road to Saint Denis and French casualties , although not known , were probably of a similar number . The French failed to put up a meaningful resistance to the British force , which rapidly established beachheads and carried French outposts without facing significant opposition . The island reverted to its pre @-@ Revolutionary name of Bourbon following the invasion , and Farquhar briefly assumed the governorship before moving to Mauritius upon that island 's capture in December 1810 . Keating replaced him in command and remained in the position until 1814 , when the island was restored to France at the end of the Napoleonic Wars . 
 The success allowed British forces to concentrate against the one remaining French territory in the Indian Ocean , Isle de France . Bourbon provided a number of secure anchorages and plentiful supplies for the British frigate squadron , becoming Rowley and Keating 's new headquarters . With a safe harbour only a short journey away , Rowley was able to despatch his frigates against French ports on Isle de France more frequently and more aggressively , developing a plan to seize small offshore islands near the main harbours on Isle de France to disrupt the passage of shipping and the ability of French frigates to use these ports as raiding bases . This plan ultimately led to the disastrous attempt to seize the shipping in Grand Port in which four frigates of Rowley 's squadron were lost . 
 = = Photo gallery = = 
 = USS Wainwright ( DD @-@ 62 ) = 
 USS Wainwright ( Destroyer No. 62 / DD @-@ 62 ) was a Tucker @-@ class destroyer built for the United States Navy prior to the American entry into World War I. The ship was the first U.S. Navy vessel named in honor of U.S. Navy officers Jonathan Wainwright , his cousin , Commander Richard Wainwright , and his son , Jonathan Wainwright , Jr .. 
 Wainwright was laid down by the New York Shipbuilding of Camden , New Jersey , in September 1914 and launched in June of the following year . The ship was a little more than 315 feet ( 96 m ) in length , just under 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) abeam , and had a standard displacement of 1 @,@ 090 long tons ( 1 @,@ 110 t ) . She was armed with four 4 @-@ inch ( 10 cm ) guns and had eight 21 @-@ inch ( 530 mm ) torpedo tubes . Wainwright was powered by a pair of steam turbines that propelled her at up to 30 knots ( 56 km / h ) . 
 After her May 1916 commissioning , Wainwright sailed in the Atlantic and the Caribbean . After the United States entered World War I in April 1917 , Wainwright was part of the first U.S. destroyer squadron sent overseas . Patrolling the Irish Sea out of Queenstown , Ireland , Wainwright made several unsuccessful attacks on U @-@ boats , and rescued survivors of several ships sunk by the German craft . 
 Upon returning to the United State after the war , Wainwright resumed operations with the destroyers of the Atlantic Fleet until May 1922 , when she was decommissioned . In April 1926 , Wainwright was transferred to the United States Coast Guard to help enforce Prohibition as a part of the " Rum Patrol " . She operated under the name USCGC Wainwright ( CG @-@ 24 ) until April 1934 , when she was returned to the Navy . She was sold for scrap in August 1934 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Wainwright was authorized in 1913 as the sixth and final ship of the Tucker class which , like the related O 'Brien class , was an improved version of the Cassin @-@ class destroyers authorized in 1911 . Construction of the vessel was awarded to New York Shipbuilding of Camden , New Jersey , which laid down her keel on 1 September 1914 . Just over nine months later , on 12 June 1915 , Wainwright was launched by sponsor Miss Evelyn Wainwright Turpin , a descendant of the ship 's namesakes , Commodore Jonathan Wainwright ( 1821 – 1863 ) , his cousin Richard Wainwright ( 1817 – 1862 ) , and son Jonathan Wainwright , Jr . ( 1849 – 1870 ) , all U.S. Navy officers that died while serving . As built , Wainwright was 315 feet 3 inches ( 96 @.@ 09 m ) in length and 29 feet 9 inches ( 9 @.@ 07 m ) abeam and drew 9 feet 4 inches ( 2 @.@ 84 m ) . The ship had a standard displacement of 1 @,@ 060 long tons ( 1 @,@ 080 t ) and displaced 1 @,@ 205 long tons ( 1 @,@ 224 t ) when fully loaded . 
 Wainwright had two Curtis steam turbines that drove her two screw propellers , and an additional steam turbine geared to one of the propeller shafts for cruising purposes . The power plant could generate 17 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 13 @,@ 000 kW ) and move the ship at speeds up to 30 knots ( 56 km / h ) . 
 Wainwright 's main battery consisted of four 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) / 50 Mark 9 guns , with each gun weighing in excess of 6 @,@ 100 pounds ( 2 @,@ 800 kg ) . The guns fired 33 @-@ pound ( 15 kg ) armor @-@ piercing projectiles at 2 @,@ 900 feet per second ( 880 m / s ) . At an elevation of 20 ° , the guns had a range of 15 @,@ 920 yards ( 14 @,@ 560 m ) . 
 Wainwright was also equipped with eight 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes . The General Board of the United States Navy had called for two anti @-@ aircraft guns for the Tucker @-@ class ships , as well as provisions for laying up to 36 floating mines . From sources , it is unclear if these recommendations were followed for Wainwright or any of the other ships of the class . 
 = = Early career = = 
 USS Wainwright was commissioned into the United States Navy on 12 May 1916 under the command of Lieutenant Fred H. Poteet . After fitting out at Philadelphia , the destroyer rounded Cape May on 20 June and headed for Newport , Rhode Island , to load torpedoes before joining Division 8 of the Atlantic Fleet Destroyer Flotilla . Following exercises near Eastport , Maine , she remained on the New England coast until mid @-@ September when she headed south for gunnery tests and training off the Virginia capes . Upon the completion of a fortnight 's gun drills , the ship then returned to Buzzard 's Bay , Massachusetts , on 2 October . Later that month , Wainwright operated out of Newport , practiced torpedo tactics near Vineyard Sound , and visited New York to pick up cargo for the flotilla 's tender , Melville . She returned to Newport on the 18th and , eight days later , resumed torpedo practice near Vineyard Sound for the remainder of the month . She put into Boston , Massachusetts on 1 November for extensive repairs in the navy yard . 
 <unk> , the destroyer got underway for the Caribbean on 8 January 1917 . Steaming via Hampton Roads , Virginia , she reached Culebra Island , near Puerto Rico , on the 14th and conducted war games exercises with the Atlantic Fleet . In the course of those operations , she visited the Dominican Republic as well as Guantanamo Bay and Santiago in Cuba . Later that month , Wainwright carried Assistant Secretary of the Navy Franklin D. Roosevelt ; Brigadier General George Barnett , the Commandant of the Marine Corps ; and the Chairman of the Civil Service Commission from Santiago to Port @-@ au @-@ Prince , Haiti . Following that assignment , Wainwright conducted torpedo exercises , patrols , and power trials near Guantanamo Bay until the beginning of March . 
 She returned to Boston on 10 March for a short period in the Navy Yard . On 31 March , she departed Boston for Hampton Roads where she arrived on 2 April . The following morning , in response to the imminent threat of war with Germany , Wainwright began to search for submarines and to patrol Hampton Roads to protect the Fleet and naval bases . Two days later , other warships relieved her on patrol ; and she anchored with the Fleet in the mouth of the York River . The next day , 6 April 1917 , the United States entered World War I. 
 = = World War I = = 
 By the spring of 1917 , the unrestricted submarine warfare campaign — which Germany had launched at the beginning of February — had so succeeded that the entire Allied war effort was endangered . Strong reinforcements to the Allied antisubmarine forces were desperately needed to avert defeat and needed at once . In response to a request from the Royal Navy for the service of American antisubmarine warfare ships in European waters , the United States Navy began sending destroyers eastward across the Atlantic . 
 Wainwright again briefly patrolled Hampton Roads before heading for the New York Navy Yard on 14 April , and on to Boston , where she arrived two days later , to prepare for overseas duty . On 24 April , the destroyer departed Boston in company with Wadsworth , Porter , Davis , Conyngham , and McDougal , bound for the British Isles . This division — led by Commander Joseph K. Taussig — was the first American naval unit to be sent to Europe . The destroyers reached Queenstown on the southern coast of Ireland on 4 May and , after fueling , began patrolling the southern approaches to Liverpool and other British ports on the coast of the Irish Sea . 
 Wainwright reported her first scrape with a German submarine on 11 May . She sighted an abandoned lifeboat at about 08 : 00 . After investigating the drifting boat for occupants and finding none , she sank the boat with gunfire . At about 08 : 15 , a lookout reported that a torpedo had missed the destroyer some 150 yards ( 140 m ) astern . Wainwright then fired several rounds from her 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) guns at what was thought to be a periscope . The supposed submarine disappeared soon thereafter ; and , despite a thorough investigation of the area , the destroyer could turn up no more evidence of the presence of a U @-@ boat . 
 The summer of 1917 provided few opportunities for Wainwright to test her sub @-@ killing techniques . On 4 July , a member of the destroyer 's crew spotted a purported periscope and soon thereafter others claimed that a torpedo was reported to have passed the ship , 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) astern . Wainwright depth @-@ charged the last indicated position of the undersea raider but to no avail . On the morning of 20 August , after Rowan brought up some oil with one of her depth charges , Wainwright dropped a couple of depth charges as she passed through the faint slick . A few minutes later , she joined other ships in some sporadic gunfire but failed to prove that a submarine was in the area . 
 The fall , on the other hand , brought Wainwright increased activity . After spending the first two weeks of September in repairs at Birkenhead , near Liverpool , she departed the yard at Laird Basin at about 07 : 00 on the 14th to return to Queenstown . Three quarters of an hour into the afternoon watch , she received orders sending her to the scene of a submarine attack against an Allied merchantman some 15 nautical miles ( 28 km ) south @-@ southeast of Helvick Head , Ireland . Wainwright rang up full speed , made off for the reported location , and began a search for the U @-@ boat in conjunction with a British dirigible and other surface units . Near the end of the second dog watch , she sighted the submarine 's conning tower and bow about 6 nautical miles ( 11 km ) off . 
 Wainwright charged to the attack , but the submarine submerged almost immediately . Upon reaching the spot where the submarine had been , the warship located an oil slick and began dropping depth charges which failed to achieve positive results . Approaching darkness and the necessity of escorting an Admiralty oiler forced Wainwright to break off her attack . After she shepherded the oiler to safety , she returned to the area of her attack and patrolled throughout the night , but the submarine had apparently retired from the neighborhood . 
 Four days later , while searching for a U @-@ boat in the area of <unk> Rock , the destroyer received word that the <unk> Lightship had rescued survivors from a fishing vessel . Wainwright rendezvoused with the craft to interview the four seamen of the smack Our <unk> . They revealed that the U @-@ boat — which turned out to be UC @-@ 48 — was of the latest type Germany had in action . The destroyer relieved the lighthouse vessel of the four fishermen and continued the search until dusk , when she headed back to Queenstown to land the rescued men . 
 For a month , she carried on conducting routine patrols . Action finally came on the morning of 18 October , when Wainwright again received orders to Helvick Head to hunt for an enemy submarine . She arrived at the designated location at about 11 : 15 and searched for more than two hours for clues as to the U @-@ boat 's location . Then , at 13 : 58 , she sighted a submarine 's conning tower about 1 @,@ 500 yards ( 1 @,@ 400 m ) off her starboard bow . The enemy appeared to be maneuvering into position for a torpedo attack but submerged the moment Wainwright charged to the attack . When the destroyer reached the estimated location of the U @-@ boat , she dropped a depth charge and then a buoy to mark the spot . The warship followed that maneuver with a systematic , circular search out to a radius of 20 nautical miles ( 37 km ) . Having found nothing by 04 : 00 the following morning , she gave up and shaped a course for Queenstown . 
 The ensuing six months brought no new encounters with U @-@ boats . She scouted areas where submarines had been reported but neither sighted nor engaged the enemy . On one occasion , she collided with a merchantman , Chicago City , and had to enter the drydock at Spencer Jetty that same day , 24 November 1917 , for repairs . 
 While steaming generally south on 29 April 1918 , she sighted a sail bearing almost due west whose hull was down below the horizon . By the time the destroyer had swung around to an intercepting course , the sail had disappeared . While the destroyer steamed toward the estimated position of the sail , she searched for evidence of a submarine . After covering 10 nautical miles ( 19 km ) westward , she came upon an area marked by a number of small oil slicks . Wainwright chose the most promising of the slicks and dropped four depth charges . She then commenced another fruitless search which ended at midnight when she received orders to return to Queenstown . 
 Wainwright continued to operate out of Queenstown until June 1918 when she was reassigned to United States naval forces in France . On the 8th , she reported for duty at Brest , the French port from which she conducted her patrols for the remainder of the war . Those patrols brought no further encounters with the enemy . Only two events of note occurred between June and November 1918 . On the night of 19 / 20 October , she sighted what appeared to be a submarine running on the surface . However , upon closer inspection , the object proved to be a derelict carrying the crew of the 77 @-@ ton Portuguese schooner Aida , which had been captured by German submarine U @-@ 43 and sunk with explosive charges . Wainwright took on the survivors and saw them safely into port . Later , during the evening of 1 November , heavy winds at Brest caused the destroyer to drag anchor : and she struck the breakwater . After Jarvis had failed to pull her loose , the tug Concord took over and finally managed to refloat the warship at 19 : 20 and towed her into Brest . 
 Hostilities ended on 11 November 1918 , and Wainwright returned home early in 1919 to resume duty with the Atlantic Fleet destroyers . She operated along the east coast and in the Caribbean until 19 May 1922 when she was decommissioned at Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . The destroyer remained in reserve until the spring of 1926 . 
 = = Coast Guard career = = 
 On 17 January 1920 , Prohibition was instituted by law in the United States . Soon , the smuggling of alcoholic beverages along the coastlines of the United States became widespread and blatant . The Treasury Department eventually determined that the United States Coast Guard simply did not have the ships to constitute a successful patrol . To cope with the problem , President Calvin Coolidge in 1924 authorized the transfer from the Navy to the Coast Guard of twenty old destroyers that were in reserve and out of commission . Wainwright was activated and acquired by the Coast Guard on 2 April 1926 , as part of a second group of five to augment the original twenty . 
 Wainwright moved to Boston on 22 May and remained there until 27 July when she got underway for the Connecticut coast . She reached New London , two days later ; and , on the 30th , she was commissioned by the Coast Guard . The warship retained her name while serving with the Coast Guard 's " Rum Patrol " to suppress the illegal importation of alcoholic beverages . She served at New London from the summer of 1926 until 1929 . On 4 January 1929 , she headed south to Charleston , South Carolina , whence she conducted gunnery practice until 4 February when she returned north to Boston . In January 1930 , she headed south again for gunnery practice but this time at St. Petersburg , Florida . During each of the two succeeding years — in January 1931 and late in March 1932 — she returned to St. Petersburg for a month of target practice and afterward resumed her duties along the New England coast . 
 In May 1933 , her permanent duty station was changed to New York , and she reported there at the end of the first week in June . After a summer of normal operations , the warship began target practice at Hampton Roads , on 7 September . 
 = = U.S. Navy duty in Cuba = = 
 That duty , however , was interrupted on the 9th by orders to report for duty with the Navy in the area of the Florida Strait during the series of revolts in Cuba which finally resulted in the beginning of Fulgencio Batista 's 25 @-@ year rule . On 6 November , Wainwright was released from duty with the Navy and was ordered back to New York . 
 = = Return to Coast Guard duty = = 
 Wainwright arrived three days later and resumed duties with the Coast Guard until March 1934 . On the 14th , she departed the station at Stapleton , New York , and arrived in Philadelphia the following day . She was decommissioned by the Coast Guard on 29 March . 
 = = Return to Navy , decommissioning , and disposal = = 
 On 27 April , the Commandant , 4th Naval District , took possession of Wainwright for the Navy . Her name was reinstated on the Navy list briefly but was struck once again on 5 July 1934 . On 22 August , she was sold to Michael Flynn , Inc . , of Brooklyn , New York , for scrapping . 
 = Water rail = 
 The water rail ( Rallus aquaticus ) is a bird of the rail family which breeds in well @-@ vegetated wetlands across Europe , Asia and North Africa . Northern and eastern populations are migratory , but this species is a permanent resident in the warmer parts of its breeding range . The adult is 23 – 28 cm ( 9 – 11 in ) long , and , like other rails , has a body that is flattened laterally , allowing it easier passage through the reed beds it inhabits . It has mainly brown upperparts and blue @-@ grey underparts , black barring on the flanks , long toes , a short tail and a long reddish bill . Immature birds are generally similar in appearance to the adults , but the blue @-@ grey in the plumage is replaced by buff . The downy chicks are black , as with all rails . The brown @-@ cheeked rail , R. indicus , has distinctive markings and a call that is very different from the pig @-@ like squeal of the western races , and is now usually split as a separate species . 
 The water rail breeds in reed beds and other marshy sites with tall , dense vegetation , building its nest a little above the water level from whatever plants are available nearby . The off @-@ white , blotched eggs are incubated mainly by the female , and the precocial downy chicks hatch in 19 – 22 days . The female will defend her eggs and brood against intruders , or move them to another location if they are discovered . This species can breed after its first year , and it normally raises two clutches in each season . Water rails are omnivorous , feeding mainly on invertebrates during summer and berries or plant stems towards winter . They are territorial even after breeding , and will aggressively defend feeding areas in winter . 
 These rails are vulnerable to flooding or freezing conditions , loss of habitat and predation by mammals and large birds . The introduced American mink has exterminated some island populations , but overall the species ' huge range and large numbers mean that it is not considered to be threatened . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The rails are a bird family comprising nearly 150 species . Although the origins of the group are lost in antiquity , the largest number of species and the most primitive forms are found in the Old World , suggesting that this family originated there . However , the genus Rallus , the group of long @-@ billed reed bed specialists to which the water rail belongs , arose in the New World . Its Old World members , the Water , African and Madagascan rails , form a superspecies , and are thought to have evolved from a single invasion from across the Atlantic . Genetic evidence suggests that the water rail is the most closely related of its genus to the Pacific Gallirallus rails , and is basal to that group . The water rail was first described by Linnaeus in his Systema Naturae in 1758 under its current scientific name , Rallus aquaticus . The binomial name is the Latin equivalent of the English " water rail " . 
 = = = Fossils = = = 
 The oldest known fossils of an ancestral water rail are bones from Carpathia dated to the Pliocene ( 5 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 8 million years ago ) . By the late Pleistocene , two million years ago , the fossil evidence suggests that the water rail was present across most of its present range . This species is surprisingly well recorded , with over 30 records from Bulgaria alone , and many others from across southern <unk> and China . A rail from <unk> , Rallus <unk> , was smaller but more robust than the water rail , and probably had poorer flight abilities . In the Quaternary , the island lacked terrestrial mammals , and this distinctive form was presumably descended from its continental relative . It became extinct at about the same time as humans arrived on the island , between 16 @,@ 700 and 5 @,@ 300 BC . The nominate race of water rail is now a very rare resident on <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 The adult of the nominate subspecies is a medium @-@ sized rail , 23 – 28 cm ( 9 @.@ 1 – 11 @.@ 0 in ) long with a 38 – 45 cm ( 15 – 18 in ) wingspan . Males typically weigh 114 – 164 g ( 4 @.@ 0 – 5 @.@ 8 oz ) and females are slightly lighter at 92 – 107 g ( 3 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 8 oz ) . The upper parts from the forehead to tail are olive @-@ brown with black streaks , especially on the shoulders . The sides of the head and the underparts down to the upper belly are dark slate @-@ blue , except for a blackish area between bill and eye , and brownish sides to the upper breast . The flanks are barred black and white , and the undertail is white with some darker streaks . The long bill and the iris are red , and the legs are flesh @-@ brown . The sexes are similar ; although the female averages slightly smaller than the male , with a more slender bill , determining sex through measurements alone is unreliable . The juvenile has a blackish crown and a white chin and throat . The underparts are buff or white with darker bars , and the flank markings are brown and buff , rather than black and white . The undertail is buff , and the eye , bill and leg colours are duller than the adult . The downy chick is all black apart from a mainly white bill . After breeding , the rail has an extensive moult , and is flightless for about three weeks . Individual adults can be identified by the markings on the undertail , which are unique to each bird . Adult males have the strongest black undertail streaks . It has been suggested that the dark barring on the undertail of this species is a compromise between the signalling function of a pure white undertail , as found in open water or gregarious species like the common moorhen , and the need to avoid being too conspicuous . 
 The water rail can readily be distinguished from most other reed bed rails by its white undertail and red bill ; the latter is a little longer than the rest of the rail 's head ( 55 – 58 % of the total ) and slightly down @-@ curved . The somewhat similar slaty @-@ breasted rail of tropical Asia has a stouter bill , a chestnut crown and white @-@ spotted upperparts . Juvenile and freshly moulted water rails may show a buff undertail like spotted crake , but that species ' plumage is spotted with white , and it has a much shorter , mainly yellowish bill . The range of the water rail does not overlap with that of any other Rallus species , but vagrants could be distinguished from their American relatives by the lack of rufous or chestnut on the closed wing . The larger African rail has unstreaked darker brown upperparts and brighter red legs and feet . 
 = = = Vocalisations = = = 
 The water rail is a vocal species which gives its main call , known as " <unk> " , throughout the year . This is a series of grunts followed by a high @-@ pitched piglet @-@ like squeal and ending in more grunts . It is used as a territorial call , alarm and announcement . Members of a pair may call alternately , the male giving lower and slower notes than his partner . The courtship song , given by both sexes , is a tyick @-@ tyick @-@ tyick often ending with a trill from the female ; the male may sing for hours . The flight call is a sharp whistle , and other vocalizations include a loud repeated creak given by the male when showing the nest site to the female , and a purring given by both parents when at the nest with chicks . The rails are most vocal when setting up a territory and early in the breeding season , when calling may continue at night . Chicks initially cheep weakly , but soon develop a <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> begging call . 
 When researchers played recordings of the reed warbler at night to attract that species for trapping , they found water rails and other wetland birds were also grounded , despite a lack of suitable habitat , suggesting that the rails and other nocturnal migrants recognised the warbler ’ s song and associated it with the marshy habitat in which it is usually found . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 There are three recognised subspecies . 
 R. a. aquaticus ( Linnaeus , 1758 ) . This is the nominate subspecies that breeds in Europe , North Africa , Turkey , western Asia to the Caspian Sea and western Kazakhstan , and in a narrow band east to central Siberia . 
 R. a. hibernans ( Salomonsen , 1931 ) . The Icelandic race , which has slightly warmer brown upperparts than the nominate form . The bars of the flanks are dark brown , not black , and the bill is somewhat shorter ; the grey of the underparts may have a brown tinge . 
 R. a. korejewi ( Zarudny , 1905 ) ( includes the dubious forms <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ) . This subspecies breeds in south central Asia from southern and eastern Iran east to western China , and in the Indian subcontinent in Kashmir and Ladakh . It is slightly larger than the nominate race , with paler brown upperparts and slightly paler slate underparts . It has a weak brown stripe through the eye . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The water rail breeds across temperate Eurasia from Iceland and the British Isles discontinuously to North Africa , Saudi Arabia and western China . Its distribution in Asia is poorly studied . 
 The Icelandic population of water rail , R. a. hibernans , became extinct around 1965 , as a result of loss of habitat through the draining of wetlands , and predation by the introduced American mink . 
 Prior to its extinction , at least some birds were present year @-@ round on the island , relying on warm volcanic springs to survive through the coldest months , but this race was also found in winter in the Faroe Islands and Ireland , and on passage through the Western Isles , suggesting that the Icelandic form was a partial migrant . The nominate subspecies , R. a. aquaticus is resident in the milder south and west of its range , but migrates south from areas that are subject to harsh winters . It winters within its breeding range , and also further south in North Africa , the Middle East and the Caspian Sea area . The peak migration period is September to October , with most birds returning to the breeding grounds from March to mid @-@ April . A specimen of the nominate population labelled as " Baluchistan " and collected by Richard Meinertzhagen is considered of doubtful provenance . R. a. korejewi is another partial migrant , with some of the population wintering from Iraq and eastern Saudi Arabia eastwards through Pakistan and northern India to western China . 
 The breeding habitat of the water rail is permanent wetland with still or slow @-@ moving fresh or brackish water and dense , tall vegetation , which may include common reed , <unk> , irises , bur @-@ reed or sedges . In coastal areas , sea rush is common in saltmarsh breeding sites , with sedges and bur @-@ reed dominant in somewhat less saline environments . A study in the Netherlands and Spain showed that the rush provided better concealment than the other maritime plants . As elsewhere , nests were constructed from the nearest available plants . Where it occurs , saw @-@ sedge provides good breeding habitat , its tall ( 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) ) dense structure providing good cover for the nesting rails . The preferred habitat is Phragmites reedbed with the plants standing in water , with a depth of 5 – 30 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 11 @.@ 8 in ) , muddy areas for feeding and a rich diversity of invertebrate species . Locations with nearby willows or shrubs are favoured above large areas of uniform habitat . In addition to natural fresh or marine marshes , this rail may use gravel or clay excavations and peat workings as long as there is suitable habitat with good cover . It may be found in rice paddies or on floating islands , and it occurs in Kashmir in flooded sugarcane fields . A Finnish study showed that the main factor influencing the distribution of water rails was the extent of vegetation cover , with the highest densities in the most vegetated areas ; the presence of other marshes nearby was also significant . However , factors such as temperature , rainfall , length of shore line and extent of peat , important for some other marsh birds , were not statistically relevant . The areas with the highest densities of the rail also had the greatest numbers of three species considered at risk in Finland , the great reed warbler , Eurasian bittern and marsh harrier . The northern limit of breeding seems to be determined by the transition from nutrient @-@ rich wetland to poorer , more acidic water . This leads to the replacement of common reed by a more open vegetation type dominated by marsh cinquefoil , which is unsuitable for the rails . 
 Occasionally , more unusual locations are used . One pair in Scotland nested in the open by the side of a road , and when an English nature reserve installed nest boxes for bearded tits ( reed " <unk> " with a wooden floor ) , rails nested both in the boxes and under the wooden floor , in the latter case sometimes with the tits in residence above . Although mainly a lowland species , the water rail breeds at 1 @,@ 240 m ( 4 @,@ 070 ft ) in the Alps and 2 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) in Armenia . An Italian study suggested that reed bed birds need a minimum area of wetland for breeding , which for the water rail is about 1 ha ( 2 @.@ 5 acres ) , although the highest densities are in marshes of 10 ha ( 25 acres ) or more . 
 On migration and in winter , a wider range of wet habitats may be used , including flooded thickets or bracken . Freezing condition may force birds into more open locations such as ditches , rubbish dumps and gardens , or even out onto exposed ice . A Welsh study suggested that individual winter territories overlap , with each bird using a significant proportion of the reed bed . After site desertion in freezing weather , birds return to their former range . A density of 14 birds per hectare ( 6 @.@ 6 per acre ) was recorded . Birds wintering in Iceland rely on warm geothermal streams , and may access streams through tunnels under the snow . When not feeding , they may shelter in holes and crevices in the solidified lava . This species sometimes wanders well outside its normal range and vagrants have been found in the Azores , Madeira , Mauritania , the Arctic , Greenland , Malaysia and Vietnam . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 This rail is a skulking species , its streaked plumage making it difficult to see in its wetland habitat . Its laterally compressed body allows it to slip though the densest vegetation , and it will " freeze " if surprised in the open . It walks with a high @-@ stepping gait , although it adopts a crouch when it runs for cover . It swims , when necessary , with the jerky motion typical of rails , and it flies short distances low over the reeds with its long legs dangling . Although their flight looks weak , water rails are capable of long sustained flights during their nocturnal migrations , and are sometimes killed in collisions with lighthouses or wires . British @-@ ringed birds have been recovered from as far away as Poland , Czechoslovakia and Sweden . 
 This species defends its breeding and wintering territories . Birds will charge each other with neck outstretched when breeding , sometimes both members of a pair attacking together . Large strongly @-@ marked males are dominant in winter , when the direct aggression is replaced by <unk> while standing upright on tip @-@ toe , head jerking and bill thrusting . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The water rail is monogamous and highly territorial when breeding . The birds pair off after arriving at their nesting areas , or possibly even before spring migration . In large wetlands with good conditions birds may nest 20 – 50 m ( 22 – 55 yd ) apart . Territories vary in size , but 300 m2 ( 360 sq yd ) is typical . The pair give courting and contact calls throughout the breeding season . The male selects the nest site which he shows to the female while posturing with raised back feathers , wings arched over his back , tail spread and bill pointed vertically downwards . This display is accompanied by a loud call . Before mating , he raises his wings and tail , and bows with his bill touching his breast . The male feeds the female during courtship , and , when incubating , she may leave the nest to display to the male , walking round him , calling softly , rubbing her bill against his and taking short runs to and from him . 
 The nest is made from whatever wetland vegetation is available and built mostly by the male , usually in a single day . It is raised 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) or more above the level of the marsh , and is sometimes constructed on clumps of roots , tree stumps or similar support . It may be built up higher if the marsh waters start to rise . The nest is 13 – 16 cm ( 5 @.@ 1 – 6 @.@ 3 in ) across and about 7 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) high . It is well hidden and approached cautiously by narrow tracks . 
 The typical clutch is 6 – 11 eggs across most of the range , but appears to be smaller ( 5 – 8 ) in Kashmir at around 1 @,@ 500 m ( 4 @,@ 900 ft ) altitude . Laying dates vary with location , from late March in western Europe and North Africa , to late May in Kashmir and June in Iceland . The clutch size may be smaller early or late in the breeding season . The breeding season can be extended by replacement and second clutches . The eggs are blunt and oval , smooth and slightly glossy ; the colour varies from off @-@ white to pink @-@ buff , with reddish @-@ brown blotches mainly at the broader end that sometimes merging into a single patch . Variation in egg size across the four subspecies is much less than differences between individual eggs ; the average size of the eggs of the nominate subspecies , 36 mm × 26 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 in × 1 @.@ 0 in ) , is therefore typical for the species as a whole . The eggs weigh about 13 g ( 0 @.@ 46 oz ) , of which 7 % is shell . 
 Both parents incubate the eggs , although the female takes the larger share of this duty . The eggs are incubated for 19 – 22 days to hatching , with at least 87 % success . Food is brought to the nest by the other adult and passed to the sitting parent who feeds the chicks . The precocial , downy young leave the nest within two days of hatching but continue to be fed by their parents , although the chicks also find some of their own food after about five days . They are independent of their parents after 20 – 30 days and can fly when aged 7 – 9 weeks . If a nest appears to have been discovered , the female may carry the chicks or eggs one by one to another location ; the eggs are carried in the bill , but small chicks may be tucked under the wing . Sitting birds may stay on the eggs even when approached closely , or attack the intruder , or feign injury as a distraction . The water rail can breed after its first year , and it normally raises two broods . 
 Average survival after fledging has been estimated as between 17 and 20 months , with an annual survival rate slightly less than 50 % per year for the first three years , and somewhat higher thereafter . The maximum recorded age is 8 years 10 months . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Water rails are omnivorous , although they mainly feed on animals . These include leeches , worms , gastropods , small crustaceans , spiders , and a wide range of both terrestrial and aquatic insects and their larvae . Small vertebrates such as amphibians , fish , birds and mammals may be killed or eaten as carrion . Vertebrates are impaled with a strike of the bill which breaks the prey 's spinal cord . Plant food , which is consumed more in autumn and winter , includes the buds , flowers , shoots and seeds of water plants , berries and fruit . In south Asia , paddy ( harvested rice kernels ) may sometimes be eaten . The young rails are fed mainly on insects and spiders . Food obtained on land or from mud is normally washed in water before it is eaten . After rain , rails may probe soft ground for earthworms . This species will occasionally feed in the open even when not forced to do so by cold weather ; Edmund Meade @-@ Waldo described seven rails feeding in an open meadow . Despite its skulking nature , the water rail appears to thrive in captivity when fed on animal food such as raw meat or earthworms ; one individual was taught to jump for worms suspended from a fishing rod . 
 Water rails follow definite routes when feeding , frequently returning to good hunting areas . These rails are versatile and opportunist foragers . They will jump to take insects from plants , climb to find berries , or dislodge apples from trees so they can be eaten on the ground . They will kill birds by impaling or drowning them , particularly if the bird 's ability to escape is restricted . They have been recorded as killing a European <unk> and a king quail in an aviary , and small birds trapped in bird ringers ' mist nets . One bird killed a twite caught with it in a Heligoland trap . They are also nest predators , particularly of small birds that nest in reeds such as the great reed warbler . Water rails may defend a winter feeding territory , although this is smaller than when breeding , with individuals perhaps less than 10 m ( 11 yd ) apart ; favoured sites may hold hundreds of birds . Aggressive behaviour outside the breeding season may extend to attacks on other marsh rails such as spotted and Baillon 's crake . 
 = = Predators and parasites = = 
 Predators of the water rail include a number of mammals and large birds . The American mink was partly responsible for the extinction of the Icelandic population , and cats and dogs have also been recorded as killing this species . At least locally , otters will also eat rails and other water birds . The Eurasian bittern , another reed bed bird , will consume rails , as will grey herons . Water rails are particularly vulnerable to the heron when forced out of the cover of the reeds by very high tides . Wetland @-@ hunting harriers are predictable predators , but more unusually , the rail has also been recorded as a prey item of the tawny owl , short @-@ eared owl , Eurasian eagle @-@ owl , greater spotted eagle , common kestrel , and night @-@ hunting peregrine falcons . 
 Parasites include the sucking lice <unk> <unk> and Pediculus <unk> , the tick Ixodes frontalis , and the louse fly <unk> avicularia . The water rail can be infected by the avian influenza virus and the bacterium Borrelia burgdorferi , carried by Ixodes ticks , which is also a human pathogen causing Lyme disease . Three lice , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> and <unk> cuspidatus discovered on dead water rails in 2005 on the Faroe Islands were all species that had not been found on the archipelago previously . The parasitic flatworm <unk> <unk> was found in one rail 's nasal sinus , and at least three species of feather mite have been detected on the plumage . The louse Philopterus <unk> and the nematode Strongyloides avium have been found on the subspecies R. a. indicus . The eastern subspecies is also one of the many intermediate hosts of another nematode , <unk> <unk> , which causes human <unk> , a disease found in Thailand , Japan and other parts of Southeast Asia . The nematode 's first @-@ stage hosts are copepods of the genus Cyclops , which are consumed directly or indirectly by a wide variety of vertebrates before maturing in the third and final host , a carnivorous mammal . The rail is therefore unlikely to be a source of human <unk> , which is normally caused by consuming raw or undercooked infected poultry , pork , freshwater fish , or by drinking water contaminated with infected Cyclops . 
 = = Status = = 
 The water rail 's numbers are declining , but it has a large population of 100 @,@ 000 – 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 adults and a huge breeding range estimated at 15 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 km2 ( 6 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 sq mi ) ; it is therefore classed as Least Concern on the IUCN Red List . In most European countries , the population is either stable or decreasing slightly due to loss of habitat . The rail 's range and numbers are increasing in Morocco , with breeding as far south as Oued Massa . Little is known about the Asian range , but korejewi is a common breeder in Pakistan and Kashmir . 
 Introduced predators are a threat to vulnerable island populations . In addition to the extirpation of the Icelandic race , mink have been responsible for marked declines in the populations of water rails and other ground @-@ nesting birds in the Hebrides , where the mainly fish @-@ eating otter was the only native carnivore . The mink derived from fur farms on Lewis , from whence they spread through Harris , North Uist and South Uist . Mink and ferret eradication programmes have enabled the rail to return to islands including Lewis and Harris , and further projects are ongoing or planned on the Scottish mainland . Locally , habitat may be affected by the drainage of marshes , canalisation of water courses and urban encroachment , or by pollution . 
 Water rails have been eaten by humans for thousands of years ; they were eaten by the Romans , and depicted in wall paintings at Pompeii , and consumption continued through the Middle Ages to modern times . 
 = Red @-@ billed chough = 
 The red @-@ billed chough , Cornish chough or simply chough ( / ˈtʃʌf / <unk> ) ( Pyrrhocorax pyrrhocorax ) , is a bird in the crow family , one of only two species in the genus Pyrrhocorax . Its eight subspecies breed on mountains and coastal cliffs from the western coasts of Ireland and Britain east through southern Europe and North Africa to Central Asia , India and China . 
 This bird has glossy black plumage , a long curved red bill , red legs , and a loud , ringing call . It has a buoyant acrobatic flight with widely spread primaries . The red @-@ billed chough pairs for life and displays fidelity to its breeding site , which is usually a cave or crevice in a cliff face . It builds a wool @-@ lined stick nest and lays three eggs . It feeds , often in flocks , on short grazed grassland , taking mainly invertebrate prey . 
 Although it is subject to predation and parasitism , the main threat to this species is changes in agricultural practices , which have led to population decline , some local extirpation , and range fragmentation in Europe ; however , it is not threatened globally . The red @-@ billed chough , which derived its common name from the jackdaw , was formerly associated with fire @-@ raising , and has links with Saint Thomas Becket and Cornwall . The red @-@ billed chough has been depicted on postage stamps of a few countries , including the Isle of Man , with four different stamps , and The Gambia , where the bird does not occur . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The red @-@ billed chough was first described by Linnaeus in his Systema Naturae in 1758 as Upupa pyrrhocorax . It was moved to its current genus , Pyrrhocorax , by Marmaduke Tunstall in his 1771 Ornithologia Britannica . The genus name is derived from Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) , " flame @-@ coloured " , and κόραξ ( korax ) , " raven " . The only other member of the genus is the Alpine chough , Pyrrhocorax graculus . The closest relatives of the choughs are the typical crows , Corvus , especially the jackdaws in the subgenus Coloeus . 
 " Chough " was originally an alternative onomatopoeic name for the jackdaw , Corvus monedula , based on its call . The similar red @-@ billed species , formerly particularly common in Cornwall , became known initially as " Cornish chough " and then just " chough " , the name transferring from one species to the other . The Australian white @-@ winged chough , Corcorax melanorhamphos , despite its similar shape and habits , is only distantly related to the true choughs , and is an example of convergent evolution . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 There are eight extant subspecies , although differences between them are slight . 
 P. p. pyrrhocorax , the nominate subspecies and smallest form , is endemic to the British Isles , where it is restricted to Ireland , the Isle of Man , and the far west of Wales and Scotland , although it recolonised Cornwall in 2001 after an absence of 50 years . 
 P. p. <unk> , described by Louis Jean Pierre Vieillot in 1817 as <unk> <unk> , occurs in the red @-@ billed chough 's continental European range , excluding Greece . It is larger and slightly greener than the nominate race . 
 P. p. <unk> , described by Charles Vaurie under its current name in 1954 , is resident in North Africa and on La Palma in the Canary Islands . Compared to P. p. <unk> , it is larger , has a longer tail and wings , and its plumage has a greener gloss . It is the longest @-@ billed form , both absolutely and relatively . 
 P. p. baileyi described by Austin Loomer Rand and Charles Vaurie under its current name in 1955 , is a dull @-@ plumaged subspecies endemic to Ethiopia , where it occurs in two separate areas . The two populations could possibly represent different subspecies . 
 P. p. docilis , described by Johann Friedrich Gmelin as Corvus docilis in 1774 , breeds from Greece to Afghanistan . It is larger than the African subspecies , but it has a smaller bill and its plumage is very green @-@ tinted , with little gloss . 
 P. p. himalayanus , described by John Gould in 1862 as Fregilus himalayanus , is found from the Himalayas to western China , but intergrades with P. p. docilis in the west of its range . It is the largest subspecies , long @-@ tailed , and with blue or purple @-@ blue glossed feathers . 
 P. p. centralis , described by Erwin Stresemann in 1928 under its current name , breeds in Central Asia . It is smaller and less strongly blue than P. p. himalayanus , but its distinctness from the next subspecies has been questioned . 
 P. p. brachypus , described by Robert Swinhoe in 1871 as Fregilus graculus var. brachypus , breeds in central and northern China , Mongolia and southern Siberia . It is similar to P. p. centralis but with a weaker bill . 
 There is one known prehistoric form of the red @-@ billed chough . P. p. primigenius , a subspecies that lived in Europe during the last ice age , which was described in 1875 by Alphonse Milne @-@ Edwards from finds in southwest France . 
 Detailed analysis of call similarity suggests that the Asiatic and Ethiopian races diverged from the western subspecies early in evolutionary history , and that Italian red @-@ billed choughs are more closely allied to the North African subspecies than to those of the rest of Europe . 
 = = Description = = 
 The adult of the " nominate " subspecies of the red @-@ billed chough , P. p. pyrrhocorax , is 39 – 40 centimetres ( 15 – 16 inches ) in length , has a 73 – 90 centimetres ( 29 – 35 inches ) wingspan , and weighs an average 310 grammes ( 10 @.@ 9 oz ) . Its plumage is velvet @-@ black , green @-@ glossed on the body , and it has a long curved red bill and red legs . The sexes are similar ( although adults can be sexed in the hand using a formula involving tarsus length and bill width ) but the juvenile has an orange bill and pink legs until its first autumn , and less glossy plumage . 
 The red @-@ billed chough is unlikely to be confused with any other species of bird . Although the jackdaw and Alpine chough share its range , the jackdaw is smaller and has <unk> grey plumage , and the Alpine chough has a short yellow bill . Even in flight , the two choughs can be distinguished by Alpine 's less rectangular wings , and longer , less square @-@ ended tail . 
 The red @-@ billed chough 's loud , ringing chee @-@ ow call is clearer and louder than the similar vocalisation of the jackdaw , and always very different from that of its yellow @-@ billed congener , which has rippling preep and whistled sweeeooo calls . Small subspecies of the red @-@ billed chough have higher frequency calls than larger races , as predicted by the inverse relationship between body size and frequency . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The red @-@ billed chough breeds in Ireland , western Great Britain , the Isle of Man , southern Europe and the Mediterranean basin , the Alps , and in mountainous country across Central Asia , India and China , with two separate populations in the Ethiopian Highlands . It is a non @-@ migratory resident throughout its range . 
 Its main habitat is high mountains ; it is found between 2 @,@ 000 and 2 @,@ 500 metres ( 6 @,@ 600 and 8 @,@ 200 ft ) in North Africa , and mainly between 2 @,@ 400 and 3 @,@ 000 metres ( 7 @,@ 900 and 9 @,@ 800 ft ) in the Himalayas . In that mountain range it reaches 6 @,@ 000 metres ( 20 @,@ 000 feet ) in the summer , and has been recorded at 7 @,@ 950 metres ( 26 @,@ 080 feet ) altitude on Mount Everest . In Ireland , Great Britain and Brittany it also breeds on coastal sea cliffs , feeding on adjacent short grazed grassland or machair . It was formerly more widespread on coasts but has suffered from the loss of its specialised habitat . It tends to breed at a lower elevation than the Alpine chough , that species having a diet better adapted to high altitudes . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The red @-@ billed chough breeds from three years of age , and normally raises only one brood a year , although the age at first breeding is greater in large populations . A pair exhibits strong mate and site fidelity once a bond is established . The bulky nest is composed of roots and stems of heather , <unk> or other plants , and is lined with wool or hair ; in central Asia , the hair may be taken from live Himalayan tahr . The nest is constructed in a cave or similar fissure in a crag or cliff face . In soft sandstone , the birds themselves excavate holes nearly a metre deep . Old buildings may be used , and in Tibet working monasteries provide sites , as occasionally do modern buildings in Mongolian towns , including Ulaanbaatar . The red @-@ billed chough will utilise other artificial sites , such as quarries and <unk> for nesting where they are available . 
 The chough lays three to five eggs 3 @.@ 9 by 2 @.@ 8 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 5 by 1 @.@ 1 inches ) in size and weighing 15 @.@ 7 grammes ( 0 @.@ 55 oz ) , of which 6 % is shell . They are spotted , not always densely , in various shades of brown and grey on a creamy or slightly tinted ground . 
 The egg size is independent of the clutch size and the nest site , but may vary between different females . The female incubates for 17 – 18 days before the altricial downy chicks are hatched , and is fed at the nest by the male . The female broods the newly hatched chicks for around ten days , and then both parents share feeding and nest sanitation duties . The chicks fledge 31 – 41 days after hatching . 
 Juveniles have a 43 % chance of surviving their first year , and the annual survival rate of adults is about 80 % . Choughs generally have a lifespan of about seven years , although an age of 17 years has been recorded . The temperature and rainfall in the months preceding breeding correlates with the number of young fledging each year and their survival rate . Chicks fledging under good conditions are more likely to survive to breeding age , and have longer breeding lives than those fledging under poor conditions . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The red @-@ billed chough 's food consists largely of insects , spiders and other invertebrates taken from the ground , with ants probably being the most significant item . The Central Asian subspecies P. p. centralis will perch on the backs of wild or domesticated mammals to feed on parasites . Although invertebrates make up most of the chough 's diet , it will eat vegetable matter including fallen grain , and in the Himalayas has been reported as damaging barley crops by breaking off the ripening heads to extract the corn . In the Himalayas , they form large flocks in winter . 
 The preferred feeding habitat is short grass produced by grazing , for example by sheep and rabbits , the numbers of which are linked to the chough 's breeding success . Suitable feeding areas can also arise where plant growth is hindered by exposure to coastal salt spray or poor soils . It will use its long curved bill to pick ants , dung beetles and emerging flies off the surface , or to dig for grubs and other invertebrates . The typical excavation depth of 2 – 3 cm ( 1 – 1 in ) reflects the thin soils which it feeds on , and the depths at which many invertebrates occur , but it may dig to 10 – 20 cm ( 4 – 8 in ) in appropriate conditions . 
 Where the two chough species occur together , there is only limited competition for food . An Italian study showed that the vegetable part of the winter diet for the red @-@ billed chough was almost exclusively Gagea bulbs , whilst the Alpine chough took berries and hips . In June , red @-@ billed choughs fed on Lepidoptera larvae whereas Alpine choughs ate cranefly pupae . Later in the summer , the Alpine chough mainly consumed grasshoppers , whilst the red @-@ billed chough added cranefly pupae , fly larvae and beetles to its diet . Both choughs will hide food in cracks and fissures , concealing the cache with a few pebbles . 
 = = = Natural threats = = = 
 The red @-@ billed chough 's predators include the peregrine falcon , golden eagle and Eurasian eagle @-@ owl , while the common raven will take nestlings . In northern Spain , red @-@ billed choughs preferentially nest near lesser kestrel colonies . This small insectivorous falcon is better at detecting a predator and more vigorous in defence than its corvid neighbours . The breeding success of the red @-@ billed chough in the vicinity of the kestrels was found to be much higher than that of birds elsewhere , with a lower percentage of nest failures ( 16 % near the falcon , 65 % elsewhere ) . 
 This species is occasionally parasitised by the great spotted cuckoo , a brood parasite for which the Eurasian magpie is the primary host . Red @-@ billed choughs can acquire blood parasites such as Plasmodium , but a study in Spain showed that the prevalence was less than one percent , and unlikely to affect the life history and conservation of this species . These low levels of parasitism contrast with a much higher prevalence in some other passerine groups ; for example a study of thrushes in Russia showed that all the fieldfares , redwings and song thrushes sampled carried <unk> , particularly Haemoproteus and Trypanosoma . 
 Red @-@ billed choughs can also carry mites , but a study of the feather mite <unk> <unk> , acquired by young birds a few months after fledging when they join communal roosts , suggested that this parasite actually improved the body condition of its host . It is possible that the feather mites enhance feather cleaning and deter pathogens , and may complement other feather care measures such as sunbathing , and anting — rubbing the plumage with ants ( the formic acid from the insects deters parasites ) . 
 = = Status = = 
 The red @-@ billed chough has an extensive range , estimated at 10 million square kilometres ( 3 @.@ 8 million sq mi ) , and a large population , including an estimated 86 @,@ 000 to 210 @,@ 000 individuals in Europe . Over its range as a whole , the species is not believed to approach the thresholds for the global population decline criterion of the IUCN Red List ( i.e. , declining more than 30 % in ten years or three generations ) , and is therefore evaluated as least concern . 
 However , the European range has declined and fragmented due to the loss of traditional pastoral farming , persecution and perhaps disturbance at breeding and nesting sites , although the numbers in France , Great Britain and Ireland may now have stabilised . The European breeding population is between 12 @,@ 265 – 17 @,@ 370 pairs , but only in Spain is the species still widespread . Since in the rest of the continent breeding areas are fragmented and isolated , the red @-@ billed chough has been categorised as " vulnerable " in Europe . 
 In Spain , the red @-@ billed chough has recently expanded its range by utilising old buildings , with 1 @,@ 175 breeding pairs in a 9 @,@ 716 square kilometres ( 3 @,@ 751 square miles ) mi ) study area . These new breeding areas usually surround the original montane core areas . However , the populations with nest sites on buildings are threatened by human disturbance , persecution and the loss of old buildings . Fossils of both chough species were found in the mountains of the Canary Islands . The local extinction of the Alpine chough and the reduced range of red @-@ billed chough in the islands may have been due to climate change or human activity . 
 A small group of wild red @-@ billed chough arrived naturally in Cornwall in 2001 , and nested in the following year . This was the first English breeding record since 1947 , and a slowly expanding population has bred every subsequent year . 
 In Jersey , the Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust , in partnership with the States of Jersey and the National Trust for Jersey began a project in 2010 , aimed at restoring selected areas of Jersey 's coastline with the intention of returning those birds that had become locally extinct . The red @-@ billed chough was chosen as a flagship species for this project , having been absent from Jersey since around 1900 . Durrell initially received two pairs of choughs from Paradise Park in Cornwall and began a captive breeding programme . In 2012 , the red @-@ billed choughs were living free in the central valley area of Durrell Wildlife Park , and the Trust expects colonisation of the coastal areas of Jersey in the following years . 
 = = In culture = = 
 In Greek mythology , the red @-@ billed chough , also known as ' sea @-@ crow ' , was considered sacred to the Titan Cronus and dwelt on Calypso 's ' Blessed Island ' , where " The birds of broadest wing their mansions form / The chough , the sea @-@ mew , the loquacious crow . " 
 The red @-@ billed chough has a long association with Cornwall , and appears on the Cornish coat of arms . According to Cornish legend King Arthur did not die after his last battle but rather his soul migrated into the body of a red @-@ billed chough , the red colour of its bill and legs being derived from the blood of the last battle and hence killing this bird was unlucky . Legend also holds that after the last Cornish chough departs from Cornwall , then the return of the chough , as happened in 2001 , will mark the return of King Arthur . 
 Up to the eighteenth century , the red @-@ billed chough was associated with fire @-@ raising , and was described by William Camden as <unk> avis , " <unk> it secretly <unk> fire sticks , setting their houses afire " . Daniel Defoe was also familiar with this story : 
 It is counted little better than a kite , for it is of ravenous quality , and is very mischievous ; it will steal and carry away any thing it finds about the house , that is not too heavy , tho ' not fit for its food ; as knives , forks , spoons and <unk> cloths , or whatever it can fly away with , sometimes they say it has stolen bits of firebrands , or lighted candles , and lodged them in the stacks of corn , and the thatch of barns and houses , and set them on fire ; but this I only had by oral tradition . 
 Not all mentions of " chough " refer to this species . Because of the origins of its name , when Shakespeare writes of " the crows and choughs that wing the midway air " [ King Lear , act 4 , scene 6 ] or Henry VIII 's Vermin Act of 1532 is " <unk> to <unk> <unk> , Crowes and <unk> " , they are clearly referring to the jackdaw . 
 Since at least the 14th century , Thomas Becket , Archbishop of Canterbury has been attributed a coat of arms consisting of three Cornish choughs on a silver field . The symbolism behind this is not known for certain ; according to one legend , a chough strayed into the cathedral during Becket 's murder , while another school of thought states that the choughs are a canting reference to Becket 's name , as they were once known as " <unk> " . The latter theory does not stand up to scrutiny , as the use of the term " <unk> " to mean a chough is not found before the 19th century . Regardless of its origin , the chough is still used in heraldry as a symbol of Becket , and appears in the arms of several persons and institutions associated with him , most prominently the city of Canterbury . 
 This species has been depicted on the stamps of Bhutan , The Gambia , the Isle of Man , Turkmenistan and Yugoslavia . 
 = United States Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in Labor and Management = 
 The United States Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in Labor and Management ( also known as the McClellan Committee ) was a select committee created by the United States Senate on January 30 , 1957 , and dissolved on March 31 , 1960 . The select committee was directed to study the extent of criminal or other improper practices in the field of labor @-@ management relations or in groups of employees or employers , and to suggest changes in the laws of the United States that would provide protection against such practices or activities . It conducted 253 active investigations , served 8 @,@ 000 subpoenas for witnesses and documents , held 270 days of hearings , took testimony from 1 @,@ 526 witnesses ( 343 of whom invoked the Fifth Amendment ) , and compiled almost 150 @,@ 000 pages of testimony . At the peak of its activity in 1958 , 104 persons worked for the committee . 
 The select committee 's work led directly to the enactment of the Labor @-@ Management Reporting and Disclosure Act ( Public Law 86 @-@ 257 , also known as the Landrum @-@ Griffin Act ) on September 14 , 1959 . 
 = = Background and creation = = 
 In December 1952 , Robert F. Kennedy was appointed assistant counsel for the Committee on Government Operations by the then @-@ chairman of the committee , Senator Joseph McCarthy . Kennedy resigned in July 1953 , but rejoined the committee staff as chief minority counsel in February 1954 . When the Democrats regained the majority in January 1955 , Kennedy became the committee 's chief counsel . Soon thereafter , the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the U.S. Senate Committee on Government Operations , under the leadership of Democratic Senator John L. McClellan ( chair of the committee and subcommittee ) , began holding hearings into labor racketeering . 
 Much of the Permanent Subcommittee 's work focused on a scandal which emerged in 1956 in the powerful trade union , the International Brotherhood of Teamsters . In the mid @-@ 1950s , Midwestern Teamster leader Jimmy Hoffa began an effort to unseat Dave Beck , the union 's international president . In October 1955 , mobster Johnny Dio met with Hoffa in New York City and the two men conspired to create as many as 15 paper locals ( fake local unions which existed only on paper ) to boost Hoffa 's delegate totals . When the paper locals applied for charters from the international union , Hoffa 's political foes were outraged . A major battle broke out within the Teamsters over whether to charter the locals , and the media attention led to investigations by the U.S. Department of Justice and the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations . 
 Beck and other Teamster leaders subsequently challenged the authority of the Permanent Subcommittee to investigate the union by arguing that the Senate 's Labor and Public Welfare Committee had jurisdiction over labor racketeering , not Government Operations . McClellan objected to the transfer of his investigation to the Labor Committee because he felt the Labor chairman , Senator John F. Kennedy , was too close to union leaders and would not thoroughly investigate organized labor . 
 To solve its jurisdictional and political problems , the Senate established on January 30 , 1957 , an entirely new committee , the Select Committee on Improper Activities in Labor and Management , and gave it broad subpoena and investigative powers . The new select committee was given a year to complete its work , and charged with studying the extent of criminal or other improper practices in the field of labor @-@ management relations or in groups of employees or employers . Half the membership was drawn from the Committee on Government Operations and half from the Committee on Labor and Public Welfare . McClellan , Ervin , McCarthy , and Mundt were drawn from Government Operations , and Kennedy , McNamara , Ives , and Goldwater from Labor . An equal number of Democrats and Republicans sat on the Select Committee . Senator McClellan was named chair of the Select Committee , and Republican Senator Irving Ives of New York vice chair . Democrats and liberals , primarily , criticized the committee for not having a neutral attitude toward labor . Only three of the committee 's eight members looked on organized labor favorably , and only one of them ( Senator Patrick McNamara ) was strongly pro @-@ labor . The committee 's other five members were strongly pro @-@ management , and that included the Select Committee 's Southern conservative chair , John L. McClellan . McClellan hired Robert F. Kennedy as the subcommittee 's chief counsel and investigator . Kennedy , too , did not have a neutral opinion of labor unions . Appalled by stories he had heard about union intimidation on the West Coast , Kennedy undertook the chief counsel 's job determined to root out union malfeasance and with little knowledge or understanding of or even concern over management misbehavior . The biases of the Select Committee members and its chief counsel , some observers concluded , led the committee to view corruption in labor @-@ management relations as a problem with unions , not management , and management as nothing more than a victim . 
 Senator McClellan gave Robert Kennedy extensive control over the scheduling of testimony , areas of investigation , and questioning of witnesses . This suited McClellan , a conservative Democrat and opponent of labor unions : Robert Kennedy would take the brunt of organized labor 's outrage , while McClellan would be free to pursue an anti @-@ labor legislative agenda once the hearings began to draw to a close . Republican members of the Select Committee voiced strong disagreement with McClellan 's decision to let Kennedy set the direction for the committee and ask most of the questions , but McClellan largely ignored their protests . Robert Kennedy proved to be an <unk> interrogator , fumbling questions and engaging in shouting matches with witnesses rather than laying out legal cases against them . McClellan and Kennedy 's goal had been to refer nearly all their investigations to the Justice Department for <unk> , but the department refused to do so because it concluded that nearly all the legal cases were significantly flawed . A frustrated Robert Kennedy publicly complained about the Justice Department 's decisions in September 1958 . 
 Chief Counsel Kennedy resolved to investigate a wide range of labor unions and corporations , including the International Brotherhood of Teamsters , the United Auto Workers ( UAW ) , Anheuser @-@ Busch , Sears , and Occidental Life Insurance . The Select Committee also established formal liaisons with the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) , Internal Revenue Service , Federal Narcotics Bureau , Department of Labor , and other federal agencies as well as state and local offices and officials involved in law enforcement . 
 = = Investigations = = 
 The Select Committee focused its attention for most of 1957 on the Teamsters union . Teamsters President Dave Beck fled the country for a month to avoid its subpoenas before returning in March 1957 . The Select Committee had a difficult time investigating the Teamsters . Four of the paper locals were dissolved to avoid committee scrutiny , several Teamster staffers provided verbal testimony which differed substantially from their prior written statements ( the Select Committee eventually charged six of them with contempt of Congress ) , and union records were lost or destroyed ( allegedly on purpose ) . But , working with the FBI , the Select Committee electrified the nation when on February 22 , 1957 , wiretaps were played in public before a national television audience in which Dio and Hoffa discussed the creation of even more paper locals , including the establishment of a paper local to organize New York City 's 30 @,@ 000 taxi cab drivers and use the charter as a means of extorting money from a wide variety of employers . The 1957 hearings opened with a focus on corruption in Portland , Oregon , and featured the testimony of Portland crime boss Jim Elkins . With the support of 70 hours of taped conversations , Elkins described being approached by two Seattle gangsters about working with the Teamsters to take over Portland vice operations . The colorful testimony brought the committee 's investigations national media attention from the outset . As 1 @.@ 2 million viewers watched on live television , evidence was unearthed over the next few weeks of a mob @-@ sponsored plot in which Oregon Teamsters unions would seize control of the state legislature , state police , and state attorney general 's office through bribery , extortion and blackmail . On March 14 , 1957 , Jimmy Hoffa was arrested for allegedly trying to bribe an aide to the Select Committee . Hoffa denied the charges ( and was later acquitted ) , but the arrest trigged additional investigations and more arrests and indictments over the following weeks . Less than a week later , Beck admitted to receiving an interest @-@ free $ 300 @,@ 000 loan from the Teamsters which he had never repaid , and Select Committee investigators claimed that loans to Beck and other union officials ( and their businesses ) had cost the Teamsters more than $ 700 @,@ 000 . Beck appeared before the Select Committee for the first time on March 25 , 1957 , and notoriously invoked his Fifth Amendment right against self @-@ incrimination 117 times . Beck was called before the McClellan Committee again in May 1957 , and additional interest @-@ free loans and other potentially illegal and unethical financial transactions exposed . Based on these revelations , Beck was indicted for tax evasion on May 2 , 1957 . 
 The Beck and Hoffa hearings generated strong criticisms of Robert Kennedy . Many liberal critics said he was a brow @-@ beater , <unk> , insolent , overbearing , intolerant , and even vicious . Hoffa and other witnesses often were able to anger Kennedy to the point where he lost control , and would shout and insult them . Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas , one of Robert Kennedy 's mentors and a close friend , criticized Kennedy for presuming the guilt of anyone who exercised his Fifth Amendment rights . Noted attorney Edward Bennett Williams accused the Select Committee of bringing witnesses into executive session , ascertaining that they would exercise their Fifth Amendment rights , and then force them to return in public and refuse to answer questions — merely to generate media attention . The Chicago American newspaper so strongly criticized Robert Kennedy for his overbearing , zealous behavior during the hearings that a worried Joseph P. Kennedy , Sr. rushed to Washington , D.C. to see for himself if Robert Kennedy was endangering John Kennedy 's political future . 
 During much of the summer and fall of 1957 , the Select Committee investigated corruption in the Bakery Workers Union , United Textile Workers , Amalgamated Meat Cutters Union , and Transport Workers Union . In the late fall , the committee focused its attention on union @-@ busting , and examined the behavior of companies such as Morton Packing Company , Continental Baking Company , and Sears , Roebuck and Company . 
 While continuing to investigate and hold hearings on other unions and corporations , the McClellan Committee also began to examine the behavior of Jimmy Hoffa and other Teamsters officials . Senator McClellan accused Hoffa of attempting to gain control of the nation 's economy and set himself up as a sort of private government . The Select Committee also accused Hoffa of instigating the creation of the paper locals , and of arranging for a $ 400 @,@ 000 loan to the graft @-@ ridden International <unk> 's Association in a bid to take over that union and gain Teamsters control of the waterfront as well as warehouses . Johnny Dio , who by late summer 1957 was in prison serving time on bribery and conspiracy charges , was paroled by a federal court in order to testify at the Select Committee 's hearings . But in a two @-@ hour appearance before the Select Committee , Dio invoked his Fifth Amendment right against self @-@ incrimination 140 times , and refused to answer any of the committee 's questions . But despite the problems encountered in interrogating Dio , the Select Committee developed additional testimony and evidence alleging widespread corruption in Hoffa @-@ controlled Teamster units was presented in public in August 1957 . The worsening corruption scandal led the AFL @-@ CIO to eject the Teamsters on December 6 , 1957 . 
 As the Hoffa hearings occurred in August 1957 , the Select Committee met in executive session to restructure its organizations and set its agenda for the future . The Select Committee had succeeded in securing the removal of Beck as Teamsters president and seemed on the verge of sending Jimmy Hoffa to jail as well , but the Committee had also been strongly criticized for its handling of witnesses and its apparent one @-@ sidedness in exposing union but not management corruption . To guide the Select Committee 's investigations in the future , McClellan established a set of 11 areas of investigation for the committee , nine of which involved labor misdeeds and only one of which involved management misbehavior ( preventing workers from organizing unions ) . The management @-@ oriented area came last on the committee 's list of priorities , and there were no staff assigned to investigate the issue . 
 Under the new guidelines , the Select Committee 's schedule of hearings slowed . In January 1958 , Chairman McClellan asked for and received permission from the Senate to extend the deadline for completing the committee 's work for another year . For a short time early in the year , the Select Committee investigated the International Union of Operating Engineers , and uncovered a limited financial scandal at the top of the union . But the main focus of the committee for the first half of the year was the United Auto Workers . Republicans on the Select Committee , notably Barry Goldwater , had for several months in late 1957 accused Robert Kennedy of covering up extensive corruption in the UAW . The Republicans pointed to a lengthy , ongoing , and sometimes violent strike which the UAW was conducting against the Kohler plumbing fixtures company in Wisconsin . Walter Reuther , President of the Auto Workers , told Select Committee investigators that the Kohler Company was committing numerous unfair labor practices against the union and that the union 's books were in order . Despite no evidence of any mismanagement or organized crime infiltration , Kennedy and McClellan went ahead with hearings on the UAW in February 1958 . The five @-@ week series of hearings produced no evidence of corruption . A second set of hearings into the UAW in September 1959 lasted just six days , and once more uncovered no evidence of UAW malfeasance . The September 1959 hearings were the last public hearings the embarrassed committee ever held . 
 As the UAW hearings were winding down , the Select Committee issued its first Interim Report on March 24 , 1958 . The report roundly condemned Jimmy Hoffa ( by now President of the Teamsters ) and accused the Teamsters of gathering enough power to destroy the national economy . <unk> its attention back on the Teamsters , the Select Committee held a short set of hearings in August 1958 intended to expose corruption by the Hoffa regime . But a number of witnesses recanted their written testimony and the hearings led nowhere . 
 In February 1959 , the Select Committee 's attention turned to an investigation of organized crime . McClellan had won yet another one @-@ year extension of the Select Committee 's existence in January , giving it additional time for more investigations . This new focus was a natural outgrowth of the committee 's previous investigations , but it also reflected the committee 's frustration at uncovering no additional scandals like the one which had rocked the Teamsters . Through much of the spring and summer of 1959 , the committee held a series of public hearings which brought a number of organized crime figures to the public 's attention , including Anthony <unk> , Vito Genovese , Anthony Provenzano , Joey <unk> , Sam Giancana , and Carlos Marcello . Although more muted and less frequent , criticisms of the Select Committee and Robert Kennedy continued . Kennedy 's moralism about labor racketeering , several high @-@ profile critics concluded , even endangered the Constitution . Although McClellan wanted to further investigate organized crime , the Select Committee had reached the limits of its jurisdiction and no further investigations were made . 
 By September 1959 , it was clear that the Select Committee was not developing additional information to justify continued operation . A second interim report was released in August 1959 once again denouncing the Teamsters and Jimmy Hoffa . Robert F. Kennedy resigned as the Select Committee 's chief counsel on September 11 , 1959 , and joined Senator John F. Kennedy 's presidential campaign as campaign manager . Committee members became more involved in passing legislation to deal with the abuses uncovered . 
 Although his committee had already been dissolved by 1960 , McClellan began a related three @-@ year investigation in 1963 into the union benefit plans of labor leader George Barasch , alleging misuse and diversion of $ 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 of benefit funds . McClellan 's notable failure to find any legal wrongdoing led to his introduction of several pieces of new legislation including McClellan 's own bill on October 12 , 1965 setting new fiduciary standards for plan trustees . Senator Jacob K. Javits ( R ) of New York also introduced bills in 1965 and 1967 increasing regulation on welfare and pension funds to limit the control of plan trustees and administrators . Provisions from all three bills ultimately evolved into the guidelines enacted in the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 ( ERISA ) . 
 = = Disbandment and legislative and other outcomes = = 
 The final report of the Select Committee on Improper Activities in Labor and Management was issued on March 31 , 1960 . At that time , the authority granted by the Senate to the Select Committee was transferred to the Committee on Government Operations . 
 During its existence , the Select Committee conducted 253 active investigations , served 8 @,@ 000 subpoenas for witnesses and documents , held 270 days of hearings with 1 @,@ 526 witnesses ( 343 of whom invoked the Fifth Amendment ) , compiled almost 150 @,@ 000 pages of testimony , and issued two interim and one final report . At its peak , 104 persons were engaged in the work of the committee , including 34 field investigators . Another 58 staffers were delegated to the committee by the Government Accounting Office and worked in Detroit , Chicago , New York City , and southern Florida . To accommodate the huge staff , a corridor was blocked off in the Old Senate Office Building and turned into a suite of offices . 
 Some observers continued to criticize the Select Committee . In 1961 , Yale Law professor Alexander Bickel accused Kennedy of being punitive and battering witnesses , compared his tactics to those of Joseph McCarthy , and declared Kennedy unfit to be Attorney General . At the turn of the century , historians and biographers continued to criticize the Select Committee 's lack of respect for the constitutional rights of witnesses brought before it . 
 = = = Legislative and legal outcomes = = = 
 Several historic legal developments came out of the select committee 's investigation , including a U.S. Supreme Court decision and landmark labor legislation . The right of union officials to exercise their Fifth Amendment rights was upheld and a significant refinement of constitutional law made when the U.S. Supreme Court reaffirmed the right of union officials to not divulge the location of union records in Curcio v. United States , 354 U.S. 118 ( 1957 ) . 
 The scandals uncovered by the Select Committee led directly to passage of the Labor @-@ Management Reporting and Disclosure Act ( also known as the Landrum @-@ Griffin Act ) in 1959 . Calls for legislation and drafts of bills began circulating in the Senate as early as May 1957 . Among the more prominent bills was one submitted in 1958 by Senators John F. Kennedy and Irving Ives ( with assistance from nationally @-@ known labor law professor Archibald Cox ) which covered 30 areas , including union recordkeeping , finances , and democratic organizational structures and rules . The Kennedy @-@ Ives bill proved immensely controversial , leading to the longest Senate debate of the year , and the greatest number of amendments and floor votes any piece of legislation that year . But President Dwight D. Eisenhower opposed the bill and it died when the Congressional session ended in December 1958 . Kennedy reintroduced the bill , with some additional provisions , in 1959 . Although Ives had retired from the Senate , Senator Sam Ervin agreed to co @-@ sponsor the revised bill . The Kennedy @-@ Ervin bill also encountered stiff opposition , and Republicans were able to win Senate approval of a management " bill of rights " to the bill which labor strongly denounced . But with this and other Republican @-@ backed amendments , the bill passed the Senate overwhelmingly . 
 By 1959 the Eisenhower administration had crafted its own bill , which was co @-@ sponsored in the House of Representatives by Phillip M. Landrum ( Democrat from Georgia ) and Robert P. Griffin ( Republican from Michigan ) . The Landrum @-@ Griffin bill contained much stricter financial reporting and fiduciary restrictions than the Kennedy @-@ Ervin bill as well as several unrelated provisions restricting union organizing , picketing , and boycott activity . A conference committee to reconcile the House and Senate bills began meeting on August 18 , 1959 . On September 3 and 4 , the House and Senate passed the conference committee bill , which was far closer to the original Landrum @-@ Griffin bill than the Kennedy @-@ Ervin bill , and President Eisenhower signed the bill into law on September 14 , 1959 . 
 After the Select Committee 's mandate expired , Senator McClellan and others advocated that the Senate expand the jurisdiction of one or more committees not only to provide oversight of the new labor law but also to continue the Senate 's investigations into organized crime . McClellan originally sought jurisdiction for his own Committee on Government Operations , but members of his committee balked at the request . However , McClellan was able to convince the full Senate to impose jurisdiction on Government Operations , and the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations began making inquiries into matters pertaining to syndicated or organized crime . 
 = = = Impact on key participants = = = 
 The national attention paid to Robert F. Kennedy during the Select Committee 's hearings helped launch his career as a government official and politician . It also earned him a reputation for ruthlessness and hard work . His experiences with the Select Committee significantly affected Robert Kennedy , and strongly influenced his decision to make fighting organized crime a high priority during his tenure as United States Attorney General . After leaving the Select Committee , Robert F. Kennedy spent the better part of a year writing about his experiences and what he had learned about unions and organized crime . Kennedy 's book , The Enemy Within , was published in February 1960 . 
 The hearings also made Jimmy Hoffa a household name in the United States . The hearings were a critical turning point in Hoffa 's career as a labor leader . Bringing down Dave Beck ensured that Hoffa would become president of the Teamsters , an outcome Robert Kennedy later regretted . Although Hoffa was indicted several times in federal and state courts based on evidence uncovered by the Select Committee , he was never convicted on any of the charges . Prosecutors and others accused Hoffa of jury tampering and <unk> witnesses in order to beat conviction , but these charges also were never proven in a court of law . After he became U.S. Attorney General in January 1961 , Robert F. Kennedy formed a " get Hoffa squad " whose mission was to identify additional evidence and secure a conviction against Hoffa . Kennedy 's focus on Hoffa was so strong that many observers at the time as well as later historians believed Kennedy had a personal vendetta against Hoffa . Hoffa was eventually convicted by a federal district court jury on March 4 , 1964 , on two counts of tampering with the jury during his 1962 conspiracy trial in Nashville , Tennessee , and sentenced to eight years in prison and a $ 10 @,@ 000 fine . While on bail during his appeal , a second federal district court jury convicted Hoffa on July 26 , 1964 , on one count of conspiracy and three counts of mail and wire fraud . Hoffa entered prison on March 7 , 1967 , and Frank Fitzsimmons was named Acting President of the union . Hoffa resigned as Teamsters president on July 9 , 1971 . Barred by a commutation of sentence agreement from participating directly or indirectly in union activities until 1980 , Hoffa was released from prison on December 23 , 1971 , but disappeared on July 30 , 1975 ( and was presumably murdered ) . 
 The hearings had positive benefits for other key participants as well . The Kennedy @-@ Ives bill was Senator John F. Kennedy 's most important legislative accomplishment , and although it was not enacted into law many Senators nonetheless revised their opinion and now saw him as a serious legislator . This helped remove a major obstacle to Kennedy 's political aspirations . Kennedy also used the publicity he gained from the Select Committee 's work to launch his own presidential bid in 1960 . The work of the Select Committee also was a key turning point in the Senate career of John L. McClellan . McClellan devoted significant time and resources of the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations ( of which he was chair ) to pushing anti @-@ organized crime agenda in 1960s , and his efforts kept the issue alive despite the prominence of other issues such as the civil rights movement and Vietnam War . When limited jurisdiction over organized crime was transferred to the Committee on Government Operations after the disbandment of the Select Committee , Senator McClellan held a number of sensational hearings on organized crime from 1960 to 1964 which became known as the <unk> Hearings . In 1962 , McClellan published his own account of the Select Committee 's activities and findings in the book Crime Without Punishment . The senator sponsored several pieces of important anti @-@ crime legislation in the 1960s and early 1970s , including the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 and the Organized Crime Control Act of 1970 ( part of which contains the highly influential Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act ) . 
 = = Members = = 
 = = = 85th United States Congress = = = 
 The Select Committee 's chair was Senator John L. McClellan , and the vice chair was Senator Irving Ives . An equal number of Democrats and Republicans sat on the committee . Republican Senator Joseph McCarthy died on May 2 , 1957 , and was replaced by Republican Senator Homer E. Capehart . Democratic Senator Patrick McNamara resigned from the committee on March 31 , 1958 , to protest the Select Committee 's rough treatment of union witnesses . He was replaced by Democratic Senator Frank Church . 
 = = = 86th United States Congress = = = 
 The Select Committee 's chair was Senator John L. McClellan . With the retirement of Senator Irving Ives from the Senate in December 1958 , the new Vice Chair became Senator Karl E. Mundt . Senator Homer E. Capehart joined the committee to keep the partisan balance . 
 = = = Chairmen and staff = = = 
 Senator John L. McClellan ( D @-@ Arkansas ) was the committee 's only chair for its entire history . 
 At the peak of its activity in 1958 , 104 persons worked for the committee , including 34 field investigators . Another 58 staff were loaned to the committee from the General Accounting Office . Committee staff included : 
 Robert F. Kennedy , Chief Counsel . 
 Carmine Bellino , Chief Assistant to the Chief Counsel . 
 Angela Novello , Personal Secretary to the Chief Counsel . 
 Robert E. Manuel , Assistant Counsel . 
 Walter Sheridan , Chief Investigator . 
 Paul Tierney , investigator . 
 <unk> J. Duffy , investigator . 
 Richard G. Sinclair , investigator . 
 James F. <unk> , investigator . 
 John T. <unk> , investigator . 
 Ruth Y. Watt , Chief Clerk . 
 Kenneth O 'Donnell , administrative assistant . 
 Pierre Salinger , investigator . 
 John Seigenthaler , investigator . 
 Edwin Guthman , investigator . 
 = USS Massachusetts ( BB @-@ 2 ) = 
 USS Massachusetts ( BB @-@ 2 ) was an Indiana @-@ class battleship and the second United States Navy ship comparable to foreign battleships of the time . Authorized in 1890 and commissioned six years later , she was a small battleship , though with heavy armor and ordnance . The ship class also pioneered the use of an intermediate battery . She was designed for coastal defense and as a result her decks were not safe from high waves on the open ocean . 
 Massachusetts served in the Spanish – American War ( 1898 ) as part of the Flying Squadron and took part in the blockades of Cienfuegos and Santiago de Cuba . She missed the decisive Battle of Santiago de Cuba after steaming to Guantánamo Bay the night before to resupply coal . After the war she served with the North Atlantic Squadron , performing training maneuvers and gunnery practice . During this period she suffered an explosion in an 8 @-@ inch gun turret , killing nine , and ran aground twice , requiring several months of repair both times . She was decommissioned in 1906 for modernization . 
 Although considered obsolete in 1910 , the battleship was recommissioned and used for annual cruises for midshipmen during the summers and otherwise laid up in the reserve fleet until her decommissioning in 1914 . In 1917 she was recommissioned to serve as a training ship for gun crews during World War I. She was decommissioned for the final time in March 1919 under the name Coast Battleship Number 2 so that her name could be reused for USS Massachusetts ( BB @-@ 54 ) . In 1921 she was scuttled in shallow water off the coast of Pensacola , Florida and then used as a target for experimental artillery . The ship was never scrapped and in 1956 it was declared the property of the state of Florida . Since 1993 the wreck has been a Florida Underwater Archaeological Preserve and is included in the National Register of Historic Places . It serves as an artificial reef and diving spot . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Massachusetts was constructed from a modified version of a design drawn up by a policy board in 1889 for a short @-@ range battleship . The original design was part of an ambitious naval construction plan to build 33 battleships and 167 smaller ships . The United States Congress saw the plan as an attempt to end the U.S. policy of isolationism and did not approve it , but a year later approved funding for three coast defense battleships , which would become Massachusetts and her sister ships Indiana and Oregon . The ships were limited to coastal defense due to their moderate endurance , relatively small displacement and low freeboard , or distance from the deck to the water , which limited seagoing capability . They were however heavily armed and armored ; Conway 's All The World 's Fighting Ships describes their design as " attempting too much on a very limited displacement . " 
 Construction of the ships was authorized on 30 June 1890 and the contract for Massachusetts — not including guns and armor — was awarded to William Cramp & Sons of Philadelphia , who offered to build it for $ 3 @,@ 020 @,@ 000 . The total cost of the ship was almost twice as high , approximately $ 6 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . The contract specified the ship had to be built in three years , but slow delivery of armor plates and guns caused a delay . Her keel was laid down on 25 June 1891 and she was launched two years later on 10 June 1893 . The launching ceremony was attended by thousands of people , including Secretary of the Navy Hilary A. Herbert and commander George Dewey . Her preliminary sea trial did not take place until March 1896 because of the delays in armor and gun deliveries . At this point Massachusetts was almost complete , and her official trial was held a month later . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Massachusetts was commissioned on 10 June 1896 with Captain Frederick Rodgers in command . She had her shakedown cruise between August and November 1896 , followed by an overhaul at the New York Navy Yard . In February 1897 she made a short voyage to Charleston , South Carolina . The battleship departed New York again in May for Boston , where a celebration in her honor was held . For the next ten months the warship participated in training maneuvers with the North Atlantic Squadron off the coast of Florida and visited several major ports on the American east coast . On 27 March 1898 , she was ordered to Hampton Roads to join the Flying Squadron under Commodore Winfield Scott Schley for the blockade of Cuba . 
 = = = Spanish – American War = = = 
 After the outbreak of the Spanish – American War the Flying Squadron steamed to Key West . There Schley met with Rear Admiral Sampson , who had just returned from the bombardment of San Juan , Puerto Rico . They discussed the possible locations of the Spanish squadron under Admiral Cervera , and Schley was sent to the harbor of Cienfuegos , Cuba to look for Cervera . Schley arrived off Cienfuegos on 22 May and took several days to establish that Cervera 's ships were not in the harbor . The squadron then proceeded to Santiago de Cuba , the only other port on the southern coast of Cuba large enough for the Spanish ships , arriving after several delays on 29 May . On arrival , the Spanish cruiser Cristóbal Colón was visible from outside the harbor entrance , confirming that the Spanish fleet was in the harbor . Schley blockaded the harbor and informed Sampson , who arrived with his own squadron on 1 June and assumed overall command . 
 During the next month Massachusetts took part in the blockade of Santiago , occasionally bombarding the harbor forts . On the night of 2 – 3 July she and the two cruisers New Orleans and Newark left the blockade to load coal in Guantanamo Bay . This caused her to miss the Battle of Santiago de Cuba on 3 July , in which the Spanish fleet attempted to break through the blockade and was completely destroyed . The next day the battleship came back to Santiago , where she and Texas fired at the disarmed Spanish cruiser Reina Mercedes , which was being scuttled by the Spanish in an attempt to block the harbor entrance channel . Massachusetts was then sent to Puerto Rico to support the American occupation until she steamed home to New York on 1 August , arriving on 20 August . 
 = = = Post Spanish – American War = = = 
 After a quick overhaul in drydock , Massachusetts was attempting to leave New York Harbor on 10 December 1898 when she struck Diamond Reef , flooding five of her forward compartments . She was forced to return to the navy yard , where she was placed in drydock again for repairs which took around three months . For a year Massachusetts served with the North Atlantic Squadron , visiting various cities on the Atlantic coast . In May 1900 , she and Indiana were placed in reserve as the navy had an acute officer shortage and needed to put the new Kearsarge @-@ class and Illinois @-@ class battleships into commission . The battleships were reactivated the following month as an experiment in how quickly this could be achieved , and Massachusetts returned to service with the North Atlantic Squadron . 
 In March 1901 the battleship grounded again , this time in the harbor of Pensacola , Florida , but the ship was able to continue her trip . A more serious accident occurred during target practice in January 1903 , when an explosion in an 8 @-@ inch turret killed nine crew members . They were the first fatalities aboard a United States battleship since the sinking of the Maine . Another accident happened in August of that year , when Massachusetts grounded on a rock in Frenchman Bay , Maine . The ship was seriously damaged and had to be repaired in drydock . In December 1904 yet another lethal accident took place aboard Massachusetts : three men were killed and several others badly burned when a broken gasket caused steam to fill the boiler room . On 8 January 1906 the battleship was decommissioned and her crew was transferred to her sister ship Indiana , which had completed a three @-@ year modernization . Massachusetts now received the same upgrades , including twelve 3 " / 50 caliber gun single @-@ purpose guns to replace the 6 @-@ inch and most of the lighter guns , new Babcock & Wilcox boilers , counterweights to balance her main turrets , a lattice mast and electric traversing mechanisms for her turrets . 
 On 2 May 1910 Massachusetts was placed in reduced commission so she could be used for the annual Naval Academy midshipmen summer cruise . Despite her modernizations the battleship was now regarded as " obsolete and worthless , even for the second line of defense " by Secretary of the Navy George von Lengerke Meyer . She saw little use other than summer cruises and was transferred to the Atlantic Reserve Fleet when it was formed in 1912 . After a quick trip to New York for a Presidential Fleet Review in October 1912 , the warship returned to Philadelphia and stayed there until she was decommissioned on 23 May 1914 . 
 = = = World War I and beyond = = = 
 After the United States entered World War I Massachusetts was recommissioned for the final time on 9 June 1917 . She was used by Naval Reserve gun crews for gunnery training in Block Island Sound until 27 May 1918 . The battleship was then redeployed to serve as a heavy gun target practice ship near Chesapeake Bay until the end of World War I. Massachusetts returned to Philadelphia on 16 February 1919 . She was decommissioned for the final time on 31 March 1919 , after being re @-@ designated “ Coast Battleship Number 2 ” two days earlier so her name could be reused for Massachusetts ( BB @-@ 54 ) . 
 She was struck from the Naval Vessel Register on 22 November 1920 and loaned to the War Department , then used as a target ship for experimental artillery . She was scuttled in shallow water off Pensacola in January 1921 and bombarded by the coastal batteries of Fort Pickens and by railway artillery . She was returned on 20 February 1925 to the navy , which offered her for scrap , but no acceptable bids were received . Another attempt to scrap her was made in 1956 , but the state prevented this . Eventually the ship was declared the property of the State of Florida by the Supreme Court of Florida . On 10 June 1993 — the centennial anniversary of her launching — the site became the fourth Florida Underwater Archaeological Preserve . In 2001 the wreck was also added to the National Register of Historic Places , and it still serves as an artificial reef and diving spot . 
 = Sukhoi Su @-@ 35 = 
 The Sukhoi Su @-@ 35 ( Russian : <unk> Су @-@ 35 ; NATO reporting name : Flanker @-@ E ) is a designation for two separate , heavily upgraded derivatives of the Su @-@ 27 ' Flanker ' jet plane . They are single @-@ seat , twin @-@ engine , <unk> multirole fighters , designed by Sukhoi and built by Komsomolsk @-@ on @-@ Amur Aircraft Production Association ( KnAAPO ) . 
 The first variant was designed during the 1980s , when Sukhoi sought to upgrade its high @-@ performance Su @-@ 27 , and was initially known as the Su @-@ 27M . Later re @-@ designated Su @-@ 35 , this derivative incorporated aerodynamic refinements with increased manoeuvrability , enhanced avionics , longer range , and more powerful engines . The first Su @-@ 35 prototype , converted from a Su @-@ 27 , made its maiden flight in June 1988 . More than a dozen of these were built , some of which were used by the Russian Knights aerobatic demonstration team . The first Su @-@ 35 design was later modified into the Su @-@ 37 , which possessed thrust vectoring engines and was used as a technology demonstrator . A sole Su @-@ 35UB two @-@ seat trainer was built in the late 1990s that strongly resembled the Su @-@ 30MK family . 
 In 2003 , Sukhoi embarked on a second modernization of the Su @-@ 27 to produce what the company calls a 4 + + generation fighter that would bridge the gap between legacy fighters and the upcoming fifth @-@ generation Sukhoi PAK FA . This derivative , while omitting the canards and air brake , incorporates a reinforced airframe , improved avionics and radar , thrust @-@ vectoring engines , and a reduced frontal radar signature . In 2008 the revamped variant , erroneously named the Su @-@ 35BM in the media , began its flight test programme that would involve four prototypes , one of which was lost in 2009 . 
 The Russian Air Force has ordered 98 production units , designated Su @-@ 35S , of the newly revamped Su @-@ 35 . Both Su @-@ 35 models are marketed to many countries , including Brazil , China , India , Indonesia , and South Korea ; China ordered the Su @-@ 35 in late 2015 . Sukhoi originally projected that it would export more than 160 units of the second modernized Su @-@ 35 worldwide . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 = = = Upgraded Su @-@ 27 = = = 
 In the early 1980s , while the Su @-@ 27 was entering service with the Soviet Air Forces , Sukhoi looked to develop a follow @-@ on variant . Originally designated " Su @-@ 27M " and known internally as the " T10 @-@ M " , it would be much more agile and feature greatly improved avionics compared to the aircraft considered to be the best contemporary fighter . It was also to carry more armament to improve its Air @-@ to @-@ ground weaponry capabilities . 
 The improved variant , the development of which began in the early 1980s , featured a host of changes in aerodynamics , avionics , powerplants , and construction methods , as well as increasing payload capacity . High @-@ strength composites and Aluminium @-@ lithium alloys were used to reduce weight and boost internal fuel volume . One of the distinguishing features of this early design were the canards , which improved airflow over the wings , eliminating buffeting and allowing the aircraft to fly at an angle of attack of 120 ° . These canards were governed by a new digital fly @-@ by @-@ wire flight @-@ control system . The aircraft was fitted with the <unk> AL @-@ <unk> ( AL @-@ <unk> ) turbofan engine which is larger , more reliable and , with a thrust of 125 kN ( 28 @,@ 200 lbf ) , more powerful than those found on the Su @-@ 27 . 
 Also new was the fire @-@ control system , at the heart of which is the <unk> pulse @-@ Doppler radar , which could track up to 15 aerial targets simultaneously and guide up to six missiles simultaneously . The tail " stinger " houses the <unk> N @-@ 012 rear @-@ facing radar . The aircraft could carry various bombs ( including napalm , dumb and Cluster munitions ) and both air @-@ to @-@ air and air @-@ to @-@ surface missiles ; and had two additional underwing pylons . The cockpit was modernized , equipped with multi @-@ function colour LCD screens , and fitted with a K @-@ <unk> ejection seat inclined at 30 ° to improve pilot g @-@ force tolerance . Range was increased to 4 @,@ 000 km ( 2 @,@ 222 nmi ) , the adoption of an aerial refuelling probe enables further range extension . The aircraft was characterized by its twin nose wheel – as a result of higher payload – and larger tail fins with Carbon @-@ fiber @-@ reinforced polymer square @-@ topped tips . 
 = = = Testing and demonstration = = = 
 The Su @-@ 27M ( T @-@ 10S @-@ 70 ) prototype first flew on 28 June 1988 piloted by Sukhoi chief test pilot Oleg Tsoi . The first prototype differed slightly from later examples in : retaining standard Su @-@ 27 vertical stabilizers without the cropped top ; lacking a fire @-@ control system ; having a three @-@ tone grey / blue camouflage scheme , along with minor differences . Designated T10M @-@ 1 to T10M @-@ 10 , the first ten prototypes were built by Komsomolsk @-@ on @-@ Amur Aircraft Production Association ( KnAAPO ) in conjunction with Sukhoi ( as the Soviet military @-@ industrial structure separated the aircraft designer and manufacturer ) . They differed slightly , as four were converted from Su @-@ 27s , and the others were new @-@ builds . The second prototype started flying in January 1989 , while the third followed in mid @-@ 1992 . The prototypes were used to validate the canards and new flight @-@ control system . 
 In 1990 , the first prototype was displayed to Ministry of Defence officials at Kubinka Air Base . The aircraft first aerial demonstration occurred on 13 February 1992 , in front of CIS leaders in <unk> , Minsk , before making its public debut at that year 's Farnborough Airshow . The third prototype , T10M @-@ 3 , appeared at the Dubai Airshow in 1993 , by which time Sukhoi had re @-@ designated its fighter the " Su @-@ 35 " . T10M @-@ 3 demonstrated its dogfight manoeuvres , including the Pugachev 's Cobra , to potential export customers . Viktor Pugachyov subsequently piloted the prototype in a mock fight with an Su @-@ 30MK . The Su @-@ 35 performed at numerous air shows during the following years , including at the 1993 and 1995 MAKS <unk> and the 1994 ILA Berlin Air Show . In addition to Su @-@ 27 conversions , three production Su @-@ 35s were completed in 1996 and delivered to Russian Air Force ( VVS ) for testing . 
 Throughout the Su @-@ 35 's flight test programme , active controls during manoeuvres such as the Pugachev 's Cobra and tailslide could not be maintained . The eleventh Su @-@ 27M ( T10M @-@ 11 ) was built by KnAAPO and delivered in 1995 for the installation of exclusive systems to give it thrust @-@ vectoring capabilities . The resultant Su @-@ 37 technology demonstrator made its first flight in April 1996 . A second Su @-@ 35 was modified into an Su @-@ 37 in the late 1990s . In 2001 , AL @-@ 31F engines with fixed nozzles , an upgraded fly @-@ by @-@ wire controls , and improved cockpit systems were fitted to a Su @-@ 37 for testing . 
 In total , 15 airworthy Su @-@ 35s ( Su @-@ 27M ) were produced , including an Su @-@ 35UB two @-@ seat prototype , along with two static test prototypes . The Su @-@ 35UB , powered by two modified AL @-@ <unk> with thrust @-@ vectoring nozzles , made its first flight on 7 August 2000 . It was demonstrated to South Korea during that country 's F @-@ X replacement fighter tender , before becoming an avionics testbed . The original Su @-@ 35 never entered serial production due to a lack of funding , and the VVS continued to use its Su @-@ 27 fleet . The Su @-@ 35 's automatic control of canards and the Su @-@ 37 's thrust @-@ vectoring technology were applied to the Sukhoi Su @-@ 30MKI . One of the Su @-@ 35s , T10M @-@ 10 , served as a testbed for the Saturn 117 ( AL @-@ <unk> ) engine intended for Russia 's upcoming PAK FA fifth @-@ generation jet fighter . 
 = = = Modernization = = = 
 In 2003 , even as Russia aimed to export the Su @-@ 27M , Sukhoi launched a project to produce a fighter to bridge the gap between upgraded variants of the Su @-@ 27 and Su @-@ 30MK , and Russia 's fifth @-@ generation Sukhoi PAK FA . The project 's aim was a second modernization of the Su @-@ 27 airframe ( hence its classification as a " 4 + + generation fighter " ) by incorporating several characteristics that would be implemented on the PAK FA . Additionally , the aircraft was to be an alternative to the Su @-@ 30 family on the export market . The design phase was to take place until 2007 , when it would be available for sale . It was later reported that the programme was launched due to concerns that the PAK FA project would encounter funding shortages . The project 's in @-@ house designation is T @-@ <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , " Big Modernization " ) while the aircraft is marketed as the Su @-@ 35 . 
 While the aircraft maintains a strong superficial resemblance to the Su @-@ 27 , the airframe , avionics , propulsion and weapons systems of the Su @-@ 35 have been thoroughly overhauled . Technological advancements have produced more compact and lighter hardware , such as the radar , shifting the centre of gravity to the aircraft 's rear . These improvements removed the need for canards and saw the abandonment of the " tandem triplane " featured on several Su @-@ 27 derivatives . Also omitted was the Su @-@ 27 's dorsal airbrake , which was replaced by differential deflection of the vertical stabilizers . Other aerodynamic refinements include a height reduction of the vertical stabilizers , a smaller aft @-@ cockpit hump , and shorter rearward @-@ projecting " sting " . 
 The reinforced airframe sees extensive use of titanium alloys , increasing its durability to some 30 years or 6 @,@ 000 service hours , and raising the maximum takeoff weight to 34 @.@ 5 tonnes . Internal fuel capacity was increased by more than 20 % to 11 @.@ 5 tonnes , and could be raised to 14 @.@ 5 tonnes with the addition of drop tanks ; in @-@ flight refueling can also be used to extend missions . 
 Sukhoi has overhauled the avionics suite , at the heart of which is the information management system that enhances man @-@ machine interaction . The system , which has two digital computers , collects and processes data from various tactical and flight @-@ control systems and presents the relevant information to the pilot through the two main multi @-@ function displays , which , together with three secondary MFDs , form the glass cockpit . The aircraft features many other upgrades to its avionics and electronic systems , including digital fly @-@ by @-@ wire flight @-@ control system , and the pilot is equipped with a head @-@ up display and night @-@ vision goggles . 
 The Su @-@ 35 employs an Irbis @-@ E passive electronically scanned array radar that constitutes an essential component of the aircraft 's fire @-@ control system . The radar is capable of detecting a 3 @-@ square @-@ metre ( 32 sq ft ) aerial target at a distance of 400 km ( 250 mi ) , and can track 30 airborne targets and engage eight of them at the same time . Su @-@ 35S uses the <unk> Irbis passive antenna array with electronic scanning radar for improved locating . The radar can also map the ground using a variety of modes , including the synthetic aperture mode . The Irbis @-@ E is complemented by an OLS @-@ 35 optoelectronic targeting system that provides laser ranging , TV , Infra @-@ red search and track ( IRST ) functionality . The Su @-@ 35 is compatible with a multitude of long- and short @-@ range air @-@ to @-@ air missiles , precision and unguided air @-@ to @-@ ground weaponry that include missiles , fuel @-@ air bombs and rockets . A maximum weapon payload of 8 tonnes can be carried on the fourteen hardpoints . The fighter may use missiles with a range of up to 300 km 
 The Su @-@ 35 is powered by a pair of izdeliye ( Product ) 117S ( AL @-@ <unk> ) turbofan engines . Developed jointly by Sukhoi , NPO Saturn and <unk> , the engine is a heavily upgraded AL @-@ 31F variant , and draws on the design of the fifth @-@ generation PAK FA 's Saturn 117 ( AL @-@ <unk> ) engines . Its thrust output is estimated at 142 kN ( 31 @,@ 900 lbf ) , 20 kN ( 4 @,@ 500 lbf ) more than the Su @-@ 27M 's AL @-@ 31F . It has a service life of 4 @,@ 000 hours , compared to the AL @-@ 31F 's 1 @,@ 500 ; the two engines feature thrust @-@ vectoring capability . Each thrust vectoring ( TVC ) nozzle has its rotational axis canted at an angle , similar to the configuration on the Su @-@ 30MKI . The thrust vectoring nozzles operate in one plane for pitch , but the canting allows the aircraft to produce both roll and yaw by vectoring each engine nozzle differently . A similar thrust vectoring system is also implemented on the PAK FA . 
 The engine may give the Su @-@ 35 limited supercruise capability , or sustained supersonic speed without the use of afterburners . Radar @-@ absorbent material is applied to the engine inlets and the front stages of the engine compressor to halve the Su @-@ 35 's frontal radar cross @-@ section ( RCS ) ; the canopy was also modified to deflect radar waves . 
 = = = Production and flight testing = = = 
 Design work on the Su @-@ 35 had been completed by 2007 , paving the way for KnAAPO to construct the first prototype in the summer of 2007 . Upon completion , Su @-@ 35 @-@ 1 was ferried to the Gromov Flight Research Institute in Zhukovsky Airfield before being placed on static display at that year 's MAKS air show . At the time , Sukhoi General Designer Mikhail <unk> commented that the aircraft was in great demand abroad , saying Russia was negotiating with several prospective customers and that there were plans to export the aircraft starting in 2010 . 
 Preparations began for the aircraft 's maiden flight immediately following the air show . Particular efforts were made to debug the flight @-@ control system and test the engine . By mid @-@ February 2008 , Su @-@ 35 @-@ 1 had been rolled out to conduct taxiing tests . On 19 February , Sukhoi test pilot Sergey Bogdan took the aircraft aloft for its first flight from Zhukovsky , accompanied by an Su @-@ <unk> acting as a chase plane . During the 55 @-@ minute flight , the Su @-@ 35 reached a height of 5 @,@ 000 metres ( 16 @,@ 000 ft ) , and tests were carried out on its stability , controllability and engines . The prototype was put on static display for President Vladimir Putin and Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev the following day . 
 Approximately 40 flights were conducted before the second prototype took to the air on 2 October from KnAAPO 's <unk> Airport , again piloted by Sergey Bogdan . The Su @-@ 35 had earlier in July made its first demonstration flight in front of Defence Ministry and foreign officials . At the time , Sukhoi estimated that a total of 160 Su @-@ 35s would be supplied to customers worldwide , in particular those in Latin America , Southeast Asia and the Middle East . Domestically , the VVS Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief Colonel General Alexander Zelin stated that the service was seeking enough aircraft , estimated to be 24 – 36 units , to equip " at least two to three regiments " . 
 On 26 April 2009 , the fourth Su @-@ 35 prototype was destroyed at <unk> Airport during a taxi run . The aircraft crashed into a barrier at the end of the runway , burned , and was written off . The pilot , Yevgeny Frolov , ejected and was taken to hospital with burns and other injuries . The aircraft was expected to be the third flying prototype , with its first flight scheduled on 24 April , which was rescheduled for 27 April . A commission was opened to investigate the crash , but several sources initially speculated that the incident had been the result of a brake failure or a faulty fuel pump . 
 During the 2009 MAKS air show , the Russian Defence Ministry signed a US $ 2 @.@ 5 billion contract for 64 fighters , which consisted of a 48 @-@ aircraft launch order for the Su @-@ 35S ( " Serial " ) . The Russian government promised to provide Sukhoi an additional US $ 100 million in capital , with additional financial assistance from <unk> and <unk> , the latter of which was contracted to provide US $ 109 million to start the production programme . The Su @-@ 35S 's estimated price was $ 40 million each , and the 64 @-@ aircraft contract was the largest aircraft order after the collapse of the Soviet Union . All are expected to be delivered by 2015 . 
 In November 2009 , KnAAPO started manufacturing the first serial aircraft ; Sukhoi estimated that 24 to 30 aircraft would be produced each year from 2010 to 2020 . On 11 October 2010 , the first production Su @-@ 35S had completed general assembly ; at this point the preliminary flight test programme had logged 350 flight hours across 270 flights using the two remaining flying prototypes . Sukhoi confirmed that the aircraft had fully met all specifications and parameters , including maximum speed , height , radar detection range and manoeuvrability . The first Su @-@ 35S took its maiden flight in May 2011 . 
 Following preliminary tests , the Defence Ministry was expected to initiate state joint tests involving six Su @-@ 35s to further scrutinize systems such as weapons . In early 2012 , two aircraft were reportedly planned for delivery in 2011 , eight in 2012 , twelve in 2013 and 2014 , and fourteen in 2015 . In February 2014 , the Russian Air Force received 12 Su @-@ 35S aircraft . By 2014 , 34 of the 48 aircraft originally ordered had been delivered with the remaining 14 due in 2015 . 
 In March 2015 , it was reported that Russia and India signed an agreement to jointly develop a fifth @-@ generation upgrade to the Su @-@ 35 . A Russian industry source stated that the upgraded Su @-@ 35S will cost about US $ 85 million each . 
 A contract for another 50 Su @-@ 35s was signed in August 2015 , but parent company United Aircraft Corporation ( UAC ) stated in January 2016 that delays in finalizing the order was due to a lack of clarity in Russia ’ s 2016 federal budget , which was only signed by Russian President Vladimir Putin in mid @-@ December 2015 . The fighters will be delivered at a rate of 10 aircraft per year starting in 2016 . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Russia = = = 
 Three production Su @-@ 27Ms were completed and delivered to VVS in 1996 for testing . They were operated by 929th State Flight Test Center ( abbreviated as <unk> in Russian ) at <unk> Air Base , Akhtubinsk , performing weapons trials . During one such flights , a weapon pylon , to which a bomb and rocket were attached , fell into a village in Ryazan ; nobody was hurt . In 2001 , the Air Force decided that the aerobatics team Russian Knights would receive several Su @-@ 27Ms , presumably from <unk> and Sukhoi . After pilots from the team undertook conversion course at <unk> AB , the first of five aircraft was delivered to the team in July 2003 . It was expected that the Su @-@ 27Ms would enhance the flying repertoire of their new owners , but due to various reasons , they were used as a source of spare parts for other aircraft in the demonstration fleet . 
 In late May 2011 , Sukhoi flew the first Su @-@ 35S to the Defence Ministry 's 929th State Flight Test Centre at Akhtubinsk prior to states joint tests conducted to prepare the aircraft for operational service with the VVS . Official trials commenced in mid @-@ August with the two Su @-@ 35 prototypes , before being joined by production aircraft . As of March 2012 , four Su @-@ 35S units were involved in such tests , operating alongside the two flying prototypes . These Su @-@ 35s had by April and August 2012 , completed 500 and 650 test flights , respectively . 
 On 28 December 2012 , Sukhoi delivered a batch of six serial production Su @-@ 35S fighters to the VVS . Defence Ministry officials accepted the aircraft at KnAAPO 's manufacturing plant in Komsomolsk @-@ on @-@ Amur , Russia . Five of the six Su @-@ 35S delivered in December went to the Gromov Flight Research Institute , where in February 2013 an eighteen @-@ month programme began to test the Su @-@ 35 's ability to conduct highly maneuverable short @-@ range combat . The programme consists of three components , which are dogfights ; the use of weapons and the ability to evade enemy fire ; and the ability to destroy helicopters and unmanned aerial vehicles . State @-@ acceptance trials would conclude in 2015 , by which time a second 48 @-@ aircraft order is expected to have been signed with the VVS . Another 12 Su @-@ 35S fighters were delivered in 2013 . 
 In December 2012 , Russian officials commented that the Swifts and Russian Knights aerobatics teams would receive new aircraft to replace the Mikoyan MiG @-@ 29 and Su @-@ 27 , respectively . The Swifts was expected to receive the Su @-@ <unk> and the Russian Knights receive the Su @-@ 35 . Deputy Prime Minister Dmitry Rogozin commented the upgrade was to " show to the world not only the inimitable skill of our pilots , but also the talent of our aircraft designers ... " Russian Air Force received another 12 Su @-@ 35S fighters on 12 February 2014 to be deployed with an air regiment based in Russia ’ s Far East . 
 In January 2016 , Russia , for the first time in combat conditions , deployed four Su @-@ 35S planes to its <unk> base ; on 1 February the Russian defence ministry said the aircraft had begun to participate in the Russian air operations in Syria . 
 = = = China = = = 
 Since the early 1990s , an extensive sales arrangement of the Su @-@ 35 to China has been discussed . Sukhoi officials , in 1995 , announced their proposal to co @-@ produce the Su @-@ 35 with China , contingent on Beijing 's agreement to purchase 120 aircraft . However , it was alleged that the Russian Foreign Ministry blocked the sale of the Su @-@ 35 and Tupolev Tu @-@ 22M bombers over concerns about the arrangements for Chinese production of the Su @-@ 27 . 
 In 2006 , China was showing interest in the modernized Su @-@ 35 , and was negotiating with Moscow for a purchase of the fighter . At the 2007 MAKS air show , a number of Chinese delegates were seen taking photos and videos of the Su @-@ 35 prototypes . In November 2010 , Russia , through Rosoboronexport , was ready to resume talks with China on the sale of the Su @-@ 35 . China reciprocated in 2011 by presenting a proposal on the purchase of the fighter . 
 In March 2012 , the Russian media reported that the two countries were in final contract negotiations for 48 Su @-@ 35s ; the remaining obstacle is reportedly Moscow 's demand that Beijing guarantee proper licensing for its Su @-@ 35 production . China denied this deal because it did not want the Su @-@ 35 , but only shown slight interest in its 117S engine ; at the 2012 Zhuhai Air Show Russia approached China with its 117S engine in a failed attempt to sell Su @-@ 35 . 
 In late 2012 , it was reported that China wanted to purchase only 24 units , which was less than what Russia deemed to be worthwhile , thus stalling negotiations . By late 2012 , the negotiations resumed , this time involving 24 aircraft . During the next three years , negotiations would prove to be protracted , with several false reports claiming that a deal had been reached between the two countries ; for example , in March 2013 , it was reported that both sides had signed an initial agreement for 24 Su @-@ 35s and four submarines prior to Chinese President Xi Jinping 's visit to Russia . Negotiations concluded in November 2015 , when a contract for 24 fighters worth $ 2 billion , was signed . The first aircraft will be delivered to China in 2016 . One motive for China 's purchase of the Su @-@ 35 is its thrust @-@ vectoring 117S engine ; while China has recently developed modern fighters , its engines still lag behind Russia and the West despite heavy investments by China in domestic engine programs during recent years to catch up . According to Russian National Defense magazine , China will not order additional Su @-@ 35s but will instead focus on its domestic fighter programs especially its fifth generation fighters . 
 = = = Potential operators = = = 
 In May 2006 , it was reported that Venezuela planned to purchase dozens of Su @-@ 30 and Su @-@ 35 fighters , and as many as 100 T @-@ 90 tanks . There were unconfirmed reports in October 2008 that the Venezuela government had ordered 24 Su @-@ 35s for the Venezuelan Air Force . In July 2012 , Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez repeated his interest in acquiring the Su @-@ 35 fighters . 
 In January 2015 , North Korea has expressed interest in the fighter . But due to the international sanctions imposed on North Korea the delivery of fighters is unlikely in the near future . 
 Also in September 2015 , Indonesia 's Ministry of Defence selected the Su @-@ 35 to replace the Indonesian Air Force 's aging F @-@ 5E Tiger II fleet . Indonesian Air Force intends to initially buy 8 Su @-@ 35S fighters from Russia . 
 Vietnam and Algeria are also interested in this aircraft . In February 2015 , one of the Su @-@ 35 was tested at <unk> Airport in Algeria . According to " Kommersant " , the Algerian military were satisfied with the fighter 's flight characteristics and now Moscow is waiting for a formal application . It is expected that the first phase will focus on the acquisition of at least 12 aircraft . 
 Negotiations have begun with Egypt on the sale of Su @-@ 35 fighters , according to leaked information from Russia 's military @-@ industrial complex . 
 = = = Failed bids = = = 
 = = = = Brazil = = = = 
 In 2001 , Brazil under President Fernando Henrique Cardoso announced the F @-@ X tender to procure a replacement for its aging aircraft including the Dassault Mirage IIID / E and Northrop F @-@ 5 . Sukhoi partnered with <unk> to submit the Su @-@ 27M for the US $ 700 million tender that would see at least twelve aircraft delivered to the Brazilian Air Force . Other contenders were the Mirage 2000 , F @-@ 16 , MiG @-@ 29 , and JAS Gripen . Any contract would have been accompanied by an offset agreement that would see the winning bidder provide input to Brazil 's aviation industry . Had the Su @-@ 35 won , Russia would have purchased 50 Embraer airliners for use by Aeroflot . The Su @-@ 35 and Mirage 2000 were the front @-@ runners to the program , but the former was favoured for its superior flight characteristics . According to the Centre for Analysis of Strategies and Technologies , the Su @-@ 35 would have been the first heavy supersonic fighter to be delivered to Latin America . The tender was suspended for much of 2003 as the newly elected President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva focused more on social welfare . The tender was again suspended in 2005 , pending the availability of new fighters . 
 In 2007 , Russia submitted the modernized Su @-@ 35 for Brazil 's relaunched F @-@ X2 competition . The tender this time attracted the participation of the Boeing F / A @-@ 18E / F Super Hornet , Lockheed Martin F @-@ <unk> , Saab JAS Gripen NG , Dassault Rafale , and Eurofighter Typhoon . Brazil was looking to purchase at least 36 , and up to 120 , aircraft to replace Northrop F @-@ <unk> , Alenia / Embraer A @-@ <unk> , and Dassault Mirage IIIs . In October 2008 , the Brazilian Air Force selected the Boeing F / A @-@ 18E / F Super Hornet , Dassault Rafale , and Saab Gripen NG as the three finalists . In October 2009 , Rosoboronexport declared that Russia would provide 120 Su @-@ 35s and full technology transfer to Brazil . The Su @-@ 35 was expected re @-@ enter the tender after Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff postponed the programme in January 2011 due to fiscal concerns . In December 2013 , the Brazilian government selected the Gripen NG for procurement . 
 = = = = Others = = = = 
 At the 1996 Seoul Air Show , Russia submitted the Su @-@ 35 ( Su @-@ 27M ) and Su @-@ 37 for South Korea 's F @-@ X procurement programme , a 40 @-@ aircraft requirement to replace the Republic of Korea Air Force 's F @-@ 4D / Es , RF @-@ 4Cs , and F @-@ 5E / Fs . The Su @-@ 35 competed against the Dassault Rafale , Eurofighter Typhoon , and F @-@ 15K Slam Eagle . The proposed Su @-@ 35 featured a phased grid radar and AL @-@ 31FP vectoring @-@ thrust engines ; final assembly would have taken place in South Korea , the offer included a full technology transfer . The US $ 5 billion contract may have been partially financed through a debt @-@ reduction deal on money Russia owed to South Korea . The Su @-@ 35 was reportedly the cheapest aircraft to purchase and maintain , however it was eliminated early in the bidding process , along with the Typhoon . The F @-@ 15K , viewed as the competition 's front @-@ runner due to South Korea 's ties with the United States , was chosen in 2002 . Reports have claimed that , had South Korea not chosen the F @-@ 15K , the United States would have refused to integrate American weapons on the selected aircraft . 
 In 2002 , Sukhoi offered Su @-@ 30 family aircraft to Australia , including the Su @-@ 35 . However Australia opted for the F @-@ 35 to replace the F @-@ 111 and F / A @-@ 18 . Russia has offered the Su @-@ 35 to India , Malaysia , Algeria and Greece ; no firm contracts have materialised , with the first three countries having been occupied with other fighter projects and unlikely to procure the modernized Su @-@ 35 . In 2010 , Libya was expected to sign a contract for twelve Su @-@ 35s as part of a bigger military transaction that would have included S @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 surface @-@ to @-@ air missiles , Kilo @-@ class submarines , and T @-@ 90 tanks . The civil war in Libya and the resulting military intervention caused Rosoboronexport to miss out on US $ 4 billion in arranged contracts as they were never signed . 
 = = Variants = = 
 Su @-@ 27M / Su @-@ 35 
 Single @-@ seat fighter . 
 Su @-@ 35UB 
 Two @-@ seat trainer . Features taller vertical stabilizers and a forward fuselage similar to the Su @-@ 30 . 
 Su @-@ 35BM 
 Single @-@ seat fighter with upgraded avionics and various modifications to the airframe . Su @-@ 35BM is informal name . 
 Su @-@ 37 
 Thrust @-@ vectoring demonstrator . 
 Su @-@ 35S 
 Designation of production Su @-@ 35BM version for the Russian Air Force . 
 = = Operators = = 
 Russia 
 Russian Air Force – 48 Su @-@ 35S fighters in inventory as of March 2016 plus another 50 ordered in January <unk> Airport - 24 
 <unk> <unk> - 11 
 Lipetsk Air Base - 6 
 Akhtubinsk - 6 
 KnAAPO - 1 on hold 
 China 
 People 's Liberation Army Air Force – 24 Su @-@ 35S fighters ordered in 2015 . 
 = = Specifications ( Su @-@ 35S ) = = 
 Data from KnAAPO , Su @-@ 27 books , Jane 's AWA 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 1 
 Length : 21 @.@ 9 m ( 72 @.@ 9 ft ) 
 Wingspan : 15 @.@ 3 m ( 50 @.@ 2 ft , with wingtip pods ) 
 Height : 5 @.@ 90 m ( 19 @.@ 4 ft ) 
 Wing area : 62 @.@ 0 m ² ( 667 ft ² ) 
 Empty weight : 18 @,@ 400 kg ( 40 @,@ 570 lb ) 
 Loaded weight : 25 @,@ 300 kg ( 56 @,@ 660 lb ) at 50 % internal fuel 
 Max. takeoff weight : 34 @,@ 500 kg ( 76 @,@ 060 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 2 × Saturn 117S ( AL @-@ <unk> ) afterburning turbofan with 3D thrust vectoring nozzle 
 Dry thrust : 8 @,@ 800 kgf ( 86 @.@ 3 kN , 19 @,@ 400 lbf ) each 
 Thrust with afterburner : 14 @,@ 500 kgf ( 142 kN , 31 @,@ 900 lbf ) each 
 Fuel capacity : 11 @,@ 500 kg ( 25 @,@ 400 lb ) internally 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : At altitude : Mach 2 @.@ 25 ( 2 @,@ 390 km / h , 1 @,@ 490 mph ) 
 At sea level : Mach 1 @.@ 15 ( 1 @,@ 400 km / h , 870 mph ) 
 Range : At altitude : 3 @,@ 600 km ( 1 @,@ 940 nmi ) 
 At sea level : 1 @,@ 580 km ( 850 nmi ) 
 Ferry range : 4 @,@ 500 km ( 2 @,@ 430 nmi ) with 2 external fuel tanks 
 Service ceiling : 18 @,@ 000 m ( 59 @,@ 100 ft ) 
 Rate of climb : > 280 m / s ( > 55 @,@ 000 ft / min ) 
 Wing loading : 408 kg / m ² ( 500 @.@ 8 kg / m ² with full internal fuel ) ( 84 @.@ 9 lb / ft ² 50 % fuel ) 
 Thrust / weight : 1 @.@ 13 at 50 % fuel ( 0 @.@ 92 with full internal fuel ) 
 Maximum g @-@ load : + 9 g 
 Armament 
 Guns : 1 × 30 mm GSh @-@ 301 internal cannon with 150 rounds 
 Hardpoints : 12 hardpoints , consisting of 2 wingtip rails , and 10 wing and fuselage stations with a capacity of 8 @,@ 000 kg ( 17 @,@ 630 lb ) of ordnance and provisions to carry combinations of : 
 Rockets : S @-@ 25L laser @-@ guided rocket 
 S @-@ 25 unguided rocket 
 B @-@ 8 unguided S @-@ 8 rocket pods 
 B @-@ 13 unguided S @-@ 13 rocket pods 
 Missiles : Vympel R @-@ <unk> / M , and R @-@ <unk> 
 Vympel R @-@ 27R / ER / T / ET 
 Vympel R @-@ 77 – the proposed R @-@ 77M , R @-@ <unk> , K @-@ 77M 
 Vympel R @-@ <unk> 
 Kh @-@ <unk> / L 
 Kh @-@ 31P / A 
 Kh @-@ <unk> 
 Bombs : KAB @-@ 500L laser @-@ guided bomb 
 KAB @-@ <unk> laser @-@ guided bomb 
 FAB @-@ 250 250 @-@ kilogram ( 550 lb ) unguided bombs 
 FAB @-@ 500 500 @-@ kilogram ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) unguided bombs 
 Other : buddy refueling pod 
 Avionics 
 Irbis @-@ E passive phased array radar 
 OLS @-@ 35 infra @-@ red search and track system 
 <unk> Khibiny @-@ M electronic warfare pod 
 = Led Zeppelin = 
 Led Zeppelin were an English rock band formed in London in 1968 . The group consisted of guitarist Jimmy Page , singer Robert Plant , bassist and keyboardist John Paul Jones , and drummer John Bonham . The band 's heavy , guitar @-@ driven sound , rooted in blues and psychedelia on their early albums , has earned them recognition as one of the progenitors of heavy metal , though their unique style drew from a wide variety of influences , including folk music . 
 After changing their name from the New Yardbirds , Led Zeppelin signed a deal with Atlantic Records that afforded them considerable artistic freedom . Although the group was initially unpopular with critics , they achieved significant commercial success with albums such as Led Zeppelin ( 1969 ) , Led Zeppelin II ( 1969 ) , Led Zeppelin III ( 1970 ) , Led Zeppelin IV ( 1971 ) , Houses of the Holy ( 1973 ) , and Physical Graffiti ( 1975 ) . Their fourth album , which features the track " Stairway to Heaven " , is among the most popular and influential works in rock music , and it helped to secure the group 's popularity . 
 Page wrote most of Led Zeppelin 's music , particularly early in their career , while Plant generally supplied the lyrics . Jones ' keyboard @-@ based compositions later became central to the group 's catalogue , which featured increasing experimentation . The latter half of their career saw a series of record @-@ breaking tours that earned the group a reputation for excess and debauchery . Although they remained commercially and critically successful , their output and touring schedule were limited during the late 1970s , and the group disbanded following Bonham 's death from alcohol @-@ related asphyxia in 1980 . In the decades that followed , the surviving members sporadically collaborated and participated in one @-@ off Led Zeppelin reunions . The most successful of these was the 2007 Ahmet Ertegun Tribute Concert in London , with Jason Bonham taking his late father 's place behind the drums . 
 Led Zeppelin are widely considered one of the most successful , innovative , and influential rock groups in history . They are one of the best @-@ selling music artists in the history of audio recording ; various sources estimate the group 's record sales at 200 to 300 million units worldwide . With RIAA @-@ certified sales of 111 @.@ 5 million units , they are the second @-@ best @-@ selling band in the United States . Each of their nine studio albums placed in the top 10 of the Billboard album chart and six reached the number @-@ one spot . Rolling Stone magazine described them as " the heaviest band of all time " , " the biggest band of the Seventies " , and " unquestionably one of the most enduring bands in rock history " . They were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1995 ; the museum 's biography of the band states that they were " as influential " during the 1970s as the Beatles were during the 1960s . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 In 1966 , London @-@ based session guitarist Jimmy Page joined the blues @-@ influenced rock band the Yardbirds to replace bassist Paul Samwell @-@ Smith . Page soon switched from bass to lead guitar , creating a dual lead guitar line @-@ up with Jeff Beck . Following Beck 's departure in October 1966 , the Yardbirds , tired from constant touring and recording , began to wind down . Page wanted to form a supergroup with him and Beck on guitars , and the Who 's Keith Moon and John Entwistle on drums and bass , respectively . Vocalists Steve Winwood and Steve Marriott were also considered for the project . The group never formed , although Page , Beck , and Moon did record a song together in 1966 , " Beck 's Bolero " , in a session that also included bassist @-@ keyboardist John Paul Jones . 
 The Yardbirds played their final gig in July 1968 at Luton College of Technology in Bedfordshire . They were still committed to several concerts in Scandinavia , so drummer Jim McCarty and vocalist Keith Relf authorised Page and bassist Chris Dreja to use " the Yardbirds " name to fulfill the band 's obligations . Page and Dreja began putting a new line @-@ up together . Page 's first choice for the lead singer was Terry Reid , but Reid declined the offer and suggested Robert Plant , a singer for the Band of Joy and <unk> . Plant eventually accepted the position , recommending former Band of Joy drummer John Bonham . Jones inquired about the vacant position at the suggestion of his wife after Dreja dropped out of the project to become a photographer . Page had known Jones since they were both session musicians and agreed to let him join as the final member . 
 The four played together for the first time in a room below a record store on Gerrard Street in London . Page suggested that they attempt " Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' " , originally a jump blues song popularised in a rockabilly version by Johnny Burnette , which had been covered by the Yardbirds . " As soon as I heard John Bonham play " , Jones recalled , " I knew this was going to be great ... We locked together as a team immediately " . Before leaving for Scandinavia , the group took part in a recording session for the P. J. Proby album , Three Week Hero . The album 's track " Jim 's Blues " , with Plant on harmonica , was the first studio track to feature all four future members of Led Zeppelin . 
 The band completed the Scandinavian tour as the New Yardbirds , playing together for the first time in front of a live audience at Gladsaxe Teen Clubs in Gladsaxe , Denmark , on 7 September 1968 . Later that month , they began recording their first album , which was based on their live set . The album was recorded and mixed in nine days , and Page covered the costs . After the album 's completion , the band were forced to change their name after Dreja issued a cease and desist letter , stating that Page was allowed to use the New Yardbirds moniker for the Scandinavian dates only . One account of how the new band 's name was chosen held that Moon and Entwistle had suggested that a supergroup with Page and Beck would go down like a " lead balloon " , an idiom for disastrous results . The group dropped the ' a ' in lead at the suggestion of their manager , Peter Grant , so that those unfamiliar with the term would not pronounce it " <unk> " . The word " balloon " was replaced by " zeppelin " , a word which , according to music journalist Keith Shadwick , brought " the perfect combination of heavy and light , <unk> and grace " to Page 's mind . 
 In November 1968 , Grant secured a $ 143 @,@ 000 advance contract from Atlantic Records , which was then the biggest deal of its kind for a new band . Atlantic were a label with a catalogue of mainly blues , soul , and jazz artists , but in the late 1960s they began to take an interest in British progressive rock acts . Record executives signed Led Zeppelin without having ever seen them . Under the terms of their contract , the band had autonomy in deciding when they would release albums and tour , and had the final say over the contents and design of each album . They would also decide how to promote each release and which tracks to release as singles . They formed their own company , <unk> , to handle all publishing rights . 
 = = = Early years : 1968 – 70 = = = 
 The band began their first tour of the UK on 4 October 1968 , they still were billed as the New Yardbirds , and played their first show as Led Zeppelin at the University of Surrey in Battersea on 25 October . Tour manager Richard Cole , who would become a major figure in the touring life of the group , organised their first North American tour at the end of the year . Their debut album , Led Zeppelin , was released in the US during the tour on 12 January 1969 , and peaked at number 10 on the Billboard chart ; it was released in the UK , where it peaked at number 6 , on 31 March . According to Steve Erlewine , the album 's memorable guitar riffs , lumbering rhythms , psychedelic blues , groovy , bluesy shuffles and hints of English folk , made it " a significant turning point in the evolution of hard rock and heavy metal " . 
 In their first year , Led Zeppelin completed four US and four UK concert tours , and also released their second album , Led Zeppelin II . Recorded mostly on the road at various North American studios , it was an even greater commercial success than their first album , and reached the number one chart position in the US and the UK . The album further developed the mostly blues @-@ rock musical style established on their debut release , creating a sound that was " heavy and hard , brutal and direct " , and which would be highly influential and frequently imitated . Steve Waksman has suggested that Led Zeppelin II was " the musical starting point for heavy metal " . 
 The band saw their albums as indivisible , complete listening experiences , disliking the re @-@ editing of existing tracks for release as singles . Grant maintained an aggressive pro @-@ album stance , particularly in the UK , where there were few radio and TV outlets for rock music . Without the band 's consent , however , some songs were released as singles , particularly in the US . In 1969 an edited version of " Whole Lotta Love " , a track from their second album , was released as a single in the US . It reached number four in the Billboard chart in January 1970 , selling over one million copies and helping to cement the band 's popularity . The group also increasingly shunned television appearances , citing their preference that their fans hear and see them in live concerts . 
 Following the release of their second album , Led Zeppelin completed several more US tours . They played initially in clubs and ballrooms , and then in larger auditoriums as their popularity grew . Some early Led Zeppelin concerts lasted more than four hours , with expanded and improvised live versions of their repertoire . Many of these shows have been preserved as bootleg recordings . It was during this period of intensive concert touring that the band developed a reputation for off @-@ stage excess . 
 In 1970 Page and Plant retired to Bron @-@ Yr @-@ Aur , a remote cottage in Wales , to commence work on their third album , Led Zeppelin III . The result was a more acoustic style that was strongly influenced by folk and Celtic music , and showcased the band 's versatility . The album 's rich acoustic sound initially received mixed reactions , with critics and fans surprised at the turn from the primarily electric arrangements of the first two albums , further fuelling the band 's hostility to the musical press . It reached number one in the UK and US charts , but its stay would be the shortest of their first five albums . The album 's opening track , " Immigrant Song " , was released as a US single in November 1970 against the band 's wishes , reaching the top twenty on the Billboard chart . 
 = = = " The Biggest Band in the World " : 1971 – 75 = = = 
 During the 1970s , Led Zeppelin reached new heights of commercial and critical success that made them one of the most influential groups of the era , eclipsing their earlier achievements . The band 's image also changed as the members began to wear elaborate , flamboyant clothing . Led Zeppelin began travelling in a private jet airliner , a Boeing 720 ( nicknamed the Starship ) , rented out entire sections of hotels ( including the Continental Hyatt House in Los Angeles , known colloquially as the " Riot House " ) , and became the subject of frequently repeated stories of debauchery . One involved John Bonham riding a motorcycle through a rented floor of the Riot House , while another involved the destruction of a room in the Tokyo Hilton , leading to the group being banned from that establishment for life . Although Led Zeppelin developed a reputation for trashing their hotel suites and throwing television sets out of the windows , some suggest that these tales have been exaggerated . According to music journalist Chris Welch , " [ Led Zeppelin 's ] travels spawned many stories , but it was a myth that [ they ] were constantly engaged in acts of wanton destruction and lewd behaviour " . 
 Led Zeppelin released their fourth album on 8 November 1971 . In response to the treatment they had received from critics , particularly after Led Zeppelin III , the band decided to release the fourth album with no title , though it is variously referred to as Led Zeppelin IV , Untitled , IV , or , due to the four symbols appearing on the record label , as Four Symbols , Zoso or Runes . In addition to lacking a title , the original cover featured no band name , as the group wished to be anonymous and to avoid easy pigeonholing by the press . With 37 million copies sold , Led Zeppelin IV is one of the best @-@ selling albums in history , and its massive popularity cemented Led Zeppelin 's status as superstars in the 1970s . By 2006 , it had sold 23 million copies in the United States alone . The track " Stairway to Heaven " , never released as a single , is sometimes quoted as being the most requested and most played album @-@ oriented rock ( AOR ) FM radio song . The group followed up the album 's release with tours of the UK , Australasia , North America , Japan , and the UK again from late 1971 through early 1973 . 
 Led Zeppelin 's next album , Houses of the Holy , was released in March 1973 . It featured further experimentation by the band , who expanded their use of synthesisers and mellotron orchestration . The predominantly orange album cover , designed by the London @-@ based design group Hipgnosis , depicts images of nude children climbing the Giant 's Causeway in Northern Ireland . Although the children are not shown from the front , the cover was controversial at the time of the album 's release . As with the band 's fourth album , neither their name nor the album title was printed on the sleeve . 
 Houses of the Holy topped charts worldwide , and the band 's subsequent concert tour of North America in 1973 broke records for attendance , as they consistently filled large auditoriums and stadiums . At Tampa Stadium in Florida , they played to 56 @,@ 800 fans , breaking the record set by the Beatles ' 1965 Shea Stadium concert and grossing $ 309 @,@ 000 . Three sold @-@ out shows at Madison Square Garden in New York City were filmed for a motion picture , but the theatrical release of this project ( The Song Remains the Same ) was delayed until 1976 . Before the final night 's performance , $ 180 @,@ 000 of the band 's money from gate receipts was stolen from a safe deposit box at the Drake Hotel . 
 In 1974 , Led Zeppelin took a break from touring and launched their own record label , Swan Song , named after an unreleased song . The record label 's logo , based on a drawing called Evening : Fall of Day ( 1869 ) by William Rimmer , features a picture of Apollo . The logo can be found on Led Zeppelin memorabilia , especially T @-@ shirts . In addition to using Swan Song as a vehicle to promote their own albums , the band expanded the label 's roster , signing artists such as Bad Company , the Pretty Things and Maggie Bell . The label was successful while Led Zeppelin existed , but folded less than three years after they disbanded . 
 In 1975 , Led Zeppelin 's double album Physical Graffiti was their first release on the Swan Song label . It consisted of fifteen songs , of which eight had been recorded at Headley Grange in 1974 and seven had been recorded earlier . A review in Rolling Stone magazine referred to Physical Graffiti as Led Zeppelin 's " bid for artistic respectability " , adding that the only bands Led Zeppelin had to compete with for the title " The World 's Best Rock Band " were the Rolling Stones and the Who . The album was a massive commercial and critical success . Shortly after the release of Physical Graffiti , all previous Led Zeppelin albums simultaneously re @-@ entered the top @-@ 200 album chart , and the band embarked on another North American tour , now employing sophisticated sound and lighting systems . In May 1975 , Led Zeppelin played five sold @-@ out nights at the Earls Court Arena in London , at the time the largest arena in Britain . 
 = = = Hiatus from touring and return : 1975 – 77 = = = 
 Following their triumphant Earls Court appearances , Led Zeppelin took a holiday and planned an autumn tour in America , scheduled to open with two outdoor dates in San Francisco . In August 1975 , however , Plant and his wife Maureen were involved in a serious car crash while on holiday in Rhodes , Greece . Plant suffered a broken ankle and Maureen was badly injured ; a blood transfusion saved her life . Unable to tour , he headed to the Channel Island of Jersey to spend August and September recuperating , with Bonham and Page in tow . The band then reconvened in Malibu , California . During this forced hiatus much of the material for their next album , Presence , was written . 
 By this time , Led Zeppelin were the world 's number one rock attraction , having outsold most bands of the time , including the Rolling Stones . Presence , released in March 1976 , marked a change in the Led Zeppelin sound towards more straightforward , guitar @-@ based jams , departing from the acoustic ballads and intricate arrangements featured on their previous albums . Though it was a platinum seller , Presence received a mixed reaction among fans and the music press , with some critics suggesting that the band 's excesses may have caught up with them . Page had begun using heroin during recording sessions for the album , a habit which may have affected the band 's later live shows and studio recordings , although this has been denied by Page . 
 Because of Plant 's injuries , Led Zeppelin did not tour in 1976 . Instead , the band completed the concert film The Song Remains the Same and the accompanying soundtrack album . The film premiered in New York City on 20 October 1976 , but was given a lukewarm reception by critics and fans . The film was particularly unsuccessful in the UK , where , unwilling to tour since 1975 because of their tax exile status , Led Zeppelin faced an uphill battle to recapture the public 's affection . 
 In 1977 , Led Zeppelin embarked on another major concert tour of North America . The band set another attendance record , with an audience of 76 @,@ 229 at their Silverdome concert on 30 April . It was , according to the Guinness Book of Records , the largest attendance to that date for a single act show . Although the tour was financially profitable , it was beset by off @-@ stage problems . On 19 April , over 70 people were arrested as about 1 @,@ 000 fans tried to gatecrash Cincinnati Riverfront Coliseum for two sold @-@ out concerts , while others tried to gain entry by throwing rocks and bottles through glass doors . On 3 June , a concert at Tampa Stadium was cut short because of a severe thunderstorm , despite tickets indicating " Rain or Shine " . A riot broke out , resulting in arrests and injuries . 
 After the 23 July show at the Day on the Green festival at the Oakland Coliseum in Oakland , California , Bonham and members of Led Zeppelin 's support staff were arrested after a member of promoter Bill Graham 's staff was badly beaten during the band 's performance . The following day 's second Oakland concert was the group 's final live appearance in the United States . Two days later , as they checked in at a French Quarter hotel for their 30 July performance at the Louisiana Superdome , Plant received news that his five @-@ year @-@ old son , <unk> , had died from a stomach virus . The rest of the tour was immediately cancelled , prompting widespread speculation about Led Zeppelin 's future . 
 = = = Bonham 's death and break @-@ up : 1978 – 80 = = = 
 In November 1978 the group recorded at Polar Studios in Stockholm , Sweden . The resulting album , In Through the Out Door , featured sonic experimentation that again drew mixed reactions from critics . Nevertheless , the album reached number one in the UK and the US in just its second week of release . With this album 's release , Led Zeppelin 's entire catalogue returned to the Billboard Top 200 in the weeks of 27 October and 3 November 1979 . 
 In August 1979 , after two warm @-@ up shows in Copenhagen , Led Zeppelin headlined two concerts at the Knebworth Music Festival , playing to a crowd of approximately 104 @,@ 000 on the first night . A brief , low @-@ key European tour was undertaken in June and July 1980 , featuring a stripped @-@ down set without the usual lengthy jams and solos . On 27 June , at a show in Nuremberg , Germany , the concert came to an abrupt halt in the middle of the third song , when Bonham collapsed onstage and was rushed to hospital . Speculation in the press suggested that his collapse had been the result of excessive alcohol and drug use , but the band claimed that he had simply <unk> . 
 A North American tour , the band 's first since 1977 , was scheduled to commence on 17 October 1980 . On 24 September , Bonham was picked up by Led Zeppelin assistant Rex King to attend rehearsals at Bray Studios . During the journey , Bonham asked to stop for breakfast , where he downed four quadruple vodkas ( between 16 and 24 oz . ) , with a ham roll . After taking a bite of the ham roll he said to his assistant , " breakfast " . He continued to drink heavily after arriving at the studio . The rehearsals were halted late that evening and the band retired to Page 's house — the Old Mill House in <unk> , Windsor . After midnight , Bonham , who had fallen asleep , was taken to bed and placed on his side . At 1 : 45 pm the next day , Benji LeFevre ( Led Zeppelin 's new tour manager ) and John Paul Jones found Bonham dead . The cause of death was asphyxiation from vomit ; an autopsy found no other drugs in his body . Bonham was cremated on 10 October 1980 , and his ashes were buried in the graveyard of St Michael 's Church in <unk> near Droitwich , Worcestershire . A verdict of accidental death was returned at an inquest held on 27 October . 
 The planned North American tour was cancelled , and despite rumours that Cozy Powell , Carmine Appice , <unk> Barlow , Simon Kirke , or Bev Bevan would join the group as his replacement , the remaining members decided to disband . A 4 December 1980 press statement stated that , " We wish it to be known that the loss of our dear friend , and the deep sense of undivided harmony felt by ourselves and our manager , have led us to decide that we could not continue as we were " . The statement was signed simply " Led Zeppelin " . 
 = = = Post @-@ breakup = = = 
 = = = = 1980s = = = = 
 Following Zeppelin 's dissolution , the first significant project for the members was the <unk> , which Plant initially formed in 1981 , and which released its only album in 1984 . The group featured Page on lead guitar , along with studio musicians and friends of the pair , including Jeff Beck , Paul Shaffer , and Nile Rodgers . Plant focused on a different direction from Zeppelin , playing standards and in a more R & B style , highlighted by a cover of " Sea of Love " that peaked at number three on the Billboard chart in early 1985 . 
 Coda – a collection of Zeppelin outtakes and unused tracks – was issued in November 1982 . It included two tracks from the Royal Albert Hall in 1970 , one each from the Led Zeppelin III and Houses of the Holy sessions , and three from the In Through the Out Door sessions . It also featured a 1976 Bonham drum instrumental with electronic effects added by Page , called " Bonzo 's Montreux " . 
 On 13 July 1985 , Page , Plant , and Jones reunited for the Live Aid concert at JFK Stadium , Philadelphia , playing a short set featuring drummers Tony Thompson and Phil Collins , and bassist Paul Martinez . Collins had contributed to Plant 's first two solo albums while Martinez was a member of Plant 's solo band . The performance was marred by a lack of rehearsal with the two drummers , Page 's struggles with an out @-@ of @-@ tune guitar , poorly functioning monitors , and Plant 's hoarse voice . Page described the performance as " pretty shambolic " , while Plant characterised it as an " atrocity " . 
 The three members reunited again on 14 May 1988 , for the Atlantic Records 40th Anniversary concert , with Bonham 's son Jason on drums . The result was again disjointed : Plant and Page had argued immediately prior to taking the stage about whether to play " Stairway to Heaven " , Jones ' keyboards were absent from the live television feed . Page described the performance as " one big disappointment " and Plant said " the gig was foul " . 
 = = = = 1990s = = = = 
 The first Led Zeppelin box set , featuring tracks remastered under Page 's supervision , was released in 1990 and bolstered the band 's reputation , leading to abortive discussions among members about a reunion . This set included four previously unreleased tracks , including a version of Robert Johnson 's " Travelling Riverside Blues " . The song peaked at number seven on the Billboard Album Rock Tracks chart . 1992 saw the release of the " Immigrant Song " / " Hey , Hey , What Can I Do " ( the original B @-@ side ) as a CD single in the US . Led Zeppelin Boxed Set 2 was released in 1993 ; the two box sets together containing all known studio recordings , as well as some rare live tracks . 
 In 1994 , Page and Plant reunited for a 90 @-@ minute " <unk> " MTV project . They later released an album called No Quarter : Jimmy Page and Robert Plant <unk> , which featured some reworked Led Zeppelin songs , and embarked on a world tour the following year . This is said to be the beginning of a rift between the band members , as Jones was not even told of the reunion . 
 In 1995 , Led Zeppelin were inducted into the United States Rock and Roll Hall of Fame by Steven Tyler and Joe Perry of Aerosmith . Jason and Zoë Bonham also attended , representing their late father . At the induction ceremony , the band 's inner rift became apparent when Jones joked upon accepting his award , " Thank you , my friends , for finally remembering my phone number " , causing consternation and awkward looks from Page and Plant . Afterwards , they played one brief set with Tyler and Perry , with Jason Bonham on drums , and then a second with Neil Young , this time with Michael Lee playing the drums . 
 In 1997 , Atlantic released a single edit of " Whole Lotta Love " in the US and the UK , the only single the band released in their homeland , where it peaked at number 21 . November 1997 saw the release of Led Zeppelin BBC Sessions , a two @-@ disc set largely recorded in 1969 and 1971 . Page and Plant released another album called Walking into Clarksdale in 1998 , featuring all new material , but after disappointing sales the partnership dissolved before a planned Australian tour . 
 = = = = 2000s and beyond = = = = 
 2003 saw the release of the triple live album How the West Was Won , and Led Zeppelin DVD , a six @-@ hour chronological set of live footage that became the best @-@ selling music DVD in history . In July 2007 Atlantic / Rhino and Warner Home Video announced three new Led Zeppelin titles to be released that November . First was Mothership , a 24 @-@ track best @-@ of spanning the band 's career , followed by a reissue of the soundtrack The Song Remains the Same , which included previously unreleased material , and a new DVD . Led Zeppelin also made their catalogue legally available for digital download , becoming one of the last major rock bands to do so . 
 On 10 December 2007 , Led Zeppelin reunited for the Ahmet Ertegun Tribute Concert at the O2 Arena in London , with Jason Bonham again taking his late father 's place on drums . According to Guinness World Records 2009 , Led Zeppelin set the world record for the " Highest Demand for Tickets for One Music Concert " as 20 million requests for the reunion show were rendered online . Music critics praised the band 's performance and there was widespread speculation about a full reunion . Page , Jones and Jason Bonham were reported to be willing to tour , and to be working on material for a new Led Zeppelin project . Plant continued his touring commitments with Alison Krauss , stating in September 2008 that he would not be recording or touring with the band . Jones and Page reportedly looked for a replacement for Plant , considering singers including Steven Tyler from Aerosmith , and Myles Kennedy of Alter Bridge , but in January 2009 it was confirmed that the project had been abandoned . A film of the O2 performance , Celebration Day , premiered on 17 October 2012 and was released on home video on 19 November . The film grossed $ 2 million in one night , and the live album peaked at number 4 and 9 in the UK and US , respectively . Following the film 's premiere , Page revealed that he had been remastering the band 's discography with the first three albums re @-@ released on 2 June 2014 , containing bonus tracks . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Led Zeppelin 's music was rooted in the blues . The influence of American blues artists such as Muddy Waters and Skip James was particularly apparent on their first two albums , as was the distinct country blues style of Howlin ' Wolf . Tracks were structured around the twelve @-@ bar blues on every studio album except for one , and the blues directly and indirectly influenced other songs both musically and lyrically . The band were also strongly influenced by the music of the British , Celtic , and American folk revivals . Scottish folk guitarist Bert Jansch helped inspire Page , and from him he adapted open tunings and aggressive strokes into his playing . The band also drew on a wide variety of genres , including world music , and elements of early rock and roll , jazz , country , funk , soul , and reggae , particularly on Houses of the Holy and the albums that followed . 
 The material on the first two albums was largely constructed out of extended jams of blues standards and folk songs . This method led to the mixing of musical and lyrical elements of different songs and versions , as well as improvised passages , to create new material , but would lead to later accusations of plagiarism and legal disputes over copyright . Usually the music was developed first , sometimes with improvised lyrics that might then be rewritten for the final version of the song . From the visit to Bron @-@ Yr @-@ Aur in 1970 , the songwriting partnership between Page and Plant became predominant , with Page supplying the music , largely via his acoustic guitar , and Plant emerging as the band 's chief lyricist . Jones and Bonham then added to the material , in rehearsal or in the studio , as a song was developed . In the later stages of the band 's career , Page took a back seat in composition and Jones became increasingly important in producing music , often composed on the keyboard . Plant would then add lyrics before Page and Bonham developed their parts . 
 Early lyrics drew on the band 's blues and folk roots , often mixing lyrical fragments from different songs . Many of the band 's songs dealt with themes of romance , unrequited love and sexual conquest , which were common in rock , pop and blues music . Some of their lyrics , especially those derived from the blues , have been interpreted as misogynistic . Particularly on Led Zeppelin III , they incorporated elements of mythology and mysticism into their music , which largely grew out of Plant 's interest in legends and history . These elements were often taken to reflect Page 's interest in the occult , which resulted in accusations that the recordings contained subliminal satanic messages , some of which were said to be contained in backmasking ; these claims were generally dismissed by the band and music critics . Susan Fast argues that as Plant emerged as the band 's main lyricist , the songs more obviously reflected his alignment with the West Coast counterculture of the 1960s . In the later part of the band 's career Plant 's lyrics became more autobiographical , and less optimistic , drawing on his own experiences and circumstances . 
 According to musicologist Robert Walser , " Led Zeppelin 's sound was marked by speed and power , unusual rhythmic patterns , contrasting terraced dynamics , singer Robert Plant 's wailing vocals , and guitarist Jimmy Page 's heavily distorted crunch " . These elements mean that they are often cited as one of the progenitors of hard rock and heavy metal and they have been described as the " definitive heavy metal band " , although the band members have often eschewed the label . Part of this reputation depends on the band 's use of distorted guitar riffs on songs like " Whole Lotta Love " and " The Wanton Song " . Often riffs were not doubled by guitar , bass and drums exactly , but instead there were melodic or rhythmic variations ; as in " Black Dog " , where three different time signatures are used . Page 's guitar playing incorporated elements of the blues scale with those of eastern music . Plant 's use of high @-@ pitched shrieks has been compared to Janis Joplin 's vocal technique . Bonham 's drumming was noted for its power , his rapid rolls and his fast beats on a single bass drum . Jones ' basslines have been described as melodic and his keyboard playing added a classical touch to the band 's sound . 
 Page stated that he wanted Led Zeppelin to produce music that had " light and shade " . This began to be more clearly realised beginning with Led Zeppelin III , which made greater use of acoustic instruments . This approach has been seen as exemplified in the fourth album , particularly on " Stairway to Heaven " , which begins with acoustic guitar and recorder and ends with drums and heavy electric sounds . Towards the end of their recording career , they moved to a more mellow and progressive sound , dominated by Jones ' keyboard motifs . They also increasingly made use of various layering and production techniques , including multi @-@ tracking and overdubbed guitar parts . Their emphasis on the sense of dynamics and ensemble arrangement has been seen as producing an individualistic style that transcends any single music genre . Ian Peddie argues that they were " ... loud , powerful and often heavy , but their music was also humorous , self @-@ reflective and extremely subtle " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Led Zeppelin are widely considered to be one of the most successful , innovative , and influential bands in the history of rock music . Rock critic Mikal Gilmore said , " Led Zeppelin — talented , complex , grasping , beautiful and dangerous — made one of the most enduring bodies of composition and performance in twentieth @-@ century music , despite everything they had to overpower , including themselves " . 
 Led Zeppelin have influenced hard rock and heavy metal bands such as Deep Purple , Black Sabbath , Rush , Queen , Aerosmith , the Black Crowes , and Megadeth as well as progressive metal bands like Tool and Dream Theater . They influenced some early punk and post @-@ punk bands , among them the Ramones and the Cult . They were also an important influence on the development of alternative rock , as bands adapted elements from the " Zeppelin sound " of the mid @-@ 1970s , including the Smashing Pumpkins , Nirvana , Pearl Jam , Soundgarden , Bands and artists from diverse genres have acknowledged the influence of Led Zeppelin , such as Madonna , Shakira , Lady Gaga , and Katie Melua . 
 Led Zeppelin have been credited with a major impact on the nature of the music business , particularly in the development of album @-@ orientated rock ( AOR ) and stadium rock . In 1988 John Kalodner , then @-@ A & R executive of Geffen Records , remarked that " In my opinion , next to the Beatles they 're the most influential band in history . They influence the way music is on records , AOR radio , concerts . They set the standards for the AOR @-@ radio format with ' Stairway to Heaven , ' having AOR hits without necessarily having Top 40 hits . They 're the ones who did the first real big arena concert shows , consistently selling out and playing stadiums without support . People can do as well as them , but nobody surpasses them " . Andrew Loog Oldham , the former producer and manager of the Rolling Stones , commented on how Led Zeppelin had a major influence on the record business , and the way rock concerts were managed and presented to huge audiences . 
 The band have sold over 200 million albums worldwide according to some sources , while others state that they have sold in excess of 300 million records , including 111 @.@ 5 million certified units in the United States . According to the Recording Industry Association of America , Led Zeppelin are the second @-@ highest @-@ selling band , the fourth highest selling music act in the US , and one of only three acts to earn four or more Diamond albums . Led Zeppelin remain one of the most bootlegged artists in the history of rock music . 
 Led Zeppelin also made a significant cultural impact . Jim Miller , editor of Rolling Stone Illustrated History of Rock & Roll , argues that " on one level , Led Zeppelin represents the final flowering of the sixties ' psychedelic ethic , which casts rock as passive sensory involvement " . Led Zeppelin have also been described as " the quintessential purveyors " of masculine and aggressive " cock rock " , although this assertion has been challenged . The band 's fashion @-@ sense has been seminal ; Simeon Lipman , head of pop culture at Christie 's auction house , has commented that " Led Zeppelin have had a big influence on fashion because the whole aura surrounding them is so cool , and people want a piece of that " . Led Zeppelin laid the foundation for the big hair of 1980s glam metal bands such as Mötley Crüe and Skid Row . Other musicians have also adapted elements from Led Zeppelin 's attitude to clothes , jewellery and hair , such as the hipster flares and tight band T @-@ shirts of Kings of Leon , shaggy hair , clingy T @-@ shirts and bluesman hair of Jack White of the White Stripes , and Kasabian guitarist Sergio Pizzorno 's silk scarves , <unk> and side @-@ laced tight jeans . 
 = = Awards and accolades = = 
 Led Zeppelin have collected many honours and awards throughout the course of their career . They were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1995 , and the UK Music Hall of Fame in 2006 . Among the band 's awards are an American Music Award in 2005 , and the Polar Music Prize in 2006 . Led Zeppelin were the recipient of a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in 2005 , and four of their recordings have been inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame . They have been awarded five Diamond albums , as well as fourteen Multi @-@ Platinum , four Platinum and one Gold album in the United States , while in the UK they have five Multi @-@ Platinum , six Platinum , one Gold and four Silver albums . In addition to listing five of their albums among " the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " , Rolling Stone named Led Zeppelin the 14th @-@ greatest artist of all time in 2004 . 
 In 2005 , Page was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in recognition of his charity work , and in 2009 Plant was honoured as a Commander of the Order of the British Empire for his services to popular music . The band are ranked number one on VH1 's 100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock and Classic Rock 's " 50 best live acts of all time " . They were named as the best Rock band in a poll by BBC Radio 2 . They were awarded an Ivor Novello Award for " Outstanding Contribution to British Music " in 1977 , as well as a " Lifetime Achievement Award " at the 42nd Annual Ivor Novello awards ceremony in 1997 . The band were honoured at the 2008 MOJO Awards with the " Best Live Act " prize for their one @-@ off reunion , and were described as the " greatest rock and roll band of all time " . The three surviving members ( Page , Plant , and Jones ) were named as 2012 recipients of Kennedy Center Honors . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = Members = = 
 Band members 
 Jimmy Page – guitar ( 1968 – 80 ; 1985 , 1988 , 1995 , 2007 ) 
 Robert Plant – lead vocals ( 1968 – 80 ; 1985 , 1988 , 1995 , 2007 ) 
 John Paul Jones – bass guitar , keyboards ( 1968 – 80 ; 1985 , 1988 , 1995 , 2007 ) 
 John Bonham – drums ( 1968 – 80 ) 
