 Live performance guests 
 Tony Thompson – drums ( 1985 ) 
 Phil Collins – drums ( 1985 ) 
 Paul Martinez – bass ( 1985 ) 
 Jason Bonham – drums ( 1988 , 1995 , 2007 ) 
 Michael Lee – drums ( 1995 ) 
 = Exile ( Star Trek : Enterprise ) = 
 " Exile " is the fifty @-@ eighth episode of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Enterprise , the sixth episode of season three . It first aired on October 15 , 2003 on the UPN network in the United States . The episode was written by Phyllis Strong and directed by former Star Trek : Voyager actress Roxann Dawson . 
 Set in the 22nd century , the series follows the adventures of the first Starfleet starship Enterprise , registration NX @-@ 01 . In this episode , Ensign Hoshi Sato ( Linda Park ) is contacted telepathically by an alien named Tarquin ( Maury Sterling ) , who offers assistance with the Xindi . Whilst she visits Tarquin at his home , the rest of the crew investigate another mysterious sphere within the expanse . 
 The episode was seen as a take on " Beauty and the Beast " , with Sterling required to wear a full head prosthetic when Tarquin was in his non @-@ human form . Several sets were created in a gothic style to represent Tarquin 's home , while the anomalies created by the Delphic Expanse sphere were added in post production . The episode was the lowest rated so far of season three , having aired at the same time as Major League Baseball playoffs . It received a rating of 2 @.@ 3 , which was 0 @.@ 3 lower than a re @-@ run of " The Xindi " a week later at the same time as the World Series . The critical response was positive , although critics pointed out influences in this episode such as Disney Castles , The Lord of the Rings and The Three Stooges . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Sub @-@ Commander T 'Pol , examining gravitational anomaly patterns , calculates the location of a second sphere within the Delphic Expanse ( similar to the one previously seen in " Anomaly " ) , and Enterprise diverts course to investigate . Meanwhile Ensign Sato reports to sickbay , explaining to Doctor Phlox that she has been hearing voices and feels like she is being watched . She is later contacted telepathically by Tarquin , an alien that appears in human form . He explains that he can telepathically read objects , and suggests that Enterprise bring him part of the weapon used to attack Earth ( in " The Expanse " ) . 
 Enterprise soon arrives at Tarquin 's planet . He welcomes Archer and Hoshi and soon agrees to work on reading the weapon fragment , but only if Sato agrees to remain with him . They agree , and Enterprise departs to investigate the second sphere . Tarquin and Sato discuss many subjects and initially the alien seems trustworthy . However she also discovers that he had been watching her telepathically for some time and that she is not the first person to be brought here to provide companionship for him . 
 Meanwhile , Enterprise approaches the sphere , but has to halt its approach due to damage from the spatial anomalies generated by it . The ship sends down a shuttlepod coated with <unk> @-@ D ( retrieved in " Impulse " ) , and is able to approach close enough to take readings . Archer and Trip return to Enterprise and set course to retrieve Sato . Meanwhile , Tarquin attempts to trick her into staying with him permanently , but she refuses and threatens to destroy a device which enhances his telepathic abilities . He reluctantly agrees to let her go , and later provides Enterprise with the co @-@ ordinates for the Xindi colony that is building a part of the weapon . The episode ends as T 'Pol calculates that there are approximately 50 spheres in the expanse region . 
 = = Production = = 
 Both Linda Park and executive producer Rick Berman saw " Exile " as a play on the " Beauty and the Beast " story . Filming began on August 20 , 2003 , overlapping with the final day of shooting for the previous episode , " Impulse " . Shooting ran through to August 29 , the final working day before the Labor Day weekend . As Linda Park was the only member of the main cast to be required for scenes on the final day of shooting , the remaining cast began work on the following episode , " The Shipment " . A number of sets were created for use in this episode , all of which were created to show Tarquin 's home . Although this was only referred to in the script as an " alien sanctuary " , the set designers created an aged gothic @-@ inspired alien castle across five sets . Set <unk> Jim Mees added to this design by filling the areas with further gothic artifacts and exotic flowers . 
 The subplot required several effects to be added in post production to show the effects on the Enterprise due to the proximity of the sphere that the ship investigates . These were overseen by special effects supervisor Dan Curry . In order to portray Tarquin , Maury Sterling was required to wear a full head prosthetic while the character was in his true form . However , the majority of the time spent filming was while Tarquin was telepathically communicating with Hoshi , where Sterling appeared as himself . Both the writer and director had close ties to Star Trek : Voyager . Roxann Dawson portrayed Chief Engineer B 'Elanna Torres in that series , but her involvement in the Star Trek franchise has since led to her directing episodes of Enterprise , " Exile " being her sixth credit so far . Dawson had announced that she was due to direct this episode earlier in the year whilst appearing at the Las Vegas Creation convention on August 2 . " Exile " writer and series co @-@ producer Phyllis Strong also wrote episodes of Voyager , and has since gone on to write episodes of Enterprise as well . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Exile " was first aired in the United States on the UPN network on October 15 , 2003 . It received a 2 @.@ 3 / 4 percentage share among all adults , including 4 percent of all adults watching television at the time of the broadcast . This was the lowest ratings the show had received so far during season three and blame was placed against the episode going up against coverage of the Major League Baseball play @-@ off games . The episode which followed " Exile " during the following week was a repeat of the season premiere , " The Xindi " . It was aired in order to avoid putting new episodes up against a game of the 2003 Baseball World Series on the Fox Network . However , that re @-@ run received a 2 @.@ 6 rating , which was higher than " Exile " from a week earlier . 
 Michelle Erica Green reviewed " Exile " for TrekNation , and found that it reminded her of the Voyager episode " Alter Ego " where a lonely alien contacts Tuvok whilst pretending to be a character on the holodeck . She also thought that Tarquin in particular was reminiscent of Flint from The Original Series episode " Requiem for Methuselah " due to the long life span of the character . She said that Tarquin 's castle reminded her of a Disney Castle while other elements such as his communications device , were similar to something out of The Lord of the Rings . Jamahl Epsicokhan at his website " Jammer 's Reviews " , said that " Exile " was a well rounded episode but thought that it did not " venture as far as it could 've and perhaps should 've " . He described the scene where Trip has problems with the shuttlecraft as a " irrelevant but nevertheless great scene that 's kind of brilliant in a Three Stooges kind of way " . He gave the episode a score of three out of four . 
 The only home media release of " Exile " has been as part of the season three DVD box set , released in the United States on September 27 , 2005 . The Blu ray release of Enterprise was announced in early 2013 . 
 = Akodon spegazzinii = 
 Akodon spegazzinii , also known as Spegazzini 's akodont or Spegazzini 's grass mouse , is a rodent in the genus Akodon found in northwestern Argentina . It occurs in grassland and forest at 400 to 3 @,@ 500 m ( 1 @,@ 300 to 11 @,@ 500 ft ) above sea level . After the species was first named in 1897 , several other names were given to various populations now included in A. spegazzinii . They are now all recognized as part of a single , widespread and variable species . Akodon spegazzinii is related to Akodon boliviensis and other members of the A. boliviensis species group . It reproduces year @-@ round . Because it is widely distributed and common , Akodon spegazzinii is listed as " Least Concern " on the IUCN Red List . 
 Akodon spegazzinii is medium in size for the A. boliviensis species group . The coloration of its upperparts varies considerably , from light to dark and from yellowish to reddish brown . The underparts are yellow @-@ brown to gray . The eyes are surrounded by a ring of yellow fur . The skull contains an hourglass @-@ shaped interorbital region ( between the eyes ) and various features of the skull distinguish the species from its close allies . Head and body length is 93 to 196 mm ( 3 @.@ 7 to 7 @.@ 7 in ) and body mass is 13 @.@ 0 to 38 @.@ 0 g ( 0 @.@ 46 to 1 @.@ 34 oz ) . A. spegazzinii has 40 chromosomes . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Akodon spegazzinii was first described in 1897 from Salta Province by Oldfield Thomas on the basis of a collection made in late 1896 or early 1897 by mycologist Carlos Luigi Spegazzini , after whom the species was named . Four years later , Joel Asaph Allen named Akodon tucumanensis from Tucumán Province , comparing it to various species now synonymized under Abrothrix olivaceus . Thomas named an additional species , Akodon alterus , from La Rioja Province in 1919 , and considered it closely related to A. spegazzinii . A fourth species , Akodon leucolimnaeus , was described by Ángel Cabrera from Catamarca Province in 1926 , but after 1932 it was associated with Akodon <unk> ( now Necromys <unk> ) as a subspecies . 
 In 1961 , Cabrera listed both spegazzinii and tucumanensis as subspecies of Akodon boliviensis , with alterus as a full synonym of A. boliviensis tucumanensis . In 1990 , Philip Myers and colleagues reviewed the Akodon boliviensis species group . They provisionally kept Akodon spegazzinii as a species separate from A. boliviensis , with tucumanensis as a subspecies , and suggested that alterus was likely related to spegazzinii and tucumanensis . Subsequently , the treatment of these species in systematic works became variable . A 1992 paper suggested that alterus and tucumanensis were , at best , very similar to each other , but in 1997 , Michael Mares and colleagues listed each of the three as distinct species in a compendium of the mammals of Catamarca , citing differences in habitat and fur coloration . They were followed by Mónica Díaz and Rubén <unk> in 2007 , among others . However , in 2000 Díaz and colleagues listed alterus and tucumanensis as subspecies of spegazzinii in a review of the mammals of Salta . Guy Musser and Michael Carleton , in the 2005 third edition of Mammal Species of the World , also considered the three to represent the same species , as did Ulyses Pardiñas and colleagues in a 2006 review of Argentinean Akodontini . Meanwhile , Carlos Galliari and Pardiñas had recognized Akodon leucolimnaeus as a true Akodon , not a Necromys , in 1995 . Although associated with the Akodon boliviensis group , its precise status remained unclear . The common name " Catamarca akodont " was proposed for this species . 
 In 1980 , Julio Contreras and María Rosi identified an Akodon from the province of Mendoza as Akodon varius neocenus ( now Akodon neocenus ) , but the following year , they identified it as a new species , named Akodon <unk> in a presentation at a scientific meeting . However , this name was never formally validated . In 2000 , Janet Braun and colleagues formally named this species Akodon oenos and allied it to the Akodon varius species group . The specific name , oenos , is Greek for " wine " and refers to the animal 's occurrence in the wine @-@ producing region of Mendoza . The common names " Monte akodont " and " wine grass mouse " were proposed for this species . 
 In 2010 , Pablo <unk> and colleagues reviewed the members of the Akodon boliviensis species group , including A. spegazzinii , in Argentina . They could not find clear differentiation in either morphological or molecular characters between animals belonging to A. alterus , A. leucolimnaeus , A. spegazzinii , and A. tucumanensis , and consequently concluded that they all represent a single species . Although genetic variation is relatively high within A. spegazzinii , there is no clear geographic structure among haplotypes from different regions . The next year , Ulyses Pardiñas and colleagues concluded that A. oenos , which had formerly , and incorrectly , been placed in the A. varius species group , was in fact another synonym of A. spegazzinii . The proliferation of scientific names for this one species occurred because of the terseness of the original description of A. spegazzinii , and a lack of large samples and of appreciation of the substantial variation occurring within A. spegazzinii . 
 According to phylogenetic analysis of sequences from the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene , Akodon spegazzinii is most closely related to A. boliviensis and more distantly to other members of the A. boliviensis species group , including Akodon polopi and Akodon sylvanus . The boliviensis group is part of the highly diverse genus Akodon and thereby of the tribe Akodontini , which includes about 90 species of South American rodents . Akodontini is one of several tribes within the subfamily Sigmodontinae and the family Cricetidae , which includes hundreds of mainly small rodents distributed chiefly in Eurasia and the Americas . 
 = = Description = = 
 The species is intermediate in size for the Akodon boliviensis species group ; it is smaller than A. polopi and A. sylvanus , but larger than A. boliviensis and A. caenosus . The more distantly related A. budini and A. simulator , which occur in the same area , are larger . Akodon spegazzinii is variable in coloration , ranging from light to dark and from reddish to yellowish brown . In general , animals in wetter , lower @-@ lying areas are darker , and those in open , dry environments are paler . However , there is also variation within populations , and sometimes young mice are darker and lactating females are more reddish . The formerly recognized species Akodon tucumanensis corresponds to the dark , low @-@ altitude populations , while A. leucolimnaeus and A. alterus represent more reddish , high @-@ altitude animals . 
 The coloration of the upperparts is generally uniform , with some scattered darker hairs . There is a yellow ring around the eyes , which is more prominent than in A. sylvanus . The underparts are not strongly demarcated from the upperparts in color and are yellow @-@ brown to gray . There are some scattered white hairs on the chin . Although this white spot is better developed than in A. sylvanus , A. spegazzinii lacks the conspicuous white spot seen in A. simulator . The color of the feet ranges from white and yellow @-@ brown to gray . Ungual tufts of hairs cover the claws ; these hairs are grayish @-@ brown at the bases and whitish at the tips . The amount of hair on the tail is variable , but it is dark brown above and white to yellow @-@ brown below . High @-@ altitude animals tend to have hairier ears and tails . 
 In the skull , the front part ( rostrum ) is large , but not as long as in A. budini . The skull is more robust than in the very similar Akodon boliviensis , but less so than in A. simulator . The hourglass @-@ shaped interorbital region ( between the eyes ) is narrower than in A. caenosus and not as squared as in A. polopi . Members of the Akodon varius group , with which Akodon oenos was formerly associated , tend to have much broader interorbital regions . The braincase is somewhat inflated and bears well @-@ developed temporal and lambdoid crests relative to the situation in A. caenosus ; Akodon polopi , however , has even better developed crests . 
 Although the zygomatic plates ( plates of bone at the side of the skull ) are variable , their size is generally intermediate for the Akodon boliviensis group and their front margin ranges from straight to a little concave . The zygomatic notches , projections at the front of the plates , are better developed than in A. caenosus and A. sylvanus . The incisive foramina ( openings in the front part of the palate ) are long , sometimes extending between the first upper molars . Tiny posterolateral palatal pits are located at the back of the palate . The back margin of the palate is squared to rounded , with a spine in the middle ( medial process ) sometimes present . The opening behind the palate , the mesopterygoid fossa , is of intermediate width , being narrower than in A. sylvanus , A. simulator , and A. budini but broader than in A. caenosus . 
 The masseteric crests ( crests on the outer sides of the mandibles ) reach their front ends below the front border of the first molars . Usually , the capsular process ( a projection at the back of the mandible housing the root of the lower incisor ) is well @-@ developed . The enamel of the upper incisors is yellowish @-@ orange and the incisors are orthodont ( with their cutting edge perpendicular to the plane of the toothrow ) or slightly opisthodont ( with the cutting edge inclined backwards ) . In contrast , Akodon simulator has more <unk> incisors ( with the cutting edge oriented forwards ) and Akodon neocenus has more opisthodont incisors . The molars are more hypsodont ( high @-@ crowned ) than in A. caenosus , but are unlike the very hypsodont molars of A. budini . The molar rows are relatively longer than in A. polopi . There are 13 or 14 thoracic ( chest ) , 7 or 8 lumbar ( abdomen ) , and 23 or 26 caudal ( tail ) vertebrae . 
 The karyotype includes 40 chromosomes , with a fundamental number of 40 major chromosomal arms and resembles that of other members of the A. boliviensis group . Head and body length is 93 to 196 mm ( 3 @.@ 7 to 7 @.@ 7 in ) , averaging 158 mm ( 6 @.@ 2 in ) ; tail length is 46 to 83 mm ( 1 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 3 in ) , averaging 66 mm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) ; hindfoot length is 18 to 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 71 to 0 @.@ 98 in ) , averaging 23 mm ( 0 @.@ 91 in ) ; ear length is 12 to 21 mm ( 0 @.@ 47 to 0 @.@ 83 in ) , averaging 14 mm ( 0 @.@ 55 in ) ; and body mass is 13 @.@ 0 to 38 @.@ 0 g ( 0 @.@ 46 to 1 @.@ 34 oz ) , averaging 21 @.@ 6 g ( 0 @.@ 76 oz ) . Like other members of the Akodon boliviensis group , individuals of Akodon spegazzinii continue to grow in adulthood . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 Akodon spegazzinii is found in northwestern Argentina , in the provinces of Salta , Catamarca , Tucumán , La Rioja , and Mendoza , at altitudes of 400 to 3 @,@ 500 m ( 1 @,@ 300 to 11 @,@ 500 ft ) . Although its main distribution is in the northern provinces of Salta , Tucumán , and Catamarca , there are also scattered records from the more southern provinces of La Rioja and Mendoza , where it is likely restricted to patches of wet habitat . Akodon alterus has been reported from Jujuy , but this record was likely based on misidentified specimens of A. boliviensis , and records of Akodon spegazzinii from Jujuy were based on misidentified A. sylvanus . Akodon spegazzinii is known from a paleontological site in Tucumán Province dated to the latest Pleistocene ( Lujanian ) ; it is among the most common species there . The species occurs in the Yungas forest as well as the drier Monte Desert and Puna , where it is found only along streams . In the cloud grasslands of the higher portions of the Yungas , it is the dominant species of sigmodontine rodent . 
 Although reproduction occurs around the year , there is a peak during the summer ( November to April ) . Molting mostly occurs during autumn and winter ( April to August ) . At one locality in Mendoza , Akodon spegazzinii occurs at an estimated density of 21 individuals per hectare ( 8 @.@ 5 per acre ) and has a home range size of about 300 m2 ( 3200 sq ft ) . A number of sigmodontines have been recorded as occurring with A. spegazzinii , including A. caenosus , A. simulator , <unk> <unk> , Abrothrix <unk> , Reithrodon auritus , <unk> <unk> , and various species of <unk> , Necromys , Calomys , Oligoryzomys , Oxymycterus , and Phyllotis . The tick Ixodes <unk> has been recorded on A. spegazzinii in Tucumán . In addition , the mites Androlaelaps fahrenholzi , Androlaelaps rotundus , and <unk> <unk> and the flea <unk> townsendii are known from the species . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 Akodon spegazzinii is listed as " Least Concern " on the IUCN Red List in view of its wide distribution and apparently stable population ; in addition , it occurs in several protected areas . However , both Akodon oenos and Akodon leucolimnaeus are listed as " Data Deficient " with a trend of declining populations ; they are said to be threatened by agricultural development . 
 = Australian Senate committees = 
 The committees of the Australian Senate are committees of Senators , established by the Australian Senate , for purposes determined by that body . Senate committees are part of the operation of the Australian parliament , and have for some decades been involved in maintenance of government accountability to the Australian parliament , particularly through hearings to scrutinise the budget , and through public inquiries on policy questions . 
 = = History of the committees = = 
 The existence of parliamentary committees are mentioned in section 49 of the Constitution of Australia , which makes reference to ' The powers , privileges , and immunities of the Senate and of the House of Representatives , and of the members and the committees of each House ... ' However , the Senate had few committees , engaged in limited activities , until 1970 . A number of domestic committees have operated since the establishment of the parliament , however prior to 1970 the only significant committee to be established was the Regulations and Ordinances Committee in 1932 , one of the legislative scrutiny committees ( see below ) . 
 In 1970 , the present committee system was created , with a series of standing ( permanent ) committees established that mirrored the portfolio activities of government . These reforms significantly enhanced the expertise and power of the Senate : 
 The Senate is now undergoing the most fundamental and dramatic changes witnessed in the Commonwealth Parliament since the States decided to federate 70 years ago . The introduction of a wide @-@ ranging committee system will make the red @-@ carpeted Upper House potentially the most powerful parliamentary chamber in Australia . 
 These reforms were also significant in that they gave to Senate committees the role of examining the budget ( what is referred to as the estimates process or estimates hearings ) , which had hitherto been confined to the Senate and its committee of the whole . The role of the committees was enhanced by three subsequent developments . First , in 1982 the Scrutiny of Bills Committee was established , which , in examining all bills , played a role that complemented that of the examination of all delegated legislation by the Regulations and Ordinances Committee . Second , in 1989 the Senate adopted procedures for the systematic referral of bills to committees , increasing the level of legislative scrutiny taking place within parliament . Third , in 1993 , the committees adopted a more extensive procedure for consideration of the budget , creating a second opportunity each year for Senators to follow up issues identified during the initial budget estimates hearings . These second hearings are referred to as supplementary budget estimates . Though the committee system was restructured in 1994 , 2006 and again in 2009 , the range of functions has remained essentially the same . 
 = = Purposes of committees = = 
 The functions of committees depend on the type of committee and on the work it is undertaking . Most of the committees are established under the Senate 's Standing Orders . 
 = = = Standing committees = = = 
 The Legislative and General Purpose Standing Committees ( often referred to simply as ' standing committees ' ) are established by Standing Order 25 . The standing committees are actually made up of pairs of committees – a legislation committee and a references committee . The legislation committees are responsible for scrutinising bills referred to them by the chamber ; examining the government 's budget and activities ( in what is called the budget estimates process ) ; and for examining departmental annual reports and activities . The references committees are responsible for conducting inquiries into topics referred to them by the chamber . 
 = = = Select committees = = = 
 Select committees are temporary committees , established by the Senate to deal with particular issues . This may occur when a particular group of Senators wishes to examine an issue in depth , or where there is no existing committee suited to addressing a particular topic . Australian Senate select committees have included ones set up to examine the Administration of Indigenous Affairs , and Mental Health . Select committees usually cease to exist upon reporting back to the chamber . One exception to this was the Senate Select Committee on Superannuation which in various forms existed for a decade . 
 = = = Domestic committees = = = 
 Domestic committees are responsible for administering aspects of the Senate 's own affairs . The selection of bills committee meets each sitting fortnight to consider which of the bills coming before the Senate will be referred to committees for detailed consideration . The procedure committee considers " any matter relating to the procedures of the Senate referred to it by the Senate or by the President " . This committee thus regularly examines and reports back to the chamber on suggested changes to the operation of the Senate and its committees , such as what times of day the chamber will sit and what rules should govern its order of business . 
 Established by Standing Order 18 of the Senate , the privileges committee is responsible for reporting on matters of parliamentary privilege referred to it by the Senate . The protections afforded by parliamentary privilege are essential to parliament and its committees to be able to operate effectively . The bulk of the work of the privileges committee 's work is associated with facilitating a ' right of reply ' for people adversely named in the Senate , as well as involving investigations of unauthorised disclosures of Senate committee proceedings , complaints from witnesses in connection with evidence given to committees , and allegedly misleading evidence given to committees . 
 = = = Legislative scrutiny committees = = = 
 The purpose of the scrutiny of bills committee is to assess " legislative proposals against a set of accountability standards that focus on the effect of proposed legislation on individual rights , liberties and obligations , and on parliamentary propriety " . The regulations and ordinances committee performs a similar task , but for all subordinate legislation . 
 = = = Other committees = = = 
 Senators may be members of joint committees : committees jointly established by both chambers of the Australian parliament . In addition , political parties will often have caucus committees comprising members of the parliamentary party ; these committees will often have a policy focus , but are not committees of the parliament and are not bound by any of parliament 's rules of procedures . 
 = = List of committees = = 
 These are the committees of the 43rd Parliament that exist within each category : 
 = = Membership and rules of committees = = 
 The Senate 's committees are formed at the commencement of each new parliament , in accordance with rules set out in the Standing Orders . The committees exist until the first day of the following parliament , in contrast to the lower house committees , which cease to exist as soon as parliament is prorogued for an election . 
 The most important and high profile of the committees are the pairs of standing committees . These each have six members . The chairman of each legislation committee is chosen from amongst the government members , the deputy chair from amongst non @-@ government members . The reverse is the case for the references committees . Because the chair has a casting vote in the event of a committee vote being tied , the government effectively controls the legislation committees , while the non @-@ government parties control the references committees . 
 The membership and rules of committees , including those that operated during the Coalition 's period of control , are shown below : 
 Committees have two types of members : full members and participating members . In the case of standing committees , full members are the six outlined above . In addition , however , any Senator may arrange for the Senate to agree to their being made a participating member of the committee . This gives them the same rights as full members , with the important exception of being unable to vote on motions in private meetings of the committees . 
 The committees are governed by the Standing Orders of the Senate , as well as being able to pass their own resolutions to govern certain aspects of their operations ( such as the processing of correspondence and submissions to inquiries ) . 
 Committees are designed to assist the Senate as a whole . Thus the main formal structure of their work is that the Senate refers something to a committee for examination , and the committee reports back to the Senate on that matter . These reports are tabled during parliamentary sittings , but can also be presented when the Senate is not in session . Committees can gather evidence and will often hold public hearings to assist this process . To gather their evidence committees can ( with exceptions ) travel from place to place to hear evidence . Committees are able to order the production of documents and the appearance of witnesses ( powers that are in practice used very sparingly ) . Most evidence taken by committees ( both written submissions and transcripts of public hearings ) is published , however committees have the power to take evidence confidentially ( in camera ) , and regularly do so . Committees hold both public hearings and conduct business at private meetings . The minutes of private meetings are confidential ( in contrast , for example , to those of New South Wales parliamentary committees ) . 
 The rules governing committees are slightly different when conducting budget estimates hearings . In particular , during estimates hearings , 
 any Senator may ask questions of the officials appearing before the committee ( normally only members can ask questions ) 
 no evidence can be taken on a confidential basis ( normally this is an option available to a committee ) 
 under Standing Orders , Senators may direct questions to any government agency , but only within the portfolio areas for which the committee has oversight . The committee cannot restrict the agencies to which Senators may direct questions ( although the committee can control whether this happens at the public hearing , or whether it must be done in writing afterwards ) . 
 = = The work of Senate committees = = 
 A typical year in the life of a Senate legislation committee will see it conduct eight days of hearings around budget estimates , in three sessions : February ( additional estimates ) , May / June ( the main budget estimates ) and October / November ( supplementary budget estimates ) . In addition , it will typically conduct several inquiries into pieces of legislation being considered by the parliament . A references committee will conduct inquiries into policy issues referred to it by the Senate . Each of these inquiries will usually result in a report tabled in the Senate ( there may be exceptions if an election intervenes during the committee 's deliberations ) . A consolidated list of the reports prepared by all Senate committees since 1970 is published by the Department of the Senate . 
 = = = Inquiries into topics and bills = = = 
 Committee inquiries typically begin with the reference of an issue or a proposed law to the committee for inquiry and report back to the Senate . The committee will make a call for submissions , seeking public input on the matter referred to the committee . It will often publish those submissions to help inform stakeholders of the views that are being put to the committee . A committee will often hold one or more public hearings , at which committee members ask questions of key stakeholders interested in the issue under inquiry . These hearings may be held anywhere in Australia , are often broadcast , and result in a published transcript ( Hansard ) that records the evidence taken . The opportunity to make submissions , and the greater accessibility of the committees compared to parliament itself , can provide disadvantaged individuals and organisations valued opportunities to engage in democratic processes . Committees also frequently ask relevant government agencies to respond to issues raised by submissions or evidence given to the inquiry . Once evidence has been gathered there usually follows a period of research and analysis by the committee . It will then deliver a report to the Senate , which will generally include recommendations . The Commonwealth government is then expected to table a response to the report , stating responses to any recommendations the committee may have made . 
 = = = Scrutiny of the budget = = = 
 Following the introduction of appropriation bills into the Parliament , the expenditure proposed in those bills is referred to Senate legislation committees for inquiry . Such referrals result in what are generally known as budget estimates hearings . Senate standing committees will usually conduct eight days of hearings around budget estimates , in three sessions : February ( additional estimates ) , May / June ( the main budget estimates ) and October / November ( supplementary budget estimates ) . 
 During these hearings ministers , assisted by senior public servants , answer questions put to them by any Senator that relate to the operations and expenditure of departments and agencies that receive federal government funding . In such hearings , ministers from the House of Representatives are represented by a minister who is also a Senator . 
 Budget and management reforms in the 1980s and 1990s saw a change in budgeting , including a greater emphasis on outcomes , and decreasing emphasis on inputs . This has been reflected in the activities of Senate committees , with Senators ' questions being increasingly focussed on the ' results of government activities and away from a concern with inputs ' . 
 = = The Impact of Senate committees = = 
 The impact of the Senate 's committees varies and has been the subject of debate . The work of the committees is frequently more consensual and less partisan than activity in the parliamentary chambers , and unanimous committee reports that agree recommendations across party lines are not uncommon . As a result , these recommendations may contribute to subsequent government policy announcements and occasionally to changes in government actions . The work of the regulations and ordinances committee has led to revisions of subordinate legislation in significant respects . Committee scrutiny of bills has contributed to them being amended or withdrawn . The impact of committees on legislation overall has however been described as ' rather limited ' , particularly as the committees that review bills are controlled by a government majority . 
 Senate committees can be affected by the party composition of the Senate . The Clerk of the Senate , Harry Evans , argued that a government majority of seats in the Senate resulted in limitations on what the committees inquired into , and how readily governments responded to their queries and requests for information . Statistics published by centrist political party the Australian Democrats have been used to support the contention that committee operations have been inhibited by government control of the Senate , particularly in respect of selection of topics for committee inquiry . However Senator Minchin , the leader of the government in the Senate in the mid @-@ 2000s , pointed out that their political rivals had previously cut off debate on more bills in the Senate than had his government . 
 = = = Prominent Senate committee inquiries = = = 
 One of the most high @-@ profile Senate committee inquiries was the Senate Select Committee on a Certain Maritime Incident , which in 2002 investigated what became known as the Children Overboard Affair . The events and subsequent Senate committee inquiries were widely reported , and the transcripts of the inquiry formed the basis of a play , A Certain Maritime Incident . Other high @-@ profile inquiries included the Community Affairs committee 's inquiry into Children in Institutional Care , which brought to wide public notice the experiences of children who had been placed in care in sometimes inhumane circumstances and was directly responsible for state governments and churches making public apologies to the victims of abuse or neglect ; the Select Committee on Mental Health , which contributed to widespread discussion of mental health issues and to a major funding boost for services in 2006 ; and the 2006 inquiry into the Migration Amendment ( Designated Unauthorised Arrivals ) Bill , which contributed to a government decision not to proceed with controversial migration legislation . 
 = Sarcoscypha occidentalis = 
 Sarcoscypha occidentalis , commonly known as the stalked scarlet cup or the western scarlet cup , is a species of fungus in the family Sarcoscyphaceae of the Pezizales order . Fruit bodies have small , bright red cups up to 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) wide atop a slender whitish stem that is between 1 to 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 to 1 @.@ 2 in ) long . A saprobic species , it is found growing on hardwood twigs , particularly those that are partially buried in moist and shaded humus @-@ rich soil . The fungus is distributed in the continental United States east of the Rocky Mountains , Central America , the Caribbean , and Asia . It is distinguished from the related species S. coccinea and S. austriaca by differences in geographical distribution , fruiting season , and fruit body structure . Phylogenetic analysis has shown that it is most closely related to other Sarcoscypha species that contain large oil droplets in their spores . The species Molliardiomyces occidentalis is an imperfect form of the fungus that lacks a sexually reproductive stage in its life cycle . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The fungus , originally collected from Muskingum County , Ohio , was named Peziza occidentalis by Lewis David de Schweinitz in 1832 . It was assigned its current name by Pier Andrea Saccardo in 1888 . Andrew Price Morgan renamed the species Geopyxis occidentalis in 1902 because of a perceived similarity with Geopyxis <unk> , but the name change was not adopted by subsequent authors . In 1928 , Fred Jay Seaver overturned Saccardo 's naming and applied the name Plectania to Sarcoscypha coccinea and other red cup fungi . In later taxonomic revisions , Richard P. Korf reinstated the genus name Sarcoscypha . 
 The specific epithet occidentalis , derived from the Latin word for " western " , may refer to the distribution of the species in the western hemisphere . It is commonly known as the stalked scarlet cup or the western scarlet cup . 
 = = Phylogeny = = 
 The phylogenetic relationships in the genus Sarcoscypha were analyzed by Francis Harrington in the late 1990s . The cladistic analysis combined comparison of sequences from the internal transcribed spacer in the non @-@ functional RNA with fifteen traditional morphological characters , such as spore features , fruit body shape , and degree of hair curliness . Based on this analysis , S. occidentalis is part of a clade of evolutionarily related taxa that includes the species S. dudleyi , S. emarginata , S. <unk> , S. <unk> and S. mesocyatha . All of these species contain large oil droplets in their spores , in contrast to the other major clade of Sarcoscypha ( containing the type species S. coccinea ) , characterized by having smaller , more numerous droplets . The species most closely related to S. occidentalis is S. mesocyatha , known only from Hawaii . 
 = = Description = = 
 Depending on their age , the fruit bodies of S. occidentalis may range in shape from deep cups to saucers to discs in maturity , and they can reach diameters up to 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) . In young specimens , the edges of the cup are curled inwards , and crenulate ( with small rounded scallops ) ; the cup edges in older specimens become <unk> ( with jagged edges cut into irregular segments ) . The cups rest atop a stem that is small to medium @-@ sized , up to 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) long and 1 @.@ 5 – 2 mm thick , and attached centrally or to the side to the underside of the cup . The base of the stem may be covered with translucent " hairs " . The fertile spore @-@ bearing inner surface of the cups , the hymenium , is bright red but fades to yellow or orange when dry . It is smooth or becomes so with time . The fruit bodies are fleshy to rubbery when fresh , but become leathery when dry . The flesh is thin and has no distinctive odor or taste . S. occidentalis is " of no culinary value " . A Jamaican variety has been named ( as Plectania occidentalis var. jamaicensis ) ; it has a pinker hymenium . 
 <unk> is a term used to refer to the tissue or tissues containing the hymenium of an ascomycete fruit body . The ectal excipulum ( outer tissue layer ) is thin ( 20 – 30 µm thickness ) , made of a tissue type known as <unk> <unk> , consisting of more or less parallel hyphae all in one direction , with wide <unk> and non @-@ thickened walls . The medullary <unk> ( middle tissue layer ) is thick ( 200 – 600 µm ) and made of textura <unk> , a tissue layer made of irregularly interwoven hyphae with distinct spaces between the hyphae . The asci ( filamentous structures in which the ascospores develop ) are cylindrical with gradually tapering bases , eight @-@ spored , and measure 240 – 280 by 12 – 15 µm . The ascospores have ellipsoidal to roughly cylindrical shapes , usually with blunt ends , and measure 19 – 22 by 10 – 12 µm . They have smooth surfaces and usually contain two large oil drops . The paraphyses ( sterile , filamentous hyphae present in the hymenium ) are cylindrical , 2 – 3 µm thick , barely enlarged at their apices , straight , and mostly unbranched above . They may sometimes anastomose , but do not form a conspicuous network . The paraphyses contain numerous red granules . 
 = = = Anamorph form = = = 
 Anamorphic or imperfect fungi are those that seem to lack a sexual stage in their life cycle , and typically reproduce by the process of mitosis in structures called conidia . In some cases , the sexual stage — or teleomorph stage — is later identified , and a teleomorph @-@ anamorph relationship is established between the species . The International Code of Botanical Nomenclature permits the recognition of two ( or more ) names for one and the same organisms , one based on the teleomorph , the other ( s ) restricted to the anamorph . The anamorphic state of S. occidentalis is Molliardiomyces occidentalis , described by John W. Paden . This form produces smooth , colorless conidiophores ( specialized stalks that bear conidia ) measuring 20 – 230 by 2 – 3 @.@ 2 µm . The conidia are roughly spherical to ovoid , smooth , translucent ( hyaline ) , and 4 @.@ 6 – 7 @.@ 0 by 3 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 8 µm . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Sarcoscypha occidentalis is frequently confused with S. coccinea , but is distinguished macroscopically from this species by its smaller fruit bodies , smaller spores , and less hairy exterior . The two also differ in seasonal and geographic distribution : S. coccinea fruits earlier in the year , and is distributed in eastern North America , in the midwest , in the valleys between the Pacific coast and the Sierras and Cascades , as well as Europe , Africa , Australia , and India . Another eastern North American species , S. austriaca , has scarlet fruit bodies up to 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) wide , and fruits in the early spring . 
 S. occidentalis may also be mistaken for <unk> <unk> , which occurs in the same habitat . M. <unk> , however , has taller cups and is covered with stiff white hairs . Another cup @-@ fungus , Scutellinia scutellata , is disc @-@ shaped without a stem , and is fringed with black hairs around its rim . 
 = = Ecology , habitat and distribution = = 
 As a saprobic fungus , Sarcoscypha occidentalis is part of a community of fungi that play an important role in the forest ecosystem by breaking down the complex insoluble molecules cellulose and lignin of wood and leaf litter into smaller oligosaccharides that may be used by a variety of microbes . Fruit bodies of S. coccinea may grow either solitarily , scattered or grouped together on sticks , twigs , and fragments of dead wood , usually somewhat decomposed and partially buried in the top 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) of soil and forest litter . It prefers soil that is moist and shaded and has a high content of humus . Like all Sarcoscypha species , it prefers the wood of angiosperms , such as oak , maple , and basswood ; one field guide notes a preference for shagbark hickory . In the United States , it fruits from late spring to early autumn , which contrasts it with S. coccinea , found usually in the spring . 
 The fungus is found in North America east of the Rocky Mountains , and at higher elevations in Central America and the Caribbean . It has also been collected in Japan and Taiwan . 
 = SMS Frauenlob = 
 SMS Frauenlob ( " His Majesty 's Ship Frauenlob " ) was the eighth member of the ten @-@ ship Gazelle class , built by the Imperial German Navy . She was built by the AG Weser dockyard in Bremen , laid down in 1901 , launched in March 1902 , and commissioned into the High Seas Fleet in February 1903 . Armed with a main battery of ten 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns and two 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , Frauenlob was capable of a top speed of 21 @.@ 5 knots ( 39 @.@ 8 km / h ; 24 @.@ 7 mph ) . 
 Frauenlob spent her entire career in the reconnaissance forces of the High Seas Fleet . She saw action during World War I at the Battle of Heligoland Bight in August 1914 , where she badly damaged the British cruiser HMS Arethusa , and at the Battle of Jutland on 31 May 1916 . There , in a chaotic night engagement , Frauenlob was hit by a torpedo launched by HMS Southampton , which caused the ship to capsize and sink with the vast majority of her crew . The wreck was discovered in 2000 , and is in remarkably good condition , sitting upright on the ocean floor . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Frauenlob was 105 meters ( 344 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 12 @.@ 4 m ( 41 ft ) and a draft of 4 @.@ 99 m ( 16 @.@ 4 ft ) forward . She displaced 3 @,@ 158 t ( 3 @,@ 108 long tons ; 3 @,@ 481 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two triple @-@ expansion engines manufactured by AG Weser . They were designed to give 8 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 6 @,@ 000 kW ) , for a top speed of 21 @.@ 5 knots ( 39 @.@ 8 km / h ; 24 @.@ 7 mph ) . The engines were powered by eight coal @-@ fired Marine @-@ type water @-@ tube boilers . Frauenlob carried 700 tonnes ( 690 long tons ) of coal , which gave her a range of 4 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 100 km ; 5 @,@ 100 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . She had a crew of 14 officers and 256 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with ten 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 40 guns in single mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , six were located amidships , three on either side , and two were placed side by side aft . The guns could engage targets out to 12 @,@ 200 m ( 40 @,@ 000 ft ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 500 rounds of ammunition , for 150 shells per gun . She was also equipped with two 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes . They were submerged in the hull on the broadside . The ship was protected by an armored deck that was 20 to 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 to 0 @.@ 98 in ) thick . The conning tower had 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick sides , and the guns were protected by 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick shields . 
 = = History = = 
 Frauenlob was ordered under the contract name " G " and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in 1901 and launched on 22 March 1902 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 17 February 1903 . She was named for the schooner Frauenlob , launched in 1853 , that had been paid for in part by the donations of women from the German lands ; the name means " praise women . " After her commissioning , Frauenlob was assigned to the fleet reconnaissance forces , where she served for the duration of her career . In 1905 , she was assigned to the Cruiser Division , alongside her sister Arcona and the cruisers Hamburg and Friedrich Carl . 
 Frauenlob was recommissioned into the fleet on 2 August 1914 , as a result of the outbreak of World War I. On 28 August 1914 , Frauenlob saw her first action in the Battle of Heligoland Bight . The British Harwich Force , composed of two light cruisers and 33 destroyers under Commodore Reginald Tyrwhitt , raided the German picket line in the Heligoland Bight . Frauenlob was stationed to the southwest of the island of Heligoland in support of the picket line . At about 09 : 00 , Frauenlob and the light cruiser Stettin were sent out to reinforce the beleaguered German patrols . 
 Frauenlob shortly thereafter encountered the British cruiser HMS Arethusa and opened fire at 09 : 09 . She quickly found the range and hit the British ship an estimated 25 – 35 times , disabling all but one of her guns and inflicting serious damage . One shell detonated a cordite charge and set Arethusa on fire . The ship 's engine room flooded and her speed fell to 10 kn ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She turned away to starboard in order to escape from the punishing fire , but Frauenlob kept up with the badly damaged British cruiser until she disappeared in the fog . In return , Frauenlob was hit ten times , but was not seriously damaged ; in all , five men were killed and another thirty @-@ two were wounded . After the engagement ended , Frauenlob took the badly damaged minesweeper T33 under tow and returned her to Heligoland , before proceeding to Wilhelmshaven . 
 By the Battle of Jutland , on 31 May – 1 June 1916 , Frauenlob was assigned to the IV Scouting Group , under the command of Commodore Ludwig von Reuter , which was tasked with screening for the High Seas Fleet . She was not actively engaged in the battle until later on the evening of 31 May ; at around 9 : 15 , the IV Scouting Group encountered the British 3rd Light Cruiser Squadron and briefly engaged them , but due to the poor visibility , only Stettin and München fired for long , and to no effect . 
 Later , during the chaotic night fighting , the battlecruisers Seydlitz and Moltke passed too closely in front of Stettin , which forced the entire Scouting Group to fall out of line , inadvertently bringing them into contact with the 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron . A ferocious firefight ensued , at a range of only 730 meters ( 2 @,@ 400 ft ) . Frauenlob opened fire on HMS Southampton and HMS Dublin , as did the rest of the IV Scouting Group . In return , Southampton launched a torpedo that struck Frauenlob at around 22 : 35 , which cut her power and caused serious flooding . British 6 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) shellfire set the deck alight , and the stricken cruiser quickly capsized and sank , taking twelve officers and 308 men down with her . Only 9 men from her crew survived . 
 = = Wreck = = 
 In 2000 , the wreck was located by Danish divers . The British marine archeologist Innes McCartney led a subsequent dive and confirmed that the wreck sits upright on the sea floor and is largely intact . Skeletal remains from the ship 's crew are scattered around the sunken cruiser . The wreck was positively identified when McCartney 's team recovered the ship 's bell in 2001 , which they donated to the Laboe Naval Memorial near Kiel , where the bell is currently on display . 
 = Old Melbourne Gaol = 
 The Old Melbourne Gaol is a museum on Russell Street , in Melbourne , Victoria , Australia . It consists of a bluestone building and courtyard , and is located next to the old City Police Watch House and City Courts buildings . It was first constructed starting in 1839 , and during its operation as a prison between 1842 and 1929 , it held and executed some of Australia 's most notorious criminals , including bushranger Ned Kelly and serial killer Frederick Bailey Deeming . In total , 133 people were executed by hanging . Though it was used briefly during World War II , it formally ceased operating as a prison in 1924 ; with parts of the gaol being incorporated into the RMIT University , and the rest becoming a museum . 
 The three @-@ storey museum displays information and memorabilia of the prisoners and staff , including death masks of the executed criminals . At one time the museum displayed Ned Kelly 's skull , before it was stolen in 1978 ; as well as the pencil used by wrongly convicted Colin Campbell Ross to protest his innocence in writing , before being executed . Paranormal enthusiasts claim the museum is haunted , with claims of ghostly apparitions and unexplained voices near cells . 
 = = History = = 
 An allotment of scrubland to the north @-@ east of Melbourne was selected as Port Phillips first permanent gaol . On 1 January 1838 , George Wintle was appointed to be gaoler at the prison at £ 100 a year ; with the site becoming colloquially known as Wintle 's Hotel . Construction of the gaol started in 1839 – 1840 on Collins Street West , but it was considered too small at the time . A second gaol was then built between 1841 and 1844 at the corner of Russell and La Trobe Streets , adjoining the then Supreme court . The first cell block was opened for prisoners in 1845 , but the facilities were considered inadequate ; escapes occurring frequently . The gaol was already crowded by 1850 . 
 With the discovery of gold in 1851 ( when the Port Phillip District became the new Colony of Victoria ) , and the resulting influx of population , law and order became more difficult to maintain . Subsequently , a new wing , with its own perimeter wall , was constructed between 1852 and 1854 ; the building using bluestone instead of sandstone . The design was based on that of British prison engineer Joshua Jebb , and especially the designs for the Pentonville Model Prison in London ( which suited the current prison reform theories at the time ) . The new wing was extended in between 1857 and 1859 , with the boundary wall also being extended during this time . In 1860 , a new north wing was built ; which included entrance buildings , a central hall and chapel . Between 1862 and 1864 , a cell block was built for female prisoners on the western side – it was basically a replica of the present east block ( until this time , female convicts were not kept apart from the male prisoners ) . In 1864 , the perimeter wall , and the gaol overall , was completed ; making it a dominant feature of authority on the Melbourne skyline . 
 At its completion , the prison occupied an entire city block , and included exercise yards , a hospital in one of the yards , a chapel , a bath house and staff accommodation . A house for the chief warders was built on the corner of Franklin and Russell streets , and 17 homes were built for gaolers on Swanston street in 1860 . Artefacts recovered from the area indicate that even the gaolers and their families lived within the gaol walls in the 1850s and 1860s . 
 = = = Operation = = = 
 Much of daily life inside the gaol could be gleaned from sources such as diaries written by John <unk> , governor of the gaol between 1869 and 1884 . During its operation , the gaol was used to house short @-@ term prisoners , lunatics and some of the colony ’ s most notorious and hardened criminals . It also housed up to twenty children at a time – including those imprisoned for petty theft or vagrancy , or simply those staying with a convicted parent . Babies under twelve months old were allowed to be with their mothers . The youngest prisoner was recorded as three @-@ year @-@ old Michael Crimmins , who spent 6 months in the prison in 1857 for being idle and disorderly . In 1851 , the 13- and 14 @-@ year @-@ old O 'Dowd sisters were imprisoned because they had nowhere else to go . 
 Prisoners convicted of serious crime , such as murder , arson , burglary , rape and shooting , would begin their time on the ground floor with a time of solitary confinement . They were also forbidden from communicating with other prisoners , which was strictly enforced by the usage of a silence mask , or calico hood , when outside their cells . They would only be given a single hour of solitary exercise a day , with the remaining 23 hours spent in their cells . Inside the cells , prisoners would be able to lie on a thin mattress over the slate floors . They could only bathe and change clothes once a week , and attend the chapel on Sundays ( with a Bible provided to promote good behaviour ) . Prisoners might only have been allowed to finally socialise with other prisoners towards the end of their sentences . 
 The routine for prisoners was regulated by a system of bells , and enforced by punishments ; prisoners who obeyed the rules would be promoted to the second floor – whereby they would be allowed to work in the yards everyday . Male prisoners would perform hard labour – including breaking rocks , and other duties in the stone quarries , while women would sew , clean and cook . Women would also make shirts and waistcoats for male prisoners , as well as act as domestic servants for the governor and his family . Prisoners who had become trusted , those nearing the completion of their sentence , and debtors , were housed on the third floor communal cells . These top level cells were large , and held up to six prisoners at time ; and were mostly reserved to prisoners convicted of minor crimes such as drunkenness , vagrancy , prostitution or petty theft . 
 = = = Executions = = = 
 During its operation , the gaol was the setting for 133 hangings . The most infamous was that of bushranger Ned Kelly at the age of 25 , on 11 November 1880 . After a two @-@ day trial , Kelly was convicted of killing a police officer . As stated by law at the time , executed prisoners were buried ( without head ) in unmarked graves in the gaol burial yard . The head was normally removed from the body as part of the <unk> study of hanged felons . Historian and associate professor of Wollongong University John <unk> states that the lack of monitoring for burial processes was odd , given Victorian society 's normally brilliant attention to detail . 
 The first hanging of a woman in Victoria , Elizabeth Scott , was performed in the prison on 11 November 1863 – along with her co @-@ accused , Julian Cross and David <unk> . The last person to be executed was Angus Murray in 1924 , the same year the gaol was closed . 
 = = = = Ned Kelly = = = = 
 Edward " Ned " Kelly , born sometime between June 1854 and June 1855 , was an Irish @-@ Australian bushranger , and was seen by some as merely a cold @-@ blooded killer , while to others he was a folk hero for his defiance of the colonial authorities . As a youth he clashed with the Victoria Police , and after an incident at his home in 1878 , police parties searched for him in the bush . He killed three policemen , and subsequently the colony proclaimed Kelly and his gang wanted outlaws . A final violent confrontation with police took place at <unk> on 28 June 1880 . Kelly , dressed in a home @-@ made plate metal armour and helmet , was captured and sent to gaol . He was hanged for murder at the Old Melbourne Gaol in November 1880 . His notoriety affirmed him as a polarising iconic figure in Australian history , folk lore , literature , art and film . He was in cell number 113 at the Old Melbourne Gaol 
 = = = = Colin Campbell Ross = = = = 
 Colin Campbell Ross , an Australian wine @-@ bar owner , was wrongly convicted of the rape and murder of 12 @-@ year @-@ old Alma <unk> in December 1921 . The case , dubbed the Gun Alley Murder , was heavily influenced by public hysteria at the time , which ultimately served to condemn him . Despite his pleas of innocence ( including an attempt whereby a letter was thrown over the gaol walls ) , he was executed by hanging in the gaol in April 1922 ( only 115 days after the body was found ) . A new four @-@ strand rope was used for the first time at the execution , and proved to be a failure ; Ross slowly strangled for more than forty minutes before his death . A prison report later ruled that such a rope must never be used again . He was posthumously pardoned on 27 May 2008 . 
 = = = = Frederick Bailey Deeming = = = = 
 Frederick Bailey Deeming was born on 30 July 1853 . At 16 years of age he ran away to sea , and thereafter , he began a long career of crime , largely thieving and obtaining money under false pretences . He was responsible for the murder of his first wife Marie , and his four children , at Rainhill , England , on or about 26 July 1891 , and a second wife , Emily , at Windsor , Melbourne , on 24 December 1891 . Less than three months elapsed between the discovery of Emily Mather ’ s body in Windsor , Melbourne , in March 1892 , and Deeming ’ s execution at the Old Melbourne Gaol for her murder in May 1892 ; a remarkably short time by comparison to modern western legal standards . After his execution , it was reported that over 12 @,@ 000 people cheered on the streets outside , and there was public speculation that Deeming was in fact Jack the Ripper . 
 = = = Closure and re @-@ opening = = = 
 In 1870 , a review of the penal system was conducted , with the recommendation being made to close the gaol and relocate prisoners to more suitable locations . The gaol gradually slowed its operations , and demolished portions of the original site between 1880 and 1924 . In 1924 , the gaol was finally closed . However , in March 1927 , the Old Melbourne Gaol was integrated into part of the new Emily McPherson College , and was used for educational purposes . This necessitated changes to the prison ; in 1929 , despite poor record keeping of prisoner burials , historical evidence suggested the remains of approximately 32 executed prisoners , including Ned Kelly , were exhumed from the Old Melbourne Gaol and buried at mass graves in a quarry at Pentridge . In 1930 , the women 's cell block , walls and several other buildings were demolished , and a further four coffins were believed to have been moved to Pentridge in 1937 . 
 As the Gaol was progressively decommissioned , the building ’ s fabric , including bluestone grave markers of executed prisoners , was incorporated into a sea wall at Brighton in Victoria in the 1930s . The grave marker for Martha Needle , executed in 1894 , has recently been rediscovered after being buried by metres of sand . 
 During World War II , the gaol was used as a military prison for soldiers found to be absent without leave . A new wall was built in the eastern courtyard during this time , so that cell block inmates were separated from the college girls . After the end of the war , the section used for holding prisoners was then used only as a storage facility for the Victoria Police Force , whose headquarters were nearby in Russell Street . 
 In May 1974 , the sections used by the school were remodelled by architects Eggleston , McDonald and <unk> , to act as the schools food and fashion departments . The Emily McPherson College was merged into RMIT University in 1979 , bringing the gaol entrance gates , and other facilities alongside it . In 1990 , RMIT performed work to restore the enclosed balcony to its former 1927 design . In 1994 , RMIT performed further work to landscape the inner courtyard , and in 1995 , removed the temporary war @-@ time pavilion classrooms . As of 2010 , the sections that RMIT owns are collectively known as the " RMIT Building 11 . Architect : Colonial Government Architect " , and include the entrance block and chapel ; with the bath house and chapel serving as art studios . 
 = = Museum = = 
 In 1957 , the National Trust of Australia listed the Old Melbourne Gaol on its heritage register , and a year later marked it as a site that needed to be preserved at all costs . Furthermore , in 1965 , the Melbourne Junior Chamber of Commerce floated the idea of converting it into a museum , for the purposes of tourism . In 1972 , the gaol was reopened as a public museum , under the management of the National Trust of Australia ( Victoria ) . 
 As of 2010 , the gaol is recognised as Victoria 's oldest surviving penal establishment , and attracts approximately 140 @,@ 000 visitors per year . The cells have been filled with information about individual prisoners , which also serve to illustrate the history of Melbourne itself . 
 In addition to historical information , it also includes various memorabilia ; including death masks , an iron mask , and a pair of leather gloves designed to prevent inmates from practising self @-@ abuse . Notably , it still includes Ned Kelly 's death mask , pistol and replica of his suit of armour , as well as the pencil used by Colin Ross to write a letter protesting his innocence , which he threw over the prison walls . 
 Operators also run several features , including the candlelit Hangman 's Night Tour ( with actors portraying prolific and brutal hangman Michael Gateley ) , and the daily Watch House Experience ; an interactive performance in which visitors are treated as the prisoners would have been during its operation . In 2010 , the Old Melbourne Gaol Crime and Justice Experience won the heritage and cultural tourism category at the Qantas Australian Tourism Awards in Hobart . 
 = = = Ned Kelly 's skull = = = 
 A skull , believed to be Ned Kelly 's , was on display in the museum until it was stolen from a glass cabinet in 1978 . Efforts have been taken by scientists and the government to determine the location of the skull , and whether it was authentic to begin with ; it was reported that members of the public may have the remains of bones and teeth taken as souvenirs when graves were exhumed in 1929 . Special interest was directed to finding a photograph of former South Melbourne councillor Alex Talbot holding Ned Kelly 's skull , and information on grave exhume contractor Lee of Lee and Dunn , or his family , who was tasked with delivering Kelly 's skull to the governor . 
 In 2009 , West Australian farmer Tom Baxter handed a skull to authorities , arguing that it was the one stolen from the gaol – while refusing to explain how he obtained it . Former Pentridge prison chaplain Father Peter Norden has stated that he believed the skull handed in could not belong to Kelly , and that it probably belonged to a woman . In 2010 , there was further speculation that the skull actually belonged to Frederick Bailey Deeming , with the Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine claiming that the skull is similar to both Kelly 's and Deeming 's death masks . 
 = = = Haunting = = = 
 The museum is considered haunted by paranormal enthusiasts , including British parapsychologist Darren Done . Done spent a night at the gaol in 2003 , and claimed that he heard unexplained voices , and detected evidence of an electrical interference to suggest paranormal activity . He has since undertaken more research at the gaol , and in 2005 , he claimed to have recorded a ghostly figure with a grotesque visage standing in a doorway at the gaol . Theories suggest that the voice of a woman , claimed to have been heard , might belong to Elizabeth Scott ( the first woman hung at the gaol ) . Notably , none of the reported hauntings are related to that of Ned Kelly . Local enthusiast group <unk> Australia conducts monthly tours to gather data and statistics for paranormal activity ; making use of various monitoring equipment . However , Joe Nickell , a writer for the Skeptical Inquirer , argues that evidence of ghostly phenomena at the site is scant . 
 = Destruction Derby = 
 Destruction Derby is a vehicular combat racing video game developed by Reflections Interactive and published by Psygnosis . Based on the sport of demolition derby , the game tasks the player with racing and destroying cars to score points . The developers implemented simulated physics to make the results of collisions easier to predict , and they kept the game 's tracks small to increase the number of wrecks . Versions of Destruction Derby were released for MS @-@ DOS , PlayStation and Sega Saturn . A Nintendo 64 version , Destruction Derby 64 , was released in 1999 by Looking Glass Studios and THQ . Critics found Destruction Derby enjoyable and they praised its graphics and car damage system , but the Nintendo 64 and Sega Saturn releases received mixed reviews . The game started the Destruction Derby franchise , beginning with its 1996 sequel , Destruction Derby 2 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Destruction Derby is a vehicular combat racing video game based on the sport of demolition derby . The game contains three vehicles . Collisions in the game affect the controls of each car , limiting their steering and maximum speed . Frontal collisions risk damage to the car 's radiator , which causes the car to overheat and stop running . Four game modes are available : Destruction Derby , Wreckin ' Racing , Stock Car Racing and Time Trial . In Destruction Derby , the player earns points by destroying other cars in a large , trackless arena called The Bowl ; in Stock Car Racing , the player must finish in first place , and no points are awarded for destroying cars . Wreckin ' Racing is a hybrid of the two , in which the player earns points both by winning the race and by destroying other cars . Time Trial is a solo time attack mode . The PlayStation version features system link play for two players , while the MS @-@ DOS version has an online multiplayer mode . 
 Destruction Derby 64 , the game 's Nintendo 64 version , features updated graphics and an increased number of cars and tracks ; and it adds new modes such as capture the flag . The game contains twenty @-@ four cars and more than twelve courses . It also supports split @-@ screen multiplayer for up to four players . 
 = = Development = = 
 The British development studio Reflections Interactive began creating Destruction Derby for the PlayStation in late 1994 . It was published by Sony Computer Entertainment 's Psygnosis branch , which allowed Reflections to receive PlayStation development kits long before that console 's release . The game debuted at the May 1995 Electronic Entertainment Expo , and its initial title was variously reported as Demolition Derby and Demolish ' em Derby . Writers for Edge and Next Generation commented that the game could " <unk> " Ridge Racer upon the PlayStation 's release . 
 To make the results of car collisions easier to predict , Reflections implemented simulated physics into Destruction Derby . Director Martin Edmondson believed that the game would otherwise be " completely unplayable " , as with " pool when the collisions are all off " . Producer Tony Parks noted that the physics were simplified to improve performance and to compensate for the PlayStation 's digital controller , and that the team sought a balance between " realism and playability " . Performance was also improved by optimising the game 's graphics , and by reducing the level of detail of objects in the distance . Destruction Derby 's game engine supports up to twenty cars on screen simultaneously , which no console racing game , other than Daytona USA , had achieved until that time . However , a single wire @-@ frame model , differentiated by texture maps , was used for every vehicle . Damage to vehicles is modelled in real @-@ time , based on the speed and angle of the cars involved . The team made the game 's tracks small to " keep the density of the cars on the track very high " , which allowed for large @-@ scale wrecks . Plans were made to support up to eight players with the PlayStation Link Cable . 
 Destruction Derby was published by Sega and developed by Perfect Entertainment for the Sega Saturn , as part of a deal that also brought Wipeout to the console . Due to the limitations of the Saturn , this version lacks transparencies . GameFan 's Ryan Lockhart estimated that the port was " 80 % ready " in the magazine 's August 1996 issue , and it was released in August 1996 . A Nintendo 64 version of Destruction Derby was announced by the UK magazine CTW in 1998 , alongside Nintendo 64 versions of Psygnosis games such as Wipeout and <unk> .. Destruction Derby 64 was developed by Looking Glass Studios and published by THQ , under license from Psygnosis . At the time , Looking Glass head Paul Neurath said in a press release , " We are delighted to have teamed up with THQ for the launch of Destruction Derby 64 " . Aaron Boulding of IGN commented that the game " had a tough time just making it to the N64 " during its 18 months in production , and noted that " development duties [ ... ] passed from Psygnosis to Looking Glass Studios and publishing [ was ] picked up by THQ . " The game was released in October 1999 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 A writer for GamePro called Destruction Derby " the most raucous racing experience of the fall " . He believed that its " graphics are almost all you could want for a game " of this type , but wrote that " nothing here stands out as graphically spectacular " . He complained that the game does not let players customise cars , and he disliked its lack of split @-@ screen multiplayer . He summarised , " Limited options keep Destruction Derby out of the winner 's circuit , but this rowdy stock @-@ car racer still generates a stadium full of <unk> ' fun . " Victor Lucas of The Electric Playground stated that " the beauty of the game " is the strategy involved in making " calculated strikes " against enemy vehicles , and he wrote , " If you go all out and try to make big noise on the track , more than likely you 'll be limping to the scrap yard in seconds . " He believed that the game 's Stock Car racing mode " is no match for the white knuckle inertia of either Wipeout or Ridge Racer " , and that the demolition derbies in The Bowl were " most fun to be had " in the game . He praised the game 's graphics and physics , and concluded , " Destruction Derby is a winner in every capacity . " 
 Lee Buchanan of PC Gamer US praised " the spectacular visuals that bring to life the most jarring collisions I 've seen on a computer " , and he noted that " [ car ] damage is depicted beautifully " . Like Lucas , he wrote that the player " can 't just mindlessly smash into other cars ; this is thinking man 's destruction " . Although he found the game too easy " even at the toughest difficulty level " , he found this to be a minor issue that did not detract from the experience . He considered the game 's online play to be a high point , and he finished , " Destruction Derby is a blast , and a welcome change of pace from high @-@ end driving simulations . " Peter Olafson of Computer Gaming World called the game " a great simulation " of demolition derbies , and he wrote that the wrecks are " convulsive and realistic " . He believed that the game " has never @-@ before @-@ seen quality that will instantly make it a showpiece game to demonstrate to open @-@ mouthed friends and relatives " , and he considered the car damage to be " especially marvelous — and unprecedented for this sort of game " . However , he found that its " useful life span is surprisingly short " and he hoped for a track editor in its sequel . He summarised , " Despite its limitations , this is a great game , but it has a lot more potential . " 
 Reviewing the game 's Sega Saturn version , Kim Randell of Computer & Video Games noted its " inferior graphics " that do not have " the sheen and glossiness of its PlayStation counterpart " . Randell believed that it was a " haphazard conversion " that was made " much too late " . Erik Reppen of Game Informer wrote that it " doesn 't seem fair to compare " the Nintendo 64 release to the PlayStation version , and he complained that car damage does not hinder performance . He said that it would more accurately be described as " Destruction Derby Arcade " . He found that the game was far too easy for " experienced racers and big fans of the franchise " to enjoy , and finished , " It was fun , but I wouldn 't buy it . " Aaron Boulding of IGN believed that Destruction Derby 64 came too long after the original version , and that it was " a shadow of the outdated PSX game " . He complained about the " bland backgrounds and flat textures " and noted that the graphics are " grainy " and suffer from slowdown ; but he enjoyed the car damage visuals . Boulding liked the split @-@ screen multiplayer and called the new capture the flag mode the game 's best aspect , but he concluded that " even [ these elements ] may not make it worth a rental " . 
 GameFan 's Levi Buchanan praised Destruction Derby 64 as " the best racer for the Nintendo 64 this year " , and he lauded its " simplistic control " as a remedy for the complex controls that he believed had " ruined the PlayStation versions " . He liked its graphics but wrote that its music " isn ’ t too hot " . Buchanan enjoyed its multiplayer component and wrote that " the slowdown when all four join in is minima [ l ] — nice programming on the part of Looking Glass " . Although he complained that the game 's vehicle damage is not " segmented throughout your car " , he concluded by calling the game " pure , unadulterated fun [ that ] has enough tracks and hidden vehicles to keep you playing for a very long time " . Jeff Gerstmann of GameSpot wrote , " Graphically , Destruction Derby 64 surpasses the old PlayStation games by quite a bit - not that that is a particularly hard thing to do " . He found that its framerate was adequate even in split @-@ screen mode , and concluded that it was " a better game than its PlayStation counterparts " . He finished , " Give it a rent next time you 're rounding up the posse for a day of gaming . " 
 Destruction Derby spawned the Destruction Derby series , and was directly followed by Destruction Derby 2 in 1996 . Later entries include Destruction Derby Raw ( 2000 ) and Destruction Derby : Arenas ( 2004 ) , the last of which was developed by Studio 33 . Destruction Derby was re @-@ released through the PlayStation Network store in 2007 . 
 = The Boat Race 1863 = 
 The 20th Boat Race between crews from the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge took place on the River Thames on 28 March 1863 . Oxford won by 15 lengths in a time of 23 minutes 6 seconds . It took the overall record to ten wins each , the first time since the 1836 race that the scores were level . The race was the third to be held on the ebb tide , along the Championship Course in reverse , from Mortlake to Putney . It was the first time since the race was held in the fashion since the 1856 race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities , and since the 21st century , is followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1862 race by ten lengths , with Cambridge leading overall with ten victories to Oxford 's nine . 
 According to Drinkwater , neither boat club president was " sensible of their duty to posterity , for they kept no records of the training of the crews " . Both crews arrived at Putney on 21 March , one week before the race , and each put in four practice sessions in the run @-@ up to the main event . Cambridge 's boat was built by Searle . The race was umpired by Joseph William Chitty who had rowed for Oxford twice in 1849 ( in the March and December races ) and the 1852 race . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew averaged over 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 83 m ) in height , and weighed an average of 11 st 8 @.@ 5 lb ( 73 @.@ 5 kg ) , 2 @.@ 75 pounds ( 1 @.@ 2 kg ) per rower more than their Light Blue opposition . Six of the Oxford crew had represented their university in the previous year 's race , including W. M. Hoare who was rowing at stroke for the third time . The Cambridge boat contained two members of the 1862 crew , including William Cecil <unk> and John Graham Chambers . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford , who were clear pre @-@ race favourites , won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Cambridge . Like the 1856 race , the race was conducted on the ebb tide , and the start was moved to Barker 's Rails , to " give the steamers room between the Aqueduct and the crews " . The start of the race was delayed for around half an hour as a result of a number of steamers impinging upon the course . The future British King , Edward VII , was in attendance . At the time of the race , there was a mild breeze and the water was " perfect , but for the steamers . " 
 Cambridge made the better start , but Oxford 's steady rowing brought them level and within 300 yards ( 270 m ) of the start , they were nearly half @-@ a @-@ length up on the Light Blues . By Craven Steps , they were clear and two lengths up by the Mile Post . Oxford crossed over to row directly in front of Cambridge , and according to MacMichael , " it was evident here that the race was over , barring accidents . " The Dark Blues were three lengths up as they shot Barnes Bridge and won by fifteen lengths . It was Oxford 's third consecutive victory and took the overall total to ten wins each , the first time since the 1856 race that the scores were tied . 
 = Benedict Arnold ( governor ) = 
 Benedict Arnold ( 21 December 1615 – 19 June 1678 ) was president and then governor of the Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations , serving for a total of 11 years in these roles . Coming from Somerset , England , he was born and raised in the town of Ilchester , likely attending school in Limington , nearby . In 1635 , at the age of 19 , he accompanied his parents , siblings and other family members on a voyage from England to New England , where they first settled in Hingham in the Massachusetts Bay Colony . In less than a year they moved to Providence on the Narragansett Bay at the request of Roger Williams . In about 1638 they moved once again , about five miles south to the Pawtuxet River , settling on the north side at a place commonly called Pawtuxet . Here they had serious disputes with their neighbors , particularly Samuel Gorton , and as a result put themselves and their lands under the jurisdiction of Massachusetts , a situation lasting for 16 years . 
 Learning the native languages at an early age , Arnold became one of the two leading interpreters in the Rhode Island colony , Roger Williams being the other . He was frequently called upon to interpret during negotiations with the natives , but on one occasion was accused by them of misrepresentation . 
 In 1651 Arnold left Providence and Pawtuxet with his family , settling in Newport where he began his public service which would last continuously until his death . He quickly became a freeman , Commissioner , and Assistant , and in 1657 succeeded Roger Williams as president of the colony , serving for three years . In 1662 he was once again elected President , and during the second year of this term the Royal Charter of 1663 was delivered from England , naming him as the first governor of the colony , and offering broad freedoms and self @-@ determination to the colony . 
 A bold and decisive leader , Arnold was elected for two additional terms as governor , the last time following the devastation of King Philip 's War . He died on 19 June 1678 while still in office , and was buried in the Arnold Burying Ground , located on Pelham Street in Newport . In his will he left to his wife his " stone built wind mill , " which still stands as an important Newport landmark . His many descendants include General Benedict Arnold , best known for his treason during the American Revolutionary War , and Senator Stephen Arnold Douglas who debated Abraham Lincoln in 1858 , and lost to him during the 1860 presidential election . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born 21 December 1615 in Ilchester , Somerset , England , Benedict Arnold was the second child and oldest son of William Arnold and Christian Peak . Living in the large town of Ilchester , he was familiar with the nearby villages of Northover , from where his grandparents Nicholas and Alice Arnold had come ; Yeovilton , where his Aunt Joane 's husband William Hopkins ( ancestor of Rhode Island Governor Stephen Hopkins ) was from ; and Limington , after which place he would name one of his properties in New England , calling it " Lemmington Farm . " All four of these localities lie within two miles of each other . Arnold was likely educated at the Free Grammar School associated with the parish church in Limington , slightly more than a mile to the east of Ilchester . This ancient school is where Thomas Wolsey was the curate and schoolmaster from 1500 to 1509 . Wolsey later became the Lord Cardinal and Primate of England . 
 At the age of 19 , Arnold accompanied his parents and siblings aboard a ship destined for New England . With his parents , siblings , and other relatives and associates , the Arnolds gathered their baggage and supplies in the spring of 1635 and made the trip from Ilchester to Dartmouth on the coast of Devon . In a family record begun by his father , he wrote " <unk> my father and his family Sett Sayle from Dartmouth in Old England , the first of May , friday & c . Arrived in New England June <unk> Ano 1635 . " The name of the ship on which he sailed was not recorded , nor has it been identified since . It is possible that Stukeley Westcott of Yeovil , five miles south of Ilchester , was also on the same ship , bringing his family including his daughter Damaris , aged 15 , the future wife of Arnold . 
 Upon their arrival in New England , the Arnolds joined a group of settlers from Hingham , Norfolk , England , where they established the new town of Hingham in the Massachusetts Bay Colony . William Arnold received title to a house lot here in September 1635 , but the following spring he and several other settlers were persuaded by Roger Williams to join him in establishing a new settlement on the Narragansett Bay , named Providence . In the family record the younger Arnold wrote , " <unk> . We came to Providence to Dwell the 20th of April , 1636 @.@ per me <unk> Arnold . " Arnold received a house lot on what is now North Main Street in Providence , and his father was granted the second lot south of his . 
 = = Providence and Pawtuxet = = 
 In 1637 Arnold was one of 13 settlers who signed a compact agreeing to subject themselves to any agreements made by a majority of the masters of families . About 1638 he accompanied his father , his brother @-@ in @-@ law William Carpenter and Robert Cole in a move about five miles south to the Pawtuxet River . The settlement , called Pawtuxet , was still within the jurisdiction of Providence ( and later became a part of Cranston , Rhode Island ) . On 17 July 1640 Arnold signed an agreement with 38 other Providence residents to form a more compact government " to preserve the peace and insure the prosperity of a growing community . " It did neither , especially after the arrival of Samuel Gorton in Providence , who Roger Williams wrote was " bewitching and <unk> poor Providence . " In one incident , " Upon the attempt to enforce the execution of an award against Francis Weston made by eight men orderly chosen , Gorton , with many of his followers , assailed the representatives of law and order making a tumultuous hubbub . " In a petition that Arnold wrote , dated 17 November 1741 , he with 12 others formally applied to Massachusetts for help , asking the government there to " lend us a <unk> helping hand . " Massachusetts replied that they could not help unless the complainants fell under their jurisdiction . 
 Being highly offended by Gorton , who had moved with some of his adherents to Pawtuxet , the Arnolds , Cole , and Carpenter went to Boston , and on 2 September 1642 submitted themselves to the government and jurisdiction of Massachusetts . They were received by the General Court there , and appointed justices of the peace . In doing this , these settlers allowed a foreign jurisdiction into the midst of the Providence government , a condition that would last for 16 years . Gorton , unhappy about being under the jurisdiction of Massachusetts , then moved with his followers another 12 miles further south , settling at a place called Shawomet , beyond the limits of Massachusetts ' jurisdiction . 
 Having already become proficient in the Narragansett and Wampanoag native languages , and harboring an intense dislike of Gorton , Arnold and his father devised a scheme to undermine their adversary , and to simultaneously obtain extensive lands from the local Indians . Gorton had purchased Shawomet from Miantonomi , the chief sachem of the Narragansett people . Two minor sachems , <unk> and <unk> , had some control of the lands at Pawtuxet and Shawomet , and Arnold , acting as interpreter , took these chieftains to Governor Winthrop in Boston , and had them submit themselves and their lands to Massachusetts , and claim that the sale of Shawomet to Gorton was done " under duress . " Now with a claim to Shawomet , Massachusetts directed Gorton and his followers to appear in Boston to answer " complaints " made by the two minor sachems . When Gorton refused , Massachusetts sent a party to Shawomet to arrest Gorton and his neighbors . The ensuing trial had nothing to do with the land claims , but instead focused on the writings and beliefs of Gorton , for which he and others in his group were imprisoned . Ultimately , Gorton was released and went to England where he was given legal title to his lands from the Earl of Warwick , and in his honor the settlement of Shawomet was renamed Warwick . 
 Besides Roger Williams , Arnold was the only member of the colony who was highly proficient in the Narragansett and Wampanoag tongues , and he was often called upon to interpret during negotiations . In June 1645 he was sent by the General Court of Massachusetts to the Narragansett people to urge them to desist from engaging in a war with the Mohegans . On 28 July of the same year Arnold and two others were sent out to get the hostile tribes to send deputies to Boston to talk and make peace . This attempt failed , and a month later Arnold would not go back again , as he had been charged with mis @-@ representing the reply of the tribes two months earlier , and Roger Williams went as interpreter in his place . 
 The issue of the Pawtuxet settlers remaining under the jurisdiction of Massachusetts was a constant irritant to Roger Williams , Gorton , and the other Providence and Warwick settlers . At a meeting of the General Court of Rhode Island held at Warwick on 22 May 1649 it was ordered that letters be sent to Arnold and the other Pawtuxet settlers in reference to their subjecting themselves to the Rhode Island colony . This did not happen , and the Pawtuxet settlers continued under Massachusetts for another nine years . Arnold and his father , while not laying claim to the Shawomet lands , nevertheless had extensive land holdings , and in 1650 Arnold paid a tax of five pounds , the highest in the colony , and his father paid three and a half pounds , the second highest amount . 
 In June 1650 Roger Williams wrote to Governor Winthrop in Massachusetts saying that Arnold had bought a house and land at Newport , with the intention to move there . While his reasons for moving were not revealed in his own writings , some historians have suggested that it was mercantile interests that compelled the move , while others have suggested political interests , or wanting to get away from the hostile atmosphere of Providence and Pawtuxet were reasons . 
 = = Newport and politics = = 
 In 1651 Arnold left troubled Providence and Pawtuxet for the politically enlightened island of Aquidneck , settling in Newport . He recorded in the family record , " Memorandum . We came from Providence with our family to Dwell at Newport in Rhode Island the 19th of November , Thursday in afternoon , & arrived ye same night Ano . Domina 1651 " . With only a few exceptions , men from Newport held the reins of power for the first century of Rhode Island history . When the first English settlers came to Aquidneck Island in 1638 , they organized a quarterly court and English @-@ style jury trial . In 1640 Newport established monthly courts , rights of appeal and trial by jury , whereas in Providence there was no court , no judge , and no jury . Newport was by far the most attractive settlement on the Narragansett Bay , with most of its settlers being educated . 
 Significant political events were taking place upon Arnold 's arrival in Newport . William Coddington had been successful in removing the island towns of Newport and Portsmouth from the government with the two mainland towns of Providence and Warwick under a commission he obtained earlier in England , and he was appointed as governor for life of the two island towns in 1651 . Providence , feeling that the Patent of 1643 had been abandoned , sent Roger Williams to England , and those on the island opposed to Coddington sent Dr. John Clarke , accompanied by William Dyer , to have Coddington 's charter annulled . Finding success , Williams and Dyer returned to New England , but Clarke remained in England for the next decade , acting as a diplomat to further the colony 's interests . In February 1653 Dyer brought letters revoking Coddington 's commission , with the authority of the government to proceed under the Patent of 1643 , and the status quo of 1647 . John Sanford succeeded Coddington in 1653 , and with the change of administration came the work leading to the reunification of the four towns under one government . In 1653 Arnold became a freeman of Newport , and from that point forward served in some public capacity every year until his death in 1678 . In 1654 he was selected as one of the commissioners from Newport ( each of the four towns had six ) , and from 1655 to 1656 he was an Assistant . As a member of the Court of Commissioners he was very active , and a member of the most important committees . In 1655 he was appointed by the court with Roger Williams , Samuel Gorton and William <unk> to frame a letter of thanksgiving to the English Lord President of the Council ( on colonial affairs ) , and to present humble acknowledgments and submission of the colony to His Highness , the Lord Protector , Oliver Cromwell , and the letter of reply from Cromwell was placed in the custody of Arnold . In 1657 , at the age of 41 , Arnold was elected as the President of the colony , succeeding Roger Williams in this capacity . 
 = = = Terms as president = = = 
 Arnold became President at a crucial time in Rhode Island 's history . Tremendous political change was occurring in England , and this resulted in significant changes and opportunities for the little colony of Rhode Island , which was constantly being harassed by its larger , predatory neighbors , primarily Massachusetts and Connecticut . Since the overthrow and execution of England 's King Charles I in 1649 , Oliver Cromwell had been running the country , but his death in 1658 marked the restoration of the monarchy , and Charles II ascended to the throne . Rhode Island was quick to adjust to the new political reality , and on 18 October 1660 the General Court of Commissioners met at Warwick , where two letters were read , one from Dr. Clarke telling of the Restoration , and one from His Majesty , containing the royal declaration and proclamation . Leaders in the colony set aside a special day of proclamation , where the citizens could recognize the new king . 
 Arnold , was succeeded as President in 1660 by William Brenton , but continued for many years as a Commissioner , as well as an Assistant from 1660 to 1661 . In these roles he headed a committee to draft and send a new commission to Dr. Clarke , giving due credit to the King 's father , Charles I , for the Patent of 1643 , which gave the Rhode Island colony its official existence . Reference was made of " sundry obstructions " stemming from " claims of neighbors about us , " referring to interests that both the Massachusetts Bay Colony and Connecticut Colony had on the Narragansett lands . The document went on to include Dr. Clarke as the agent and attorney for the colony , and used deferential language toward " his most gracious and <unk> Majesty , Charles the Second , by the Grace of God , the most mighty and potent King of England . " In this commission , the four towns of the Rhode Island colony declared their " <unk> affection " for the new king . This commission to Dr. Clarke , on behalf of the colony , armed the able diplomat with what he needed to fulfill his mission . He wrote a well @-@ crafted letter on behalf of the colony asking for an experiment in liberty where the colony would become " a Republic of Liberty under Law , in which every man is king and no man subject . " 
 = = = <unk> with the Quakers = = = 
 A 1658 letter from the United Colonies ( Massachusetts , Plymouth , New Haven and Connecticut ) announced the arrival in 1657 of the Quakers , calling them notorious heretics , and calling for their speedy removal from the colonies . The United Colonies wanted the Quakers removed from Newport , and used the threat of withholding trade as leverage for their position . While Arnold was no friend of the Quakers , his reply , endorsed by the four Assistants ( one from each town ) , demonstrated a firm adherence to the Rhode Island doctrine of religious tolerance . He wrote , " Concerning these Quakers ( so @-@ called ) , which are now among us , we have no law among us , whereby to punish any for only declaring by words , & c . , theire <unk> and understandings concerning the things and days of God , as to salvation and an eternal condition . " He goes on to say that the Quakers find a " delight to be persecuted by <unk> [ sic ] powers , " thus gaining more adherents to their cause . He felt that their doctrines tended to be very absolute , " cutting down and overturning relations and civil government among men ... " 
 President Arnold promised Massachusetts Governor Simon Bradstreet that at the next session of the General Assembly the Quakers ' " <unk> <unk> " would be considered , and he hoped some action would be taken to prevent the " bad effects of their doctrines and endeavors . " At the March 1658 session of the Assembly , the Rhode Island doctrine of " freedom of different consciences " was reaffirmed , and a letter was sent to the Commissioners stating that if troubles arose from harboring Quakers , the matter would be presented to the supreme authority of England . Following this , no further complaints came from the other colonies . 
 = = = Terms as governor = = = 
 In 1662 Arnold was once again elected president of the colony , and in the second year of this term , the result of Clarke 's earlier diplomacy came to fruition with the Royal Charter of 1663 , which historian Thomas Bicknell described as " the grandest instrument of human liberty ever constructed . " Under this instrument Arnold became the first governor of the Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations , with William Brenton as his Deputy . The earlier governing body , the Court of Commissioners , was replaced with a legislature of ten Assistants and a House of Deputies , with six from Newport , and four each from Providence , Portsmouth and Warwick . One of the first acts performed by Arnold as governor was to address a letter to Governor Winthrop of Connecticut about running a line between the two colonies as provided by the Charter . In 1664 the King 's Commissioners came to Rhode Island to settle claims of jurisdiction over the Narragansett country , specifically addressing rival claims between the Rhode Island and Connecticut colonies over land at Westerly and the settlement at Wickford . While the commissioners were able to forestall a major confrontation , no substantial changes were made , and the disputes between the two colonies would continue for the next fifty years . The King 's Commissioners also appointed Arnold as a justice of the peace and a magistrate of the " King 's Province " ( later Washington County , Rhode Island ) . 
 In the election of 1666 , Arnold retired from office , and was succeeded once again by William Brenton . Nevertheless , he and others were compelled to sit in the Assembly as deputies " as the Court due desire their assistance . " In 1669 Arnold was again chosen as governor , and re @-@ elected in 1670 when the controversy with Connecticut over disputed lands in King 's Province and Westerly became acute . On 11 July of that year Arnold sent a strong letter to Connecticut 's Governor Winthrop informing him of Rhode Island 's determination to appeal to King Charles concerning " invasions and intrusions upon the lands and government of this Colony . " There is no record , however , of this threat being carried through . 
 During this administration , the Quakers were finding the religious tolerance of Rhode Island to be a fertile ground for their missionaries , and they also found a safe haven from other colonies here . The Quakers not only found success in the spread of their religion , but also became a strong political force as well . Arnold was once again elected governor in 1671 , but in 1672 the governorship went to the Quaker Nicholas Easton , and the Quakers would hold the reins of power for three of the next five years . Arnold had , however , left a positive mark on the colony , and after more than ten years of Arnold leadership in the colony , the disorganization and fragmentary governments of the four towns were united and put in order , with courts established and an organized society put into motion . 
 = = = Business and land interests = = = 
 While Arnold 's usefulness had been in great demand for the welfare of the colony , his successful political career was mirrored by equally successful agricultural and mercantile pursuits . While living at Pawtuxet he became agent for arms , ammunition and liquors , and had an establishment on the Warwick side of the river offering Boston goods and provisions in demand at the time . In his book <unk> Defense , Samuel Gorton complained that Arnold constantly traded with the Indians on the Sabbath day and was too liberal in providing them with powder . He further complained that Arnold would not sell items to the Warwick settlers unless they submitted themselves to the jurisdiction of Massachusetts . The Warwick settlers also complained that he furnished the Indians with strong drink and wine , which was forbidden by the Warwick town council . 
 After leaving the governorship in 1672 , Arnold likely attended to his commercial interests , and he was said to be the wealthiest person in the colony . He had a wharf and warehouse mentioned in his will , and he had commercial interests in the West Indies , evident from a 1674 letter that he wrote to his son @-@ in @-@ law , Roger Goulding , urging him to complete his ( Arnold 's ) business in the Barbados . 
 Arnold held several parcels of land in and around Newport , one of which he called his " Lemmington Farm , " which was named after the village of Limington in his native Somerset , England . In 1657 he was one of about a hundred individuals who purchased Conanicut Island , the second largest island in the Narragansett Bay where the town of Jamestown is currently located . He also , with John Greene acquired Goat Island and Coaster 's Harbor Island , which later became the property of the town of Newport . 
 Sometime after January 1658 he and six others each had a one @-@ seventh interest in a company that bought a large tract of land in the Narragansett country known as the <unk> Purchase , a tract that would later become South Kingstown , Rhode Island . He held this until his death , when the property was bequeathed to his three sons , Benedict , Josiah , and Oliver . He also owned two parcels of land in Newport , one where his wharf and warehouse were located , and the other the site of his mansion house . 
 = = = King Philip 's War = = = 
 From 1675 to 1676 , King Philip 's War , " the most disastrous conflict to ever devastate New England , " left the mainland towns of Rhode Island in ruins . This confrontation between many indigenous people and the English settlers was named for Metacomet , sachem of the Wampanoags , who was also called King Philip . Though much more at peace with the Indians than the other colonies , because of geography , the Rhode Island colony took the brunt of damage from this conflict , and the settlements of Warwick and Pawtuxet were totally destroyed , with much of Providence destroyed as well . Several of Arnold 's relatives who lived in these areas fled to Long Island , and his aged father had been moved from Pawtuxet to his brother 's garrison house , but nevertheless did not survive the conflict . In April 1676 it was voted by the Assembly " that in these troublesome times and straits in this Colony , this Assembly desiring to have the advice and concurrence of the most judicious inhabitants , if it may be had for the good of the whole , do desire at their next sitting the company and counsel of Mr. Benedict Arnold ... " and 15 others . Quakers were noted for their pacifism , and the Quaker governor , Walter Clarke , was in office during the conflict . Even though the war had ended , in the election of 1677 the so @-@ called " war party " was successful , and Arnold was voted back into office as governor . 
 During this term his health began to fail , and though ill , Arnold was still re @-@ elected in May 1678 . He was too ill to leave his house , and his deputy governor , John Cranston , along with two assistants and a recorder , transacted the colony 's business by visiting him at home . His health did not improve , and within a month of his latest election to governor , he was dead . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Arnold wrote his will on 24 December 1677 , during his last full term as governor . A codicil to the will was written the following February , and the governor died in June while still in office . On 29 June Samuel Hubbard of Newport wrote a letter to Dr. Edward Stennett of London , saying " Our Governor died the 19th day of June , 1678 , buried 20th day , all this island was invited , many others was [ sic ] there , judged near a thousand people , brother <unk> spoke there excellently led forth , I praise God . " In his will Governor Arnold gave to his wife , for life , certain land with mansion house and " stone built wind mill . " While there are romantic legends of early <unk> men coming to Newport and building the stone structure that continues to stand in the city , the strongest evidence suggests that the structure was the base of Arnold 's windmill mentioned in his will . 
 Benedict Arnold , his wife , and many of his family are buried in the Arnold Burying Ground located on Pelham Street in Newport . For many years the cemetery was buried under a garden in the back yard of a residence , but in 1949 a major renovation began whereby all the stones were unearthed , cleaned , and returned to their original positions . While there is no inscription on the slabs covering the graves of the governor and his wife , his grave is marked with a governor 's medallion . 
 Lieutenant Governor and Rhode Island historian Samuel G. Arnold wrote of him , " That he was no friend of the doctrines , or advocate of the conduct of the followers of Fox [ Quakers ] is evident from his writings ; but that like Williams , he recognized the distinction between persecution and opposition , between legal force and moral suasion as applied to matters of opinion , is equally apparent . In politics and in theology he was alike the opponent of Coddington and the friend of John Clarke and throughout his long and useful life he displayed talents of a brilliant order which were ever employed for the welfare of his fellow men . " 
 = = Family and descendants = = 
 Arnold was married on 17 December 1640 to Damaris , the daughter of Stukeley Westcott and Julianna <unk> . They had nine children : Benedict , Caleb , Josiah , Damaris , William , Penelope , Oliver , <unk> , and Freelove . All but William grew to adulthood , married , and had children . His son Caleb , a physician , married Abigail Wilbur , who was the daughter of Samuel Wilbur , Jr . , and the granddaughter of both Samuel <unk> [ Sr. ] and John Porter , two signers of the compact establishing the town of Portsmouth with Anne Hutchinson . 
 Notable descendants of Benedict Arnold , through his son Benedict , include his 2nd great @-@ grandson , also named Benedict Arnold , one of the great generals of the American Revolutionary War who was best known for his treason to the American cause when he switched sides to fight with the British . Descendants through his son Caleb Arnold include Commodore Oliver Hazard Perry , American hero of the Great Lakes during the War of 1812 and his younger brother Commodore Matthew C. Perry , who compelled the opening of Japan to the West with the Convention of Kanagawa in 1854 ; and Senator Stephen Arnold Douglas who debated Abraham Lincoln in 1858 before a senate race and later lost to him in the 1860 presidential election . Rhode Island colonial Deputy Governor George Hazard is another descendant . The rodeo champion , western artist and inventor Earl W. Bascom is also a descendant . 
 = = Ancestry of Benedict and Damaris Arnold = = 
 = William G. Farrow = 
 William Glover Farrow ( 24 September 1918 – 15 October 1942 ) was a lieutenant in the United States Army Air Corps who participated in the Doolittle Raid . Born to Isaac and Jessie Farrow , he graduated from high school in 1935 and attended the University of South Carolina . Farrow joined the Air Corps training program in November 1940 , and was commissioned in July 1941 . In February 1942 , he volunteered to participate in the Doolittle Raid , which took place in April of that year . Farrow was captured by the Japanese after the completion of his bombing mission . He was tried and , along with two other crew members , sentenced to death and executed by firing squad . His ashes were recovered and interred in the Arlington National Cemetery in 1946 , and he posthumously received multiple awards . 
 = = Early life = = 
 William Farrow was born in Darlington , South Carolina , on 24 September 1918 . His father Isaac was employed at a cigarette company in Raleigh , North Carolina ; his mother Jessie , born in 1897 , was the daughter of a wealthy tobacco warehouse owner . At age sixteen , William became an Eagle Scout . He graduated from St. John 's High School in May 1935 , and went on to attend the University of South Carolina . 
 During the fall of 1939 , he received his pilot training at the Hawthorne School of Aeronautics in Orangeburg , South Carolina . On 23 November 1940 , Farrow joined the United States Army Air Corps ' Aviation Cadet Program . In July of the following year , he obtained his aviator badge and a commission as a second lieutenant at Kelly Field in Texas . Following his completion of the B @-@ 25 Mitchell training program , he was sent to Pendleton Field in Oregon as a member of the 34th Bomb Squadron . 
 = = Doolittle Raid = = 
 In February 1942 , following the squadron 's transfer to Columbia Army Air Base in January , Farrow volunteered to participate in the Doolittle Raid , an attempt to retaliate against the Japanese as a result of their attack on Pearl Harbor . At the time , however , the mission was secret and its target unknown to the volunteers . On 1 April 1942 , after training in various places around the United States , the crews and their respective aircraft departed from San Francisco aboard the USS Hornet ( CV @-@ 8 ) . The mission took place on 18 April . The B @-@ 25 which Farrow piloted , named Bat out of Hell , was the sixteenth and final aircraft to depart from the Hornet . After the aircraft 's targets in Nagoya , which included an oil tank and aircraft factory , had been bombed , Farrow intended to land in <unk> . However , the Japanese had deactivated the beacon that Farrow was using for direction . 
 = = Capture and death = = 
 Sixteen hours after departure from the Hornet , the aircraft 's fuel exhausted , Farrow and his crew bailed out near Japanese @-@ controlled Nanchang , China . The Japanese captured Farrow and all members of his crew , and subjected them to imprisonment , interrogation , and torture . The men were subsequently tried and sentenced to death . Most of the crew members ' sentences were commuted to life imprisonment by the Emperor of Japan , but the sentences of three men , including Farrow , stood . The night before their execution , the men were permitted to write final letters . The International Red Cross was to mail the letters after receiving them from the Japanese . The Japanese , however , did not pass on the letters , and they were never mailed . Farrow wrote letters to his mother and to a friend , Lt. Ivan Ferguson . In the letter addressed to his mother , Farrow wrote : 
 You have given much , so much more to me than I have returned , but such is the Christian way . You are and always will be a real angel . Be brave and strong for my sake . I love you , Mom , from the depths of a full heart ... Don 't let this get you down . Just remember God will make everything right and that I 'll see you all again in the hereafter ... So let me implore you to keep your chin up . Be brave and strong for my sake . P.S. My insurance policy is in my bag in a small tent in Columbia . Read <unk> by Bryant if you want to know how I am taking this . My faith in God is complete , so I am unafraid . 
 At dawn on 15 October , the men were taken to a public cemetery near Shanghai , where they were shot by a Japanese firing squad . Following the bodies ' cremation , the ashes were taken to a mortuary . After the war ended , the men 's ashes were recovered and their letters found in a secret file of the War Ministry Building in Tokyo . In 1946 , Farrow was interred with honors at the Arlington National Cemetery , Section 12 , Grave 157 . 
 = = Honors = = 
 Farrow was posthumously given multiple awards . These included the Order of the Sacred Tripod ( <unk> ) of the Republic of China , the Distinguished Flying Cross , and the Purple Heart . He was also awarded the Prisoner of War Medal , which , by authorization of Congress in 1985 , was given to all members of the United States Armed Forces who had been a prisoner of war after 5 April 1917 . 
 = 1st Sustainment Brigade ( United States ) = 
 The 1st Sustainment Brigade is a sustainment brigade of the United States Army based at Fort Riley , Kansas . It provides logistics support to the 1st Infantry Division . 
 Activated in 2007 , the unit is a modular brigade capable of a variety of actions . Though assigned to the 1st Infantry Division on a permanent basis , it is capable of independent operations and taking on subordinate units to fulfill large scale sustainment operations for the United States Army . 
 Formed from the Division Support Command of the 1st Infantry Division , the Brigade carries the lineage and honors of the division dating back to World War I campaigns as early as 1917 . Having also seen action in World War II , the Vietnam War , and the Gulf War , the brigade has numerous awards and decorations from its previous designation . The brigade has also seen three tours in Iraq in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom . 
 = = Organization = = 
 The 1st Sustainment Brigade ( 1SB ) in garrison at Fort Riley is composed of four subordinate battalions . The 1st Special Troops Battalion ( STB ) contains a Headquarters and Headquarters Company ( HHC ) , 267th Signal Company , and the 24th Transportation Company . The 1st STB and the 541st Combat Sustainment Support Battalion are permanently assigned to the 1SB . The 1SB has an Administrative Control Minus ( <unk> ) Training and Readiness ( TRA ) relationship with the 84th Explosive Ordnance Demolition ( EOD ) Battalion and the 1st Infantry Division Headquarters and Headquarters Battalion ( <unk> ) . Thanks to the brigade 's modular design , it is also capable of gaining additional subordinate units upon deployment to a theater of operations . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The 1st Infantry Division Support Command ( DISCOM ) traces its origins to World War I , where in 1917 , the Division Trains were formed to support the newly formed 1st Infantry Division . In 1921 , the Division trains were consolidated into the Special Troops , 1st Infantry Division . After World War I , the Special Troops deployed to Fort Riley , Kansas . Three of the DISCOM 's former subordinate battalions , the 101st Forward Support Battalion ( FSB ) and 201st Forward Support Battalions , and the 701st Main Support Battalion , served in World War I , but with different divisions . 
 These units deployed back to Germany to support the 1st Infantry Division during World War II , and participated in all eight campaigns credited to the 1st Infantry Division . In 1955 , the Division and its support organizations returned to Fort Riley , Kansas . 
 In 1965 , the division deployed to South Vietnam , as a part of the Vietnam War buildup . DISCOM units supported the Division in all of the eleven campaigns it participated in while deployed to South Vietnam . 
 After Vietnam , the DISCOM underwent many changes . The Division Material Management Center ( <unk> ) was established , and the Finance and Personnel Services Companies ( PSC ) were reorganized into battalion commands . In 1990 , the DISCOM deployed again , this time to Southwest Asia in support of Operation Desert Storm . 
 In 1996 , the DISCOM , deployed to Europe for a third time and consisted of the 101st FSB at Fort Riley , Kansas , the 201st FSB in Vilseck , Germany , the 701st <unk> in Kitzingen , Germany , the 601st Aviation Support Battalion ( ASB ) in <unk> , Germany , and the Headquarters and Headquarters Company ( HHC ) , also in Kitzingen . 
 = = = Operation Iraqi Freedom = = = 
 In 2003 , the DISCOM was deployed to Turkey in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom I. The DISCOM simultaneously supported peacekeeping operations in the Balkans and deployed a logistics task force to support Operation Iraqi Freedom I throughout Iraq . In 2004 , the DISCOM redeployed to Southwest Asia in Support of Operation Iraqi Freedom II . In addition to the organic DISCOM units , the 225th Forward Support Battalion from Hawaii and the 230th Support Battalion from North Carolina deployed to support logistical operations for Task Force Danger . Finally , in 2005 , the DISCOM redeployed to Germany to reconstitute and prepare for future contingency operations . The DISCOM was awarded the Meritorious Unit Commendation for its contributions during Operation Iraqi freedom II . 
 As of January 2006 , the DISCOM consisted of the 201st Field Support Battalion in Vilseck , Germany , the 701st Maneuver Support Battalion in Kitzingen , Germany , the 299th Field Support Battalion in Schweinfurt Germany , the 601st Aviation Support Battalion in <unk> , Germany , and the Headquarters and Headquarters Company ( HHC ) , also in Kitzingen . Over the months between January 2006 and July 2006 the 601st [ 1 ] returned to Fort Riley , the 701st was inactivated , the 299th was task organized to the 2nd Brigade Combat Team in preparation for another deployment to Operation Iraqi Freedom , and the 201st was task organized under the 3rd Brigade Combat Team and later deactivated . The DISCOM HHC was re @-@ deployed to Fort Riley Kansas in August 2006 to build the 1st Sustainment Brigade . 
 For a brief period , the DISCOM gained administrative control over the 97th Military Police Battalion , the 541st <unk> , the Band , and the 101st Military Intelligence Battalion . The 101st was in @-@ activated in December 2006 , the 541st and 97th were deployed and task organized away from the DISCOM . 
 In November 2006 , the brigade reviewed its own Shoulder Sleeve Insignia ( SSI ) and Distinctive Unit Insignia . These items were based heavily on the SSI of the 1st Infantry Division . Later that month , the Brigade was informed that it would be deployed to Iraq again in 2007 . 
 The 1st Sustainment Brigade ( SB ) was activated on 15 February 2007 at 10 : 00 am local time at Fort Riley , Kansas . It is a scalable <unk> Sustainment Brigade , with a mission statement of : Plans , synchronizes , monitors , and executes distribution operations . Conducts sustainment operations within assigned area of operation . Conducts Theater Opening and / or Theater Distribution operations when directed . Provides support to joint , interagency , and multinational forces as directed . 
 The brigade deployed to Iraq again in late 2007 , operating in the areas such as those around Central Iraq . The brigade 's headquarters during this time has been Camp Taji . The brigade made history on 16 June 2008 when it heralded the return of the battlefield promotion system in the US Army . The system , which was previously discontinued , was part of a pilot program that the Army was looking at to bring battlefield promotions back . 
 Soldiers of the brigade were also some of the first to use the MRAP , or Mine Resistant Ambush Protected vehicle . The soldiers used the vehicles to train other soldiers on use of the vehicle , particularly leaders of the 10th Sustainment Brigade , which replaced the 1st Sustainment Brigade in late 2008 . 
 The 1st Sustainment Brigade provides a full spectrum support including : configuring for , distributions and <unk> to and from maneuver Brigade Combat Teams , other support brigades , and to joint interagency and multinational elements as directed . The 1st SB supports Early Entry Operations or Hub operations with augmentation , providing postal , replacement , and casualty operations as well as essential personnel services and Trial Defense Services on an area basis . The brigade is assigned as the sustainment unit of the 1st Infantry Division , however it can also operate independently , being assigned other units and other missions independent of the division . 
 = = Honors = = 
 As it was a part of the 1st Infantry Division 's command , the Brigade received campaign participation credit and awards for all of the same conflicts as the Division Headquarters up until it became an independent unit in 2006 . Thereafter , it retained separate lineage . 
 = = = Unit Decorations = = = 
 = = = Campaign Streamers = = = 
 = SMS Sperber = 
 SMS Sperber ( " His Majesty 's Ship Sperber — Sparrowhawk " ) was an unprotected cruiser built for the German Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) , the second member of the Schwalbe class . She had one sister ship , Schwalbe . Sperber was built at the Kaiserliche Werft ( Imperial Dockyard ) in Danzig ; her keel was laid down in September 1887 and her completed hull was launched in August 1888 . She was commissioned for service in April 1889 . Designed for colonial service , Sperber was armed with a main battery of eight 10 @.@ 5 @-@ centimeter ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns and had a cruising radius of over 3 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 600 km ; 3 @,@ 500 mi ) ; she also had an auxiliary sailing rig to supplement her steam engines . 
 Sperber spent the majority of her career overseas . She briefly served in German East Africa in late 1889 and early 1890 , before being transferred to the South Seas Station in German New Guinea . She remained there for three years before being transferred to German Southwest Africa from early 1894 to late 1896 . She was decommissioned in Germany in December 1896 and overhauled before recommissioning for another tour abroad in December 1902 . She briefly spent time in the East @-@ American Station off Venezuela in early 1903 and East Africa from July to October of that year , before being assigned to the East Asia Squadron by the end of the year . After spending 1904 in Chinese waters , Sperber was reassigned to Southwest Africa , where she remained until 1911 . She returned to Germany at the end of the year and was decommissioned a second time , but was thereafter used as a target ship until 1918 . She was later sold for scrap in 1920 and broken up in Hamburg . 
 = = Design = = 
 Sperber was 66 @.@ 9 meters ( 219 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 9 @.@ 36 m ( 30 @.@ 7 ft ) and a draft of 4 @.@ 4 m ( 14 ft ) forward . She displaced 1 @,@ 359 t ( 1 @,@ 338 long tons ; 1 @,@ 498 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two horizontal 2 @-@ cylinder double @-@ expansion steam engines powered by four coal @-@ fired cylindrical water @-@ tube boilers . These provided a top speed of 13 @.@ 5 knots ( 25 @.@ 0 km / h ; 15 @.@ 5 mph ) and a range of approximately 3 @,@ 290 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 090 km ; 3 @,@ 790 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . To supplement the steam engines , she was fitted with a barquentine rig . Sperber had a crew of 9 officers and 108 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with eight 10 @.@ 5 cm K L / 35 guns in single pedestal mounts , supplied with 765 rounds of ammunition in total . They had a range of 8 @,@ 200 m ( 26 @,@ 900 ft ) . Four guns were mounted on each broadside . The gun armament was rounded out by five 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) revolver cannons . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Sperber was laid down at the Kaiserliche Werft ( Imperial Shipyard ) in Danzig in September 1887 . She was launched on 23 August 1888 , and then @-@ Kapitän zur See ( Captain at Sea ) Franz <unk> gave the launching speech . She began her sea trials on 2 April 1889 , which lasted until 7 June ; after completion of the trials , she was temporarily decommissioned . She was thereafter assigned to the South Seas Station in German New Guinea to replace the gunboats Adler and Eber , which had been destroyed by the 1889 Apia cyclone . On 20 August , Sperber was recommissioned for her new assignment , and she departed Kiel on 4 September , bound for the Pacific . While coaling in Aden on 13 October , the cruiser received orders to head to German East Africa , which was gripped by the Abushiri Revolt . There , she was to replace the old sail corvette Leipzig and the aviso Pfeil . 
 = = = First deployment abroad = = = 
 Sperber arrived in Zanzibar on 26 October ; four days earlier , the protectorate of Wituland had been granted to Germany . Sperber 's first assignment upon reaching East Africa was to conduct a formal survey of the border between Wituland and British Kenya . Sperber was also to conduct the formal flag raising in the new protectorate . Starting on 1 November , Sperber joined the fight against the rebels . In early December , Sperber and her sister ship Schwalbe were present at ceremonial reception of the Emin Pasha Relief Expedition at Bagamoyo . Both ships were also involved with settling the border of Wituland on 27 – 29 December . In mid @-@ January 1890 , Pfeil , Leipzig , and Sophie left East Africa , leaving Schwalbe , Sperber , and Carola on the station . 
 On 22 April , Sperber was finally released to resume her original assignment to the South Seas Station . She met Alexandrine in Australia and visited the ports of Melbourne and Sydney , where she underwent an overhaul . Sperber finally arrived in Apia in German Samoa on 30 July . She thereafter took Friedrich Biermann , the Imperial Commissioner for the Marshall Islands , on a tour of the islands . The cruiser returned to Apia on 5 October . In January 1891 , Sperber 's commander presided over the unveiling of a monument to the German sailors who had been killed at the Battle of <unk> in December 1888 . The cruiser then departed for Sydney for another overhaul , which lasted from 24 January to 21 March . After the repair work was completed , Sperber went on a tour of Germany 's colonies in the Pacific , including the Bismarck Archipelago , the Marshalls , and Butaritari . She was back in Apia by 6 June , where she remained stationed until 15 December . The new unprotected cruiser Bussard joined her there on 13 December . 
 In February 1892 , Sperber left for another overhaul in Sydney . While en route , she had to stop at <unk> in the Gilbert Islands and send a landing party ashore to punish locals who had attacked German businessmen there . The overhaul lasted from 3 March to 3 May , after which Sperber went on another tour of the islands , including the Marshalls , Butaritari , and <unk> Island . At <unk> the Deputy Chancellor , Georg <unk> , came aboard the ship . Sperber was back in Apia by 17 May , and she remained there until 1 November , when she left for another tour , which included stops at <unk> , Herbertshöhe — the capital of German New Guinea — and Friedrich Wilhelmshafen . Another period of dockyard work at Sydney followed from 6 February 1893 to 18 April . In the meanwhile , unrest in Samoa broke out , under the leadership of King Mata 'afa Iosefo . He was arrested , however , which caused the movement to disperse ; after she returned from Sydney , Sperber was tasked with taking Mata 'afa into exile on Jaluit Atoll . 
 The unprotected cruiser Falke , which had been assigned to German Southwest Africa , was ordered to replace Sperber in November 1893 . Sperber was in turn ordered to return to Germany , and she departed the South Seas Station on 6 November . While en route , however , her orders were changed and she was instead sent to Southwest Africa . She stopped in Cape Town , South Africa for an overhaul , and finally arrived in Kamerun on 28 May 1894 . Her shallower draft , compared to her predecessor Falke , permitted her to routinely cross the sandbar in the mouth of the Kamerun River . At this time , the only other German warship on the station was the gunboat Hyäne , though the government steamer Nachtigal and the hulked gunboat <unk> were also available in the colony . Sperber was thereafter responsible for conducting patrols of the colony . 
 She visited Cape Town on 10 November 1895 , and while on her way there , she carried a granite copy of the <unk> that had been placed there by the Portuguese explorer Diogo Cão in the late 15th century . The original stone monument had been transported back to Berlin for preservation in 1893 by Falke . A short period of dockyard maintenance lasted from 17 to 29 February 1896 . On 6 March , she was sent to Swakopmund in response to an uprising by the local population . She send a landing party ashore to help the <unk> ( Protection force ) secure the city . From 23 March to 9 April , Sperber went to <unk> for a period of rest for her crew . On 22 September , she departed Southwest Africa and headed for Germany ; she arrived in Kiel on 18 November and was decommissioned on 7 December . Starting in early 1898 , Sperber was taken into drydock for a major overhaul . The work lasted until August , and she was placed back in reserve once it was completed . 
 = = = Second deployment abroad = = = 
 On 16 December 1902 , the ship was again commissioned for service abroad , this time to reinforce the East @-@ American Station in Central and South America . She left Kiel on 5 January 1903 and arrived in Willemstad in Curaçao . The Venezuela Crisis of 1902 – 03 was by that time winding down , and so apart from visits to a few Venezuelan ports , her presence was unnecessary . Instead , she was ordered to German East Africa in late February . Sperber left the East @-@ American Station on 22 March and steamed through the Mediterranean Sea , arriving in Dar es Salaam on 1 July . She was there only briefly , before she was again transferred , this time to the East Asia Squadron on 9 October . She arrived in Singapore on 23 November and continued on to the mouth of the Yangtze in China , where she was stationed at the time . From there , she went to Shanghai on 15 May 1904 , and visited several Chinese ports , followed by an overhaul from August to December in Germany 's concession at Tsingtao . In early 1905 , Sperber visited ports in southern China , where she received orders to return to Southwest Africa . She went Tsingtao on 24 April before departing for Africa , arriving in Douala on 26 July . There , she met the gunboat Habicht . 
 On 27 January 1907 , Sperber was present in Lomé for the opening of the first railroad line in German Togoland . Between 1908 and 1909 , she conducted an extensive survey of the west @-@ African coast . In February 1909 , she visited the ruins of Groß <unk> , the old capital of the Brandenburger Gold Coast , a colony founded by Frederick William I of Prussia in the 17th century . She thereafter returned to survey work in Kamerun and Southwest Africa . On 6 March 1910 , she was transferred to German East Africa to replace Bussard . While en route , her crew helped to put out a major fire in Lüderitz Bay on 15 April . After arriving in East Africa , Sperber conducted the normal routine of visiting ports in the colony . She went to Cape Town for an overhaul from 26 October to 3 December . On 6 March 1911 , she received orders to return to Germany for a second time . She arrived in Wilhelmshaven on 29 June , and was decommissioned again on 6 July . She was stricken from the naval register on 16 March 1912 and was thereafter used as a target ship until 1918 . She was sold on 7 August 1920 and broken up for scrap in Hamburg in 1922 . 
 = Typhoon Paka = 
 Typhoon Paka , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Rubing , was the last tropical cyclone in the 1997 Pacific Ocean hurricane and typhoon season , and was among the strongest Pacific typhoons in the month of December . Paka , which is the Hawaiian name for Pat , developed on November 28 from a trough well to the southwest of Hawaii . The storm tracked generally westward for much of its duration , and on December 7 it crossed into the western Pacific Ocean . Much of its track was characterized by fluctuations in intensity , and on December 10 the cyclone attained typhoon status as it crossed the Marshall Islands . On December 16 , Paka struck Guam and Rota with winds of 230 km / h ( 145 mph ) , and it strengthened further to reach peak winds on December 18 over open waters . Subsequently , it underwent a steady weakening trend , and on December 23 Paka dissipated . 
 Typhoon Paka first impacted the Marshall Islands , where it dropped heavy rainfall and left US $ 80 million in damages . Later , it passed just north of Guam , where strong winds destroyed about 1 @,@ 500 buildings and damaged 10 @,@ 000 more ; 5 @,@ 000 people were left homeless , and the island experienced a complete power outage following the typhoon . Damage on the island totaled US $ 500 million , which warranted the retirement of its name . Paka also caused minor damage in the Northern Mariana Islands , and overall the typhoon caused no reported fatalities . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 As the weather synoptics of the northern Pacific Ocean transitioned into a late @-@ fall to early winter @-@ type pattern , convection from the monsoon trough extended to the east of the International Date Line . During late November , a westerly disturbance developed into twin troughs on opposite sides of the equator ; the one in the Southern Hemisphere ultimately developed into Tropical Cyclone Pam , while the one in the Northern Hemisphere formed into an area of convection about 2000 km ( 1240 mi ) southwest of Hawaii . The disturbance gradually organized as it drifted north @-@ northeastward , and on November 28 it developed into Tropical Depression Five @-@ C about 465 km ( 290 mi ) west @-@ northwest of Palmyra Atoll . Operationally , the Central Pacific Hurricane Center ( CPHC ) did not begin issuing warnings on the system until December 2 . 
 The tropical depression continued drifting north @-@ northeastward , and failed to strengthen significantly . It turned to the west on December 1 , due to the presence of a strong anticyclone to its north with a ridge extending westward past the International Date Line . On December 2 , based on satellite estimates , the CPHC upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Paka while located about 1000 km ( 625 mi ) south @-@ southeast of Johnston Atoll . Due to the presence of high clouds across the area , forecasters had difficulty at times in locating the low @-@ level circulation . After becoming a tropical storm , Paka remained nearly stationary for about two days before resuming a slow motion to the west @-@ southwest . It steadily intensified due to warm water temperatures , and on December 3 the storm attained winds of 105 km / h ( 65 mph ) . The next day , however , it encountered dry air and began weakening ; by December 6 , the winds had decreased to minimal tropical storm status for about 12 hours . Subsequently , Paka began to re @-@ intensify , and on December 7 the storm crossed the International Date Line into the western North Pacific Ocean with winds of 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) . 
 Upon entering the western North Pacific Ocean , tropical cyclone warning duties transferred from the CPHC to the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) , and the JMA first assessed Paka as a 65 km ( 40 mph ) storm . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) unofficially assumed warning duties for interests in the United States Department of Defense . Paka continued to intensify after crossing the date line , and from late on December 7 through early the following day it remained a strong tropical storm . However , upper @-@ level wind shear increased , and it again weakened . At 1200 UTC on December 9 , the JTWC assessed Paka as an 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) tropical storm and forecast it to continue weakening . By December 10 , the shear had begun to decrease as the storm moved through the Marshall Islands , and that night the JTWC upgraded Paka to typhoon status . Paka officially attained typhoon status when JMA classified it with winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) at 0000 UTC on December 11 . 
 After attaining typhoon status , Paka strengthened fairly quickly , and by December 12 it reached sustained winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) for a ten @-@ minute ( 10 min ) duration , or 215 km / h ( 135 mph ) over a one @-@ minute ( 1 min ) duration . Subsequently , it briefly weakened as its forward motion increased . However , Paka again re @-@ intensified , and at 1200 UTC on December 14 it attained the unofficial ranking of super typhoon status while over the open Pacific Ocean . At the same time , the JMA classified it with 10 min sustained winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) . After reaching its initial peak intensity , Typhoon Paka began to weaken as it approached the southern Mariana Islands ; the NEXRAD Doppler weather radar from Guam revealed the presence of a primary eyewall of 74 km ( 46 mi ) in diameter , with a fragmented inner wall cloud of 19 km ( 11 mi ) in diameter . Additionally , satellite imagery indicated an eyewall <unk> within the eye of the typhoon . It slowed and began to re @-@ intensify as it continued westward , and at 0530 UTC on December 16 the northern portion of the outer eyewall of Paka passed over the island of Rota ; 20 minutes later , the southern portion of the inner wall cloud moved across northern Guam . As it tracked through the Rota Channel , the center of Paka passed about 8 km ( 5 mi ) north of the northern tip of Guam , its closest approach to the island . 
 Typhoon Paka continued to steadily intensify after passing the Marianas Islands , and late on December 17 it reached its peak intensity of 185 km / h ( 115 mph 10 min sustained ) while located 440 km ( 275 mi ) west @-@ northwest of Guam . Early on December 18 , the JTWC assessed it as attaining peak winds of 295 km / h ( 185 mph 1 min winds ) . On December 19 , it entered the area of responsibility of the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration , or PAGASA , and was named Rubing . Shortly thereafter , Paka moved through an area of progressively increasing wind shear , which resulted in a steady weakening trend . By December 21 , winds decreased to tropical storm status . The next day , it degenerated into a tropical depression before it dissipated on December 23 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Marshall Islands = = = 
 Prior to the typhoon passing through the Marshall Islands , several hundred residents on the island of Ebeye fled to safer structures . The threat of Paka prevented Continental Micronesia from flying in or out of the area . 
 Paka entered the Marshall Islands between Mili and Majuro as a tropical storm on December 10 , and after strengthening into a typhoon , it left the archipelago on December 14 . The cyclone affected several islands in the nation , and the Majuro and Kwajalein atolls reported wind gusts in excess of 75 km / h ( 45 mph ) . On Jaluit Atoll , the typhoon dropped 217 mm ( 8 @.@ 54 in ) of precipitation in six hours , with a total of about 300 mm ( 11 @.@ 8 in ) recorded in 30 hours . Strong waves inundated low @-@ lying islands , which flooded crops with salt water . The combination of the wind and flooding caused severe damage to banana , papaya , and lime trees across the territory . Typhoon Paka damaged 70 % of the houses on Ailinglaplap Atoll , and most of the coconut trees on the atoll were left toppled or damaged . Strong winds left large portions of Ebeye island without electricity or telephone . The typhoon caused no reported deaths or injuries in the region , and damage was estimated at US $ 80 million . 
 = = = Guam = = = 
 The Guam National Weather Service issued a typhoon watch on December 14 , which was upgraded to a typhoon warning the next day . The Antonio B. Won Pat International Airport was closed during the passage of Paka , with only emergency flights permitted . 
 Passing a short distance north of the island , Typhoon Paka produced strong winds across northern Guam , though reliable wind reports are incomplete due to the long duration and intensity of the winds . The highest reading believed to be reliable was at Apra Harbor . There , a station recorded a wind gust of 277 km / h ( 171 mph ) before the sensor failed as winds shifted to the southwest ; since the winds from the southwest were stronger and of greater duration , officials believe gusts there reached 297 km / h ( 184 mph ) . Additionally , Andersen Air Force Base recorded a peak wind gust of 381 km / h ( 236 mph ) , which at the time was considered the highest wind speed on record , surpassing the 1934 world record of 372 km / h ( 231 mph ) on Mount Washington in New Hampshire . However , a subsequent wind survey of the area discarded the reading at the base , as it was considered unreliable . As <unk> are less exposed than wind sensors , pressure readings on the island are considered accurate ; the lowest reading on the island was 948 hPa ( 27 @.@ 99 inHg ) at Andersen Air Force Base . In two days , the typhoon dropped about 533 mm ( 21 in ) of precipitation on the northern portion of the island , or about 89 % of the monthly rainfall total . Waves along northern Guam reached about 11 m ( 35 ft ) in height . 
 The strong winds from Paka left around 1 @,@ 500 buildings destroyed on the island , of which 1 @,@ 160 were single @-@ family homes . A further 10 @,@ 000 buildings sustained damage to some degree , with 60 % of the homes on the island reporting major damage . In all , about 5 @,@ 000 people were left homeless due to the typhoon . Additionally , an estimated 30 – 40 % of the public buildings received major damage . Buildings on the island made of reinforced concrete fared well , as opposed to light metal @-@ frame structures , which more often than not were destroyed . Large tourist hotels near Hagåtña , on which Guam is dependent , received generally minor damage , such as broken windows and damaged power generators . 
 A complete island @-@ wide power outage followed the typhoon ; damage to the main electrical transmission and distribution system was estimated at <unk> million . Following the passage of the typhoon , 25 % of the homes on Guam were left without water . Telephone service remained working after the storm , due to most lines being underground . Strong waves washed away a few coastal roads in the northern portion of the island , leaving them temporarily closed . The waves surpassed the seawall at Apra Harbor , damaging the road and infrastructure of the seaport ; many boats were washed ashore after breaking from their moorings . Strong winds damaged a radar system and lights along the runway of the Antonio B. Won Pat International Airport , though most airport facilities received light damage . Andersen Air Force Base also sustained heavy damage , with hundreds of downed trees and many facilities left damaged . Across Guam , damage was estimated at <unk> million . About 100 people were injured , but the typhoon caused no deaths on the island . 
 = = = Northern Mariana Islands = = = 
 A typhoon watch was issued for Rota , Tinian , and Saipan on December 14 , which was upgraded to a typhoon warning the next day . Because Paka was intensifying while passing to the south of Rota , the first wind , or northeast through east winds , was less severe than the second wind from the southeast . Sustained winds on the island reached 145 km / h ( 90 mph ) , with gusts reaching 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . Many trees in the mountainous portion of the island were left defoliated , which limited nesting and foraging sites for the endangered bridled white @-@ eye bird . While passing to the south of the island , Paka dropped 250 – 300 mm ( 10 – 12 in ) of rain . Damage on the island totaled $ 4 @.@ 4 million ( 1997 USD , $ 6 @.@ 4 million 2015 USD ) . The typhoon also produced above @-@ normal precipitation on Saipan . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the passage of the typhoon in the Ailinglaplap Atoll in the Marshall Islands , residents experienced severe food shortages due to damaged crops and little rainfall . Experts estimated the entire redevelopment of its fauna would require more than a decade . As a result of the crop shortage , large @-@ scale evacuations of the islands ' residents were considered . Officials in the nation requested assistance from the Federal Emergency Management Agency of the United States , and on March 20 , 1998 , the area was declared a disaster area ; the declaration allowed for the usage of emergency funds . 
 On December 17 , 1997 , President Bill Clinton declared Guam a federal disaster area , making it eligible for federal assistance . One week later , a disaster declaration was ordered for the Northern Mariana Islands . Ultimately , FEMA received 14 @,@ 770 Individual Assistance Applications from residents on Guam . In turn , FEMA provided the residents with over $ 27 million in assistance ( 1997 USD , $ 39 million 2015 USD ) . The entire island of Guam was left without power after Paka . Water and sewage systems on Guam were directly affected minimally by the typhoon . With the usage of power generators , most areas of the island had water pumping capabilities within a few days after the typhoon . The Antonio B. Won Pat International Airport was partially reopened to daytime flights a day after the typhoon , and by a week after the passage of Paka the airport was fully re @-@ opened . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 Due to the heavy damage from the typhoon , the Central Pacific Hurricane Center requested the retirement of the name in April 2006 ; the name Paka was replaced with Pama . 
 = M @-@ 311 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 311 is a 13 @.@ 7 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 22 @.@ 0 km ) state trunkline highway in Calhoun County in the US state of Michigan that runs from the intersection of M @-@ 60 in Burlington north to I @-@ 94 at Exit 104 in Emmett Township . It was previously an unsigned state trunkline , meaning that no reassurance markers were used to identify the highway . The route mainly consists of 11 Mile Road , which was a county road prior to the 1998 rationalization process . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 311 follows 11 Mile Road between M @-@ 60 and I @-@ 94 . In the village of Burlington , M @-@ 311 is known as Marshall Street . There is a jog in 11 Mile Road as it runs northwesterly between Q Drive and O Drive . At N Drive , M @-@ 311 / 11 Mile Road turns along N Drive a short distance before turning back northward . Near D Drive , 11 Mile Road passes Hyde Lake . M @-@ 311 crosses the Kalamazoo River just south of I @-@ 94 . All of M @-@ 311 is two @-@ lane , rural highway in forest lands and farm fields , and none of it is listed on the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 311 was created on October 1 , 1998 as a part of Governor John Engler 's Rationalization process . The original routing started at BL I @-@ 94 / Michigan Avenue and Raymond Avenue . It followed Raymond Avenue to Emmet Street before turning east to Cooper Avenue . From Cooper Avenue , M @-@ 311 turned east again on N Drive North until meeting 11 Mile Road . There it followed 11 Mile Road south to M @-@ 60 in Burlington . Since the original transfer , all of M @-@ 311 north of I @-@ 94 was returned to Calhoun County control . This eliminated the section that made a " U @-@ turn " . Since December 2009 , the highway has been signed in the field . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Calhoun County . 
 = 2009 Checker Auto Parts 500 = 
 The 2009 Checker O 'Reilly Auto Parts 500 was the thirty @-@ fifth and penultimate stock car race of the 2009 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series and the ninth in the ten @-@ race season @-@ ending Chase for the Sprint Cup . It was held on November 15 , 2009 at Phoenix International Raceway , in Avondale , Arizona before a crowd of 90 @,@ 000 . The 312 @-@ lap race was won by Jimmie Johnson of the Hendrick Motorsports team after starting from third position . Jeff Burton finished second and Denny Hamlin came in third . 
 Martin Truex , Jr. won the pole position , although he was passed by Kurt Busch by the end of the first lap . Fifty @-@ six laps later , Johnson became the leader of the race . Many Chase for the Sprint Cup participants , including Jeff Gordon and Mark Martin ran in the top ten for most of the race . Johnson maintained the first position to lead the most laps of 238 , and to win his seventh race of the season . There were four cautions and nine lead changes among four different drivers during the course of the race . 
 The race was Johnson 's seventh win of the 2009 season , and the forty @-@ seventh of his career . The result kept Johnson in the lead of the Drivers ' Championship , one @-@ hundred and eight points ahead of Mark Martin and one @-@ hundred and sixty nine in front of Jeff Gordon . Chevrolet maintained their lead in the Manufacturers ' Championship , fifty @-@ eight ahead of Toyota , ninety @-@ five in front of Ford and one @-@ hundred and eight ahead of Dodge . The race attracted 5 @.@ 17 million television viewers . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Phoenix International Raceway is one of five short tracks to hold NASCAR races , the others being Richmond International Raceway , Dover International Speedway , Bristol Motor Speedway , and Martinsville Speedway . The standard track at Phoenix International Raceway is a four @-@ turn short track oval that is 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) long . The track 's turns are banked at eleven degrees , while the front stretch , the location of the finish line , was banked at three degrees . The back stretch , which has a dogleg shape instead of a straight , has nine degrees of banking . 
 Before the race , Jimmie Johnson led the Drivers ' Championship with 6 @,@ 297 points , and Mark Martin stood in second with 6 @,@ 224 points . Jeff Gordon followed in third with 6 @,@ 185 points , fifty @-@ nine ahead of Kurt Busch , and ninety @-@ eight in front of Tony Stewart in fourth and fifth . Juan Pablo Montoya with 6 @,@ 061 was eleven points ahead of Greg Biffle , as Denny Hamlin with 5 @,@ 975 points , was two ahead of Ryan Newman , and seventy @-@ seven in front of Kasey Kahne . Carl Edwards and Brian Vickers in eleventh and twelfth with 5 @,@ 857 and 5 @,@ 777 points rounded out the contenders for the Chase for the Sprint Cup . In the Manufacturers ' Championship , Chevrolet were leading with 247 points , fifty @-@ five ahead of their rival Toyota . Ford , with 158 points , were seven points ahead of Dodge in the battle for third . Johnson was the race 's defending champion . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Two practice sessions were held before the Sunday race — both on Saturday . A practice session scheduled for Friday morning was cancelled because of rain . The first session lasted 45 minutes , and the second and final session lasted 60 minutes . 
 Although forty @-@ six drivers were entered in the qualifier ; according to NASCAR 's qualifying procedure , only forty @-@ three could race . Each driver ran two laps , with the starting order determined by the competitor 's fastest times . Martin Truex , Jr. clinched his third pole position of the season , with a time of 26 @.@ 643 . He was joined on the grid 's front row by Kurt Busch . Johnson qualified third , Kahne took fourth , and Hamlin started fifth . Biffle , Kyle Busch , Stewart , Casey Mears and Martin completed the top ten positions . The three drivers that failed to qualify were Regan Smith , Kevin Conway and Brandon Ash . After the qualifier Truex said , " ( Today ) we were pretty good in practice . This is a weird track where you go out in practice , then expect to pick up a half @-@ second somehow ( in qualifying ) . We did . It 's strange , but it felt good . " 
 In the first practice session , Sam Hornish , Jr. was fastest , placing ahead of Kahne in second , and Kyle Busch in third . Biffle was fourth fastest , and Hamlin placed fifth . Montoya , Johnson , Martin , Stewart and Gordon rounded out the top ten fastest drivers in the session . Of the other drivers in the chase , Vickers was fifteenth fastest , while Newman placed seventeenth . Later that day , Johnson was fastest in the second and final practice session , ahead of Martin in second , and Dale Earnhardt , Jr. in third . Truex was fourth quickest , and Kurt Busch took fifth . Jeff Burton managed sixth . Gordon , Jamie McMurray , Joey Logano and Kahne followed in the top ten . Other chase drivers included Montoya in seventeenth and Edwards in twenty @-@ third . Kahne scraped the turn two wall and sustained minor damage to his right @-@ hand quarter . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The race , the thirty @-@ fifth of a total of thirty @-@ six in the 2009 season , began at 3 : 15 p.m. EST and was televised in the United States on ESPN . Around the start of the race , weather conditions were sunny . Phoenix International Raceway <unk> Ken Bowers began pre @-@ race ceremonies by giving the invocation . Former J Records recording artist Tyrese Gibson performed the national anthem , and Senator John McCain commanded the drivers to start their engines . No driver had to move to rear of the grid at the start of the race . 
 Truex retained his pole position lead into the first lap . On the same lap , Kurt Busch passed Truex to become the new race leader . One lap later , Martin , who started tenth , fell to eleventh . On the 4th lap , Hornish had moved up to seventh position after passing Kyle Busch and Gordon . Two laps later , Montoya moved into the sixteenth position , as Martin passed Stewart for tenth on lap 7 . By the 9th lap , Kurt Busch had a one @-@ second lead over Truex One lap later , Kurt Busch increased his lead to 1 @.@ 5 seconds . On lap 13 , Martin passed Kyle Busch to claim ninth . Two laps later , Martin moved into eighth . 
 Gordon who began the race in fourteenth , had moved up eight positions to sixth by lap 22 . Three laps later , Truex had reduced Kurt Busch 's lead to one second , as Martin moved into seventh on lap 28 . One lap later , Kurt Busch extended his lead over Truex to 1 @.@ 6 seconds , as Gordon moved into fifth position . On lap 33 , Johnson passed Truex for second ; Martin passed Gordon to claim fifth on lap 38 . Four laps later , Johnson closed to half a second from Kurt Busch . Twelve laps later , Earnhardt dropped to twentieth position . On lap 57 , Johnson passed Kurt Busch to claim the lead , with Martin moving to fourth one lap later . 
 By lap 60 , Johnson built up a 1 @.@ 5 second lead over Kurt Busch , while Hamlin moved into the third position . Green flag pit stops took place from lap 65 to 73 ; Kurt Busch reclaimed the lead at the end of the cycle . On lap 90 , Johnson passed Kurt Busch to take over the lead position . One lap later , Hamlin took over fifth position . On the 102nd lap , Martin and Gordon moved into third and fourth respectively . Four laps later , Montoya moved into fourth . Having started on pole position , Truex clinched sixth position on lap 107 . On lap 115 , the pace car moved on track because debris was spotted on the track . During the caution , most of the leaders made pit stops . 
 Johnson maintained his lead on the restart , followed by Martin and Gordon . Also , the second caution was prompted when Michael Waltrip damaged his car on that restart , Brad Keselowski was hit from behind and David Ragan spun sideways . None of the leaders chose to make pit stops , as the clean @-@ up crew came on track to clear debris and fluids . Johnson held the lead at the lap 127 restart . Gordon accelerated slower than the leaders and dropped to sixth position by the next lap . On lap 129 , Kyle Busch and Gordon made contact , but both managed to continue , without damaging their cars . By the next lap , Hamlin passed Martin for second position . On lap 134 , Johnson had a 1 @.@ 5 second lead , as Clint Bowyer moved into the fifth position . By the 138th lap , Johnson 's lead was increased to 2 seconds . 
 Kurt Busch and Montoya moved into fourth and ninth positions respectively on lap 141 . By the 150th lap , Johnson had built up a 2 @.@ 7 second lead over Hamlin . On lap 162 , Johnson 's lead of 3 @.@ 4 seconds was reduced to nothing when debris was spotted on the track , causing a caution . During the caution , some of the leaders elected to make pit stops . Johnson remained the leader on the restart , ahead of Bowyer and Hamlin . Two laps later , a multi @-@ car collision occurred on the front straightway as Earnhardt lost control of his car , and collected Logano , Scott Speed , Hornish , Bobby Labonte , Kenseth , Stewart , Vickers and Keselowski . The damaged cars headed to the pit road during the caution as crews cleaned up debris . 
 Johnson maintained his lead at the restart . On lap 179 , Earnhardt headed for his garage because of an oil leak . Three laps later , Vickers and Labonte retired from the race , and Gordon dropped to tenth position . By the 186th lap , Johnson rebuilt his lead to 2 @.@ 3 seconds , as Bowyer passed Gordon to claim third . Five laps later , Martin and Gordon moved into sixth and ninth positions respectively . Johnson 's lead over Kurt Busch was three seconds by lap 196 . Four laps later , Edwards moved up to eighteenth position , while Montoya moved to eighth , one lap later . By lap 203 , Johnson <unk> a 3 @.@ 4 second lead , while Burton was passed by Martin for fifth position five laps later . Johnson 's lead was increased to 4 @.@ 3 seconds by the 215th lap . 
 On lap 219 , Hamlin moved into the third position , and one lap later , Martin moved up another place to fourth . On lap 222 , Johnson increased his lead over Kurt Busch to almost five seconds . Six laps later , Earnhardt rejoined the race . Green flag pit stops began on lap 240 ; Johnson made a pit stop on lap 242 , giving the lead to Kenseth . After pit stops , Johnson regained the first position . By lap 277 , the drivers reported their cars becoming loose as track temperatures began to drop . Twelve laps later , Burton passed Hamlin for the second position . On lap 296 , Gordon passed Ambrose to claim ninth , while Truex moved into the fifth position . By lap 302 , Johnson maintained a 1 @.@ 8 second lead over Burton . Two laps later , David Reutimann moved back into the top ten after passing Ambrose , while Kurt Busch moved up to sixth on lap 310 . Johnson maintained his lead to win his seventh race of the 2009 season . Burton finished second , ahead of Hamlin in third , Martin in fourth , and Truex in fifth . Kurt Busch , Bowyer , Montoya , Gordon and Reutimann rounded out the top ten finishers . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 Johnson appeared in victory lane to celebrate his seventh win of the season in front of 90 @,@ 000 who attended the race . Johnson also earned $ 267 @,@ 001 in race winnings . Afterward , he said , " I guess it could have been a statement we were sending . There was a lot of pressure . All week long , we wondered if we could step up like we did today . I 'm very proud how we rose to the occasion . " , he continued , " When I go home tonight , I 'm going to be ( mentally ) driving laps , what I think I need to do in qualifying trim so I can put my best effort in on Friday . Same thing for race practice on Saturday , and go racing Sunday . Texas was such a good lesson . And I hope that the points we lost in Texas isn 't what keeps us from winning this championship . " 
 Burton , who finished second , was happy with his performance , " [ New crew chief ] Todd <unk> has come in and done a great job , the team ’ s done a great job . We had one <unk> early on pit road but the rest of them we picked out our spots every single time , and that ’ s what it takes ; it takes a team effort . " In the subsequent post @-@ race press conference , Hamlin said , " Anytime that Jimmie is down is not usually because of performance , it 's usually because of an incident like last week . There was no doubt in my mind they were going to come this week and make a statement . Obviously leading all the laps pretty much and winning the race sends a statement out there that he is the best , that they 're not going to be denied this year . " 
 The race result left Johnson maintaining the lead in the Drivers ' Championship with 6 @,@ 492 points . After the race , Martin who finished fourth , was less optimistic about his championship chances , " We 've still got to go to Homestead and run like this again because we 've still got that threat behind us , Jeff Gordon , especially . " Gordon maintained third with 6 @,@ 323 points , forty @-@ two ahead of Kurt Busch and one @-@ hundred and sixteen in front of Stewart . In the Manufacturers ' Championship , Chevrolet maintained the lead with 256 points . Toyota remained second with 198 points . Ford followed with 161 points , six ahead of Dodge in fourth . 5 @.@ 17 million people watched the race on television . The race took two hours , forty @-@ nine minutes and twenty @-@ six seconds to complete , and the margin of victory was 1 @.@ 033 seconds . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Standings after the race = = 
 = Hurricane Pauline = 
 Hurricane Pauline was one of the deadliest Pacific hurricanes to make landfall in Mexico . The sixteenth tropical storm , eighth hurricane , and seventh major hurricane of the 1997 Pacific hurricane season , Pauline developed out of a tropical wave from Africa on September 16 , 1997 , moving across South America and into the Pacific Ocean . On October 5 , the depression intensified into a tropical storm early the next day and by October 7 , Pauline had reached hurricane intensity . It initially moved eastward , then turned northwestward and quickly strengthened to reach peak winds of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) . It paralleled the Mexican coastline a short distance offshore before weakening and making landfall near Puerto Angel , on October 9 , and dissipated the next day . 
 Hurricane Pauline produced torrential rainfall along the Mexican coastline , peaking at 32 @.@ 62 inches ( 930 mm ) in Puente <unk> . Intense flooding and mudslides in some of the poorest areas of Mexico killed between 230 and 500 people , making it one of the deadliest Eastern Pacific storms in recorded history . The passage of the hurricane destroyed or damaged tens of thousands of houses , leaving around 300 @,@ 000 people homeless and causing $ 447 @.@ 8 million in damage ( 1997 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave exited the coast of Africa on September 16 . It traversed steadily westward , with the southern portion of the wave axis moving across northern South America . On September 26 the wave entered the eastern Pacific Ocean near Panama , and slowly organized . A weak low @-@ level trough extended from the Caribbean Sea to south of Mexico , disrupting the normal flow of westward steering currents . On October 3 , the tropical wave developed a distinct area of deep convection , and began to drift eastward to the south of Mexico . Two days later a low @-@ level circulation formed , and midday on October 5 the system developed into Tropical Depression Eighteen @-@ E while located about 250 miles ( 410 km ) south @-@ southwest of Huatulco in the state of Oaxaca . 
 With an absence of vertical wind shear , the depression drifted just south of due east and steadily organized . The system developed banding features and a central dense overcast , and early on October 6 the depression intensified into a tropical storm and was named Pauline while located about 295 miles ( 475 km ) south @-@ southeast of Salina Cruz , Oaxaca . A strong high pressure system eroded the trough over southeastern Mexico , which turned Pauline to the northeast . An eye feature developed late on October 6 , and early the next day Pauline intensified into a hurricane about 265 miles ( 425 km ) southeast of Salina Cruz after turning to the north and northwest . 
 Pauline rapidly intensified after becoming a hurricane with favorable conditions for continued development , and 18 hours after becoming a hurricane it attained a peak intensity of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) . The winds of the hurricane weakened slightly to 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) , but on October 8 Pauline re @-@ strengthened to reach winds of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) a short distance off the coast of Mexico . The hurricane turned more to the west @-@ northwest while paralleling the southern coast of Oaxaca , and Pauline quickly weakened due to interaction with the mountainous terrain before landfall near Puerto Ángel as a 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) hurricane early on October 9 . The tropical cyclone continued to weaken as it paralleled the coast a short distance inland . On October 10 , Pauline dissipated over the state of Jalisco . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Early forecasts underestimated the peak intensity of Pauline by 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . On October 7 , about 41 hours before landfall , the government of Mexico issued a hurricane warning from Tapachula in Chiapas to Punta Maldonado in Guerrero . Shortly after Pauline made landfall , the warning was extended northwestward to Manzanillo , Colima , and later to Puerto Vallarta , Jalisco . Pauline 's turn to the west @-@ northwest near landfall was unexpected , resulting in hurricane conditions with only a few hours notice in some areas . 
 Authorities in El Salvador declared a national state of alert in response to the potential threat from the hurricane . Residents in flood @-@ prone areas were warned of potential flash flooding . As the hurricane turned sharply to the northwest , there are no reports of damage or deaths from Pauline in the country . Officials in Puerto Madero closed port facilities to all ships , excluding ships in open seas seeking shelter . The government ultimately closed six major ports between Acapulco and Puerto Madero . State authorities in Oaxaca opened 75 emergency shelters and prepared 50 schools to house 10 @,@ 000 people . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Few surface observations were taken during the passage of the hurricane , though officials reported that southern Mexico experienced the brunt of the storm . Puerto Escondido , Oaxaca , near where Pauline made landfall , reported a peak wind gust of 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) several hours before the hurricane moved through the area ; no reports were available after that time . An anemometer in Acapulco reported a wind gust of 59 mph ( 95 km / h ) with sustained winds of 46 mph ( 75 km / h ) . However , officials estimate Pauline might have been a hurricane while passing through the area . The hurricane produced very heavy rainfall along its path , with many areas receiving more than 15 inches ( 381 mm ) . According to the Comision Nacional del Agua , precipitation was recorded at 2 @,@ 132 sites . The two highest reported rainfall totals are 27 @.@ 1 inches ( 688 mm ) at San Luis <unk> , and 32 @.@ 62 inches ( 930 mm ) at Puente <unk> , near Paso <unk> . This made Pauline the wettest tropical cyclone in the history of Guerrero . In Acapulco , the hurricane dropped 16 @.@ 9 in ( 430 mm ) of rainfall in 24 hours . This broke the city precipitation record set originally in 1974 ; the 1997 total represented about 25 % of the city 's annual rainfall . Seas of about 30 ft ( 9 m ) were reported along the Oaxaca coastline while the hurricane made landfall . 
 Hurricane Pauline lightly affected the state of Chiapas , but severely affected Oaxaca and Guerrero , two of the poorest regions of Mexico . The area most impacted was the region in and around Acapulco . Throughout the country , Hurricane Pauline resulted in $ 447 @.@ 8 million in damage ( 1997 USD ) . A report issued by the United Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs reported 137 deaths three days after Hurricane Pauline . Four days after the passage of the hurricane , a Reuters news report stated there were 173 dead with about 200 missing , while the government of Mexico issued a statement reporting 149 deaths . Ultimately , media reports indicated a death toll of at least 230 people , and the Mexican Red Cross estimated 400 dead and at least 1 @,@ 900 missing . The Church World Service estimated at least 500 people were killed . Relief Web suggests that 217 fatalities were reported and 600 @,@ 000 people were impacted . Approximately 300 @,@ 000 people were left homeless due to the storm . 
 = = = Environment = = = 
 The hurricane caused severe damage to the environment ; 200 square miles ( 700 km ² ) of low @-@ lying rainforest and pine and evergreen oak woodlands were greatly damaged in southern Mexico . Strong waves produced severe beach erosion in some locations . The erosion affected two nesting cycles for the Olive Ridley turtle , destroying about 40 million eggs . Nearly 806 @,@ 000 nests were affected , and about 50 % of these were wiped out . The deadliest and most intense hurricane to hit southern Mexico since 1959 , the hurricane was the first documented hurricane strike on Pacific coral reefs . Crop damage was extreme , and 400 @,@ 000 bags of coffee were lost . In the days after the hurricane , soybean and wheat prices increased . In all , Hurricane Pauline had a large effect on fauna in Southern Mexico . 
 = = = Oaxaca = = = 
 A state of emergency was declared for the state of Oaxaca shortly after Pauline made landfall . Abundant rainfall caused the River Los Perros to overflow its capacity , flooding 50 municipalities in Oaxaca . The flooding damaged 12 bridges , of which two were destroyed , and cut off some areas of electricity , drinking water , and telecommunications for several days . The passage of the hurricane affected thousands of houses , leaving roughly 250 @,@ 000 homeless in the state . At least 110 people died in the state , with hundreds of thousands of residents and 1 @,@ 278 communities being affected . 
 Strong winds from the hurricane downed trees and power lines throughout southern Oaxaca . The storm temporarily isolated Puerto Ángel , Oaxaca and a navy base thereby cutting off communications from the rest of Mexico . In Huatulco , the winds blew down antennas at the local television station and destroyed at least 30 cardboard houses . A community near the airport of the city was hit hard , with several people left homeless . Heavy rainfall from the storm caused severe flooding in portions of Oaxaca and neighboring Chiapas . A total of about 500 entire communities were destroyed in Oaxaca ; the areas worst affected were <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 = = = Guerrero = = = 
 Heavy rainfall led to severe mudslides and flooding throughout southern Guerrero . Entire communities were nearly destroyed , with some remaining flooded for a week after the hurricane . The flooding washed out or destroyed thousands of acres of crops , and killed thousands of cattle . The flooding and mudslides isolated more than 45 @,@ 000 people from the outside world . The passage of the hurricane resulted in damage to houses , bridges , and electrical and water supply . About 400 mm ( 16 in ) fell in the city in a three @-@ hour span , resulting in rivers overflowing its banks . About 1 @,@ 100 vessels were stranded at port , and 35 ships sunk . Damage to the coffee industry was $ 80 million ( 1997 USD ) . One environmental agency remarked that it will take 15 years for coffee crops to recover . According to one preliminary estimate , 123 people died in Guerrero , primarily in Acapulco . Over 200 were missing by four days after the hurricane due to being washed out to sea or buried in mudslides . A total of 50 @,@ 000 people were left homeless across the state . Striking the week after Tropical Storm Olaf , previously wet grounds combined with heavy rainfall from Pauline resulted in severe mudslides and flash flooding in shanty towns around Acapulco Bay . There , around 5 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed with another 25 @,@ 000 damaged , with 10 @,@ 000 people left homeless in and around the city . The luxury resort hotels near the beach were largely unaffected by the hurricane , though residents in the shanty towns lost what little they had . Much of the city was covered in mud , and 70 percent of Acapulco was without water as a result of the hurricane . Most of the city 's one million residents were left without power or telephone service . Overall , total damage was nearly $ 300 million pesos . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Volunteers from the Mexican Red Cross quickly went to disaster areas with search and rescue teams , including using specially trained dogs to search for hurricane victims trapped under muddy areas of Acapulco . By four days after the storm each team was finding one or two corpses per day , with officials stating the search could take weeks . In Guerrero , the teams rescued a total of 35 people from hazard . Hours after the hurricane passed through the area , relief works traveled by boat through flooded areas to assist the worst @-@ hit areas . The Red Cross provided food , water , clothing , blankets , water purification supplies , milk powder and other non @-@ perishable foods , and medical supplies to those staying in government shelters in Oaxaca , Guerrero , and Chiapas . The Mexican Red Cross also set up shelters to house and feed hundreds of displaced people , and by four days after the storm , the Red Cross distributed 100 tonnes of relief supplies to hurricane victims . Medical workers were also deployed to the area to aid the injured . 
 Officials set up emergency water purification plants in Acapulco , though water remained largely unavailable . Water trucks were sent to the city , with thousands standing in line for fresh water . Tourists in luxury hotels of Acapulco , for the most part generally unaffected by the hurricane , and rapidly recovered while other parts of the city remained devastated . Hotels were forced to use bottled water and ration their available water to as little as possible to provide water for the rest of the city . Extreme price gouging occurred in the city following the hurricane , with one consumer protection official reporting shopkeepers charging 200 percent more for milk , 500 percent more for tortillas , and 1000 percent more than usual for water . Even though the government was blamed for lack of warnings and water shortages , Ernesto Zedillo , the president of Mexico at that time , cut his vacation in Europe short to respond to the catastrophe . Government officials set up 39 aid centers for Acapulco citizens , though some residents were unable to get food and water . Some residents suspected than the President and his Institutional Revolutionary Party of taking aid supplies for their own purposes . The president promised to seek charges and decided to close aid centers in favor of opening soup kitchens . Despite having the food , the Mexican army did not set up the kitchens , nor was aid distributed at the aid centers . 
 Most of Acapulco remained closed for at least a week after the hurricane . Initially , authorities around Acapulco gave preference to clean up tourist areas , which resulted in the scenic highway from the hotels to the airport being quickly fixed . Tourism greatly decreased following the hurricane , causing some hotels to charge 40 percent less than normal in an attempt to bring people back . One airline offered two plane tickets for the price of one from Mexico City to Acapulco . Most hotels were almost completely back to normal around a month after the hurricane . 
 = = = Donations = = = 
 The governments of Oaxaca and Guerrero asked UNICEF for assistance , specifically water tanks , water pumps , and construction material . International aid initially focused almost solely on the damage in Acapulco . By a week after the hurricane , 500 communities in Oaxaca remained isolated and without assistance , with several large communities in Guerrero not receiving any material aid by a week after the hurricane . The Adventist Development and Relief Agency organized about 7 tons of food and clothing , and sent a bus of 40 people to help isolated villages in southern Mexico . Around ten days after the hurricane struck , 20 @,@ 000 people were still isolated from emergency crews and relief works , causing the president to suspect people could begin starving to death . Helicopters were initially sent to the remote areas , though severe fog and heavy rainfall after the hurricane grounded the operations . The government worked to bring food to remote mountain communities , though officials noted the serious risk in doing so . 
 Three days after the hurricane , the American Red Cross sent an initial donation of $ 25 @,@ 000 ( 1997 USD ) , and also sent plastic sheets for temporary roofing and cleaning supplies such as mops , brooms , buckets , sponges , bleach , and cleaning chemicals . Local chapters also offered assistance . The chapter in San Antonio , Texas sent cleaning kits , and the chapter in Los Angeles delivered 2 @,@ 000 comfort kits containing hygiene supplies and crossword puzzles for children . The German Red Cross also offered assistance . 
 = = = Diseases = = = 
 The floodwaters from the hurricane combined with raw sewage in many poor areas of southwestern Mexico , leading to a widespread threat for a spread of tropical diseases . As a result , government health workers opened vaccination centers in several cities along the Guerrero and Oaxaca coasts . Thousands were inoculated for typhoid fever and tetanus . Officials noted a potential threat for dengue and cholera as a result of the spoiled water . Health workers also stated mosquitos possessing malaria and dengue fever were likely to breed in large areas of leftover water . In Acapulco , about two days after the hurricane passed , the first day of sun in a week evaporated the areas of leftover water , spreading dust across the region with the deadly diseases . Residents were warned to boil their food and water for 30 minutes due to the threat for contamination by the dust . At least twenty cases of cholera and at least six cases of dengue fever were reported . Most significantly , there were 14 @,@ 630 cases of malaria in 616 villages in Oaxaca due to Pauline ; this represented about 80 % of the malaria cases in Mexico during 1998 . Army soldiers distributed chlorine tablets to disinfect water pools and wheelbarrows to remove rotting mud and sewage from their damaged homes . Two C @-@ 130 Hercules planes and twenty helicopters airlifted food and water to smaller villages south of Acapulco that were stranded for nearly a week after the hurricane . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 Less than a month after Pauline , Hurricane Rick struck the same general region , which brought additional rainfall and hampered relief efforts . Compared to Pauline , however , damage was minimal . Because of the high death tolls and the extent of damage in Mexico , The name Pauline was retired in the spring of 1998 by the World Meteorological Organization and will never again be used for a Pacific hurricane . It was replaced by Patricia in the 2003 season . 
 = Junko Sakurada = 
 Junko Sakurada ( <unk> <unk> , Sakurada Junko , born 1958 ) is a Japanese singer and actress . She was part of a music trio in 1973 , which included <unk> Yamaguchi and Masako Mori . Sakurada then became successful in a solo music career , with 18 top ten singles in the 1970s . Her acting career ran from 1973 to 1993 . She received multiple awards for her acting roles , including the Hochi Film Award , Award of the Japanese Academy , Kinema Junpo Award , and Mainichi Film Concours . Following her marriage , in a Blessing ceremony of the Unification Church in 1992 , she retired from performing . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Sakurada was born in 1958 . She is a singer and actress . In 1973 , she was part of " a hit female trio " , which also included musicians <unk> Yamaguchi and Masako Mori . The music trio became popular as part of the television program Producing the Stars ( Star Tanjō ! ) ; they were known as " The Trio of Third @-@ Year Junior High School Students " ( " Hana no Chu 3 Trio " ) . According to Japan Pop ! : Inside the World of Japanese Popular Culture , after this experience in a music group , she went off on her own to develop a solo music career , and became a megastar . Cruising the Anime City : An Otaku Guide to Neo Tokyo described Sakurada as a 1970s music idol , like Pink Lady and Linda Yamamoto . 
 Throughout the 1970s she released a string of hit singles ; nine top 5 singles , and in total eighteen top 10 singles of which Hajimete No Dekigoto ( First Affair ) sold best , grossing over 527 @,@ 000 copies according to Oricon and peaking at number one . After winning the 4th edition of the Star Tanjō ! contest in 1972 , with highest ever points and jury votes , she released her first single in February 1973 called " Tenshi Mo Yume Miru " ( The Dreams of an Angel ) which was written by Yu Aku , and sold over 120 @,@ 000 copies while peaking at number 12 . With the release of her third single , " Watashi No Aoi Tori " ( My Bluebird ) , she won the prestigious Best Newcomer award the 15th edition of the Japan Record Award . In the winter of 1973 following 1974 the single " Hana Monogatari " ( Flower Fairy Tales ) was her first top ten hit single , which sold over 237 @,@ 000 copies . She participated for the first time at the 25th edition of the Kōhaku Uta Gassen festival in 1974 , with her hit single " Kiiroi Ribbon " ( Yellow Ribbon ) . She would perform for a total of 9 times at the festival . In that same year she also performed in Finland . 
 Following the success of her single " Hajimete No Dekigoto " , the song " Hitori <unk> " ( Walking Alone ) ( which was the theme song for her first ever movie production " Spoon Ippai No Shiawase " ( Spoonful of Happiness ) was released in March 1975 and peaked at number 4 , grossing over 350 @,@ 000 copies . She was the best selling Japanese female musical artist of 1975 , and 4th best selling of 1976 . In the summer of 1975 the single " <unk> No Natsu " ( Seventeen Summers ) was released , and became her second best selling single ; grossing over 404 @,@ 000 copies and peaking at number 2 on the Oricon charts . At the 17th edition of the Japan Record Awards " <unk> No Natsu " won her the award for most popular artist voted by the public . In the fall of the same year she was awarded at the 6th edition of the Japan Music Awards for her single " Tenshi No Kuchibiru " ( Lips of an Angel ) , which sold over 281 @,@ 000 copies and peaked at number 4 on the charts . 
 After scoring a string of hits in 1976 and 1977 ( most notably " Natsu Ni <unk> " ( Beware of the Summer ) which sold 360 @,@ 000 copies , " Ki Ga <unk> Yo " ( I <unk> ) which sold 286 @,@ 000 copies and " Kimagure Venus " ( Whimsical Venus ) which sold 210 @,@ 000 copies ) she was again awarded at the 20th edition of the Japan Record Awards for her single " Shiawase Shibai " ( Pretending to be Happy ) which sold over 366 @,@ 000 copies and peaked at number 3 on the charts ( penned by Miyuki Nakajima ) with a gold medal . She would score her last top 10 hit single in the summer of 1978 with the disco inspired single " Lipstick " , and would release her last single and album in 1983 . 
 Several of her singles have also been featured on the Japanese music show " The Best Ten " , which aired from 1978 up to 1989 . These include " Shiawase Shibai " ( peaking at no . 3 ) , " Oi <unk> Yokohama " ( peaking at no . 10 ) , " Lipstick " ( peaking at no . 8 ) , " <unk> Ni <unk> " ( peaking at no . 11 ) , " Fuyu Iro No Machi " ( peaking at no . 20 ) , and " Santa Monica No Kaze " ( peaking at no . 17 ) . 
 Sakurada 's acting career began in 1973 and lasted through 1993 , with roles in 13 films and many television dramas . She received multiple awards for her acting roles , including the Hochi Film Award , Award of the Japanese Academy , Kinema Junpo Award , and Mainichi Film Concours . In 1991 , her memoir , Gift God Gave Me , was published and the media reported that she had become a " movie heartthrob " . 
 Sakurada is a member of the Unification Church founded by Sun Myung Moon in Seoul , South Korea in 1954 . According to The Washington Times , which is owned by the Unification Church affiliated News World Communications , Sakurada joined the church in 1977 . 
 In August 1992 , Sakurada took part in a Blessing ceremony of the Unification Church in Seoul , South Korea along with 10 @,@ 000 other couples representing 131 nations . Her husband is a Japanese businessman who is also a Unification Church member and an official within the church . Sakurada said to journalists that she felt " very happy " to have married a husband selected for her by Moon . 
 According to The Australian , " Ms Sakurada disappeared from public life soon after the ceremony . " One of Sakurada 's last roles as a star was in the television piece Don 't Call Me Auntie ( <unk> <unk> <unk> de ) on NHK . According to The Daily Yomiuri , " This was one of Junko Sakurada 's last starring roles before she fell out of favor with the public . Since she took part in the Rev. Moon 's Unification Church mass marriage in Seoul in August , it is said that her commercial contracts have evaporated . " In 1999 a church spokesperson said : " Ms Sakurada is living happily with her husband and three children . She does not want to talk to the press . " 
 In November 2006 , she released a book titled " <unk> Jun Van <unk> " . 
 = = Works = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Watashi No Aoi Tori ( 1973 ) , winner of the newcomer 's prize at the Japan Record Awards 
 Hana Monogatari ( 1973 ) , rose to the Oricon best ten 
 Hajimete no Dekigoto ( 1975 ) , reached Oricon # 1 
 Natsu Ni <unk> ( 1976 ) , prizewinning performance 
 Kimagure Venus ( 1977 ) , nominated for a Japan Record Award 
 Shiawase Shibai ( 1977 ) , gold medal at Japan Record Awards 
 Lipstick ( 1978 ) 
 Santa Monica No Kaze ( 1979 ) , won Producers ' Association award at Japan Song Awards 
 <unk> ( 1981 ) 
 Kōhaku Uta Gassen 
 Kiiroi Ribbon ( <unk> ) ( 1974 ) 
 Hajimete no Dekigoto ( <unk> ) ( 1975 ) 
 Natsu ni go <unk> ( <unk> ) ( 1976 ) 
 Kimagure Venus ( <unk> ) ( 1977 ) 
 Shiawase Shibai ( <unk> ) ( 1978 ) 
 Santa Monica no Kaze ( <unk> ) ( 1979 ) 
 <unk> Natsu ( <unk> ) ( 1980 ) 
 This is a " Boogie " ( 1981 ) 
 <unk> to <unk> ( <unk> , Sailor Suit and Machine Gun ) ( 1982 ) 
 Charted Singles 
 Studio albums 
 Live Albums 
 Greatest Hits Releases 
 = = = Film = = = 
 Spoon Ippai no Shiawase ( <unk> , Spoonful of Happiness ) ( Shochiku , 1975 ) 
 Otoko wa <unk> yo <unk> <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) ( Toho , 1975 ) 
 Hana no Kō ni <unk> - <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> ) ( Shochiku , 1975 ) 
 <unk> - Shiroi Shōjo ( <unk> ・ <unk> ) ( Shochiku , 1976 ) 
 Wakai Hito ( <unk> , Youth ) ( Toho , 1976 ) 
 <unk> no Sekkei ( <unk> , Love 's Plans ) ( Shochiku , 1977 ) 
 Ai no Arashi no Naka de ( <unk> , In the Storm of Love ) ( Toho , 1978 ) 
 <unk> no <unk> no Ie ( <unk> ) ( Toho , 1979 ) 
 <unk> ( <unk> , Turbulence ) ( Toei , 1980 ) 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) ( Toei , 1987 ) 
 Umi e see you ( <unk> see you , Across the Sea to See You ) ( Toho , 1988 ) 
 <unk> no <unk> ( <unk> , Good Person 's Terms ) ( Shochiku , 1989 ) 
 Hana no Furu Gogo ( <unk> , Afternoon of Falling Flowers ) ( Toho , 1989 ) 
 Aurora no Shita de ( <unk> , Beneath the Aurora ) ( Toei , 1990 ) 
 Shiroi Te ( <unk> , White Hand ) ( Toho , 1990 ) 
 <unk> - Wakai Hi no <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , Mandala - Kōbō @-@ Daishi 's Youth ) ( Toho @-@ Towa , 1991 ) 
 <unk> ( <unk> , Moving ) ( Kadokawa Pictures , 1993 ) 
 = = = Television = = = 
 <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) ( TV Asahi , 1973 ) 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) ( Nippon Television , 1974 ) 
 Wakai ! Sensei ( <unk> ! <unk> , Young ! Teacher ) ( TBS , 1974 ) 
 Tonari no Tonari ( <unk> , Near to Nearby ) ( Nippon Television , 1974 – 1975 ) 
 <unk> <unk> Tai ( <unk> , Aspiring Collaboration Party ) ( TBS , 1975 ) 
 Edo Professional - <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> , Edo Professional - Expert Assassin ) opening narrator ( ABC ( of Asahi ) and Shochiku , 1978 ) 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) ( Nippon Television , 1978 ) 
 Ai no <unk> ( <unk> , Education in Love ) ( TBS , 1980 ) 
 <unk> <unk> ... ( <unk> … , <unk> the Onion ... ) ( TBS , 1981 ) 
 Machi : <unk> @-@ tachi wa Ima ( <unk> ～ <unk> , Town : Young People , Now ) ( NHK , 1982 ) 
 Hara Peko <unk> ( <unk> , Hara Peko Comrade ) ( TBS , 1982 ) 
 Mito <unk> ( <unk> , Mito <unk> ) ( TBS and <unk> , 1982 ) 
 <unk> Kido <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , Surgeon <unk> Kido ) ( TBS , 1983 ) 
 Ōoku ( <unk> , Ōoku ) ( <unk> , 1984 ) 
 25 @-@ sai @-@ tachi : <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ～ <unk> , We 're 25 : Uncertain Premonition ) } ( NTV , 1984 ) 
 <unk> <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> Marriage ) ( TBS , 1985 ) 
 Kisetsu <unk> no <unk> ( <unk> , Season 's End Mirage ) ( NHK , 1985 ) 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) ( NHK morning drama , 1985 ) 
 <unk> Drama Special ( <unk> , Wednesday Drama Special ) ( TBS <unk> , 1986 ) 
 <unk> Masamune ( <unk> ) as Princess <unk> , wife of Masamune ( NHK Taiga drama , 1987 ) 
 New York Koi Monogatari ( <unk> , New York Love Story ) ( CX , 1988 ) 
 <unk> Genta 80 @-@ <unk> ( <unk> , Genta <unk> , <unk> ) ( NTV , 1989 ) 
 <unk> <unk> na Monogatari ( <unk> , Strange Tales of the World ) ( CX , 1990 ) 
 Otoko to Onna no Mystery ( <unk> , The Mystery of Man and Woman ) ( CX , 1991 ) 
 <unk> <unk> na Monogatari ( <unk> , Strange Tales of the World ) - 8 hours 50 minutes ( CX , 1991 ) 
 <unk> Mystery Gekijō ( <unk> , Tuesday Mystery Theatre ) （ ANB , 1991 ） 
 <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) ( CX , 1992 ) 
 <unk> <unk> ! ( <unk> ! , It 's Okay to Laugh ! ) ( four appearances ) 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Brigham Young University = 
 Brigham Young University ( often referred to as BYU or , colloquially , The Y ) is a private research university located in Provo , Utah , United States . It is owned and operated by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( LDS Church ) , and , excluding online students , is the largest of any religious university and the third largest private university in the United States , with 29 @,@ 672 on @-@ campus students . Approximately 99 percent of the students are members of the LDS Church , and one @-@ third of its US students are from Utah . 
 Students attending BYU are required to follow an honor code , which mandates behavior in line with LDS teachings such as academic honesty , adherence to dress and grooming standards , and abstinence from extramarital sex and from the consumption of drugs and alcohol . Many students ( 88 percent of men , 33 percent of women ) either delay enrollment or take a hiatus from their studies to serve as Mormon missionaries . ( Men typically serve for two @-@ years , while women serve for 18 months . ) An education at BYU is also less expensive than at similar private universities , since " a significant portion " of the cost of operating the university is subsidized by the church 's tithing funds . 
 BYU offers programs in liberal arts , engineering , agriculture , management , physical and mathematical sciences , nursing and law . The university is broadly organized into 11 colleges or schools at its main Provo campus , with certain colleges and divisions defining their own admission standards . The university also administers two satellite campuses , one in Jerusalem and one in Salt Lake City , while its parent organization , the Church Educational System ( CES ) , sponsors sister schools in Hawaii and Idaho . The university 's primary focus is on undergraduate education , but it also has 68 master 's and 25 doctoral degree programs . 
 BYU 's athletic teams compete in Division I of the NCAA and are collectively known as the BYU Cougars . Their college football team is an NCAA Division I Independent , while their other sports teams compete in either the West Coast Conference or Mountain Pacific Sports Federation . BYU 's sports teams have won a total of fourteen national championships . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early days = = = 
 Brigham Young University 's origin can be traced back to 1862 when a man named Warren Dusenberry started a Provo school in a prominent adobe building called Cluff Hall , which was located in the northeast corner of 200 East and 200 North . On October 16 , 1875 , Brigham Young , then president of the LDS Church , personally purchased the Lewis Building after previously hinting that a school would be built in Draper , Utah , in 1867 . Hence , October 16 , 1875 , is commonly held as BYU 's founding date . Said Young about his vision : " I hope to see an Academy established in Provo ... at which the children of the Latter @-@ day Saints can receive a good education unmixed with the pernicious atheistic influences that are found in so many of the higher schools of the country . " 
 The school broke off from the University of Deseret and became Brigham Young Academy , with classes commencing on January 3 , 1876 . Warren Dusenberry served as interim principal of the school for several months until April 1876 when Brigham Young 's choice for principal arrived — a German immigrant named Karl Maeser . Under Maeser 's direction the school educated many luminaries including future U.S. Supreme Court Justice George Sutherland and future U.S. Senator Reed Smoot among others . The school , however , did not become a university until the end of Benjamin Cluff , Jr 's term at the helm of the institution . At that time , the school was also still privately supported by members of the community and was not absorbed and sponsored officially by the LDS Church until July 18 , 1896 . A series of odd managerial decisions by Cluff led to his demotion ; however , in his last official act , he proposed to the Board that the Academy be named " Brigham Young University " . The suggestion received a large amount of opposition , with many members of the Board saying that the school wasn 't large enough to be a university , but the decision ultimately passed . One opponent to the decision , Anthon H. Lund , later said , " I hope their head will grow big enough for their hat . " 
 In 1903 , Brigham Young Academy was dissolved , and was replaced by two institutions : Brigham Young High School , and Brigham Young University . ( The BY High School class of 1907 was ultimately responsible for the famous giant " Y " that is to this day embedded on a mountain near campus . ) The Board elected George H. Brimhall as the new President of BYU . He had not received a high school education until he was forty . Nevertheless , he was an excellent orator and organizer . Under his tenure in 1904 the new Brigham Young University bought 17 acres ( 69 @,@ 000 m2 ) of land from Provo called " Temple Hill " . After some controversy among locals over BYU 's purchase of this property , construction began in 1909 on the first building on the current campus , the Karl G. Maeser Memorial . Brimhall also presided over the University during a brief crisis involving the theory of evolution . The religious nature of the school seemed at the time to collide with this scientific theory . Joseph F. Smith , LDS Church president , settled the question for a time by asking that evolution not be taught at the school . A few have described the school at this time as nothing more than a " religious seminary " . However , many of its graduates at this time would go on to great success and become well renowned in their fields . 
 = = = Expansion = = = 
 Franklin S. Harris was appointed the university 's president in 1921 . He was the first BYU president to have a doctoral degree . Harris made several important changes to the school , reorganizing it into a true university , whereas before , its organization had remnants of the Academy days . At the beginning of his tenure , the school was not officially recognized as a university by any accreditation organization . By the end of his term , the school was accredited under all major accrediting organizations at the time . He was eventually replaced by Howard S. McDonald , who received his doctorate from the University of California . When he first received the position , the Second World War had just ended , and thousands of students were flooding into BYU . By the end of his stay , the school had grown nearly five times to an enrollment of 5 @,@ 440 students . The university did not have the facilities to handle such a large influx , so he bought part of an Air Force Base in Ogden , Utah and rebuilt it to house some of the students . The next president , Ernest L. Wilkinson , also oversaw a period of intense growth , as the school adopted an accelerated building program . Wilkinson was responsible for the building of over eighty structures on the campus , many of which still stand . During his tenure , the student body increased six times , making BYU the largest private school at the time . The quality of the students also increased , leading to higher educational standards at the school . Finally , Wilkinson reorganized the LDS Church units on campus , with ten stakes and over 100 wards being added during his administration . 
 Dallin H. Oaks replaced Wilkinson as president in 1971 . Oaks continued the expansion of his predecessor , adding a law school and proposing plans for a new School of Management . During his administration , a new library was also added , doubling the library space on campus . Jeffrey R. Holland followed as president in 1980 , encouraging a combination of educational excellence and religious faith at the university . He believed that one of the school 's greatest strengths was its religious nature and that this should be taken advantage of rather than hidden . During his administration , the university added a campus in Jerusalem , now called the BYU Jerusalem Center . In 1989 , Holland was replaced by Rex E. Lee . Lee was responsible for the Benson Science Building and the Museum of Art on campus . A cancer victim , Lee is memorialized annually at BYU during a cancer fundraiser called the Rex Lee Run . Shortly before his death , Lee was replaced in 1995 by Merrill J. Bateman . 
 Bateman was responsible for the building of 36 new buildings for the university both on and off campus , including the expansion of the Harold B. Lee Library . He was also one of several key college leaders who brought about the creation of the Mountain West Conference , which BYU 's athletics program joined — BYU previously participated in the Western Athletic Conference . A BYU satellite TV network also opened in 2000 under his leadership . Bateman was also president during the September 11th attacks in 2001 . The planes crashed on a Tuesday , hours before the weekly devotional normally held at BYU . Previous plans for the devotional were altered , as Bateman led the student body in a prayer for peace . Bateman was followed by Cecil O. Samuelson in 2003 . Samuelson was succeeded by Kevin J Worthen in 2014 . 
 = = Academics = = 
 = = = Admissions and demographics = = = 
 BYU accepted 49 percent of the 11 @,@ 423 people who applied for admission in the summer term and fall semester of 2013 . The average GPA for these admitted students was 3 @.@ 82 . U.S. News and World Report describes BYU 's selectivity as being " more selective " and compares it with such universities as the University of Texas at Austin and The Ohio State University . In addition , BYU is ranked 26th in colleges with the most freshman Merit Scholars , with 88 in 2006 . BYU has one of the highest percentage of accepted applicants that go on to enroll ( 78 percent in 2010 ) . 
 Students from every state in the U.S. and from many foreign countries attend BYU . ( In the 2005 @-@ 6 academic year , there were 2 @,@ 396 foreign students , or eight ( 8 ) percent of enrollment . ) Slightly more than 98 percent of these students are active members of the LDS Church . In 2006 , 12 @.@ 6 percent of the student body reported themselves as ethnic minorities , mostly Asians , Pacific islanders and Hispanics . 
 = = = Graduation honors = = = 
 Undergraduate students may qualify for graduation honors . University Honors is the highest distinction BYU awards its graduates . Administered by the Honors Program , the distinction requires students to complete an honors curriculum requirement , a Great Questions requirement , an Experiential Learning requirement , an honors thesis requirement , and a graduation portfolio that summarizes the student 's honors experiences . 
 The university also awards Latin scholastic distinctions separately from the Honors Program : summa cum laude ( top 1 percent ) , magna cum laude ( top 5 percent ) , and cum laude ( top 10 percent ) . The university additionally recognizes Phi Kappa Phi graduation honors . 
 = = = Rankings = = = 
 For 2016 , U.S. News & World Report ranked BYU as tied for 66th for national universities in the United States . A 2013 Quarterly Journal of Economics study of where the nation 's top high school students choose to enroll ranked BYU No. 21 in its peer @-@ reviewed study . The Princeton Review has ranked BYU the best value for college in 2007 , and its library is consistently ranked in the nation 's top ten — No. 1 in 2004 and No. 4 in 2007 . BYU is also ranked No. 19 in the U.S. News and World Report 's " Great Schools , Great Prices " lineup , and No. 12 in lowest student @-@ incurred debt . Due in part to the school 's emphasis on undergraduate research , in rankings for 2008 @-@ 2009 , BYU was ranked No. 10 nationally for the number of students who go on to earn PhDs , No. 1 nationally for students who go on to dental school , No. 6 nationally for students who go on to law school , and No. 10 nationally for students who go on to medical school . BYU is designated as a research university with high research activity by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching . ] ] Forbes Magazine ranked it as the No. 1 " Top University to Work For in 2014 " and as the best college in Utah . 
 In 2009 , the university 's Marriott School of Management received a No. 5 ranking by BusinessWeek for its undergraduate programs , and its MBA program was ranked by several sources : No. 22 ranking by BusinessWeek , No. 16 by Forbes , and No. 29 by U.S. News & World Report . Among regional schools the MBA program was ranked No. 1 by The Wall Street Journal 's most recent ranking ( 2007 ) , and it was ranked No. 92 among business schools worldwide in 2009 by Financial Times . For 2009 , the university 's School of Accountancy , which is housed within the Marriott School , received two No. 3 rankings for its undergraduate program — one by Public Accounting Report and the other by U.S. News & World Report . The same two reporting agencies also ranked the school 's MAcc program No. 3 and No. 8 in the nation , respectively . In 2010 , an article in the Wall Street Journal listing institutions whose graduates were the top @-@ rated by recruiters ranked BYU No. 11 . Using 2010 fiscal year data , the Association of University Technology Managers ranked BYU No. 3 in an evaluation of universities creating the most startup companies through campus research . 
 = = = Notable research and awards = = = 
 Scientists associated with BYU have created some notable inventions . Philo T. Farnsworth , inventor of the electronic television , received his education at BYU , and later returned to do fusion research , receiving an honorary degree from the university . Harvey Fletcher , also an alumnus of BYU , inventor of stereophonic sound , went on to carry out the now famous oil @-@ drop experiment with Robert Millikan , and was later Founding Dean of the BYU College of Engineering . H. Tracy Hall , inventor of the man @-@ made diamond , left General Electric in 1955 and became a full professor of chemistry and Director of Research at BYU . While there , he invented a new type of diamond press , the tetrahedral press . In student achievements , BYU Ad Lab teams won both the 2007 and 2008 L 'Oréal National <unk> Competition , and students developed the Magnetic Lasso algorithm found in Adobe Photoshop . In prestigious scholarships , BYU has produced 10 Rhodes Scholars , four Gates Scholars in the last six years , and in the last decade has claimed 41 Fulbright scholars and 3 Jack Kent Cooke scholars . 
 = = = International focus = = = 
 Over three quarters of the student body has some proficiency in a second language ( numbering 107 languages in total ) . This is partially due to the fact that 45 percent of the student body at BYU has been missionaries for LDS Church , and many of them learned a foreign language as part of their mission assignment . During any given semester , about one @-@ third of the student body is enrolled in foreign language classes , a rate nearly four times the national average . BYU offers courses in over 60 different languages , many with advanced courses that are seldom offered elsewhere . Several of its language programs are the largest of their kind in the nation , the Russian program being one example . The university was selected by the United States Department of Education as the location of the national Middle East Language Resource Center , making the school a hub for experts on that region . It was also selected as a Center for International Business Education Research , a function of which is to train business employees in international languages and relations . 
 Beyond this , BYU also runs a very large study abroad program , with satellite centers in London , Jerusalem , and Paris , as well as more than 20 other sites . Nearly 2 @,@ 000 students take advantage of these programs yearly . In 2001 , the Institute of International Education ranked BYU as the number one university in the U.S. to offer students study abroad opportunities . The BYU Jerusalem Center , which was closed in 2000 due to student security concerns related to the Second Intifada and , more recently , the 2006 Israel @-@ Lebanon conflict , was reopened to students in the Winter 2007 semester . 
 A few special additions enhance the language @-@ learning experience . For example , BYU 's International Cinema , featuring films in several languages , is the largest and longest @-@ running university @-@ run foreign film program in the country . As already noted , BYU also offers an intensive foreign language living experience , the Foreign Language Student Residence . This is an on @-@ campus apartment complex where students commit to speak only their chosen foreign language while in their apartments . Each apartment has at least one native speaker to ensure correct language usage . 
 = = = Academic freedom issues = = = 
 In 1992 , the university drafted a new Statement on Academic Freedom , specifying that limitations may be placed upon " expression with students or in public that : ( 1 ) contradicts or opposes , rather than analyzes or discusses , fundamental Church doctrine or policy ; ( 2 ) deliberately attacks or derides the Church or its general leaders ; or ( 3 ) violates the Honor Code because the expression is dishonest , illegal , unchaste , profane , or unduly disrespectful of others . " These restrictions have caused some controversy as several professors have been disciplined according to the new rule . The American Association of University Professors has claimed that " infringements on academic freedom are distressingly common and that the climate for academic freedom is distressingly poor . " The new rules have not affected BYU 's accreditation , as the university 's chosen accrediting body allows " religious colleges and universities to place limitations on academic freedom so long as they publish those limitations candidly " , according to associate academic vice president Jim Gordon . The AAUP 's concern was not with restrictions on the faculty member 's religious expression but with a failure , as alleged by the faculty member and AAUP , that the restrictions had not been adequately specified in advance by BYU : " The AAUP requires that any doctrinal limitations on academic freedom be laid out clearly in writing . We [ AAUP ] concluded that BYU had failed to do so adequately . " 
 = = Organization and administration = = 
 Brigham Young University is a part of the Church Educational System of LDS Church . It is organized under a Board of Trustees , with the President of the Church ( currently Thomas S. Monson ) as chairman . This board consists of the same people as the Church Board of Education , a pattern that has been in place since 1939 . Prior to 1939 , BYU had a separate board of trustees that was subordinate to the Church Board of Education . The President of BYU , currently Kevin J Worthen , reports to the Board , through the Commissioner of Education . 
 The university operates under 11 colleges or schools , which collectively offer 194 bachelor 's degree programs , 68 master 's degree programs , 25 PhD programs , and a Juris Doctor program . BYU also manages some courses and majors through the David M. Kennedy Center for International Studies and " miscellaneous " college departments , including Undergraduate Education , Graduate Studies , Independent Study , Continuing Education , and the Honors Program . BYU 's Winter semester ends earlier than most universities in April since there is no Spring break , thus allowing students to pursue internships and other summer activities earlier . A typical academic year is broken up into two semesters : Fall ( September – December ) and Winter ( January – April ) , as well as two shorter terms during the summer months : Spring ( May – June ) and Summer ( July – August ) . 
 = = Campus = = 
 The main campus in Provo , Utah , United States sits on approximately 560 acres ( 2 @.@ 3 km2 ) nestled at the base of the Wasatch Mountains and includes 295 buildings . The buildings feature a wide variety of architectural styles , each building being built in the style of its time . The grass , trees , and flower beds on BYU 's campus are impeccably maintained . Furthermore , views of the Wasatch Mountains , ( including Mount Timpanogos ) can be seen from the campus . BYU 's Harold B. Lee Library ( also known as " HBLL " ) , which The Princeton Review ranked as the No. 1 " Great College Library " in 2004 , has approximately 8 ½ million items in its collections , contains 98 miles ( 158 km ) of shelving , and can seat 4 @,@ 600 people . The Spencer W. Kimball Tower , shortened to <unk> and pronounced <unk> by many students , is home to several of the university 's departments and programs and is the tallest building in Provo , Utah . Furthermore , BYU 's Marriott Center , used as a basketball arena , can seat over 22 @,@ 000 and is one of the largest on @-@ campus arenas in the nation . Interestingly absent on the campus of this church owned university is a campus chapel . Notwithstanding , each Sunday LDS Church services for students are conducted on campus , but due to the large number of students attending these services , nearly all of the buildings and possible meeting spaces on campus are utilized ( in addition , many students attend services off campus in LDS chapels in the surrounding communities ) . 
 = = = Museums = = = 
 The campus is home to several museums containing exhibits from many different fields of study . BYU 's Museum of Art , for example , is one of the largest and most attended art museums in the Mountain West . This Museum aids in academic pursuits of students at BYU via research and study of the artworks in its collection . The Museum is also open to the general public and provides educational programming . The Museum of Peoples and Cultures is a museum of archaeology and ethnology . It focuses on native cultures and artifacts of the Great Basin , American Southwest , Mesoamerica , Peru , and Polynesia . Home to more than 40 @,@ 000 artifacts and 50 @,@ 000 photographs , it documents BYU 's archaeological research . The BYU Museum of Paleontology was built in 1976 to display the many fossils found by BYU 's Dr. James A. Jensen . It holds many artifacts from the Jurassic Period ( 210 @-@ 140 million years ago ) , and is one of the top five collections in the world of fossils from that time period . It has been featured in magazines , newspapers , and on television internationally . The museum receives about 25 @,@ 000 visitors every year . The Monte L. Bean Life Science Museum was formed in 1978 . It features several forms of plant and animal life on display and available for research by students and scholars . 
 The campus also houses several performing arts facilities . The de Jong Concert Hall seats 1282 people and is named for Gerrit de Jong Jr . The Pardoe Theatre is named for T. Earl and Kathryn Pardoe . Students use its stage in a variety of theatre experiments , as well as for Pardoe Series performances . It seats 500 people , and has quite a large stage with a proscenium opening of 19 by 55 feet ( 17 m ) . The <unk> Theatre was named for Philip N. <unk> , a prominent Utah theatre figure . A smaller , black box theater , it allows a variety of seating and staging formats . It seats 125 , and measures 30 by 50 feet ( 15 m ) . The <unk> Theatre , named for one of BYU 's first drama teachers , is used largely for instruction in experimental theater . It seats 280 . 
 = = = Student housing = = = 
 Single students have four options for on @-@ campus housing : Heritage Halls , Helaman Halls , Wyview Park , and the <unk> . Married students can live in Wymount Terrace . 
 Heritage Halls is a twenty @-@ four @-@ building housing complex on campus which offers apartment @-@ style living . The halls house both male and female students , divided by gender into separate buildings . Each building has ten to fourteen units capable of housing six people each . 
 Helaman Halls is a slightly newer complex which underwent a 12 @-@ year renovation between 1991 and 2004 . Helaman Halls is a nine @-@ building ( ninth opened in the summer of 2010 ) , dormitory @-@ style living area . Residents share a room ( larger than Heritage Halls ) with one other resident , but do not have their own kitchen and use shared bathrooms . Residents are required to have a meal plan , and eat at the newly remodeled Commons at the Cannon Center . 
 Wyview Park was originally built for families in 1996 , but this changed in 2006 when the complex began housing single students in order to counteract loss of singles ' housing in other areas . Wyview Park has 30 buildings that offer apartment @-@ style living for students , along with the option for shared or single rooms . 
 The Foreign Language Student Residence complex has twenty @-@ five apartments where students speak exclusively in a selected foreign language . The immersion experience is available in nine languages , and students are accompanied by a native resident throughout the year to enhance the experience . 
 Married students can house in Wymount Terrace , which contains a total of 462 apartments in 24 buildings . 
 Branches of the BYU Creamery provide basic food and general grocery products for students living in Heritage Halls , Helaman , Wymount , Wyview , and the <unk> . Helaman Halls is also served by a central cafeteria called the Cannon Center . The creamery , begun in 1949 , has become a BYU tradition and is also frequented by visitors to the university and members of the community . It was the first on @-@ campus full @-@ service grocery store in the country . 
 = = = Sustainability = = = 
 BYU has designated energy conservation , products and materials , recycling , site planning and building design , student involvement , transportation , water conservation , and zero waste events as top priority categories in which to further its efforts to be an environmentally sustainable campus . The university has stated that " we have a responsibility to be wise stewards of the earth and its resources . " BYU is working to increase the energy efficiency of its buildings by installing various speed drives on all pumps and fans , replacing incandescent lighting with fluorescent lighting , retrofitting campus buildings with low @-@ E reflective glass , and upgraded roof insulation to prevent heat loss . The student groups BYU <unk> , Eco @-@ Response , and BYU Earth educate students , faculty , staff , and administrators about how the campus can decrease its environmental impact . BYU <unk> spearheaded the recent campaign to begin recycling plastics , which the university did after a year of student campaigning . 
 = = Performing arts = = 
 = = = Dance = = = 
 The BYU Ballroom Dance Company is known as one of the best formation ballroom dance teams in the world , having won the U.S. National Formation Dance Championship every year since 1982 . BYU 's Ballroom dance team has won first place in Latin or Standard ( or both ) many times when they have competed at the Blackpool Dance Festival , and they were the first U.S. team to win the formation championships at the famed British Championships in Blackpool , England in 1972 . The <unk> National <unk> championships have been held at BYU for several years , and BYU holds dozens of ballroom dance classes each semester and is consequently the largest collegiate ballroom dance program in the world . In addition , BYU has a number of other notable dance teams and programs . These teams include the Theatre Ballet , Contemporary Dance Theatre , Living Legends , and International Folk Dance Ensemble . The Living Legends perform Latin , Native American , and Polynesian dancing . BYU boasts one of the largest dance departments in the nation . Many students from all different majors across campus participate in various dance classes each semester . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The Young Ambassadors are a song and dance performing group with a 50 @-@ year history at BYU . Prior to 1970 the group was known as Curtain Time USA . In the 1960s their world tour stops included Lebanon , Jordan , and Iraq . The group first performed as the Young Ambassadors at Expo ' 70 in Japan , and has since performed in over 56 nations . The royalty of Thailand and Jordan , along with persons of high office in countries such as India , have been among their audiences . 
 The BYU Opera Workshop gave the first North American performance of the Ralph Vaughan Williams opera The Pilgrim 's Progress in April 1968 , directed by Max C. Golightly . 
 BYU 's Wind Symphony and Chamber Orchestra have toured many countries including Denmark , Hong Kong , Russia , the British Isles , and Central Europe . The Symphonic Band is also an ensemble dedicated to developing the musician , but with a less strenuous focus on performance . Additionally , BYU has a marching band program called the Cougar Marching Band . 
 BYU has a choral program with over 500 members . The four BYU auditioned choirs include the 40 @-@ member BYU Singers , the 90 @-@ member BYU Concert Choir , the 200 @-@ member BYU Men 's Chorus ( the largest male collegiate choir in the U.S. ) , and the 190 @-@ member BYU Women 's Chorus . Both the BYU Men 's Chorus and BYU Singers have toured across the United States and around the globe . Each of the four groups has recorded several times under BYU 's label Tantara Records . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 BYU has 21 NCAA varsity teams . Nineteen of these teams played mainly in the Mountain West Conference from its inception in 1999 until the school left that conference in 2011 . Prior to that time BYU teams competed in the Western Athletic Conference . All teams are named the " Cougars " , and Cosmo the Cougar has been the school 's mascot since 1953 . The school 's fight song is the Cougar Fight Song . Because many of its players serve on full @-@ time missions for two years ( men when they 're 18 , women when 19 ) , BYU athletes are often older on average than other schools ' players . The NCAA allows students to serve missions for two years without subtracting that time from their eligibility period . This has caused minor controversy , but is largely recognized as not lending the school any significant advantage , since players receive no athletic and little physical training during their missions . BYU has also received attention from sports networks for refusal to play games on Sunday , as well as expelling players due to honor code violations . Beginning in the 2011 season , BYU football competes in college football as an independent . In addition , most other sports now compete in the West Coast Conference . Teams in swimming and diving and indoor track and field for both men and women joined the men 's volleyball program in the Mountain Pacific Sports Federation . For outdoor track and field , the Cougars became an Independent . Softball returned to the Western Athletic Conference , but spent only one season in the WAC ; the team moved to the Pacific Coast Softball Conference after the 2012 season . The softball program may move again after the 2013 season ; the July 2013 return of Pacific to the WCC will enable that conference to add softball as an official sport . 
 Most recently BYU had a standout basketball player , <unk> <unk> , who in 2011 was named NCAA player of the year for basketball and led the nation in scoring . 
 The BYU men 's lacrosse club team competes in the Rocky Mountain Lacrosse Conference of the Men 's Collegiate Lacrosse Association ( <unk> ) , 
 = = Student life = = 
 = = = LDS atmosphere = = = 
 BYU 's stated mission " is to assist individuals in their quest for perfection and eternal life . " BYU is thus considered by its leaders to be at heart a religious institution , wherein , ideally , religious and secular education are interwoven in a way that encourages the highest standards in both areas . This weaving of the secular and the religious aspects of a religious university goes back as far as Brigham Young himself , who told Karl G. Maeser when the Church purchased the school : " I want you to remember that you ought not to teach even the alphabet or the multiplication tables without the Spirit of God . " 
 BYU has been considered by some Latter @-@ day Saints , as well as some university and church leaders , to be " The Lord 's university " . This phrase is used in reference to the school 's mission as an " ambassador " to the world for the LDS Church and thus , for Jesus Christ . In the past , some students and faculty have expressed dissatisfaction with this nickname , stating that it gives students the idea that university authorities are always divinely inspired and never to be contradicted . Leaders of the school , however , acknowledge that the nickname represents more a goal that the university strives for and not its current state of being . Leaders encourage students and faculty to help fulfill the goal by following the teachings of their religion , adhering to the school 's honor code , and serving others with the knowledge they gain while attending . 
 BYU mandates that its students who are members of the LDS Church be religiously active . Both LDS and Non @-@ LDS students are required to provide an endorsement from an ecclesiastic leader with their application for admittance . Over 900 rooms on BYU campus are used for the purposes of LDS Church congregations . More than 150 congregations meet on BYU campus each Sunday . " BYU 's campus becomes one of the busiest and largest centers of worship in the world " with about 24 @,@ 000 persons attending church services on campus . 
 Some 97 percent of male BYU graduates and 32 percent of female graduates took a hiatus from their undergraduate studies at one point to serve as LDS missionaries . In October 2012 , the LDS Church announced at its general conference that young men could serve a mission after they turn 18 and have graduated from high school , rather than after age 19 under the old policy . Many young men would often attend a semester or two of higher education prior to beginning missionary service . This policy change will likely impact what has been the traditional incoming freshman class at BYU . Female students may now begin their missionary service anytime after turning 19 , rather than age 21 under the previous policy . For males , a full @-@ time mission is two years in length , and for females it lasts 18 months . 
 = = = Honor code = = = 
 All students and faculty , regardless of religion , are required to agree to adhere to an honor code . Early forms of the Church Educational System Honor Code are found as far back as the days of the Brigham Young Academy and early school President Karl G. Maeser . Maeser created the " Domestic Organization " , which was a group of teachers who would visit students at their homes to see that they were following the schools moral rules prohibiting obscenity , profanity , smoking , and alcohol consumption . The Honor Code itself was not created until about 1940 , and was used mainly for cases of cheating and academic dishonesty . President Wilkinson expanded the Honor Code in 1957 to include other school standards . This led to what the Honor Code represents today : rules regarding chastity , dress , grooming , drugs , and alcohol . A signed commitment to live the honor code is part of the application process , and must be adhered by all students , faculty , and staff . Students and faculty found in violation of standards are either warned or called to meet with representatives of the Honor Council . In certain cases , students and faculty can be expelled from the school or lose tenure . Both LDS and non @-@ LDS students are required to meet annually with a Church leader to receive an ecclesiastical endorsement for both acceptance and continuance . 
 Controversy has grown in since 2014 surrounding the school 's honor code , as evidenced by growing national attention paid by national news media and the American Bar Association . Various LGBT advocacy groups have protested the honor code and criticized it as being anti @-@ gay , and The Princeton Review ranked BYU as the 3rd most LGBT @-@ unfriendly school in the United States . Beginning in 2014 and continuing through 2016 , several students have alleged that when they reported being raped , the school punished them for violating the honor code . Some students report that , having been victimized by a rapist , they are told they are now sinners . The atmosphere further prevents some students from being willing to tell the police of the crimes , a situation that local police have publicly deplored . 
 = = = Culture and activities = = = 
 BYU 's social and cultural atmosphere is unique . The high rate of enrollment at the university by members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( more than 98 percent ) results in an amplification of LDS cultural norms ; BYU was ranked by The Princeton Review in 2008 as 14th in the nation for having the happiest students and highest quality of life . However , the quirkiness and sometimes " too nice " culture is often caricatured , for example , in terms of marrying early and being very conservative . 
 One of the characteristics of BYU most often pointed out is its reputation for emphasizing a " marriage culture " . Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints highly value marriage and family , especially marriage within the faith . Approximately 51 percent of the graduates in BYU 's class of 2005 were married . This is compared to a national marriage average among college graduates of 11 percent . BYU students on average marry at the age of 22 , according to a 2005 study , while the national average age is 25 years for men and 27 years for women . 
 Many visitors to BYU , and Utah Valley as a whole , report being surprised by the culturally conservative environment . Brigham Young University 's Honor Code , which all BYU students agree to follow as a condition of studying at BYU , prohibits the consumption of alcoholic beverages , tobacco , etc . As mentioned earlier , The Princeton Review has rated BYU the " # 1 stone cold sober school " in the nation for several years running , an honor which the late LDS Church president Gordon B. Hinckley had commented on with pride . BYU 's 2014 " # 1 stone cold " sober rating marked the 17th year in a row that the school had earned that rating . BYU has used this and other honors awarded to the school to advertise itself to prospective students , showing that BYU is proud of the rating . According to the Uniform Crime Reports , incidents of crime in Provo are lower than the national average . Murder is rare , and robberies are about 1 / 10 the national average . Business Insider rated BYU as the # 1 safest college campus in the nation . 
 Many on @-@ campus student activities and clubs are organized by <unk> , the university 's official student association . A popular comedy club is Divine Comedy . 
 BYU sponsors a question @-@ answering service known as the " 100 Hour Board " . Previously an actual physical bulletin @-@ board located in the Wilkinson Student Center , it is currently hosted online : anyone with an account can go onto the website and ask a question , with topics ranging from BYU academic questions to questions about relationships or Church doctrine . The questions are answered in 100 hours by pseudo @-@ anonymous BYU students . It has been affiliated with The Universe since 2006 . 
 = = Media = = 
 The BYU Broadcasting Technical Operations Center is an HD production and distribution facility that is home to local PBS affiliate KBYU @-@ TV , local classical music station KBYU @-@ FM Classical 89 , BYU Radio , BYU Radio Instrumental , BYU Radio International , <unk> and BYU Television International with content in Spanish and Portuguese ( both available via terrestrial , satellite , and internet signals ) . <unk> is also available via cable throughout some areas of the United States . The BYU Broadcasting Technical Operations Center is home to three television production studios , two television control rooms , radio studios , radio performance space , and master control operations . 
 The university produces a weekly newspaper called The Universe ( it was published daily until 2012 ) , maintains an online news site that is regularly updated called The Digital Universe and has a daily news program broadcast via KBYU @-@ TV . The university also has a recording label called Tantara Records which is run by the BYU School of Music and promotes the works of student ensembles and faculty . 
 = = Alumni = = 
 As of November 2007 , BYU has approximately 362 @,@ 000 living alumni . Alumni relations are coordinated and activities are held at the new Gordon B. Hinckley Alumni and Visitors Center . 
 Over 21 BYU graduates have served in the U.S. Senate and U.S. House of Representatives , such as former Dean of the U.S. Senate Reed Smoot ( class of 1876 ) . Cabinet members of American presidents include former Secretary of Agriculture to President Dwight D. Eisenhower , Ezra Taft Benson ' 26 and Rex E. Lee ' 60 , who was United States Solicitor General under President Ronald Reagan . Mitt Romney , former Governor of Massachusetts and 2012 Republican Presidential Candidate , class of 1971 . 
 BYU alumni in academia include former Dean of the Harvard Business School Kim B. Clark , two time world 's most influential business thinker Clayton M. Christensen , Michael K. Young ' 73 , current president of the University of Washington , Matthew S. Holland , current president of Utah Valley University , Stan L. Albrecht , current president of Utah State University , <unk> Felin , Professor at the University of Oxford , and Stephen D. <unk> , previous president of Dixie State University . The University also graduated Nobel Prize winner Paul D. Boyer , as well as Philo Farnsworth ( inventor of the electronic television ) and Harvey Fletcher ( inventor of the hearing aid ) . Four of BYU 's thirteen presidents were alumni of the University . Additionally , alumni of BYU who have served as business leaders include Citigroup CFO Gary Crittenden ' 76 , former Dell CEO Kevin Rollins ' 84 , Deseret Book CEO Sheri L. Dew , and Matthew K. McCauley , CEO of children 's clothing company <unk> . 
 In literature and journalism , BYU has produced several best @-@ selling authors , including Orson Scott Card ' 75 , Brandon Sanderson ' 00 & ' 05 , Ben English ' 98 , and Stephenie Meyer ' 95 . BYU also graduated American activist and contributor for ABC News Elizabeth Smart @-@ Gilmour . Other media personalities include former CBS News correspondent Art <unk> , award @-@ winning ESPN sportscaster and former Miss America Sharlene Wells Hawkes ' 86 and former co @-@ host of CBS 's The Early Show Jane Clayson Johnson ' 90 . In entertainment and television , BYU is represented by Jon Heder ' 02 ( best known for his role as Napoleon Dynamite ) , writer @-@ director <unk> Tufts ' 98 , Golden Globe @-@ nominated Aaron Eckhart ' 94 , animator and filmmaker Don Bluth ' 54 , Jeopardy ! all @-@ time champion Ken Jennings ' 00 , and Richard Dutcher , the " Father of Mormon Cinema . " In the music industry BYU is represented by lead singer of the Grammy Award winning band Imagine Dragons Dan Reynolds , multi @-@ platinum selling drummer Elaine Bradley from the band Neon Trees , crossover dubstep violinist Lindsey Stirling , former American Idol contestant Carmen <unk> , Mormon Tabernacle Choir director Mack <unk> and pianist Massimiliano <unk> . 
 BYU has also produced many religious leaders . Among the alumni are several LDS Church general authorities , including two church presidents : Ezra Taft Benson ' 26 , and Thomas S. Monson ' 74 ) , six apostles ( Neil L. Andersen , D. Todd Christofferson ' 69 , David A. Bednar ' 76 , Jeffrey R. Holland ' 65 & ' 66 , Dallin H. Oaks ' 54 , and Reed Smoot 1876 ) , and two general presidents of the Relief Society ( Julie B. Beck ' 73 and Belle Spafford ' 20 ) . 
 A number of BYU alumni have found success in professional sports , representing the University in 7 MLB World Series , 5 NBA Finals , and 25 NFL Super Bowls . In baseball , BYU alumni include All @-@ Stars Rick Aguilera ' 83 , Wally Joyner ' 84 , and Jack Morris ' 76 . Professional basketball players include three @-@ time NBA champion Danny Ainge ' 81 , 1952 NBA Rookie of the Year and 4 @-@ time NBA All @-@ Star Mel Hutchins ' 51 , three @-@ time Olympic medalist and Hall of Famer Krešimir Ćosić ' 73 , and consensus 2011 national college player of the year <unk> <unk> ' 11 , currently with the New York Knicks organization . BYU also claims notable professional football players including two @-@ time NFL MVP and Super Bowl MVP and Pro Football Hall of Fame quarterback Steve Young ' 84 & J.D. ' 96 , Heisman Trophy winner Ty Detmer ' 90 , and two @-@ time Super Bowl winner Jim McMahon . In golf , BYU alumni include two major championship winners : Johnny Miller ( ' 69 ) at the 1973 U.S. Open and 1976 British Open and Mike Weir ( ' 92 ) at the 2003 Masters . 
 = Ron Swanson = 
 Ronald Ulysses " Ron " Swanson is a fictional character portrayed by Nick Offerman from the situation comedy television series Parks and Recreation on NBC , created by Greg Daniels and Michael Schur . In the series , Ron is the director of the Parks and Recreation department of fictional Pawnee , Indiana , and the immediate superior of series protagonist Leslie Knope ( Amy Poehler ) until Knope 's election to the Pawnee City Council at the end of Season 4 . In demeanor , political philosophy and work ethic , Knope and Swanson are very nearly polar opposites : where Knope is sunny and outgoing , decidedly liberal and constantly working , Swanson is distant , and as a staunch libertarian , is a strong advocate for small government — stating his belief that government should be privatized — and therefore believes that the parks department should not even exist . 
 Ron , who has an extremely deadpan and masculine personality , actively works to make city hall less effective and despises interacting with the public . He loves meat , woodworking , hunting , whisky , and breakfast foods . He hates and fears his two ex @-@ wives , both named Tammy , one of whom is played by Offerman 's real @-@ life wife , Megan Mullally . Ron claims not to be interested in the personal lives of those around him but actually cares a great deal about his colleagues , and has a particularly strong respect for Leslie . 
 Conceived by series creators Michael Schur and Greg Daniels , Ron has been a central character since the pilot episode of Parks and Recreation . Offerman had some input into the character 's creation , and some aspects of Ron 's personality were inspired by the actor , like his affinity for woodworking and 16 @-@ year @-@ old Lagavulin Single Malt Scotch . The traits of the character were also partially inspired by a real @-@ life Libertarian elected official in Burbank , California . 
 Offerman 's portrayal of Ron Swanson has received critical acclaim . The character developed a cult following and is widely considered the breakout character of the series . Schur called Ron " our cast MVP . " He was described by some critics as one of the best characters in a situation comedy in decades , and has been called the best comedic character on television since Cosmo Kramer of Seinfeld . Ron 's platonic relationship with Leslie has been compared to that of Mary Richards and Lou Grant in The Mary Tyler Moore Show . Offerman received several award nominations for the role , and won the TCA Award for Individual Achievement in Comedy , tying with Ty Burrell of Modern Family . 
 = = Background = = 
 Despite Ron being a very private person , including getting his birthdate redacted from all public documents , his background does occasionally come up . He was born in a small town to Tamara Swanson ( referred to as " Tammy 0 " by Ron ) and a father unnamed in the series . He grew up on a farm in a small town and is shown to have enjoyed woodworking from an early age , building his first chair at age five . Ron is opposed to child labor laws , stating he got his first job at a sheet metal factory at age nine and , in two weeks , was running the floor . Ron says that at age eleven , he was offered a higher paying job at the tannery and attempted to do both jobs while going to middle school before realizing it would be better to only work at the sheet metal factory . Ron claimed that , at age 12 , he went to prom and was working at a quarry . Ron moved in with his first wife , Tammy 1 , who worked at the hospital he was born at and was his math and Sunday school teacher , when he was fifteen ; he has said that although the circumstances were considered scandalous , people were too afraid of her to say anything . Ron said that at age eighteen , his father wanted him to work at the steel mill , but he chose to go to college instead . 
 Ron Swanson had been director of Pawnee Parks and Recreation Department for six years at the time Parks and Recreation began . A staunch Libertarian , with a distinctive mustache , Ron is an extremely strong advocate for small government ; despite working in a city hall job , he believes all government is a waste of taxpayer money . Ron believes the park system should be privatized and run entirely by corporations for profit , as exemplified by the business model of the Chuck E. Cheese 's chain of family entertainment centers . He advocates for program cuts wherever possible , and purposely tries to hire people who are bad at their jobs so they will slow down the government . Ron puts almost no effort into his job , and lets his deputy director Leslie Knope ( Amy Poehler ) do the vast majority of the work . 
 Ron particularly despises talking to members of the public , which is why he deliberately designed his office to be uninviting to visitors , in part by mounting a double @-@ barreled , sawed @-@ off shotgun on a swivel atop his desk aimed at the guest chair , so it will be pointed at anyone who wants to speak to him , a claymore mine ( front @-@ pointed toward enemy ) , and a Czech hedgehog . Despite his lack of interest in the job , Ron occasionally demonstrates he is a good manager who recognizes the abilities of his co @-@ workers . He claims not to be interested in the personal lives of those around him , and that his best friend was a co @-@ worker he knew for three years without ever learning his name . However , Ron cares more about his colleagues than he lets on and often helps them in spite of himself . Despite sharing a nearly opposite view on the role of government , Ron gets along well with Knope , and the two share a strong mutual respect . Although Leslie had considered a job offer in the neighboring town of Eagleton , she stays based on advice from Ron that , no matter how many job offers she gets , Pawnee will always be her hometown . Ron also developed a grudging , avuncular affection for April 's husband , Andy Dwyer , and decided to give him the " Ron Swanson Scholarship " ( $ 940 ) so Andy can attend one college course : Women 's Studies , after Andy and April couldn 't afford to pay it . In the voiceover while Ron drops Andy off for his first day of class , he recalls his own first day of college when his father dropped him off at the steel mill . His father thought he shouldn 't bother with college , but Ron hitched a ride to the school and went anyway . 
 Ron speaks in a deadpan tone of voice and seldom expresses any kind of emotion . He adheres to many stereotypically masculine traits . He claims to have only cried twice : once when he was hit by a bus at age 7 ; secondly when miniature horse Li 'l Sebastian died . Ron is an outdoor enthusiast who loves hunting , fishing , camping , and woodworking . For years , Ron has used a park ranger station in the woods as a lodge for private hunting trips with his male colleagues at city hall . He describes fishing as " like yoga , except I still get to kill something . " He is particularly attracted to brunettes and what he describes as " strong , self @-@ possessed women at the top of their fields , " with professional athletes Steffi Graf and Sheryl Swoopes among his ideal women . He loves breakfast foods and red meats ; among the types of food he enjoys are bacon @-@ wrapped shrimp , fried turkey legs inside a grilled hamburger , and bacon @-@ wrapped turkey legs , which are known in Pawnee as " The Swanson . " He also drinks heavily but seldom feels the effects of alcohol or gets hung over . He primarily drinks scotch whisky , claiming that " Clear alcohols are for rich women on diets . " He is an extremely private person , going so far as to redact his birthday from government documents to keep others from holding parties for him ( though he did reluctantly provide it as " springtime " on a hospital admission form ) . Ron knows almost nothing about popular culture ; he recognizes the name Julia Roberts only as the " toothy gal from Mystic Pizza , " and he once confused the Star Wars film franchise with Harry Potter . He enjoys the music of Willie Nelson , being shown listening to " Hello Walls " and " Buddy " during the series . Ron is extremely concerned with the image people have of him and once refused to seek treatment for a hernia , and he instead chose to remain immobile at his desk all day and night ; until April offered to take him to the hospital . 
 Before the start of Parks and Recreation , Ron has two ex @-@ wives , both of whom are named Tammy , which is also the name of Ron 's mother . Ron despises and fears both of his ex @-@ wives , and they are among the few individuals in the world who can break Ron 's usually unwavering stoicism . Nevertheless , Ron shares an extremely passionate sexual connection with his second ex @-@ wife ; he compared having sex with her to " doing peyote and sneezing , slowly , for six hours , " and added , " That woman really knows her way around a penis . " Ron is so susceptible to Tammy 2 's sexual temptations that he made a video @-@ tape warning himself about her to play in case he ever got back together with her . Ron plays the saxophone , and secretly performs at out @-@ of @-@ town jazz clubs under the name Duke Silver , which he keeps secret from his colleagues in Pawnee . He wears a trilby hat and suit jacket while playing , fronts a band called the Duke Silver Trio , and has released such albums as Memories of Now , Smooth as Silver , and Hi Ho , Duke . His music is especially popular with older women ( among them being April 's mother ) , who find Duke Silver extremely attractive . 
 = = Storyline = = 
 = = = Season One = = = 
 Ron Swanson made his first appearance in the pilot episode of Parks and Recreation , where he repeatedly denies Leslie 's requests to pursue turning a construction pit into a park because he does not believe the parks department should build parks at all . He agrees to green @-@ light the project only when city planner Mark Brendanawicz ( Paul Schneider ) secretly cashes in an unspecified favor in exchange for the approval . In a deleted scene from the episode " Canvassing , " Ron tries to leave government employment for a previously offered job at an Internet flower company . However , when he finds that business is now doing extremely poorly , Ron sadly realizes he will be in his government job for a long time . In the episode " Boys ' Club , " Ron attends a disciplinary hearing with Leslie after she gets in trouble when the underage April Ludgate ( Aubrey Plaza ) is seen drinking alcohol on a video on the Pawnee website . Ron interrupts half @-@ way through the review , defends Leslie and angrily berates the panel for aggressively questioning her . Although Ron claims he did it only due to his hatred for bureaucratic procedures , it is implied that he really did so out of respect for Leslie . 
 = = = Season Two = = = 
 In " Practice Date , " when the parks department employees hold a contest to find who can learn the biggest secrets about each other , Ron discovers Tom 's marriage to the attractive surgeon Wendy ( Jama Williamson ) is actually a green card marriage . Ron promises he will keep Tom 's arrangement a secret . Later , Tom discovers Ron playing the saxophone at a bar in his Duke Silver persona . Tom agrees to keep Ron 's secret as well . Later in the season , when Tom 's divorce with Wendy is finalized in " Tom 's Divorce , " Ron politely asks whether Tom would mind if he asked Wendy out himself , and explains , " Looking at her , I feel like she might be the perfect <unk> size for me . " Tom outwardly claims to be fine with it but , unbeknownst to Ron , is secretly upset because he actually harbors real romantic feelings for Wendy . 
 Ron 's second ex @-@ wife , Pawnee library director Tammy ( Megan Mullally ) , appeared in the episode " Ron and Tammy , " where Tammy tricks Leslie into arranging a reunion meeting with Ron under the guise of wishing to work out her differences with him . In fact , Tammy schemed to get Ron to give her the rights to land Leslie plans to turn into a park , so Tammy can build a library branch there instead . During their meeting , Ron and Tammy start loudly arguing , but eventually have passionate sex and get back together . Unable to resist Tammy 's charms , Ron asks Leslie to break up with Tammy for him . When Leslie stands up to Tammy in Ron 's defense , he is moved by what he describes as the first time any woman has put his needs before her own , and it gives him the strength to finally break up with Tammy . 
 In " Hunting Trip , " Leslie insists that Ron take her and the other female parks department employees on one of his private hunting expeditions at the park ranger cabin . Ron begrudgingly agrees , but is frustrated to learn that Leslie is in fact an excellent hunter who overshadows his own abilities . During this trip , Ron is shot in the back of the head by misfired birdshot , and becomes hallucinatory and furious after taking multiple painkillers with alcohol . He initially accuses Leslie of shooting him based on her desire to prove herself , but later learns Tom was at fault and that Leslie took the blame to keep Tom from being arrested for hunting without a license . Ron is strongly impressed that Leslie defended Tom this way , and refers to her as " a stand @-@ up guy , " which leaves Leslie overjoyed . 
 In " The Set Up , " a new city @-@ wide effort is implemented to make government officials more accessible to Pawnee residents , an idea which Ron condemns as " my hell . " As a result , he seeks to hire an assistant who will shield him from the public and allow him to continue doing nothing . After interviewing several candidates , he chooses April Ludgate , convinced her constant apathy and negative attitude will suit him perfectly . Their relationship proves very harmonious until the episode " 94 Meetings , " when April accidentally schedules nearly 93 meetings not counting one with her , on a single day . April previously kept people who wanted to meet with Ron away by scheduling them for a meeting on March 31 , a date she wrongly believed was nonexistent . When March 31 actually comes around , Ron has to enroll help from others in the park department to handle the meetings . He becomes so furious with April that she quits , but Ron later apologizes and hires her back . 
 In " The Master Plan , " state auditors Chris Traeger ( Rob Lowe ) and Ben Wyatt ( Adam Scott ) arrive in Pawnee and announce that due to the city 's crippling budget problems , they have to slash each department budget by up to 50 percent and briefly shut down the government completely . While Leslie is horrified , the anti @-@ government Ron is delighted by the idea , becoming so giddy that he asks the auditors what cuts they will be making and if he can be allowed to " watch while eating pork <unk> . " In the season finale , " Freddy Spaghetti , " Ron is assigned to a committee tasked with identifying budget cuts , a job which he enjoys thoroughly . However , when Ben and Chris reveal they are considering firing Leslie , Ron passionately defends her and insists they should fire him instead . During the final scene of the episode and season , Tom spots Ron and Wendy together in city hall and realizes with horror that they are now dating . 
 = = = Season Three = = = 
 The third season opens with Ron seen begrudgingly returning to his city hall job after the Pawnee government has been shut down for three months . Ron starts to become a father figure of sorts to April and Andy ( Chris Pratt ) during the third season , despite his insistence that " I 'm not interested in caring about people . " When April is hospitalized with influenza in " Flu Season , " she starts to explain her relationship problems with Andy , but Ron insists he does not want to know about her private affairs . However , after Ron hires Andy to be her temporary replacement , the two spend the day bonding and Ron , against his better judgment , tells Andy that April is in the hospital and that he should visit her . Later in the season , in " Media Blitz , " Ron gets even further involved by chastising April for leading Andy on , and urges her to either forgive Andy or move on . His advice ultimately helps April decide to forgive Andy . 
 Ron finds himself very happy in his relationship with Wendy , although it creates tension between him and Tom . This tension culminates in " Ron & Tammy : Part Two , " when Tom brings Tammy to a party as his date simply to aggravate Ron . This occurs , however , the same day that Wendy and Ron break up , after she decides she must move back to Canada to care for her ailing parents . Ron and Tammy end up having a wild night of drinking and sex , in which Ron gets cornrows , he and Tammy get re @-@ married and the two end up in jail . The parks department employees hold an intervention to try to convince Ron to leave Tammy , but their efforts are unsuccessful . After Tom reveals that Tammy only went to the party with him to make Ron miserable , Tammy brutally beats up Tom . This makes Ron remember how horrible Tammy is and he leaves her , thus ending their marriage for a second time , and Ron and Tom later reconcile . 
 Shortly after Leslie successfully relaunches the Pawnee harvest festival , she struggles to find any new ideas for future parks project . She becomes so stressed that Ron , in the episode " Camping , " locks her in a room and refuses to let her out until she gets some sleep . She awakens the next day refreshed and full of ideas . Ron attends Andy and April 's wedding in " Andy and April 's Fancy Party , " where he has the first dance with April . When Leslie grows concerned they are rushing into their marriage , Ron insists it is not her place to say what works for them , and offers the advice : " Leslie I got married twice , both times I was a lot older than those two and both marriages ended in divorce ... and a burning effigy . Who 's to say what works ? You find somebody you like , and you roll the dice , its all anyone can do . " At which point Leslie Knope replies " Wait , weren 't you married 3 times ? " To which Ron replies " My God you 're right . I get to burn another effigy . " In " Eagleton , " Leslie discovers Ron 's birthday , which he previously kept secret , and he fearfully suspects Leslie is planning an extravagant party for him . However , her surprise party for Ron is instead a quiet , private one more appropriate for Ron 's personality : an evening alone with a steak , scotch , and copies of his favorite movies . 
 When city manager Chris Traeger tries to remove red meat from the city hall cafeteria as part of a government @-@ wide health initiative in " Soulmates , " Ron intervenes by challenging Chris to a cook @-@ off . Chris agrees to abandon his plan if Ron 's regular hamburgers are deemed better than his lean meat turkey burgers . Although Ron exerts little effort compared to Chris , his burgers easily win the contest . In " Road Trip , " Ron reluctantly agrees to be interviewed by a young girl for her school assignment , during which he explains his libertarian beliefs about small government , and illustrates the concept of taxes by eating 40 percent of her lunch . The two bond , and he ends the day by giving her a claymore landmine as a gift . Ron gets in trouble the next day when the girl 's mother explains her daughter 's assignment was " Why Government Matters , " and that Lauren simply wrote " It doesn 't . " 
 Ron learns in the third season finale , " Li 'l Sebastian , " that Leslie and Ben are secretly having an affair despite Chris ' ban on workplace romances , and he warns them they are risking a political scandal that could cost them their jobs . Later , at the funeral of Pawnee 's celebrity miniature horse Li 'l Sebastian , Ron is nearly killed as a result of Leslie and Ben 's affair . When their efforts to hide their relationship accidentally cause Li 'l Sebastian 's eternal flame to be filled with lighter fluid instead of propane , Ron creates a massive fireball when he lights it , which burns off his eyebrows and part of his mustache . The season ends as a horrified Ron learns that his first ex @-@ wife , Tammy , has arrived to see him ; the news is enough to make his second ex @-@ wife , also named Tammy , run away in horror . 
 = = = Season Four = = = 
 In " I 'm Leslie Knope , " Ron grabs an emergency survival bag and flees to live in the wilderness after learning that his first ex @-@ wife Tammy 1 ( Patricia Clarkson ) has arrived in town . When Leslie 's campaign managers decide to announce her candidacy for city council sooner than expected , she panics and also flees to the wilderness to hide out with Ron . Together they realize they cannot run from their problems and they both return to the parks department . Tammy 1 , who is an IRS agent , later meets up with Ron in his office and serves him audit papers . 
 In " Ron and Tammys " Tammy 1 assumes control of Ron , turning him into a mustache @-@ less pushover in an effort to remarry him and take all his hidden gold . This is quite the difference compared to the influence Ron 's latest ex ( Tammy 2 ) has over him . While Tammy 1 has an ice cold personality and reduces Ron into submissiveness and quietude , Tammy 2 causes Ron to make highly irrational decisions that end up jeopardizing his position at the Parks office . Tammy 2 also tries to assume control of Ron through using manipulation of her body . Ron is saved from the grasp of Tammy 1 after his own mother , who is also ironically a <unk> her name is Tamara ( he refers to her as Tammy 0 ) to restore her son . He snaps back to his old self after witnessing a drinking contest between Tammy 1 and Tammy 0 . They then drink in order to win control over Ron . Leslie also enters this competition in hopes of freeing him of the Tammys , however she ends up failing miserably due to the high alcohol content of Swanson family mash and is the first one out of the contest . In the end , Ron finally comes to his senses and stands up for himself and tells both Tammys to leave . 
 = = = Season Five = = = 
 In " How a Bill becomes a Law , " Ron meets Diane Lewis ( Lucy Lawless ) who had been ignored when asking about filling in a pothole . Ron becomes a friend of hers and , in " Halloween Surprise , " he takes her two daughters out trick @-@ or @-@ treating and they begin dating . In " Women in Garbage , " while babysitting Diane 's daughters , he admits to Ann he loves Diane . Later in the episode , she admits she also loves him . In the fifth season finale " Are You Better off ? , " Andy is talking to Ron about a pregnancy test he found when Diane comes in and says she needs to talk to him , leaving the question if she is pregnant in a cliffhanger . 
 = = = Season Six = = = 
 In the sixth season premiere " London , " Diane reveals that she is pregnant . Ron proposes , and she accepts on the condition they not have a huge wedding . They immediately get married on the fourth floor . Later in the season it is revealed that Diane gave birth to Ron 's son , whom they named John . During The Unity Concert in the season finale , Ron 's alias Duke Silver is revealed to the public when he takes the stage with Mouse Rat . 
 = = = Season Seven = = = 
 Three years after Season 6 , at the start of Season 7 ( 2017 ) , is it revealed that Leslie and Ron have developed an apparent hatred for each other . Both have left the Parks Department , with Ron having started his own construction company . Both are competing in a bidding war for a piece of land in Pawnee owned by the Newport family . Leslie wishes to turn it into a national park , while Ron 's company has partnered with <unk> to turn it into a new corporate campus . After a function where the two teams present their proposals , Leslie and Ron have a bitter exchange of words , prompting Ben and the rest of the team to lock the both of them in the Parks Department overnight , during which the two reconcile their differences . After much prying , Leslie learns the real story from Ron 's side . After she took Jerry and April to work with her , and Tom and Donna left to run their businesses , Ron didn 't recognize anyone he worked with anymore , prompting him to make an unthinkable decision : to ask Leslie for a job in the federal government , so he could work with people he knew again . However he reminds Leslie how she unknowingly stood him up for lunch due to her new hectic life , which he felt was the " punctuation mark on a sentence that had already been written . " So Ron left the Parks Department and began his construction company . He and Leslie are eventually able to settle their differences and rekindle their friendship . 
 In a series of flash @-@ forwards in the final episode , it is shown that Ron decides to leave his now @-@ successful construction company . He is shown talking to Ben Wyatt about having diversified his funds by selling half his gold . The flash @-@ forward reveals that Ron purchased 51 % interest in the Lagavulin Distillery . Feeling his life lacks purpose , he asks Leslie for advice and she arranges for him to be the new superintendent of the Pawnee National Park . One of the last shots of Ron in the series features him " at work , " happily paddling a canoe around the lake in the park to the tune of " Buddy " by Willie Nelson . 
 = = Development = = 
 Ron Swanson was created by Parks and Recreation creators Greg Daniels and Michael Schur , although Nick Offerman himself had some input into the character 's creation . Offerman said in July 2012 that " NBC really resisted giving me this part . It took five months for me from the time Mike Schur and Greg Daniels said they wanted me to play this part . NBC insisted on auditioning every other guy in the country , and then they finally acquiesced . " The character 's traits were partially inspired by a real @-@ life Libertarian elected official that Parks and Recreation co @-@ creator Michael Schur encountered in Burbank while researching for the show , who favored as little government interference as possible and admitted , " I don 't really believe in the mission of my job . ... I 'm aware of the irony . " Ron is also partially inspired by political appointees of President George W. Bush who were perceived to be opposed to the branch of government they were overseeing . Ron 's signature mustache was one of the first ideas conceived for the character . Offerman said the deadpan style of humor he uses for Ron Swanson was cultivated during his youth , when he was an altar boy : " I would read things with the utmost sincerity , and my cousin would be cracking up because he knew I was full of shit . " 
 Many aspects of Ron 's character are based on those of Nick Offerman in real life , such as his woodworking abilities ; Offerman runs an independent carpentry business called Offerman Woodshop . Offerman also plays saxophone in real life , just as Ron does , although the Parks and Recreation writers did not know this when they wrote this element of his character . Offerman 's real @-@ life training in stage combat and Kabuki dance were the partial inspiration for self @-@ defense classes Ron offered his parks department colleagues in " Park Safety . " Ron 's second ex @-@ wife Tammy , who first appeared in the episode " Ron and Tammy , " was played by comedian and actress Megan Mullally , Offerman 's real @-@ life wife . The idea of Ron hating his ex @-@ wife Tammy was established early in the creation of the character , and it was Schur who conceived the idea of casting Mullally , an idea to which Offerman was extremely responsive . 
 Ron became more heavily involved in Parks and Recreation storylines during the second season , and Offerman largely credited Schur with the development of the character . Schur has described Offerman as a " once @-@ in @-@ a @-@ generation comedic performer , " and " our cast MVP , and in many ways our cast leader . " He compared Ron to a " 19th @-@ century rugged individualist , " and said of creating the character , " A lot of the credit has to go to Nick Offerman . In real life , he 's an incredibly interesting guy , and at the very least , it 's much easier to play an interesting guy when you 're an interesting guy . " Offerman said his own sense of humor fuels much of the character , along with those of Schur , Greg Daniels , and the writing staff ; he added : " I never dreamed that I could prosper with my perverse sense of humor on a network show . " Schur said the staff liked writing for Ron because " he 's a great mix of a superhero , and also a deeply flawed , and very human and vulnerable person . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The character of Ron Swanson received critical acclaim ; he developed a cult following and is widely considered the show 's breakout character . Joel Keller of TV Squad called Ron " one of the more inspired sitcom characters of the last decade , " Zap2it writer Joel Keller called him one of the best sitcom characters since Cosmo Kramer of Seinfeld , and Geoff Berkshire of Variety said that the character would " go down in TV history as one of the all @-@ time comedy greats . " Gabriel Perna of International Business Times wrote , " Offerman 's Ron Swanson is one of the main reasons to watch Parks and Recreation . Considering how funny the show is and the scope of its cast , that says a lot . " Likewise , Gail Pennington , television critic with the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch , called Nick Offerman " the funniest guy on TV , " and TV Fanatic writer Eric Hochberger said , " There 's certain character I watch this show for : Ron Swanson . " Jonah Weiner of Slate.com said Ron " has regularly stolen his scenes " and that Offerman has " a gift for understated physical comedy , " and Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club said Offerman was not only funny , but capable of expressing a surprising range of emotions . 
 During the second season , HitFix writer Alan Sepinwall called Ron " easily the show 's best creation so far , " and during the third season he wrote , " Ron being both awesome and hilarious is something Nick Offerman and these writers can do in their sleep by now . " Sal Basile of UGO Networks wrote , " How anyone can make Ron Swanson of Parks and Recreation likable is beyond us , but Offerman does it effortlessly . Before we knew it we couldn 't wait to see Swanson 's reactions to the slightest of problems . " Matt Fowler of IGN was critical of Ron at the start of the show , and called him " a bit of the dud ( who ) offers little to the show , and almost just stand to sour the whole thing . " However , by the second season , Fowler said the character had improved and became " an absolute stand @-@ out in the series . " Several reviewers have praised the platonic relationship between Ron and Leslie , which has been compared to that of Mary Richards and Lou Grant in The Mary Tyler Moore Show . 
 The second season episode " Ron and Tammy , " which predominantly featured Ron and his second ex @-@ wife , is widely considered one of the best Parks and Recreation episodes . Offerman was particularly praised for his subtle minimalism and facial expressions , particularly the use of his eyebrows . Based on a line from " The Stakeout , " when Ron says , " I was born ready . I 'm Ron fucking Swanson , " he is often referenced by fans and even reviewers as " Ron Fucking Swanson . " Fans created websites based on him like " Cats That Look Like Ron Swanson , " and after Ron misunderstood a turkey burger to be " a fried turkey leg inside a grilled hamburger , " the cooking website <unk> created and posted a recipe for that exact food . An image of a fake flavor of Ron Swanson @-@ themed Ben & Jerry 's ice cream , called " All of the Bacon & Eggs You Have , " was designed and circulated on the Internet . The Ben & Jerry 's corporation responded positively to the image , and said in a statement , " Ron 's beliefs are in accordance with those of Ben & Jerry 's – where two scoops of government can help the less fortunate and truly be a servant to the community and its citizens . " 
 Paste ranked him No. 2 in its list of the 20 Best Characters of 2011 , saying : " In four seasons , Ron has become the standout in a cast of incredible characters , and already seems poised to join the elite list of TV ’ s greatest comedic characters . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 In 2010 , Nick Offerman received a Television Critics Association Award nomination for Individual Achievement in Comedy for his performance as Ron Swanson , although the award was ultimately given to Jane Lynch for her performance in the musical comedy @-@ drama Glee . Also that year , Nick Offerman received a nomination for Best Supporting Actor in a Comedy from Entertainment Weekly 's <unk> Awards . 
 Despite critical success , Offerman never received a Emmy Award nomination for this role . Several reviewers expressed particular surprise that he did not receive a nomination for the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards in 2011 , which many considered the biggest snub of the season . Amy Poehler in particular was outraged by Offerman 's snub , and said it was " a hot load of bullshit that [ Offerman ] didn 't get nominated . " Multiple other actors , including Michelle Forbes and Ty Burrell ( the latter of which received a nomination in , and eventually won , the category Offerman was competing in ) stated that they believed Offerman should have been nominated , and Burrell added that Offerman deserved the nomination more than he . 
 = Hurricane Winifred ( 1992 ) = 
 Hurricane Winifred was the last tropical cyclone to make landfall in the busy 1992 Pacific hurricane season . <unk> western Mexico , especially Colima and Michoacán , Hurricane Winifred brought heavy rain and destruction to the area . Rains flooded farms and roads , and caused more than $ 5 million ( 1992 USD , $ 8 @.@ 43 million 2016 USD ) in damage and a total of three people were killed . 
 The last major hurricane of its season , Winifred existed in October 1992 . It formed southeast of Acapulco on October 6 as the twenty @-@ fourth east Pacific tropical cyclone of its season , and recurved as it strengthened . It peaked as a Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . It made landfall southeast of Manzanillo , Colima and dissipated inland . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On October 1 , a disorganized area of thunderstorms existed south of Panama . It gradually headed west @-@ northwestward , slowly organized , and developed deep and concentrated convection . The disturbed area had become organized enough to be considered a tropical depression . Numbered Twenty @-@ Four @-@ E , the cyclone was located about 460 mi ( 740 km ) south @-@ southeast of Acapulco . It moved towards the west @-@ northwest at a speed of about 12 mph ( 19 km / h ) , and by the time it was located about 550 km ( 340 mi ) south of Zihuatanejo , it had intensified into Tropical Storm Winifred . 
 Winifred steadily became more organized , and late on October 7 , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) was anticipating Winifred to reach hurricane intensity within the next 36 hours . A large cyclone , Winifred continued to intensify . Its forward speed decreased as it started to turn to the northwest . By October 8 , Winifred become a hurricane while located approximately 340 mi ( 550 km ) south @-@ southeast of Manzanillo . A small eye became evident on satellite imagery , and thus the winds increased to 85 mph ( 145 km / h ) . 
 Winifred then intensified into a moderate Category 2 hurricane on October 9 . Although the eye briefly disappeared , slight intensification was anticipated . The hurricane was curved north by an upper @-@ level trough . Winifred peaked in intensity as a major hurricane ( Category 3 or higher on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Scale ) . At this time , Winifred , had central pressure of 960 mb ( 28 inHg ) and winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . This made Winifred the final hurricane – major or otherwise – of the 1992 Pacific hurricane season . However , it was operationally believed to have peaked as a Category 2 hurricane ; the NHC did not issue any advisories with winds any higher than 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) . 
 Hurricane Winifred re @-@ curved to the north @-@ northeast , increased in forward speed , and slightly weakened as it approached land . On October 9 , it made landfall about east @-@ southeast of Manzanillo . At the time it was a Category 2 hurricane with winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) and a central pressure of 975 mb ( 28 @.@ 8 inHg ) . Hurricane Winifred quickly weakened after landfall , and weakened to a tropical storm less than three hours later , which was early on October 10 . Later on October 10 , Winifred weakened to a tropical depression , before dissipating over the mountains of central Mexico . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Five thousand people were evacuated to emergency shelters as Winifred neared . With the approach of the hurricane , watches and warnings were issued . On October 9 a tropical storm warning was issued from Zihuatanejo to Cabo Corrientes . At the same time , a hurricane watch went into effect in the same area . The watch was later replaced with a hurricane warning 12 hours later . On October 10 , all watches and warnings were dropped . 
 Starting on October 8 , Hurricane Winifred caused rainfall over an extensive area of Mexico . The highest point maximum reported was of 16 @.@ 7 in ( 420 mm ) at Lázaro Cárdenas , Michoacán , a point to the right of its track . That rain caused flooding , which was blamed for three deaths . 
 Damage was heaviest in the states of Colima and Michoacán . In areas of the former , utilities were knocked out . Waves flooded portions of Highway 200 between <unk> , Ixtapa , and Lázaro Cárdenas . Other roads were also flooded . Waves 12 ft ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) forced the closure of Playa de Oro International Airport and port facilities in Manzanillo . Throughout the affected area , trees were blown down on cars , roughly 1 @,@ 500 houses were damaged , as were hotels and restaurants . About 84 @,@ 000 ha ( 210 @,@ 000 acres ) of farmland were damaged , especially those of plantains and corn . Carlos de la Madrid Virgen , the Governor of Colima , estimated that the total damage in his state was 16000 pesos ( 1992 <unk> ) or $ 5 million ( 1992 USD , $ 8 @.@ 43 million 2016 USD ) . Elsewhere , Winifred forced a temporary closure of the port of Acapulco . 
 = Rodeløkka Line = 
 The Rodeløkka Line ( Norwegian : <unk> ) is a former line of the Oslo Tramway of Norway . It was in use from 1900 to 1961 , serving the neighborhood of Rodeløkka . After closing , the southern part of the line was designated as part of the Sinsen Line . The Rodeløkka Line was built by Kristiania Kommunale Sporveie ( KKS ) in 1900 , and was subsequently taken over by Kristiania Sporveisselskab ( KSS ) in 1905 . In 1924 , the ownership was transferred to Oslo Sporveier . It was served by Line 9 until 1949 , when it was replaced by a bus service . In 1955 , a new route from Carl Berners plass to Rodeløkka was built , and the line was served by Line 13 until 1961 , when the service was terminated . The tracks were removed between 1962 and 1964 . 
 = = Route = = 
 In 1899 , Oslo Municipality established KKS to build and operate three tram lines . The second line to open was the Rodeløkka Line on 23 March 1900 , which connected to the KSS @-@ owned Grünerløkka – Torshov Line at Nybrua near <unk> gate . The line was built as double track until <unk> . It ran along Trondheimsveien before it branched off at <unk> gate towards Rodeløkka ; it followed <unk> gate , <unk> and <unk> before reaching <unk> . Here , a small depot was built with place for six cars . On 26 January 1901 , a new connection line through <unk> gate was built from <unk> to Kirkeristen , and the company no longer needed to lease tracks from Kristiania Elektriske Sporvei in the city center . KKS was bought by KSS in 1905 . 
 The Sinsen Line opened on 1 February 1923 as a branch of the Rodeløkka Line , which continued along Trondheimsveien to Carl Berners plass . The entire Rodeløkka Line was rebuilt with double track in 1938 . In December 1940 , a service extension of the Rodeløkka Line was built from Rodeløkka to Søndre Åsen , operated by the Oslo trolleybus , remaining in service until 14 January 1945 . The tram service on the Rodeløkka Line was terminated on 6 February 1949 , and replaced with bus line 27 , although the tracks were kept . 
 A new line to Rodeløkka was opened on 3 January 1955 . The bus operation had been more expensive than the tram , and a double track line was built from Carl Berners plass through <unk> to Rodeløkka . The balloon loop was built around the block of <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . The line was connected to the old Rodeløkka Line with a triangular loop in <unk> . On 23 April 1961 , all traffic on the Rodeløkka Line was terminated . The tracks were removed between 1962 and 1964 . 
 = = Service = = 
 The line was originally connected to <unk> via Stortorvet . After the line was taken over by KSS , it was given service number 9 and operated with a twelve @-@ minute headway , connecting via the city center to Skøyen on the Skøyen Line . When the Sinsen Line opened , the souther part of the Rodeløkka was also served by Line 13 , which gave a six @-@ minute headway south of <unk> gate . From 29 June 1924 , after the takeover of Oslo Sporveier , the headway was changed to fifteen minutes . From 29 May 1927 , Line 13 was replaced with Line 12 , and from 19 June , Line 9 became Line 17 , which continued along the Ullevål Hageby Line on the other side of the city center . From 19 January 1937 , the Sinsen service was also operated by Line 3 . From 10 December 1939 , Gullfisk trams were put into service on the Sinsen services . With the reopening of the Rodeløkka Line in 1955 , the service was taken over by Line 13 , which used SM53 trams . Ridership on the new line was less than predicted , and from 1959 , the line was only served during rush @-@ hour and started to turn at the Eastern Railway Station in the city center . 
 = No Surrender ( 2005 ) = 
 No Surrender ( 2005 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event produced by the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) promotion , which took place on July 17 , 2005 at the TNA Impact ! Zone in Orlando , Florida . It was the first under the No Surrender chronology and the seventh event in the 2005 TNA PPV schedule . Nine professional wrestling matches and one pre @-@ show match were featured on the card . 
 The main event was a No Surrender Dog Collar match for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship , in which then @-@ champion Raven defended the title against Abyss . Raven won the match , thus retaining the NWA World Heavyweight Championship . The TNA X Division Championship was defended by Christopher Daniels against Petey Williams . Daniels retained the championship in the encounter . On the undercard , A.J. Styles defeated Sean Waltman with Jerry Lynn as the Special Guest Referee . Monty Brown and The Outlaw defeated the 3Live Kru ( Konnan and Ron Killings ) in a Tag Team Street Fight also on the card . 
 No Surrender is marked by the debut of Rhino in TNA . Jason Clevett of the professional wrestling section of the Canadian Online Explorer rated the show an 8 out of 10 , equal with the 2006 event 's ranking of 8 out of 10 also by Clevett . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 TNA announced in late @-@ April 2005 that they were planning to host a PPV titled No Surrender on July 17 at the TNA Impact ! Zone in Orlando , Florida . Prior to No Surrender , TNA 's television contract with Fox Sports Net ended . This left TNA without a broadcaster for several weeks . As a result , TNA began airing weekly episodes of their television program TNA Impact ! on their official website in order to build storylines and promote the No Surrender PPV event . In an article by TNA columnist Bill Banks , it was reported that some " new talent " could debut at No Surrender . TNA released a poster promoting the event featuring A.J. Styles , Chris Harris , Christopher Daniels , and Jeff Jarrett at some point beforehand . 
 = = = Storylines = = = 
 No Surrender featured nine professional wrestling matches and one pre @-@ show match that involved wrestlers from pre @-@ existing scripted feuds and storylines portraying villains , heroes , or less distinguishable characters ; these scripted events built tension and culminated in a wrestling match or series of matches . 
 The main event at No Surrender was a No Surrender Dog Collar match for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship between then @-@ champion Raven and the challenger Abyss . On the June 24 episode of Impact ! , James Mitchell returned to the promotion in a backstage segment with Abyss . Mitchell propositioned Abyss on the idea of an NWA World Heavyweight Championship match , which Abyss agreed to , creating a partnership between the two . With Mitchell as Abyss ' new manager , Abyss attacked Raven later during the show , setting up a match between the two at the PPV . Raven challenged Abyss to a Dog Collar match with " No Surrender " rules in which the only way to win was by pinfall at No Surrender on the July 1 episode of Impact ! , which was accepted . During the July 15 episode of Impact ! , Cassidy Reilly pledged his allegiance to Raven for past experiences in which Raven had saved him , going on to state he would be there to help Raven anytime he needed it . 
 The TNA X Division Championship was defended in another high profiled match on the card . Then @-@ champion Christopher Daniels was pitted against Petey Williams in the contest . On the July 1 episode of Impact ! , Terry Taylor held an interview with Daniels . During this time , Daniels announced he had defeated the best Mexican Luchador in Shocker and the best American wrestlers in Chris Sabin and Michael Shane to retain the X Division Championship . At this time , Canadian wrestler Petey Williams entered and challenged Daniels to a title defense at No Surrender , which Daniels accepted . 
 A.J. Styles challenged Sean Waltman with Jerry Lynn as the Special Guest Referee in another encounter promoted for No Surrender . At TNA 's previous PPV event Slammiversary on June 19 , then @-@ champion Styles defended the NWA World Heavyweight Championship in a King of the Mountain match against Abyss , Monty Brown , Raven , and Waltman . Waltman and Styles created an alliance during the match , which ended when Waltman turned on Styles , costing him the championship as Raven went on to win the match . Styles and Waltman had a confrontation on the July 1 episode of Impact ! , which was stopped by Lynn . Styles asked for a match against Waltman from NWA Championship Committee member Larry Zbyszko on the July 8 episode of Impact ! . Zbyszko granted Styles his request only after making Lynn the Special Guest Referee . 
 A Tag Team Street Fight pitting the 3Live Kru ( Konnan and Ron Killings ) against the team of Monty Brown and The Outlaw was promoted for the undercard . On the June 24 episode of Impact ! , Brown and The Outlaw attacked Konnan and Killings during an interview with TNA commentator Mike Tenay . Brown and The Outlaw proceeded to parody Konnan , Killings , and 3Live Kru member B.G. James leading up to No Surrender . Following a fight between Konnan , Killings , Brown , and The Outlaw on the July 15 episode of Impact ! , Tenay announced the two teams were scheduled for a Street Fight at No Surrender . 
