 After the fourth game , the series went on a two @-@ week hiatus . The Soviets returned to Russia and continued playing in an ice hockey tournament . The Canadians took a few days off , then travelled to Sweden for a pair of exhibition games before arriving in Moscow . 
 = = = Game five = = = 
 Team Canada arrived in Moscow for the final four games at the Luzhniki Ice Palace , accompanied by 3 @,@ 000 Canadian fans . Not long after starting practices in Moscow , Team Canada players Vic Hadfield , Rick Martin and Jocelyn Guevremont left the team and went home for what they felt was a lack of playing time . Team Canada used its practice @-@ time in the <unk> <unk> to learn the differences of the Russian rinks . While there had been concern about the wider ice surface , what was most strange to the Canadian players was the fish @-@ netting draped at the ends of the rink above the boards instead of glass . Considered " in play " , the netting was strung tight , and a slap shot to the netting could catapult the puck back as fast as the original shot . 
 Game five was held on September 22 . Luzhniki was filled to its 14 @,@ 000 capacity , including Communist Party Secretary Leonid Brezhnev , Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin and Soviet President Nikolai Podgorny and a large contingent of the military in dress uniform . The 3 @,@ 000 Canadian fans were given seats , but a second group , of 150 Canadian sports figures , were unable to get seats . The players marched out to the rink for the game to loud cheers , and accompanied by the song " Cowards Don 't Play Hockey " . During the pre @-@ game introductions , Jean Ratelle , captain for the night , was given the traditional gift of bread . The players were all given red and white carnations . Phil Esposito was given flowers , but he slipped and fell on a flower stem , landing on his back . Esposito recovered to laugh at his pratfall , and bowed to the delight of all of the spectators . 
 In the game , Parise scored the only goal of the first period , and Clarke and Henderson scored in the second to give Canada a 3 – 0 lead into the third period . Blinov scored for the Soviets at 3 : 34 and Henderson scored at 4 : 56 to restore Canada 's lead . <unk> scored on a deflection at 9 : 05 to start a run of four straight goals by the Soviets , who won 5 – 4 . According to Bobby Clarke , " we 're not a defensive club , yet we tried to play defensively . " 
 Despite the loss , all Canadian fans present sang " O Canada " as Team Canada left the ice . The cheering of the Canadian fans was unknown at Soviet hockey games . The Russian newspaper Pravda noted wryly that the roof of the arena had withstood the loudness of the cheering and had remained in place . 
 Team Canada was now faced with the daunting task of having to win all three remaining games to win the series . To add to the Canadian struggles , Gilbert Perreault left Team Canada for home to focus on getting into shape for the upcoming NHL season . Perreault had played in game five , practiced with the team the day after , and then asked to return home . 
 = = = Game six = = = 
 Game six was a Canadian 3 – 2 victory . There was no scoring during the first period . <unk> scored the first goal at 1 : 12 of the second period , but the Canadians ' confidence did not waver . The Canadians caught the Soviets in a lapse and scored three goals in a one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ minute span to take a 3 – 1 lead . Hull flipped a rebound over Tretiak to tie the score after Gilbert had capitalized on a Soviet giveaway . Cournoyer scored on a set @-@ up from behind the net by Berenson . Fifteen seconds later , Henderson scored what turned out to be the winning third goal on a thirty @-@ foot slap shot . Yakushev scored late in the second on a power play to finish the scoring . 
 According to Montreal Gazette sports editor Ted Blackman , Canadian players Ken Dryden and Brad Park turned in their first big games of the series . Dryden ended a personal losing streak to Soviet teams dating back to his amateur career and two previous games in the series . In his opinion , the Canadian penalty @-@ killing unit of Serge Savard , Peter Mahovlich , Bill White and Pat Stapleton was " brilliant " as it held the Soviets to one power play goal despite the disadvantage in penalty minutes . Savard himself was recovering from a fractured ankle during the series . According to commentator Brian Conacher , Team Canada had adjusted its game to not play " dump and chase " but instead retain possession in the offensive zone . The strategy led directly to Henderson 's winning goal on an interception of an errant Soviet pass . According to Conacher , " for the first time , the Soviets had opened the door a crack and Team Canada had rushed through like a freight train . " 
 Following the game , the Canadians complained that Josef Kompalla and Franz Baader , the German referees of the match ( the same ones who refereed a controversial Canada @-@ Sweden game ) , were biased , since Canada was handed 31 minutes in penalties during the game , while the Soviets only received four minutes . Phil Esposito complained that one goal by the Soviets was directly the result of the referee dropping the puck while he was talking to a team @-@ mate . The Canadians gave the pair the nickname of " <unk> and Worse . " 
 " The Slash " 
 During game six , Valeri Kharlamov was targeted by Team Canada for attention . According to Conacher , " every time they get a chance , they 're taking him for a rough ride along the boards . " Kharlamov was the target of numerous bodychecks by Brad Park . Things started to heat up in the second period . Kharlamov had knocked down Bobby Clarke , who in retaliation , rubbed Kharlamov 's face with his glove to raise Kharlamov 's temper and the two exchanged punches . Bergman then stepped in and bumped into Kharlamov and harassed him all the way back to the bench . Peter Mahovlich later elbowed Kharlamov , who retaliated by dumping Mahovlich to the ice . Later , Clarke raced down the ice to catch a streaking Kharlamov and deliberately slashed Kharlamov 's already sore ankle , injuring it and according to reports , fracturing it . Kharlamov skated over to the Canadian bench and yelled at the Canadians , before limping off the ice to the dressing room . The referees handed Clarke a minor penalty for slashing and an additional 10 @-@ minute misconduct penalty . Later , with Clarke still stuck in the box serving the misconduct , the referees also gave Dennis Hull a slashing penalty , during which Yakushev scored . On his injured ankle , Kharlamov returned to play and very nearly scored on Dryden during a power play later in the second period . 
 The incident was widely reported and condemned by the Soviet press . Kharlamov himself believed that " Bobby Clarke was given the job of taking me out of the game . " The slash was apparently done at the instigation of assistant coach John Ferguson . " I remember that Kharlamov 's ankle was hurting pretty bad . I called Clarke over to the bench , looked over at Kharlamov and said , ' I think he needs a tap on the ankle . ' I didn 't think twice about it . It was Us versus Them . And Kharlamov was killing us . I mean , somebody had to do it . " Canadian journalist Dick Beddoes asked Clarke about it later at a team reunion , calling it a " wicked two @-@ hander " , to which Clarke replied " Dick , if I hadn 't learned how to lay on a two @-@ hander once in a while , I 'd never have left <unk> <unk> . " 
 In a 2006 interview with the Russian Sport Express magazine , Clarke states that he was unaware of Kharlamov 's sore ankle at the time and does not recall Ferguson telling him to target the ankle . Further , he recalled that Kharlamov had used stick work on him , and Clarke 's slash was in retribution for Kharlamov 's actions : 
 On the thirtieth anniversary of the series , Henderson called the incident " the low point of the series " , but would later apologize to Clarke . In his 2007 book , Conacher wrote that " from the broadcast booth I was shocked and disgusted when I saw Clarke viciously chop at Kharlamov 's left ankle . " He noted " that emotionally these games had clearly gone beyond sport for Team Canada and had truly become unrestricted war on ice . " Media opinion is divided on the effect it had on the outcome of the series . The controversy and admissions that have come forth throughout the years have led some to the belief that the incident could be considered a form of cheating . Kharlamov , who had been one of the Soviets ' best forwards , missed game seven , when the Soviets could have clinched the series and while he did play in game eight , he was not at 100 % and did not score . In Clarke 's opinion , there were other factors for Team Canada 's turnaround in Moscow : " In Moscow we played much better than in Canada . We were almost equal to the Soviet team physically by then , we passed much better , we shot the puck much better , we became faster and played better on defence . Besides , when you have nothing to lose , it is easier to play . And after the fifth game we had nothing to lose . " 
 = = = Game seven = = = 
 Canada won game seven by the score of 4 – 3 . In the first period Phil Esposito scored two goals around a pair by Yakushev and Petrov , ending the first period tied 2 – 2 . The second period was scoreless . In the third , Gilbert put Canada ahead , but Yakushev scored again to tie the score at three . At 17 : 54 , Henderson fooled Soviet defender Tsygankov with a pass through Tsygankov 's feet , then skated around Tsygankov to pick up the puck and break in on Tretiak . As Henderson shot and scored , Tsygankov tripped Henderson and Henderson did not see his shot go in . The goal light went on and off quickly and Team Canada rushed onto the ice to congratulate Henderson before there was any doubt raised about the goal . The Soviet coach Bobrov publicly blamed the loss on Tsygankov . After the game , Henderson commented about the goal as the " one that gave him his most personal satisfaction ever . " 
 The game also featured a controversial incident : During the third period , a small scuffle broke out between Canada 's Gary Bergman , and the USSR 's Boris Mikhailov , in which the future Soviet captain used his skate as a weapon , kicking Bergman two times before the fight ended . Czech referee Rudy Bata and Swede referee Ove Dahlberg officiated the match , and it was announced that the German referee pair of Josef Kompalla and Franz Baader had been sent home and Bata and Dahlberg would referee the final match , in exchange for a promise that Bergman would not publicly berate the Soviets ' coach Bobrov . 
 = = = Game eight = = = 
 Controversy ensued when the Soviets wanted to back out of the refereeing agreement . The Soviets wanted to include the German pair of referees , originally scheduled for the game . Eagleson threatened to pull Team Canada from playing the eighth game . In a compromise , Kompalla refereed along with Bata instead of Baader . The ill will spilled over into the presentation of a totem pole as a gift from Team Canada . The pre @-@ game presentation was cancelled by the Soviets , but restored on the insistence of Team Canada . According to Coach Sinden , Eagleson stated that they " were going to take this totem pole and bring it to centre ice and they 'll have to take it or skate around it the whole game . " 
 Heading into the eighth and final game , each team had three wins and three losses and one tie , but the Soviets were ahead in goal differential by two goals . In Canada , much of the country enjoyed an unofficial ' half a day ' holiday , with many students in Toronto being sent home the afternoon of the game , while many others watched the game at work or school . In Montreal 's Central Station , 5 @,@ 000 fans gathered around ten TV sets to watch the game , which was simulcast in English on CBC Television and CTV , and in French by Radio @-@ Canada . Until the men 's hockey gold @-@ medal game of the 2010 Winter Olympics , it was the most @-@ watched sporting event in the history of Canadian television . 
 Team Canada took a number of questionable early penalties . With two Canadians ( White and Peter Mahovlich ) off , Yakushev scored to give the Soviets the lead 1 – 0 . The game was delayed after a mistaken call against J. P. Parise , ( he was called for interference , but Parise admitted later he was guilty of cross @-@ checking ) and emotions boiled over . Parise was called for a misconduct for banging his stick on the ice , and when he saw the misconduct called , he dashed across the ice with his stick raised . Parise nearly swung his stick at Kompalla and got a match penalty . Sinden threw a chair on the ice . Some writers have commented that the incidents resulted in the rest of the game being refereed capably . 
 After Parise 's penalty was served , it was Canada 's turn to go on the power play , and Esposito scored his sixth goal of the series to tie it at 1 – 1 . The teams exchanged power plays before <unk> scored a power play goal on a slap shot to put the Soviets ahead 2 – 1 . Brad Park then scored his only goal of the series at even strength to complete some pretty passing between Dennis Hull and the Rangers ' team @-@ mates of Ratelle , Gilbert and Park to tie the score . The period ended with the teams tied 2 – 2 . 
 In the second , the Soviets started with a quick goal by <unk> after 21 seconds . The last ten minutes saw two goals from the Soviets : Yakushev scoring his seventh of the series followed by Vasiliev on the power play to put the Soviets ahead 5 – 3 after two periods . White had countered for Canada midway through the period . It was one of few moments for Canada to cheer as the Soviets played an excellent period . The other was a goal @-@ saving play by Esposito who stopped a shot by Yury Blinov who had faked goaltender Dryden out of position and had an empty net to shoot at . Blinov was denied by Esposito who stopped the puck with his stick on the goal line . Blinov and the crowd had prematurely celebrated the apparent goal , and Blinov shook his head in disbelief . 
 Sinden told the players to try to get one back quickly , but play tight defensively and not allow the game to get out of hand . Don 't gamble until after the half @-@ way point if need be . Esposito scored to put the Canadians within one . The tension rose at the rink , and extra soldiers were dispatched for security . It was matched on the ice as Gilbert and Yevgeni <unk> had a fight . Foster Hewitt noticed : " You can feel the tension almost <unk> ! " 
 At the ten @-@ minute mark , Sinden noticed that the Soviets had changed their style , playing defence to protect the lead , rather than pressing . However , the strategy back @-@ fired on the Soviets . The change in tactics gave the Canadians more chances to score and Cournoyer scored to even it up . 
 After the Cournoyer goal , the goal judge refused to put the goal light on despite the fact that it was signalled a goal on the ice . In response , Alan Eagleson ( seated across the ice from the Team Canada bench ) attempted to reach the timer 's bench to protest , causing a ruckus in the crowd as he made his way to the timer 's bench . As he was being subdued by the Soviet police , the Canadian players headed over and Peter Mahovlich jumped over the boards to confront police with his stick . Eagleson was freed and the coaches escorted him across the ice to the bench . In anger , he shoved his fist to the Soviet crowd , as a few other Canadian supporters also gave the finger to the Soviets . The Soviets continued to play defensively . Sinden speculates the Soviets were willing to accept the tie and win the series on goal differential . 
 " The Goal " 
 In the final minute of play , with Phil Esposito , Yvan Cournoyer and Peter Mahovlich out on the ice , Paul Henderson stood up at the bench and called Mahovlich off the ice as he was skating by . " I jumped on the ice and rushed straight for their net . I had this strange feeling that I could score the winning goal " , recalls Henderson . Bobby Clarke was supposed to replace Esposito , but Phil didn 't come off ( " There was no way I was coming off the ice in that situation " Esposito said ) . Cournoyer picked up a puck that had been passed around the boards by the Soviets in a clearing attempt . He missed Henderson with a pass , but two Soviets mishandled the puck in the corner and Esposito shot the puck on Tretiak . 
 Henderson , who had fallen behind the net , got up and went to the front of the net where he was uncovered . Henderson recovered the rebound of Esposito 's shot , shot the puck and was stopped , but recovered the rebound . With Tretiak down , he put the puck past Tretiak with only 34 seconds to play . Foster Hewitt 's voice rose in excitement as he called the winning goal : 
 The scene was captured on film by cameraman Frank Lennon . The picture became iconic in Canada . Canada held on for the win in the game and thus won the series , four games to three . Pat Stapleton picked up the puck after the game . 
 Somewhat overshadowed by Henderson 's winning goal , was a four @-@ point game by Phil Esposito , two goals and two assists , and a hand in all three goals of the third period . Esposito was the only player on either team to score four points in a game during the series . According to Ron Ellis , he had " never seen another player have a period where there was so much pressure and was still able to accomplish what he did . " Sinden considered it to be Esposito 's " finest hour . " Esposito describes it as " there was no stopping me . And I think some of the guys got a little angry with me . If we had lost , I would have been the goat . But we didn 't lose . I just had enough faith in myself , that I was going to get it done , one way or another . " 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Team Canada arrived back in Canada on October 1 . The team was mobbed by an estimated crowd of 10 @,@ 000 at Montreal 's Dorval Airport . Also greeting the team was Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau and City of Montreal Mayor Jean Drapeau . <unk> Ken Dryden , Serge Savard , Yvan Cournoyer , Jean Ratelle and coach John Ferguson stayed in Montreal , while the rest of the team travelled on to Toronto . In Toronto , an estimated crowd of 80 @,@ 000 attended a ceremony at Nathan Phillips Square to salute the players . The players were welcomed by Ontario Premier Bill Davis and Toronto Mayor William Dennison . 
 After the series , it was reported that NHL president Clarence Campbell and Chicago Black Hawks ' owner Bill Wirtz had concluded an agreement with the Soviets for the Soviet national team to play an exhibition series in January 1973 against the Boston Bruins , New York Rangers and Chicago Black Hawks . Campbell characterized the reports as " presumptuous " . The NHL and the Soviets had held talks during the Moscow games , during which the Soviets had requested further games , but Campbell stated " we don 't even know if we could schedule such a series " and " we 're a long way from any arrangement . " Although the 1973 exhibition series did not take place , exhibition series would take place a few years later . 
 Kompalla gave an interview with newspaper General @-@ Anzeiger after the series . " When I recall these matches , my flesh creeps . Ten more such games and I would age several years . I am very glad that I got back home uninjured . " He went on to state that the Canadians played " very crudely , purposely using foul methods that endanger the lives of their rivals . " He complained that the Canadian team threw " cucumbers and other leftovers " at his colleague Franz Baader on the flight from Moscow to Prague and harassed visitors in hotels . Bobby Hull also criticized Team Canada , stating that the fighting and gestures of the Canadian players " were a bad example to young players and diplomatically harmful . " 
 The Soviet coaches Bobrov and Kulagin were interviewed after the series in Sovietsky Sport . They accused Team Canada of " trying several methods to intimidate their players , though this war of nerves did not bring them success . " The coaches said they were astonished that the Canadians argued with the referees . They singled out Team Canada Assistant Coach John Ferguson for his " pugnacity " . They did compliment Team Canada on their defensive skills but felt that the Soviets were technically superior , and , but for some deplorable mistakes by their players , the Soviets would have won the series . 
 Alan Eagleson was not repentant for his actions during game eight . Eagleson was not the only one jostled by police ; Eagleson 's wife and the Canadian ambassador 's wife were also jostled . Eagleson woke up with bruises from his treatment . Eagleson was not sorry , but he regretted the incident and planned to not get involved in further series . He did get a letter of support from Robert Ford , the ambassador , who basically agreed with Eagleson 's actions . Mail and messages about the incident was mostly in favour of Eagleson . According to Ted Blackman , Canadian fans were basically understanding of Team Canada 's actions as being provoked while the team was under duress . 
 = = = Soviets ' gamesmanship = = = 
 As well as the disputes over the refereeing , the goal judges on several occasions did not turn on the red light indicating a goal after a Canadian score . After Henderson 's goal in game seven , Sinden sent the entire team off the bench to ensure the goal was counted . A similar incident during game eight led to the melee that Eagleson was involved in . 
 During Team Canada 's stay in Moscow , the team 's treatment was the source of numerous complaints by the players . When leaving Sweden , the team was informed that the players would stay at one hotel , their wives at another . The players threatened not to go , and the arrangements were changed to keep the players and wives together at the <unk> Hotel . The players ' wives were fed sub @-@ standard food and the players would smuggle some of their food to their wives . The team had contracted to have Canadian beer and steaks delivered to them in Moscow . The beer was lost at the airport , while the steaks were cut in half . At a practice after game six , the Soviets tried to cut short the Canadians ' practice . 
 = = Other Team Canada games = = 
 = = = Sweden = = = 
 During the two @-@ week hiatus between games four and five , the Canadians visited Sweden and played two exhibition games versus the Swedish national team . The Team Canada management had arranged for the visit to Sweden to get used to the bigger ice surfaces in Europe , and stopping in Sweden would provide some rest for Team Canada before resuming the series in Moscow . The games took place on September 16 and September 17 at the <unk> Isstadion arena in Stockholm . Canada won game one 4 – 1 ; the second game was a 4 – 4 tie . The first exhibition game introduced Canada to the two West German referees , Josef Kompalla and Franz Baader . These two referees would figure prominently in games six and eight of the Canada @-@ Russia series . 
 Sinden considered the first period of the first Swedish game the team 's worst since the team was put together , but the team improved and started to take command . Henderson , Clarke , Cashman and Parise scored . Sinden criticized the German referees : " ... they were absolutely terrible . They couldn 't even skate . They were miles behind the play all night and don 't know the damn rules . Their incompetence helped the game become very bitter . " The players were also introduced to the style of play of the Swedes , who were well used to using stick work to throw off their opponents . " They were spearing , holding , interfering , and most of all , backstabbing . " The Canadian players would retaliate and be penalized for their retribution . As an example of the referees ' incompetence , Sinden pointed out that Esposito had been penalized for cross @-@ checking , and given a misconduct for it . Sinden , who had played international ice hockey , knew that under international rules at the time , you could not give a misconduct for cross @-@ checking . 
 A dirty incident marred the second game . Cashman was cut in the mouth by Sweden 's Ulf Sterner 's stick . The cut to his tongue required nearly 50 stitches and forced him to miss the rest of the Summit Series , although he stayed with the team . Sterner was not penalized on the play . During the second intermission , Team Canada and Team Sweden scuffled in the runway to their dressing rooms before being separated by police . Canada took a 2 – 1 lead in the game , but the Swedes were not in awe of Canada like they had been at the beginning of game one . The Swedish tactics were effective ; Canada took 31 minutes in penalties to Sweden 's two . Sweden led the game 4 – 3 before Esposito scored on a 35 @-@ foot shot in the final minute . The Swedish defenceman had actually backed into their goaltender , allowing Esposito an easy shot for goal . Sinden also admitted that the tying goal was off @-@ side but the referees had missed the call . Sinden was " thrilled with the tie . I wouldn 't be able to stomach their gloating if they beat us . " 
 Team Canada was heavily criticized by the Swedish media for its " criminal " -style play during the two games . Pictures in the newspapers highlighted the blood from a two @-@ stitch cut the Swedish captain Lars @-@ Erik Sjoberg had received on a cross @-@ check from Vic Hadfield . Reports of the games led to criticism from back home in Canada , which incensed Sinden . The team cooled off the next day with a session in <unk> playing for the employees of a Volkswagen plant . The team played mock games against local teams of youngsters 12 and 13 years in age . The practice improved the mood of the players . The team drank beer on the bus , and started " singing songs like a bunch of kids . " Several of the players then went out drinking , impressing Sinden the next day with their best practice session to date . The time in Sweden helped bring Team Canada together as a team and focused them for the final four games . 
 = = = Czechoslovakia = = = 
 After the series , Team Canada played an exhibition game against the Czechoslovak national team ; at the time , the world champions . The game took place on September 30 at the <unk> hala in Prague and ended in a 3 – 3 tie . Canada took the lead in the first period on goals by Serge Savard and Peter Mahovlich . The Czechoslovakian team tied it with two goals in the second by Bohuslav Stastny . Jiri <unk> scored at 2 : 28 of the third and the lead nearly held up until the end . Canada pulled its goalie and Savard scored his second goal with four seconds left . 
 For the game , Stan Mikita was named captain of the Canadian team . Mikita had left Czechoslovakia at age eight to live in Canada with an aunt and uncle , leaving behind his mother . During player introductions , Mikita received the largest ovation of any player . He took the opening faceoff and very nearly scored during the game . 
 = = Broadcasting = = 
 The games ' broadcasts were produced by Hockey Canada , using experienced hockey commentators from Canadian television networks . In English , CBC Television ( CBC ) and CTV Television Network ( CTV ) split the coverage , with CTV carrying games one , three , five , seven and eight , while CBC aired games two , four , six and eight . Foster Hewitt called the plays and former player Brian Conacher was the commentator for all of the games . At the request of the broadcasters , Hewitt came out of semi @-@ retirement to be part of the broadcast . In French , all games were broadcast on SRC and the broadcast team was Rene Lecavalier and former player Gilles Tremblay . For the eighth game , it was estimated that 16 million Canadians watched the match . ( A year earlier , the national census had counted 21 @,@ 963 @,@ 000 Canadians . ) 
 A partnership between Bobby Orr Enterprises and Harold Ballard bought the broadcast rights from Hockey Canada for $ 750 @,@ 000 . The bid , negotiated by Alan Eagleson , who , at the time , was both Orr 's agent and a Hockey Canada director , outbid McLaren Advertising , producers of Hockey Night in Canada , which had offered $ 500 @,@ 000 . Ballard @-@ Orr realized a profit on the series of $ 1 @.@ 2 million . 
 The series was picked up by some U.S. television stations , such as <unk> ( Channel 44 ) in Chicago . The telecasts of games one through four were produced by WSBK ( Channel 38 ) in Boston and called by Bruins ' announcers Fred Cusick and John Peirson . After efforts by WSBK to get rights to the four games in Moscow broke down , a last @-@ minute deal by Boston public television station WGBH @-@ TV allowed it to broadcast the CBC / CTV feed of games five through eight and to make the telecast available to PBS stations in several American cities , mostly those who had NHL , minor @-@ league , or major college hockey teams . WGBH fed the Canadian telecasts ; games six , seven , and eight were seen on WGBH and PBS on a tape @-@ delay in prime @-@ time . 
 The Soviet play @-@ by @-@ play was done by Nikolai Ozerov . In the style of that time , the Soviets did not televise anything during the pre @-@ game , intermissions or post @-@ game . During the intermission , the screen went black , with classical music playing quietly . After the games , the broadcast simply ended and Soviet television networks returned to regular programming . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 While Canada formally won the series , there was no winning title , and both teams could claim victory . The Soviets earned the respect of fans and players alike ; the Canadians went from scoffing at their antiquated equipment and strange training methods and practices , to admiration for their talent and conditioning . Frank Mahovlich said " give the Russians a football and they 'd win the Super Bowl in two years . " 
 Many Soviet citizens believed that the outcome may have been different if Anatoli Firsov and Vitaly Davydov had not sat out the series to protest a coaching change . In response , some offer that Canada was without Bobby Orr due to his knee injury as well as Bobby Hull ( due to his departure from the NHL to the newly formed WHA league ) . These were arguably the best Canadian players at the time ( along with Phil Esposito ) , so neither team had all of its greatest talent on the ice . The Soviet team also had the obvious advantage of playing year @-@ round . Meanwhile , the Canadian team was picked and prepared in only a few months and most players were out @-@ of @-@ shape . At the time , NHL players did not regularly train during the summer months , using the period for a holiday or other activities . 
 In the end , the Summit Series conclusively proved that the gap between the best Canadian NHL players and the top national teams of Europe ( USSR , Czechoslovakia , Sweden ) was much narrower than most observers on both sides of the Atlantic had anticipated . The Swedish national team coach Billy Harris ( a former NHL pro with the Toronto Maple Leafs ) later recalled that " the ( Swedish ) media would ask me , ' do you see even one Swedish player who could possibly have a chance in the National Hockey League ? ' I answered , ' No , I see 14 of them ! ' " The success of the 1972 Summit Series would lead to the development of the Canada Cup ice hockey world championship tournament open to both pros and amateurs , starting in 1976 . It also led to regular series of games between Soviet and NHL clubs , known as the Super Series . By the 1980s , an increasing number of players were former members of the Swedish or Czechoslovak national teams . The top Soviet players were finally allowed to sign contracts with NHL clubs in the late 1980s and early 1990s as the USSR crumbled . 
 In North America , the Series ( particularly the first few games ) exposed the need for better preparation and off @-@ season training . Philadelphia Flyers coach Fred Shero became an avid student of the Soviet style and was one of the first to bring the Russian training techniques to the NHL as the Flyers won two Stanley Cup championships in 1974 and 1975 . Tom Mellor ( who joined the small but rapidly growing group of American @-@ born NHL players after the 1972 Olympics ) lamented that the NHL training methods of the early 1970s were vastly inferior to those of the Soviets . " When I went to play for Detroit after the Olympics , Alex <unk> was the coach . ... When he would coach , we would do a couple of one @-@ on @-@ ones , two @-@ on @-@ twos , three @-@ on @-@ twos , we 'd scrimmage , and he would scrimmage with us . At the end of the scrimmage , we 'd do a couple of figure eights and then go to the bar . That was the NHL and pro mentality . " Mark Howe commented that the Soviet national team must have trained six hours on the day of a game in the 1972 Winter Olympics . On the other hand , Swedish sports journalists were extremely impressed by the toughness and " never say die " fighting spirit of the Canadians , who lost only one game out of seven on European ice despite usually trailing in the third period . According to Soviet player Boris Mikhailov , who later became a coach , " it was a meeting between two schools of hockey and we have since continued this great exchange and we have learned from each other , taking the best of both styles . " 
 As time passed , the significance of the series grew in the public consciousness , and the term " Summit Series " became its unofficial accepted name . In Canada , the Summit Series is a source of national pride , and is seen by many as a landmark event in Canadian cultural history . In Canada , Paul Henderson 's goal is considered to be one of the most famous in the history of the game . The series is also seen by many Canadians as an important win in the Cold War . 
 = = = Legacy events = = = 
 Many of the players would face each other again in future international contests . Henderson would play the Soviets in the 1974 Summit Series organized by the WHA . Eleven of the Soviet 1972 team players would play against the Montreal Canadiens in the December 31 , 1975 game of the Super Series ' 76 . Five players of Team Canada 1972 would play for Montreal ( Awrey , Cournoyer , Dryden , Lapointe and Savard ) . Many of the players would also play in the 1976 Canada Cup , including Bobby Orr , making his first appearance against the Soviets as a professional . He had the missed the chance in the Super Series ' 76 , also due to injury . 
 In 1987 , fifteen years after the series , a 60 @-@ minute commemorative video was directed and produced by Tom McKee and published by Labatt Brewing Company Limited , Toronto . The video includes interviews of Alan Eagleson and former players Bobby Clarke , Yvan Cournoyer , Paul Henderson , and Serge Savard in the studio . Every goal from the series is included as is a mention of the Soviets ' " shenanigans , " as they try to interfere with one of the Canadians ' practices in Moscow . Eagleson would later be barred from public appearances with Team Canada members after his fraud convictions related to his hockey business dealings . 
 In 1989 , Marcel Dionne retired as a member of the New York Rangers . He was the last active player from the Canadian roster . That same year , Sergei <unk> became the first Soviet to play in the NHL , for the Calgary Flames . 
 In 1997 , the Canadian Mint released a commemorative silver dollar coin to mark the 25th anniversary . 
 On November 2 , 2005 , the team was honoured , en masse , as members of the Canadian Sports Hall of Fame . In the induction ceremony , Phil Esposito spoke : " A lot of people will go back and say 1972 changed the face of the game and actually I believe it did . I 'm not so sure it changed for the better , by the way . But it did change the way we think and look at hockey in this country . " 
 In 2006 , the CBC aired a two @-@ part mini @-@ series called Canada Russia ' 72 , directed by T. W. Peacocke . The film is a dramatization of the series . The film was later made available on DVD . 
 In 2007 , for the 35th anniversary of the series , Canadian and Russian national junior teams competed in the 2007 Super Series . Four games were played in Russia , followed by four in Canada . Canada won seven of eight games and game seven was a tie . 
 In 2010 , the sweater Henderson wore while scoring the decisive final goal of the series was put up for auction by an anonymous American collector . The 42nd and winning bid of US $ 1 @,@ 067 @,@ 538 ( $ 1 @,@ 275 @,@ 000 with auction fees , confirmed as the world record for hockey memorabilia by Guinness World Book of Records in March 2012 . ) was placed by Mitchell <unk> , a Canadian shopping mall mogul . It was also announced that <unk> would be taking it on a tour of Canada , the locations of which to be decided by voters on Facebook . 
 In 2012 , the 40th anniversary , several events took place . The 2012 Canada – Russia Challenge , a series between Canadian and Russian players took place in August . In September , two books were published to mark the anniversary . That month , in Russia , members of Team Canada went on a tour of Russian cities to celebrate the anniversary . A reciprocal tour of Canada was planned but no funding was available from the Government of Canada to sponsor the tour . Nevertheless , the anniversary was marked with several events in Canada . Team Canada received a star on Canada 's Walk of Fame in Toronto . The series was replayed that month on Canadian television , and the Canadian team was honoured with a dinner at the Hockey Hall of Fame . The players again refused to appear with Alan Eagleson . 
 = = = Cultural references = = = 
 Henderson 's goal in 1972 has been described as the " goal that everyone remembers " by the Canadian rockers The Tragically Hip in their song " Fireworks " from their album Phantom Power . The song describes the national eruption of celebration over the goal . 
 In the 1994 film Anna : 6 – 18 , director Nikita Mikhalkov observes that to be a great nation , " Russia needed great enemies " . The film then shows Phil Esposito in the penalty box from video of the series . Esposito is " performing a menacing pantomime " in the words of author Dave <unk> . The term " Esposito " also was added as a derogatory term to street slang in Russia . 
 The Corner Gas episode " The Good Old Table Hockey Game " featured an 8 @-@ game table hockey series based on the Summit Series . It referenced events such as the fans booing and Esposito 's speech after Game 4 , Esposito falling on the ice before Game 6 , and Henderson 's winning goal in Game 8 . 
 = = Schedule and results = = 
 = = = Game one = = = 
 Source : Podnieks 
 = = = Game two = = = 
 Source : Podnieks 
 = = = Game three = = = 
 Source : Podnieks 
 = = = Game four = = = 
 Source : Podnieks 
 = = = Game five = = = 
 Source : Podnieks 
 = = = Game six = = = 
 Source : Podnieks 
 = = = Game seven = = = 
 Source : Podnieks 
 = = = Game eight = = = 
 Source : Podnieks 
 = = = Canada vs. Sweden = = = 
 Game one 
 Source : Dryden & Mulvoy , Podnieks 
 Game two 
 Source : Dryden & Mulvoy , Podnieks 
 = = = Canada vs. Czechoslovakia = = = 
 Source : Podnieks , Dryden & Mulvoy 
 = = Statistics = = 
 Statistics do not include the games in Czechoslovakia and Sweden . 
 = = = Team = = = 
 Source : <unk> 1996 , Dryden & Mulvoy 
 = = = Players = = = 
 = = = <unk> through sport = = = 
 Politics and sports 
 = Hurricane Jerry ( 1989 ) = 
 Hurricane Jerry caused minor damage in Texas and flash flooding in Kentucky and Virginia in October 1989 . The fourteenth tropical cyclone , tenth named storm of the season , Jerry developed from a tropical wave in the Bay of Campeche on October 12 . Initially a tropical depression , the system moved north @-@ northwestward across the Gulf of Mexico and strengthened into Tropical Storm Jerry early on the following day . Jerry continuously deepened until October 14 and then maintained intensity while curving northeastward and briefly decelerating . Later that day , the storm re @-@ curved north @-@ northwestward . Jerry began to intensify on October 15 and soon became a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Early on October 16 , Jerry made landfall on Galveston Island , Texas with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . Less than six hours later , Jerry weakened to a tropical storm and then a tropical depression shortly thereafter . Late on October 16 , Jerry was absorbed by a frontal system while situated over southwestern Arkansas . 
 Storm surge and rough surf along the coast of Texas destroyed a 20 mile ( 32 km ) section of Texas State Highway 87 , which was never repaired . Due to strong winds , about 52 @,@ 000 homes and businesses were left without electricity , most of them in the Galveston area . Many homes , businesses , and buildings were inflicted damage because of strong winds and three tornadoes spawned by the storm . Despite the issuance of a hurricane warning just eight hours prior to landfall , Jerry caused only three fatalities in Texas , possibly due to the storm 's small size ; a car fell over the Galveston Seawall , killing its three occupants . Minor wind and coastal flood damage was reported in Louisiana . Jerry and its remnants brought flash flooding to portions of the Upland South , particularly in the states of Kentucky , Virginia , and West Virginia . In eastern Kentucky , hundreds of homes were flooded and many bridges , culverts , and roads were washed out ; this left hundreds of residents stranded . Damage in Kentucky reached at least $ 5 million . Similar impact occurred in Virginia ; with $ 3 @.@ 4 million ( 1989 USD ) in damage in Buchanan County . In West Virginia , overflowing rivers in the western portions of the state forced hundreds to evacuate . Throughout the United States , Jerry resulted in about $ 70 million in damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic Ocean from the coast of northwest Africa on September 23 . No additional signs of tropical cyclogenesis were observed as the tropical wave crossed the Atlantic Ocean or the Caribbean Sea . The tropical wave decelerated upon reaching the Yucatán Peninsula , where it became a broad low pressure area , based on surface pressure fields and convective motions indicated in satellite imagery . While emerging into the Bay of Campeche on October 12 , the intensity of the low was estimated via Dvorak technique . At 1900 UTC on October 12 , a reconnaissance aircraft flight confirmed an atmospheric circulation , and the system was then classified as Tropical Depression Fourteen . However , post @-@ analysis indicates that the depression developed seven hours earlier , while located about 230 miles ( 370 km ) east @-@ northeast of Veracruz , Veracruz . 
 While moving north @-@ northwestward , satellite and reconnaissance aircraft reports indicated the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Jerry early on October 13 . Jerry then gradually intensified and moved northward between 5 and 10 mph ( 10 and 15 km / h ) . Early on October 14 , the storm turned to the north @-@ northeast and decelerated in response to an approaching mid- to upper @-@ level trough . Increasing upper @-@ level wind shear temporarily limited further intensification . However , after a mid- to upper @-@ level cut @-@ off low pressure area moved southward , the upper @-@ level outflow pattern became more favorable , causing Jerry to resume strengthening . The cut @-@ off low then forced Jerry to re @-@ curve north @-@ northwestward , while stronger steering currents and a high pressure ridge increased the storm 's forward motion to more than 10 mph ( 16 km / h ) . While approaching the Gulf Coast of the United States , deep convection began to develop near the center , and by 1800 UTC on October 15 , Jerry strengthened into a Category 1 hurricane . 
 After reaching hurricane status late on October 15 , the storm continued to intensify while approaching the coast of Texas . At 2100 UTC , Jerry attained its minimum barometric pressure of 982 mbar ( 29 @.@ 0 inHg ) . The storm strengthened slightly further before making landfall on Galveston Island near Jamaica Beach , Texas with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) at 0030 UTC on October 16 . Jerry 's landfall is among the latest dates in the satellite era that a hurricane struck the upper Texas coast . After moving inland , the storm then accelerated while turning toward the north and then north @-@ northeastward . At 0600 UTC on October 16 , Jerry weakened to a tropical storm and to a tropical depression about six hours later . Late on October 16 , the cyclone was absorbed by a frontal system over southwestern Arkansas . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Jerry was an unpredictable storm as the strengthening before landfall and the continuation to the northwest was not anticipated . Equipment failure meant that data was not readily available . The National Hurricane Center forecast model was also disabled , throwing the accuracy of Jerry 's track off . Tropical cyclone warnings and watches began early on October 14 , with a hurricane watch for Port Arthur , Texas to the mouth of the Mississippi River in Louisiana . At 2200 UTC later that day , a tropical storm watch was issued for the entire coast of Louisiana . Another tropical storm watch was posted from Port O 'Connor , Texas to Morgan City , Louisiana at 1200 UTC on October 15 . 
 Due to the unpredictability of the storm , a hurricane warning was issued from Freeport , Texas to Intracoastal City , Louisiana at 1600 UTC , only eight hours prior to landfall . Simultaneously , two separate tropical storm warnings were posted , from Matagorda to Freeport and Intracoastal City to Morgan City . Although the storm had already made landfall , a tropical storm warning was issued from Freeport to Intracoastal City at 0400 UTC on October 16 . By six hours later , all tropical cyclone warnings and watches were discontinued . 
 About 4 @,@ 000 oil company employees were evacuated off the rigs in the Gulf of Mexico , at least 1 @,@ 300 of them by helicopter . In Louisiana , approximately 8 @,@ 000 people evacuated – 1 @,@ 000 from Grand Isle and 7 @,@ 000 others from Cameron Parish . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Texas = = = 
 Rainfall from Hurricane Jerry peaked at 6 @.@ 4 inches ( 160 mm ) in Silsbee . Jerry caused light beach erosion along the Texas coast . The storm destroyed a 20 miles ( 32 km ) section of Texas State Highway 87 , between High Island and Sabine Pass . As of 2008 , the destroyed section of the highway was not been repaired , despite plans for it to be rebuilt . In Galveston County , abnormally high astronomical tides and rough surf from Jerry resulted in coastal flood damage . Beach erosion was reported , while some sand dunes were flattened . On the western end of Galveston Island , beachfront roads were inundated and covered with debris , glass , and boards . In Brazoria County , high tides caused minor road damage in Surfside Beach . Storm surge in Chambers County caused coastal flooding in Anahuac . Three people were killed when their car was either blown or washed off the Galveston Seawall during the storm . The eye of the Hurricane went directly over Kemah where waterfront businesses suffered considerable damage , including restaurants , boat docks , and bait stands . Property losses in the city of Kemah was estimated to have reached $ 2 million . In the upper end of Galveston Bay in Harris County , businesses in low @-@ lying areas were affected by coastal flooding . 
 At Scholes Field , sustained winds of 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) and gusts up to 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) were observed , ripping doors off the hangars . A walkway and four boats were damaged at the Hanks Creek Marina , located on the eastern shore of Sam Rayburn Reservoir , while the marina itself was deroofed . Similar impact was reported at the nearby Shirley Creek Marina . Strong winds destroyed four high steel towers , which supported power lines that traversed the northern Galveston Bay near the Houston Ship Channel . Elsewhere in eastern Texas , wind damage was relatively minor , mainly limited to shattered windows , toppled trees and power lines , and generally light impact to houses , mobile homes , buildings , farm buildings , and businesses in several counties in eastern Texas . Falling trees blocked numerous roads and struck houses and power lines , leaving approximately 52 @,@ 000 homes and businesses without electricity , most of them in the Galveston area . There were three tornadoes in the county , the first of which unroofed some buildings in Galveston . The second tornado , also touching down in Galveston , inflicted roof damage to many businesses , homes , and apartment complexes . The third tornado , spawned in League City , toppled several trees and a flag pole . In Chambers County a tornado near Kemah inflicted damage to a beach house . Another tornado in the county spawned in downtown Baytown shattered windows at a hospital , a mall , and store windows . In Polk County , a small tornado caused minor damage , totaling $ 10 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 In Louisiana , tides ranging from 2 to 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 to 0 @.@ 91 m ) above normal lashed the coast . However , coastal flooding damage was minimal . Gusty winds in the northwestern portion of the state downed some trees and power lines . Jerry and its remnants dropped rainfall in several other states , including Alabama , Arkansas , Illinois , Indiana , Kentucky , Maryland , Mississippi , Missouri , New Jersey , Ohio , Virginia , and West Virginia . 
 Similar rainfall was reported in Kentucky , ranging from 4 to 6 inches ( 100 to 150 mm ) . Flash flooding caused significant damage in several counties . Numerous roads and bridges were washed out . Hundreds of homes were damaged or destroyed , forcing hundreds to evacuate . Additionally , many cars were damaged or swept away . The Kentucky River overflowed at Hazard in Perry County , inundating a number of streets with up to 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) of water . About ten families were forced to evacuate . Damage in Perry County exceeded $ 1 million . In neighboring Letcher County , 100 bridges and culverts were washed out , while about 50 homes were impacted by flooding . Damage in the county reached $ 2 million . In Floyd County , over 750 students and teachers were stranded at a school in McDowell after the Frasure Creek overflowed , inundating several classrooms with over 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) of water . Over 200 homes were flooded and many bridges and roads washed in Pike County , with damage reaching $ 2 million . Many residents were left isolated in eastern Kentucky after flooding destroyed bridges and roads . According to state disaster assessment teams , hundreds of residents in eastern Kentucky and West Virginia had flood damage to their houses . Due to the impact from flooding in eastern Kentucky , President George H. W. Bush declared Clay , Floyd , Jackson , Knott , Knox , Leslie , Letcher , Magoffin , Owsley , Perry and Pike counties as disaster areas . 
 Heavy rains in West Virginia overflowed the Tug Fork and Guyandotte rivers . About 150 homes were evacuated in Matewan , where the Tug Fork River crested at 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) above its banks . Farther south in Williamson , the river overflowed its banks by about 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) . On October 19 , Governor of West Virginia Gaston Caperton toured flood @-@ ravaged areas of the state , including Mingo and Logan counties . Heavy rainfall extended eastward into extreme western Virginia . In northern Buchanan County , flash flooding destroyed or heavily damaged numerous businesses and homes . Additionally , many private bridges were swept away and more than 100 roads were inundated . Approximately 30 families were evacuated in the Hurley area , where up to 5 inches ( 130 mm ) of precipitation was observed . Damage in Buchanan County totaled $ 3 @.@ 4 million . President Bush declared Buchanan County as a disaster area on November 8 . 
 = Southdale Center = 
 Southdale Center , colloquially known as Southdale , is a shopping mall located in Edina , Minnesota , a suburb of the Twin Cities . It opened in 1956 and is the oldest fully enclosed , climate @-@ controlled mall in the United States . Southdale Center comprises 1 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 120 @,@ 000 m2 ) of leasable retail space , and contains approximately 123 retail tenants . The mall is partially owned by Simon Property Group and is anchored by Gordmans , Herberger 's , JCPenney , and Macy 's . 
 Victor Gruen , the center 's architect , designed the mall to challenge the " car @-@ centric " America that was rising in the 1950s . Since its opening in 1956 , Southdale has suffered through high vacancy rates and several store closures , but has been able to recover in recent years . Several additions have been performed on the building , including a 2011 renovation which involved the construction of a brand new food court . Southdale Center continues to use much of its original structure despite these renovations , and has been the host of several charity and community events throughout the years . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1954 – 57 : Construction and grand opening = = = 
 Southdale Center was developed by the Dayton Company and designed by Victor Gruen , an Austrian immigrant and socialist . Gruen was a European @-@ style socialist ; he found individual stores in downtown venues to be inefficient , and the suburban lifestyle of 1950s America too " car @-@ centric " and wanted to design a building that would be a communal gathering place , where people would shop , drink coffee , and socialize , as he remembered from his native Vienna . Southdale Center was loosely modeled on the arcades of several heavily populated European cities and purposely included " eye @-@ level display cases " to " lure customers into stores " . Gruen imaged that Southdale would eventually include " a medical center , schools and residences , not just a parade of glitzy stores . " The first plans unveiled for the shopping center were announced in 1952 by Gruen and Minnesota native , Donald Dayton . 
 Groundbreaking for Southdale took place on October 29 , 1954 ; 800 construction workers were needed to build the three @-@ story , 800 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 74 @,@ 000 m2 ) , 500 acre center , which had 5 @,@ 200 parking spaces , 72 available tenants , and cost $ 20 million to construct . Due to Minnesota 's harsh climate in the winter , Gruen constructed the center with a roof and air @-@ conditioning system capable of maintaining a comfortable temperature of 75 ° F ( 24 ° C ) year round . The mall was originally anchored by Dayton 's , Donaldson 's , Walgreens , and Woolworth , the former of which also developed the center . Over 40 @,@ 000 visitors attended the grand opening ceremony for the center on the morning of October 8 , 1956 . An additional 188 @,@ 000 customers visited the mall throughout the following week . 
 The center was constructed to successfully bring the community together by " gathering art , culture and entertainment under one roof with retail . " The Dayton 's store was modeled after Dayton 's flagship store in Minneapolis , Minnesota . In November of 1956 , organic architect Frank Lloyd Wright visited the mall as part of a tour of new buildings in Minnesota ; he critiqued Southdale 's overall design , stating " [ the ] garden court has all the evils of the village street and none of its charm , " further criticizing several other buildings in nearby Minneapolis . He unfavorably added that Gruen " should have left downtown , downtown . " 
 = = = 1958 – 90 : Additions , JCPenney opens , and new competition = = = 
 Over the early years of Southdale , several tenants and restaurants opened in the center . A restaurant called Sidewalk Cafe , was an " outdoor " -themed restaurant , even though the venue was fully enclosed ; Sidewalk Cafe was the first restaurant of its kind . JCPenney , a Plano , Texas @-@ based department store , announced their interest in opening a location at Southdale Center . An addition to the mall was constructed , allowing JCPenney to open a 247 @,@ 902 square feet ( 23 @,@ 000 m2 ) store in 1972 ; it became Southdale 's third anchor store , following Dayton 's and Donaldson 's . Along with the new anchor store came an entire new mall corridor connecting JCPenney to the original structure of the mall . 
 During 1976 , construction of a new shopping center directly across the street from Southdale occurred . The construction resulted in the Galleria Edina , an upscale shopping center ; the new shopping mall increased competition with neighboring shopping centers . In 1987 , Donaldson 's announced the discontinuation of their chain of stores , which would shut one of the mall 's original anchors . Instead , Donaldson 's merged with local department chain Carson Pirie Scott . 
 = = = 1991 – 2008 : Expansion , Dayton 's merger , and store closures = = = 
 In 1991 , Dayton 's announced plans to construct a significantly larger store directly north of their current location . These plans included the demolition of the original Dayton 's store to be replaced with more stores , plus a larger " garden court " , and the construction of various multi @-@ level parking garages ; these plans were eventually constructed and finalized in the early 1990 's . On June 30 , 1997 , Southdale Center was sold to the O 'Connor Group , a New York @-@ based real estate company for $ 125 million , beating out a bid placed by General Growth Properties , a firm that owns several properties in the Twin Cities . Around this time , Southdale converted their basement into a singular anchor store , which became Marshalls ; surrounding the new anchor were several specialty shops and mall management offices . 
 During the early 2000 's , following fear of competition from nearby Eden Prairie Center and Mall of America , Southdale announced further plans to renovate the center again . A complete remodeling of the center occurred in 2001 , followed by a large addition to the southern half of the property ; the addition included a sixteen screen movie theater along with an entertainment district of restaurants and shops called " The District on France " . " The District on France " included several " upscale " dining options , including California Pizza Kitchen , The Cheesecake Factory , and <unk> 's Little Italy . A renovation of the less @-@ traveled third floor also occurred , with the addition of teen @-@ geared stores ; this addition was called " <unk> on Top " . 
 Throughout the mid 2000 's , Southdale began struggling with maintaining a low vacancy rate . Mervyn 's , one of Southdale 's four anchors , announced that they had filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy , which would in turn close all of their Minnesota locations . After the closure of Mervyn 's in 2004 , several tenants followed and ended their leases as well ; national retailers like The Bombay Company , Crate & Barrel , Ritz Camera , and Select Comfort all announced closures of their Southdale locations . Talks of a Dick 's Sporting Goods filling the space formerly leased by Mervyn 's occurred , but those plans never took off and eventually dissolved . 
 = = = 2009 – present : Ongoing renovations = = = 
 In February 2011 , Simon Property Group announced that Southdale would soon be anchored by Herberger 's , a local department store chain , and would lease the space previously used by Mervyn 's . Along with this announcement came the mention of a brand new food court to replace the nearly vacant one on the less @-@ traveled third floor , a housing development consisting of apartments and condominiums , and expanded retail . The food court 's construction would include six tenants , which was later increased to eight tenants . However , the new food court forced the closure of one of Southdale 's oldest tenants , Ralph 's Shoe Service , which originally opened at the mall in 1957 . Following several tenant terminations , the mall 's Marshalls anchor announced that their 40 @,@ 000 square feet ( 3 @,@ 700 m2 ) Southdale location would move to a different shopping center in Bloomington , Minnesota . 
 The new food court located by JCPenney was completed in 2012 and featured " upscale " dining options , such as Qdoba Mexican Grill and <unk> ; several other projects took place , such as cosmetic changes for the mall and the construction of new corridors . Since 2015 , several stores and businesses have opened up locations at Southdale Center . Gordmans , a Nebraska @-@ based discount retailer , filled the vacancy previous leased by Marshalls in July 2015 , followed by the opening of a 41 @,@ 500 square feet ( 3 @,@ 900 m2 ) Dave and Buster 's restaurant , filling the vacancy of the original food court . A Homewood Suites by Hilton resort was approved by the City of Edina and will be constructed in the shopping center 's northeast parking lot in June 2016 . 
 = Barry Williams ( spree killer ) = 
 Barry Kenneth Williams ( 1944 – 24 December 2014 ) , known since 1994 as Harry Street , was a British spree killer . A foundry worker who lived with his parents , he shot eight people in the English Midlands towns of West Bromwich and Nuneaton in the space of little over an hour on 26 October 1978 , killing five . Following a high @-@ speed car chase , he was arrested and in 1979 was convicted of manslaughter on the grounds of diminished responsibility . He was detained in high @-@ security hospitals under mental health legislation . 
 After being given a conditional release in 1994 , he changed his name , moved to Wales , and married . In 2014 , following allegations of harassment against his neighbours , he was convicted of further firearms offences . He was again ordered to be detained in a secure hospital , with little likelihood of release , and died in December 2014 . 
 = = Background = = 
 At the time of his first offence , Williams was an unmarried foundry worker . He lived at 14 Andrew Road on the <unk> Mill estate in West Bromwich , West Midlands , England with his elderly parents , Hilda and <unk> , who owned and ran a metal polishing business in Birmingham . 
 He held a valid firearms certificate , allowing him to possess a single semi @-@ automatic weapon . He used this weapon at approved gun clubs for sports shooting at targets . His erratic behaviour , including shooting at dummies dressed in wigs , and modifying his bullets to make them more powerful , led to him being expelled from one club , in Telford , Shropshire . His nickname there had been " The Cowboy " . Members of another gun club where Williams was a member had expressed concerns that he was stealing bullets . 
 During the mid 1970s , he had been involved in a number of disputes with his neighbours , the Burkitt family , of 16 Andrew Road , alleging that the noise of their television and record player disturbed him and his parents . This became an obsession , and he suffered the delusion that his neighbours were mocking him . On one occasion , during a row about noise , he told Philip Burkitt " I 'm going to exterminate you " . 
 = = 1978 incident = = 
 On the evening of 26 October 1978 , about a week after the extermination threat , George Burkitt and his 20 @-@ year @-@ old son Philip were working on Philip 's Triumph Spitfire car in front of their house . At around 7pm , annoyed by the noise they were making , Williams shot them both with a 9mm , Smith & Wesson automatic pistol . George died where he fell and Philip , wounded , ran into the house . Williams followed him , shooting him again and killing him . He then shot and killed George 's wife , Iris . The <unk> ' 17 @-@ year @-@ old daughter was hit four times in the back and once in the thigh , but survived . Two other neighbours , a married couple who had witnessed the attack on the <unk> , also survived being shot . The injured were treated at Birmingham General Hospital . 
 After discharging a total of 23 rounds , Williams fled the scene by car , firing a further six shots from a second , .22 calibre , pistol as he did so . In <unk> Way he shot at two boys , aged 10 and 11 , who were playing football , and at a woman , but missed them all . Passing through Wednesbury , he shot through the windows of a barber 's shop and two houses . In one of these , a nine @-@ year @-@ old girl was hurt by flying glass . He stopped for petrol in Walsall and drove off without paying . 
 At around 8 : 10pm , Williams shot and killed another married couple , Michel and Lisa Di Maria , after stopping to use the petrol filling station which they ran , <unk> Road Service Station , at <unk> , near Nuneaton , Warwickshire , some 20 miles ( 32 km ) from his home . Lisa was killed immediately , and Michel died later in hospital . 
 Williams slept rough in some woodland , and was arrested the next morning , in Spring Gardens , Buxton , after a 30 miles ( 48 km ) car chase at high speed , starting on the Derbyshire moors . After his car was involved in a collision , he pulled a gun and attempted to hijack one of the police cars which had been following him . He was overpowered without firing his gun by the unarmed officers who had been pursuing him . He later said he had wanted the police to shoot him . Police found 147 9mm and 770 .22 rounds in his car , along with the .22 calibre pistol which had a full magazine , and several home @-@ made bombs . 
 He was subsequently charged with five counts of murder . Two counts of attempted murder were ordered to lie on file . 
 In March 1979 at Stafford Crown Court he pleaded not guilty to murder but instead pleaded guilty to manslaughter on the grounds of diminished responsibility . The plea was accepted by the prosecution , after psychiatrists gave evidence that he had an active paranoid psychosis . His indefinite detention was ordered by the trial judge , Mr Justice Stephen Brown , and he was held in Broadmoor Hospital and at Ashworth Hospital , both high security units . 
 His parents described him as " a quiet boy " and said they had " no idea " of what he had been preparing to do . 
 = = Release = = 
 Williams , who had schizophrenia , was released from hospital in 1994 once doctors and a mental health tribunal decided that he was no longer a risk to the public . This was on condition that he could be detained again if his behaviour warranted it . A Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust spokesman said in 2014 , " Harry Street was released on a conditional discharge , subject to specific conditions , in 1993 [ sic ] by a Mental Health Tribunal , an independent judicial body , after careful consideration of the medical evidence presented to them . " 
 On release , he changed his name to Harry Street and initially was allowed to live in a bail hostel around 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) from Andrew Road , resulting in complaints from the MP for the latter area , Peter Snape , on behalf of several concerned constituents , to the Home Secretary , Michael Howard . Williams subsequently moved to Wales . He married in 1996 and a child was born later that year . The family moved to <unk> Road , Hall Green , Birmingham , in 2005 . 
 = = 2013 incident = = 
 In October 2013 , allegations arose that he had waged a campaign of harassment against his next @-@ door neighbour . Williams 's home was searched by West Midlands Police as part of their investigation , and he was found to be in possession of an improvised bomb , 50 homemade bullets , a revolver and two pistols . The bomb squad was called in to make the explosive device safe . 
 At Birmingham Crown Court in October 2014 , he pleaded guilty to three charges of possessing a prohibited firearm , to putting a neighbour in fear of violence , and to making an improvised explosive device . He was again ordered to be detained indefinitely , this time under sections 37 and 41 of the Mental Health Act 1983 , by Mr Justice Blair , who said that " The effect of these orders is that the defendant may never be released " . He also likened Williams 's more recent behaviour to that leading up to the 1978 incident and said that " a similar tragedy had been narrowly averted " . Williams was returned to Ashworth Hospital , where he was already being treated on recall from his previous detention . 
 West Midlands Police announced after the trial concluded that a Multi @-@ Agency Public Protection Arrangements serious case review would be held . A spokesman for the police said , " There was no trace of Harry Street on any police systems ; but it is thanks to the tenacity of a local police officer who , when the harassment escalated , made extensive checks which led her to Street 's GP and his true identity . " 
 He died on 24 December 2014 from a suspected heart attack . 
 = 2015 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 2015 Atlantic hurricane season was a slightly below average season that produced twelve tropical cyclones , eleven named storms , four hurricanes , and two major hurricanes . It officially began on June 1 , 2015 , and ended on November 30 , 2015 . These dates historically describe the period each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic basin . However , the first named storm , Ana , developed on May 8 , nearly a month before the official start of the season , the first pre @-@ season cyclone since Beryl in 2012 and the earliest since Ana in 2003 . The season concluded with Kate transitioning into an extratropical cyclone on November 11 , almost three weeks before the official end . 
 Although most of the storms impacted land , overall effects were minimal . Ana caused minor flooding and wind damage in the Carolinas and left two dead in North Carolina . Tropical Storm Bill and its remnants caused flooding primarily in the South Central , Midwestern , and Mid @-@ Atlantic regions of the United States , while its precursor also left flooding in Central America and Mexico . The storm resulted in two deaths in Honduras , two in Guatemala , one in Mexico , and three deaths in the United States . Additionally , the United States suffered about $ 17 @.@ 9 million ( 2015 USD ) in damage . Claudette and Danny left very minimal impact on land . In late August , Tropical Storm Erika brought heavy rainfall to Dominica , leading to devastating floods . Erika caused nearly $ 500 million in damage and 30 fatalities , making it the island 's deadliest natural disaster since Hurricane David in 1979 . The storm also flooded other nearby islands , but to a much lesser degree , such as Guadeloupe , Puerto Rico , and Hispaniola . Five additional deaths occurred in Haiti . 
 Fred prompted a hurricane warning for Cape Verde for the first time ever and was the first storm to pass through the islands as a hurricane since 1892 . Strong winds there left about $ 1 @.@ 1 million in damage . Two deaths were presumed to have occurred after two fishermen never returned to port . Seven other sailors likely drowned offshore Guinea @-@ Bissau after their fishing boat collapsed . Tropical storms Grace , Henri , and Ida left negligible impact on land . Hurricane Joaquin 's intensity and slow movement in the vicinity of the Bahamas resulted in severe damage on some islands . Additionally , the American cargo ship SS El Faro went missing near Crooked Island and eventually capsized during the storm , drowning 33 people . Rough seas in Haiti also caused damage and one death from a fisherman drowning . Joaquin was the most intense satellite era tropical cyclone of non @-@ tropical origins . The remnants of Kate affected the British Isles , particularly Wales in the United Kingdom . Throughout the season , these storms collectively caused at least $ 648 @.@ 7 million in damage and 89 deaths . 
 With the exception of Tropical Storm Risk 's initial season prediction in December 2014 , all major forecasting agencies called for a below or near @-@ average season . The strong possibility of an El Niño developing in 2015 and colder than average sea surface temperatures were most often cited in these predictions . Overall , the forecasts were fairly accurate . 
 = = Seasonal forecasts = = 
 In advance of , and during , each hurricane season , several forecasts of hurricane activity are issued by national meteorological services , scientific agencies , and noted hurricane experts . These include forecasters from the United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) ' s National Hurricane and Climate Prediction Center , Tropical Storm Risk , the United Kingdom 's Met Office , and Philip J. Klotzbach , William M. Gray and their associates at Colorado State University ( CSU ) . The forecasts include weekly and monthly changes in significant factors that help determine the number of tropical storms , hurricanes , and major hurricanes within a particular year . According to NOAA and CSU , the average Atlantic hurricane season between 1981 and 2010 contained roughly 12 tropical storms , six hurricanes , three major hurricanes , and an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) index of 66 – 103 units . NOAA typically categorizes a season as either above @-@ average , average , or below @-@ average based on the cumulative ACE Index , but the number of tropical storms , hurricanes , and major hurricanes within a hurricane season are considered occasionally as well . 
 = = = Pre @-@ season forecasts = = = 
 On December 9 , 2014 , Tropical Storm Risk ( TSR ) , a public consortium consisting of experts on insurance , risk management , and seasonal climate forecasting at University College London , issued its first outlook on seasonal hurricane activity during the 2015 season . In its report , the organization forecast activity about 20 % below the 1950 – 2014 average , or about 30 % below the 2005 – 2014 average , totaling to 13 ( ± 4 ) tropical storms , 6 ( ± 3 ) hurricanes , 2 ( ± 2 ) major hurricanes , and a cumulative ACE index of 79 ( ± 58 ) units . This forecast was largely based on an enhancement of low @-@ level trade winds across the tropical Atlantic during the July to September period . TSR 's report stressed that uncertainty in this forecast existed due to the unpredictability in the El Niño Southern Oscillation and North Atlantic sea surface temperatures . 
 A few months later , on April 9 , 2015 , TSR updated its report , detailing its prediction of activity 45 % below the 1950 – 2014 average , or about 50 % below the recent 2005 – 2014 average , with 11 named storms , 5 hurricanes , 2 major hurricanes , and a cumulative ACE index of 56 units . TSR cited what were expected to be cooler than average ocean temperatures across the tropical North Atlantic and Caribbean Sea as reasoning for lower activity . In addition , the report stated that if the ACE forecast for 2015 were to verify , the total values during the three @-@ year period from 2013 – 2015 would be the lowest since 1992 – 1994 , signalling a possible end to the active phase of Atlantic hurricane activity that began in 1995 . 
 On April 9 , CSU also released its first quantitative forecast for the 2015 hurricane season , predicting 7 named storms , 3 hurricanes , 1 major hurricane , and a cumulative ACE index of 40 units . The combination of cooler than average waters in the tropical and subtropical Atlantic , as well as a developing El Niño predicted to reach at least moderate intensity , were expected to favor one of the least active seasons since the mid @-@ 1990s . The probabilities of a major hurricane striking various coastal areas across the Atlantic were lower than average , although CSU stressed that it only takes one landfalling hurricane to make it an active season for residents involved . On April 13 , North Carolina State University ( NCSU ) released its forecast , predicting a near record @-@ low season with just 4 to 6 named storms , 1 to 3 hurricanes , and 1 major hurricane . 
 On May 21 , the United Kingdom Met Office ( UKMO ) issued its forecast , predicting a season with below @-@ normal activity . It predicted 8 storms , with a 70 % chance that the number of storms would be between 6 and 10 ; it predicted 5 hurricanes , with a 70 % chance that that number would fall in the range of 3 to 7 . UKMO 's ACE index prediction was 74 units , with a 70 % chance of the index falling in the range of 40 to 108 units . On May 27 , NOAA released its seasonal forecast , predicting a below @-@ normal season with 6 to 11 named storms , 3 to 6 hurricanes , and 0 to 2 major hurricanes . NOAA indicated that there was a 70 % chance of a below @-@ normal season , a 20 % chance of a near @-@ normal season , and a 10 % chance of an above @-@ normal season . On the same day , TSR released its preseason forecasts , slightly lowering all the number with 10 tropical storms , 4 hurricanes and 1 major hurricane . 
 = = = Mid @-@ season outlooks = = = 
 On June 1 , CSU released an updated forecast , increasing the number of predicted named storms to 8 , due to the early formation of Tropical Storm Ana , while keeping the predictions for hurricanes and major hurricanes at 3 and 1 , respectively ; the ACE index forecast was also kept at 40 units . Probabilities of a major hurricane making landfall on various coastal areas remained below average . On August 5 , TSR updated their forecast and lowered the number of hurricanes developing within the basin to 4 , with only 1 forecasted to become a major hurricane . The ACE index prediction was also reduced to 44 units . 
 = = Seasonal summary = = 
 The Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 1 , 2015 . It was a near average season in which twelve tropical cyclones formed . Eleven of the twelve designated cyclones attained tropical storm status . Of the eight tropical storms , four reached at least Category 1 hurricane intensity . The 2015 season extended the period without major hurricane landfalls in the United States to ten years , with the last such system being Hurricane Wilma in 2005 . The lack of activity was primarily attributed to an atmospheric circulation that favored dry , sinking air over low latitudes to the west of 40 ° W and westerly wind shear enhanced by El Niño . A few notable events occurred during the season . Ana was the first tropical cyclone to form in the off @-@ season since 2012 . Fred was one of the easternmost tropical storms recorded and made landfall in Cape Verde as a Category 1 hurricane , becoming the first hurricane to strike that country since 1892 . Joaquin was the most intense storm of non @-@ tropical origin in the satellite era and the strongest to affect the Bahamas in October since 1866 . The tropical cyclones of this season caused 89 deaths and at least $ 648 @.@ 7 million in damage . The Atlantic hurricane season officially ended on November 30 , 2015 . 
 Tropical cyclogenesis began early , with Ana developing on May 8 , over three weeks prior to the official beginning of the season and far ahead of the long @-@ term climatological average of July 9 . The month of June featured one tropical cyclone , Bill , which formed on June 16 . Claudette , the only system in the month of July , developed on July 13 . The rate of tropical cyclogenesis increased in August , though no storms developed in the first half of the month . Danny , the season 's first major hurricane , formed on August 16 , followed by Erika on August 24 , and Fred on August 30 . September , which is the climatological peak of hurricane season , featured five additional tropical cyclones – Grace , Henri , Tropical Depression Nine , Ida , and Joaquin . The most intense storm of the season was Joaquin , which peaked as a strong Category 4 hurricane with maximum sustained winds of 155 mph ( 250 km / h ) , just short of Category 5 on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Joaquin lasted into October , though no other systems developed that month . The season 's final cyclone , Kate , developed on November 8 and became extratropical on November 11 . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an Accumulated Cyclone Energy ( ACE ) rating of 63 , which was well below the 1981 – 2010 median of 92 . Broadly speaking , ACE is a measure of the power of a tropical or subtropical storm multiplied by the length of time it existed . Therefore , a storm with a longer duration or stronger intensity , such as Joaquin , will have high values of ACE . It is only calculated for full advisories on specific tropical and subtropical systems reaching or exceeding wind speeds of 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) . Accordingly , tropical depressions are not included here . After the storm has dissipated , typically after the end of the season , the NHC reexamines the data , and produces a final report on each storm . These revisions can lead to a revised ACE total either upward or downward compared to the operational value . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm Ana = = = 
 A low pressure area of non @-@ tropical origins developed into Subtropical Storm Ana at 00 : 00 UTC on May 8 , while situated about 175 miles ( 280 km ) southeast of Myrtle Beach , South Carolina . The system was classified as subtropical due to its involvement with an upper trough , as well as its large wind field . Throughout the day , convection progressively increased as Ana moved north @-@ northwestward across the warm sea surface temperatures associated with the Gulf Stream . At 00 : 00 UTC on May 9 , the cyclone attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 60 miles per hour ( 95 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 998 millibars ( 29 @.@ 5 inHg ) . Six hours later , Ana transitioned into a fully tropical system . However , the storm soon began weakening after moving away from the warm waters of the Gulf Stream and increasing wind shear also contributed to the deterioration of Ana . Around 10 : 00 UTC on May 10 , the system made landfall near North Myrtle Beach , South Carolina , with winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . Ana weakened to a tropical depression just eight hours later and transitioned into a remnant low near the Delmarva Peninsula at 00 : 00 UTC on May 12 . The remnant low merged with a frontal system about 24 hours later . 
 Striking South Carolina on May 10 , Ana became the earliest U.S. landfalling system on record . In the state , a storm surge peaking at about 2 @.@ 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 76 m ) resulted in erosion and minor coastal flooding , with roads washed out at North Myrtle Beach . Inland , moderate rainfall caused a lake to rise above its bank , inundating some homes and streets . One drowning death occurred in North Carolina after rip currents caused a man to remain underwater for more than 10 minutes . Rainfall in the state peaked at 6 @.@ 7 inches ( 170 mm ) southeast of Kinston , North Carolina , where minor street flooding took place . In Lenoir County , local firefighters rescued several stranded individuals by boat when rising floodwaters isolated about 10 residences . Tropical storm @-@ force winds were confined to coastal areas , with a peak gust of 62 mph ( 100 km / h ) observed near Southport . An additional death occurred in North Carolina after a tree fell on a car in <unk> . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Bill = = = 
 The National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) began monitoring disorganized convection across the northwestern Caribbean Sea in association with an upper @-@ level trough on June 12 . After interacting with a broad area of low pressure near the Yucatán Peninsula , an elongated area of low pressure formed in the vicinity on June 13 . The system moved northwestward into the Gulf of Mexico and developed a well @-@ defined circulation on early June 16 . Because the system was already producing tropical storm force winds , it was immediately classified as Tropical Storm Bill while situated about 200 mi ( 320 km ) from the US . Initially continuing northwestward , Bill re @-@ curved west @-@ northwestward later on June 16 . Around 12 : 00 UTC , the storm peaked with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 997 mbar ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) . Just under five hours later , Bill made landfall near on Matagorda Island , Texas , at the same intensity . The cyclone weakened to a tropical depression and turned northward early on June 17 . However , possibly due to the rare brown ocean effect , Bill remained a tropical cyclone until late on June 18 , when it degenerated into a remnant low over eastern Oklahoma . The remnant low moved east @-@ northeastward until dissipating over West Virginia on June 21 . 
 The precursor to Bill produced widespread heavy rain in Central America . In Guatemala , flooding affected more than 100 homes while a landslide killed two people . Two others died in Honduras due to flooding with two more missing . Heavy rains fell across parts of the Yucatán Peninsula , with accumulations peaking at 13 in ( 330 mm ) in Cancún , the highest daily total seen in the city in nearly two years . One person died from electrocution in the city . In Texas , flooding was exacerbated by record rainfall in some areas in May . A number of roads were inundated and several water rescues were required in Alice and San Antonio . Major traffic jams occurred in the Houston and Dallas areas . Coastal flooding left minor damage , mostly in Galveston and Matagorda counties . One death occurred when a boy was swept into a culvert . In Oklahoma , numerous roads were also inundated by water . Interstate 35 was closed near Turner Falls due to a rockslide and near Ardmore because of high water . There were two fatalities in Oklahoma , both from drowning . There was also flooding in several others states . Across the United States , Bill was responsible for approximately $ 17 @.@ 9 million in damage . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Claudette = = = 
 In early July , a shortwave trough embedded in the westerlies crossed the United States . The system emerged over the Atlantic near the Outer Banks of North Carolina on July 12 ; a surface low soon developed . Traversing the Gulf Stream , convection abruptly increased on July 13 and it is estimated that a tropical depression formed by 06 : 00 UTC that day , roughly 255 mi ( 410 km ) east @-@ northeast of Cape Hatteras . Six hours later , the depression intensified into a tropical storm and was assigned the name Claudette . The sudden development of the cyclone was not well @-@ forecast , and Claudette was not operationally warned upon until it was already a tropical storm . Embedded within southwesterly flow ahead of mid @-@ latitude trough , the storm moved generally northeast . Claudette reached its peak intensity around 18 : 00 UTC with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) and a pressure of 1003 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 62 inHg ) . Increasing wind shear on July 14 prompted weakening , displacing convection from the storm 's center . It subsequently degenerated into a remnant low by 00 : 00 UTC on July 15 . The remnants of Claudette were absorbed into a frontal boundary just south of Newfoundland later that day . 
 Foggy and wet conditions associated with Claudette forced flight cancellations and travel delays across portions of eastern Newfoundland . 
 = = = Hurricane Danny = = = 
 A tropical wave emerged off the western coast of Africa in mid @-@ August , acquiring sufficient organization to be declared a tropical depression by 06 : 00 UTC on August 18 while located about 765 mi ( 1 @,@ 230 km ) southwest of Cape Verde . The depression intensified into Tropical Storm Danny six hours later . Steered generally westward , the cyclone initially struggled to intensify quickly in the midst of abundant Saharan Air Layer ( SAL ) , but it managed to attain hurricane intensity around 12 : 00 UTC on August 20 . Thereafter , Danny began a period of rapid deepening , becoming a Category 3 hurricane and attaining peak winds of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) early on August 21 . The negative effects of dry air and increased shear began to affect the cyclone after peak . 
 Early on August 22 , the storm weakened to a Category 2 and further to a Category 1 hurricane several hours later . Danny then deteriorated to a tropical storm by 00 : 00 UTC on August 23 . After about twelve hours , the cyclone weakened to a tropical depression as it moved through the Leeward Islands . Danny degenerated into an open wave at 18 : 00 UTC on August 24 . The remnants of Danny continued to the west @-@ northwest for another day and was last noted over Hispaniola . The hurricane prompted the issuance of several tropical storm warnings for the Lesser Antilles . Leeward Islands Air Transport cancelled 40 flights and sandbags were distributed in the United States Virgin Islands . Danny ultimately only brought light rain to the region , with its effects considered beneficial due to a severe drought . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Erika = = = 
 A westward @-@ moving tropical wave developed into Tropical Storm Erika late on August 24 while located about 1 @,@ 035 mi ( 1 @,@ 665 km ) east of the Leeward Islands . Steered briskly westward by southerly flow associated with a subtropical ridge , the storm did not strengthen further despite initially favorable conditions . On August 25 , Erika encountered wind shear and dry mid @-@ level air , causing the storm to weaken slightly and leaving the low @-@ level circulation partially exposed . Contrary to predictions of a northwesterly recurvature , the cyclone persisted on a westerly course and passed through the Leeward Islands just north of Guadeloupe on August 27 . Unfavorable conditions in the Caribbean Sea prevented Erika from strengthening beyond 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . Late on August 28 , the storm degenerated into a low pressure area just south of the eastern tip of Hispaniola . Shortly thereafter , the remnants trekked across Hispaniola and later Cuba , before reaching the Gulf of Mexico on September 1 . After striking Florida on the following day , the remains of Erika became indistinguishable over Georgia on September 3 . 
 Several Leeward Islands experienced heavy rainfall during the passage of Erika , especially Dominica . There , 15 in ( 380 mm ) of precipitation fell at Canefield Airport , causing catastrophic mudslides and flooding . A total of 890 homes were destroyed or left uninhabitable while 14 @,@ 291 people were rendered homeless , and entire villages were flattened . With a total of 30 deaths , Erika was the deadliest natural disaster in Dominica since David in 1979 . Overall , there was up to $ 500 million in damage and the island was set back approximately 20 years in terms of development . In Guadeloupe , heavy rainfall in the vicinity of Basse @-@ Terre caused flooding and mudslides , forcing roads to temporarily close . Approximately 200 @,@ 000 people in Puerto Rico were left without electricity . The island experienced at least $ 17 @.@ 4 million in agricultural damage . In the Dominican Republic , a weather station in Barahona measured 24 @.@ 26 in ( 616 mm ) of rain , including 8 @.@ 8 in ( 220 mm ) in a single hour . A total of 823 homes suffered damage and 7 @,@ 345 people were displaced . Five people died in Haiti , four from a weather @-@ related traffic accident and one from a landslide . 
 = = = Hurricane Fred = = = 
 A well @-@ defined tropical wave developed into a tropical depression just offshore Africa about 190 mi ( 310 km ) west @-@ northwest of Conakry , Guinea , early on August 30 . About six hours later , the depression intensified into a tropical storm . The next day , Fred further grew to a Category 1 hurricane and several hours later peaked with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 986 mbar ( 29 @.@ 1 inHg ) while approaching Cape Verde . After passing Boa Vista and moving away from Santo Antão , it entered a phase of steady weakening , dropping below hurricane status by September 1 . Fred then turned to the west @-@ northwest and endured increasingly hostile wind shear , but maintained its status as a tropical cyclone despite repeated forecasts of dissipation . It fluctuated between a minimal tropical storm and tropical depression through September 4 – 5 before curving sharply to the north . By September 6 , Fred 's circulation pattern had diminished considerably and the cyclone degenerated into a trough several hours later while located about 1 @,@ 210 mi ( 1 @,@ 950 km ) southwest of the Azores . The remnants were soon absorbed by a frontal system . 
 At the threat of the hurricane , all of Cape Verde was placed under a hurricane warning for the first time in history . Gale @-@ force winds battered much of the Barlavento region through August 31 , downing numerous trees and utility poles . On the easternmost islands of Boa Vista and Sal , Fred leveled roofs and left several villages without power and phone services for several days . About 70 percent of the houses in Povoação Velha were damaged to some degree . Throughout the northern islands , rainstorms damaged homes and roads , and São Nicolau lost large amounts of its crop and livestock . Monetary losses exceeded $ 1 @.@ 1 million across Cape Verde , though the rain 's overall impact on the agriculture was positive . Swells from the hurricane produced violent seas along West African shores , destroying fishing villages and submerging large swaths of residential area in Senegal . Overall , nine deaths were directly attributed to Fred . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Grace = = = 
 A well @-@ organized tropical wave emerged off the western coast of Africa on September 3 . Initially disorganized with a broad area of low pressure , a burst of convection on September 5 led to a more concise center , and a tropical depression developed around 06 : 00 UTC that day while positioned about 175 mi ( 280 km ) south of Cape Verde . The depression intensified into Tropical Storm Grace twelve hours later . Embedded within a generally favorable environment , Grace strengthened to attain peak winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) around 12 : 00 UTC on September 6 , when a mid @-@ level eye feature was evident on satellite . Thereafter , cooler waters and increased shear caused the cyclone to weaken to a tropical depression early on September 8 and dissipate at 12 : 00 UTC the next day while located within the central Atlantic . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Henri = = = 
 On September 8 , an upper @-@ level trough spawned a tropical depression southeast of Bermuda ; the next day it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Henri . Struggling against strong westerly wind shear , the system attained a peak intensity of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 1003 mbar ( hPa ) , possibly due to baroclinity . Thereafter , increasing interaction with the same upper @-@ level trough to the west degraded Henri 's circulation . It opened up into a trough on September 11 ; the remnants were later absorbed into a non @-@ tropical cyclone over the North Atlantic several days later . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Nine = = = 
 On September 10 , a strong tropical wave emerged off the western coast of Africa . Passing south of Cape Verde , its interaction with a convectively @-@ coupled kelvin wave resulted in increased convection and the formation of an area of low pressure . After further organization , the wave acquired sufficient organization to be declared a tropical depression by 12 : 00 UTC on September 16 while located within the central Atlantic . Unfavorable upper @-@ level winds caused the appearance of the cyclone to become disheveled almost immediately after formation , and despite sporadic bursts of convection atop the storm 's center , the depression dissipated at 18 : 00 UTC on September 19 without ever attaining tropical storm intensity . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Ida = = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic from the west coast of Africa on September 13 . The wave later interacted with a Kelvin wave , the latter of which contributed to the formation of Tropical Depression Nine . Moving westward with a large area of convection , the tropical wave and the Kelvin developed into a well @-@ defined low pressure area around midday on September 15 , according to satellite imagery . However , disorganization prevented its classification as a tropical depression until 06 : 00 UTC on September 18 , while located about 750 mi ( 1 @,@ 210 km ) south of the southernmost Cape Verde Islands . The depression moved west @-@ northwestward due to a subtropical ridge to the north and intensified into Tropical Storm Ida early the following day . Westerly wind shear exposed the storm 's low @-@ level circulation , causing Ida to strengthen only slightly . 
 Wind shear briefly decreased , allowing the cyclone to peak with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 1 @,@ 001 mbar ( 29 @.@ 6 inHg ) at 12 : 00 UTC on September 21 . However , shear increased later that day , causing slow weakening . Ida then decelerated and began moving in a general eastward direction on September 22 after becoming embedded in the flow associated with a mid- to upper @-@ level trough . Early on September 24 , the storm weakened to a tropical depression . During the following day , the trough was replaced with a subtropical ridge , causing Ida to turn northwestward and then west @-@ northwestward on September 26 . After shear and dry air caused much of the convection to diminish , Ida degenerated into a remnant low around 12 : 00 UTC on September 27 while situated about 1 @,@ 000 mi ( 1 @,@ 610 km ) east @-@ northeast of Barbuda . 
 = = = Hurricane Joaquin = = = 
 A non @-@ tropical low developed into a tropical depression on September 28 about 405 mi ( 650 km ) southwest of Bermuda , based on the improved circulation on satellite imagery and deep convection forming near the center . The storm initially moved slowly southwestward due to a blocking ridge of high pressure to the north . Although wind shear increased slightly , Joaquin tracked over ocean temperatures of 86 ° F ( 30 ° C ) , allowing the cloud pattern to become better organized . On September 30 , the storm intensified into a hurricane . Joaquin then rapidly deepened , becoming a Category 4 hurricane late on October 1 . Joaquin later weakened as it passed through the Bahamas , but reintensified to a Category 4 hurricane while recurving northeastward . On October 3 , maximum sustained winds peaked at 155 mph ( 250 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 931 mbar ( 27 @.@ 5 inHg ) . Thereafter , Joaquin began to rapidly weaken as it approached Bermuda . The cyclone then turned eastward and maintained hurricane status until October 7 . By the following day , Joaquin became extratropical about 445 mi ( 715 km ) west @-@ northwest of Corvo Island in the Azores . The remnants later stuck Portugal , before dissipating over the Gulf of Cádiz on October 15 . 
 Battering the Bahamas 's southern islands for over two days , Joaquin caused extensive devastation , especially on Acklins , Crooked Island , Long Island , Rum Cay , and San Salvador Island . Severe storm surge inundated many communities , trapping hundreds of people in their homes ; flooding persisted for days after the hurricane 's departure . Prolonged , intense winds brought down trees and powerlines , and unroofed homes throughout the affected region . As airstrips were submerged and heavily damaged , relief workers were limited in their ability to quickly help affected residents . Damage in the Bahamas totaled about $ 120 @.@ 6 million . Offshore , the American cargo ship El Faro and her 33 crew members were lost to the hurricane . Coastal flooding also impacted the Turks and Caicos , washing out roadways , compromising seawalls , and damaging homes . Strong winds and heavy rainfall caused some property damage in eastern Cuba . One fisherman died when heavy seas capsized a small boat along the coast of Haiti . Storm tides resulted in severe flooding in several of Haiti 's departments , forcing families from their homes and destroying crops . Joaquin also posed a threat to parts of the East Coast of the United States . State of emergencies were declared in Maryland , New Jersey , North Carolina , South Carolina , and Virginia , as well as a mandatory evacuation from Ocracoke , North Carolina . Joaquin ultimately curved northeast and caused little direct impact in the United States , but another large storm system over the southeastern states drew tremendous moisture from the hurricane , resulting in catastrophic flooding in South Carolina . The storm brought strong winds to Bermuda that cut power to 15 @,@ 000 customers . Damage on Bermuda was minor . 
 = = = Hurricane Kate = = = 
 On October 30 , a poorly @-@ defined tropical wave and its associated small area of disturbed weather emerged into the Atlantic from the west coast of Africa . Strong wind shear prevented significant development or organization of deep convection for a few days . However , by November 5 , cloudiness and showers increased as the system was approaching the Lesser Antilles . After a rapid increase in convection and the circulation becoming more well @-@ defined on satellite imagery , a tropical depression about 115 mi ( 190 km ) southeast of San Salvador Island in the Bahamas around 18 : 00 UTC on November 8 . The depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Kate early on November 9 . After initially moving northwestward , Kate briefly accelerated northward around the western periphery of a subtropical ridge over the central Atlantic . Thereafter , the cyclone accelerated further and curved northeastward due to the mid @-@ latitude westerlies . 
 After intensification and improvements to convective banding , Kate was upgraded to a Category 1 hurricane at 00 : 00 UTC on November 11 . Twelve hours later , the storm peaked with maximum sustained winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 980 mbar ( 29 inHg ) . Due to very strong wind shear and decreasing sea surface temperatures , the storm began losing tropical characteristics shortly thereafter . Early on November 12 , the system became extratropical about 430 mi ( 690 km ) south @-@ southeast of Cape Race , Newfoundland . Late on November 13 , the remnants merged with a larger extratropical cyclone . Between November 15 and November 16 , the remnants of Kate affected the United Kingdom and Ireland . Across Wales , high winds downed trees and heavy rain flooded roadways . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the North Atlantic in 2015 . The names not retired from this list will be used again in the 2021 season list . This is the same list used in the 2009 season . The name Joaquin replaced Juan after 2003 , but was not used in 2009 ; therefore , it was used for the first and only time this year . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 On April 25 , 2016 , at the 38th session of the RA IV hurricane committee , the World Meteorological Organization retired the names Erika and Joaquin from its rotating name lists , and they will not be used again for another Atlantic hurricane . The names will be replaced with Elsa and Julian for the 2021 season , respectively . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 This is a table of all of the storms that have formed during the 2015 Atlantic hurricane season . It includes their names , duration , peak strength , areas affected , damage , and death totals . Deaths in parentheses are additional and indirect ( an example of an indirect death would be a traffic accident ) , but were still related to that storm . Damage and deaths include totals while the storm was extratropical , a wave , or a low , and all of the damage figures are in 2015 USD . 
 = 2016 Australian Grand Prix = 
 The 2016 Australian Grand Prix ( formally known as the 2016 Formula 1 Rolex Australian Grand Prix ) was a Formula One motor race that was held on 20 March 2016 in Melbourne . The race was contested over fifty @-@ seven laps of the Melbourne Grand Prix Circuit and was the first round of the 2016 FIA Formula One World Championship . The race marked the eightieth race in the combined history of the Australian Grand Prix — which dates back to the 100 Miles Road Race of 1928 — and the twenty @-@ first time the event was held at the Melbourne Grand Prix Circuit . Mercedes driver Lewis Hamilton was the defending race winner . 
 Hamilton took the first pole position of the season and the fiftieth of his career in a qualifying session that saw the introduction of a new one @-@ by @-@ one elimination format that was widely criticised . His teammate Nico Rosberg took victory ahead of Hamilton and Ferrari 's Sebastian Vettel . The race was stopped on lap 18 following an accident involving Fernando Alonso and Esteban Gutiérrez . Mercedes used the break for a change of tyres that allowed their drivers to take a 1 – 2 finish after Vettel had initially led the race from the start . Romain Grosjean finished sixth , scoring points for the Haas F1 team on their début , the first completely new team to do so since 2002 . Mercedes equalled the record for most consecutive 1 – 2 finishes , by achieving their fifth in a row . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 = = = = Regulation changes = = = = 
 The race saw the introduction of a new qualifying system . As before , qualifying was divided into three parts . However , instead of eliminating the slowest drivers at the end of each respective session , the slowest driver at a given point was now eliminated from contention every ninety seconds , with the countdown starting some minutes into every session . 
 In a further change of regulations , tyre supplier Pirelli now made three instead of two tyre compounds available for each Grand Prix . For the Australian Grand Prix , these were the super @-@ soft , soft and medium compounds . With Pirelli providing every driver with two sets of tyres for the race ( of which one must be used ) and an additional one for the third part of qualifying , drivers were able to choose ten additional sets of tyres out of the three compounds available . Notably , Mercedes drivers Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg made different choices , with Rosberg opting for an additional set of mediums instead of soft tyres . The two Manor drivers chose the most conservative way , taking on four sets each of the medium and soft compounds . 
 The race saw the competitive début of the Haas F1 Team , and its car , the Haas VF @-@ 16 ; and the return of Renault as a fully manufacturer @-@ supported team after a four @-@ year absence . 
 = = = Free practice = = = 
 Per the regulations for the 2016 season , three practice sessions were held , two 1 @.@ 5 @-@ hour sessions on Friday and another one @-@ hour session before qualifying on Saturday . Rain had fallen before the start of the first practice session , rendering the track wet and slippery , and drivers initially opted to go on their first laps on intermediate tyres . Nico Rosberg was the first to set a lap time , clocking in at 1 : 44 @.@ 037 , a time soon bettered by his Mercedes teammate Lewis Hamilton at 1 : 40 @.@ 812 . As conditions improved further , Kimi Räikkönen set a new fastest time after about half an hour of practice . Soon after , the track had dried enough for the drivers to go out on slick tyres , with Daniel Ricciardo setting the first time on the medium compound with 1 : 34 @.@ 007 . After around one hour of practice , Hamilton managed the best time of the session , at 1 : 29 @.@ 725 . Still , several wet spots on the track caused problems to a number of drivers , including Max Verstappen , who flat @-@ spotted his tyres while spinning in turn six , as well as Valtteri Bottas and Rio Haryanto , who both had to pass through the gravel traps after slipping off the track . Shortly before the end of the session , rain returned and caught out many drivers , including Räikkönen and Ricciardo , whose Red Bull <unk> got stuck in a gravel pit at turn twelve . 
 Due to several rain showers between first and second practice , the track was again wet during the second session , which limited the drivers to using the intermediate tyres only . Hamilton was again fastest , setting a time of 1 : 38 @.@ 841 . Teammate Rosberg crashed at turn seven thirty minutes into the session , damaging a new @-@ specification front wing that the team had deliberately not run in first practice for fear of damage . Rosberg later apologised for the incident , which saw him trying to get back to pit lane , before his team told him to stop on track , calling an early end to his session . Nico Hülkenberg , Räikkönen , Ricciardo and Carlos Sainz , Jr. all finished within one second of Hamilton 's time , while Sergio Pérez was at one point on his way to a new fastest time overall , setting best times in the first two <unk> along the track , before having to slow in the last part of the lap due to heavy rain . The two Manor drivers Pascal Wehrlein and Haryanto covered the highest number of laps , with 24 and 22 laps in 12th and 14th place respectively . Neither Renault nor Williams drivers set a time , albeit going on track . The Sauber cars and Max Verstappen 's Toro Rosso did not leave the garage at all during the session . 
 Although rain fell on Saturday morning , the track had dried by the start of the final free practice session . Lewis Hamilton again set the fastest time with 1 : 25 @.@ 624 , less than two @-@ tenths of a second in front of teammate Rosberg , with Sebastian Vettel in third position close behind . The fastest times had been set on the super @-@ soft tyre compound . However , Mercedes 's advantage over Ferrari proved more significant , up to seven @-@ tenths of a second on the harder soft compound , the tyre most likely to be used in the race . Toro Rosso confirmed their good pace for the weekend with fourth and sixth place for Carlos Sainz and Max Verstappen respectively , being about half a second quicker than their sister team , Red Bull Racing . A major incident occurred just seconds after the beginning of the practice session , when Rio Haryanto and Romain Grosjean collided in the pit lane . Both cars needed to equip new front wings and Haas also changed the floor on Grosjean 's car . Haryanto was later issued a three @-@ place grid penalty for the incident , as well as two penalty points added to his licence . 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Qualifying got under way on Saturday afternoon with new rules in place . Just as in years before , the qualifying procedure was divided into three parts , with the first part ( Q1 ) running for 16 minutes and the second and third parts ( Q2 and Q3 ) being 15 and 14 minutes long respectively . All twenty @-@ two cars contested the first part , with seven drivers eliminated from further contention in each of the first two parts of qualifying , leaving eight drivers to compete for pole position in Q3 . However , in a change of rules , drivers were now eliminated during the session , with the slowest runner at a given point being taken out from contention every ninety seconds , beginning seven minutes into Q1 , six minutes into Q2 and five minutes into Q3 . 
 The new format meant that all cars took to the track quickly in Q1 , with everyone setting lap times on the super @-@ soft compound , the fastest tyre available at the event . The two Manor drivers were first to be eliminated , having set only one timed lap each , as were both Haas cars after them , being unable to cross the finishing line in time . The same fate caught out Daniil Kvyat , who qualified 18th . Both Sauber drivers were able to go out on a second timed lap , but proved too slow to avoid being the last to go out in Q1 , after Renault rookie Jolyon Palmer was able to avoid elimination , setting a faster time towards the end of the session . 
 Q2 started with a busy track once more , but many of the top drivers elected not to go out on a second timed run after setting sufficient lap times first time around . The eliminated drivers were determined rather quickly , with the two Renault drivers qualifying 14th and 15th respectively . The two McLarens were next to go out of contention , before Bottas was eliminated for 11th place on the grid , failing to improve on his lap time . Both Force India were the last not to make it into Q3 , with Sergio Pérez beating his teammate Hülkenberg to ninth . 
 The third part of qualifying determined pole position and only the two Mercedes drivers set two timed laps . After he clocked in behind both Ferrari drivers in his first run , Rosberg improved to second place on his second time out , but was unable to challenge teammate Hamilton , who took the fiftieth pole position of his career . Every other driver was limited to only one timed lap and in the end , the two Ferraris of Vettel and Räikkönen locked out the second row on the grid ahead of Max Verstappen and Felipe Massa . Sainz and Ricciardo rounded up the top eight on the grid . Therefore , Q3 saw little running with the final positions determined very early on and drivers exiting their cars five minutes before the end of qualifying . 
 = = = = Post @-@ qualifying = = = = 
 The new qualifying format was criticised immediately after the end of the session by pundits , drivers and team personnel alike . Sky Sports commentator Martin Brundle called for a swift revision of the rules , saying the procedure was " not acceptable " and calling for it to be abandoned before the next race . Mercedes 's executive director Toto Wolff and former driver Johnny Herbert were equally critical , describing it as " rubbish " and " embarrassing " . Red Bull team director Christian Horner was apologetic , describing the format as " [ not ] good for Formula One . " Niki Lauda , non @-@ executive chairman at Mercedes , was in agreement , calling it " a big mistake . " Particular criticism was aimed at the fact that many drivers did not get enough time to improve on their lap times , seeing many getting out of their cockpits while still technically in contention . 1996 World Champion Damon Hill observed that pole @-@ sitter Hamilton " could have waved his own chequered flag [ ... ] with four minutes still to go . " Nico Rosberg acknowledged that it had " not worked " , while Sebastian Vettel was equally critical , describing it as " the wrong way to go . " Lewis Hamilton joined the criticism but acknowledged the attempt to revitalise the format . Bernie Ecclestone , the commercial rights holder of Formula One , spoke out against the format as well , declaring it to be " pretty crap " . On the day of the race , the teams of Formula 1 voted a proposal to go back to the qualifying format as it had been in previous seasons , which was rejected by the FIA 's F1 Commission . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 At the end of the formation lap , Daniil Kvyat was unable to reach the grid due to an electrical issue . Therefore , the field went to another formation lap and the race was shortened accordingly to 57 laps . At the start proper , Vettel got away well , passing through both Mercedes cars into the lead , followed by his teammate Räikkönen in second . As Rosberg and Hamilton went through the first corner , Hamilton was forced wide and lost additional places , falling down to sixth . Kevin Magnussen suffered a puncture on the first lap and pitted for new tyres , while Esteban Gutiérrez had mechanical issues at the back of the field . Hamilton was able to pass fifth @-@ placed Massa on lap four , as Vettel was leading from Räikkonen , Rosberg and Verstappen . On lap eight , Sainz was the first of the top @-@ ten runners to pit for new tyres . Meanwhile , Hamilton was unable to pass Verstappen for fourth , discussing alternative tactics with his team on the radio communication . Pascal Wehrlein had a good start in his debut as well , running in 14th place at that point of the race . 
 On the end of lap eleven , Rosberg was the first front runner to go into the pitlane and Vettel followed suit just two laps later . A quicker stop by Rosberg saw Vettel emerge just in front of him , but the Ferrari stayed ahead and he passed Hamilton for second on lap 16 . On the same lap , both Räikkönen and Hamilton pitted as well , re @-@ establishing the order . One lap later , Fernando Alonso had a major accident as he ran into the back of Gutiérrez , being lifted into the air at 300 km / h ( 190 mph ) and hitting the left @-@ hand barrier before subsequently rolling over several times before coming to rest upside @-@ down against the barrier at turn three , experiencing a peak force of 46G . While Alonso walked away with minor injuries , a safety car was deployed for a short time before the race direction decided to red flag the race due to the huge amounts of debris across the track from both Alonso 's McLaren and damaged advertising boards , causing all cars to come back into pitlane . 
 While the cars waited for the restart , work on the cars was allowed and Hamilton 's front wing was changed , while Rio Haryanto ended his race . As the race resumed behind the safety car , both Ferraris were running on the super @-@ soft tyre compound , with both Mercedes now equipped with mediums , which were set to last for the rest of the race . The running order at the restart was : Vettel , Rosberg , Räikkönen , Ricciardo , Verstappen , Sainz , Hamilton , Massa , Grosjean , Bottas . Grosjean in ninth was the only driver who had not pitted before the red flag was shown , which allowed him to save one pit stop and change his tyres during the break . 
 Vettel led away at the restart , but his Ferrari teammate Räikkönen was forced to pull into the pits on lap 22 with fire coming from his airbox and subsequently retired , handing second place to Rosberg . Over the next couple of laps , Vettel was able to pull away from Rosberg on the softer tyre compound . Marcus Ericsson was handed a drive @-@ through penalty for having his team work on his car less than 15 seconds before the restart . By lap 31 , the gap between Vettel and Rosberg started to come down again , while Hamilton moved ahead of Sainz into fifth as the latter pitted . Two laps later , Verstappen was in as well , but a slow pit stop lost him time . On lap 35 , Rosberg took the lead as Vettel pitted , who also lost time due to a mistake during his stop . He emerged back on track in fourth place . Hamilton now started to pull back time on the leaders , while debutant Palmer held off the two Toro Rossos in a struggle for ninth place . 
 On lap 40 , Ericsson started to slow on track and eventually retired . One lap later , Hamilton moved into second ahead of Ricciardo on the main straight . Lap 42 saw first Sainz and then Verstappen overtake Palmer 's Renault , who fell back to eleventh . Another lap later , Ricciardo changed tyres and came out fifth behind Massa , taking fourth three laps later . At the front , Hamilton and Vettel slowly closed on Rosberg , with the gap between the two also coming down . Vettel came onto the back of Hamilton with five laps remaining , chasing him closely for several laps before making a mistake in the second to last corner of lap 55 , losing his chances at second place . 
 As the race ended , Nico Rosberg took victory , thirty @-@ one years after his father Keke Rosberg had won the 1985 Australian Grand Prix . Hamilton and Vettel rounded out the podium ahead of Ricciardo and Massa . With Romain Grosjean having finished in sixth , Haas F1 became the first new ( and " from scratch " ) constructor since Toyota in 2002 to score points in its inaugural Grand Prix race entry . Behind Grosjean , Hülkenberg , Bottas , Sainz and Verstappen were the other point scorers . By finishing fourth , Daniel Ricciardo equalled the highest ever finish by an Australian driver at their home event , after Mark Webber did the same in 2012 . It was Mercedes 's fifth consecutive 1 – 2 finish , equalling a record set by Ferrari in 1952 and 2002 and by themselves in 2014 . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 At the podium interviews , conducted by former Formula One driver Mark Webber , both Mercedes drivers expressed delight at their result . Hamilton in particular described his race as " great " and added that he " loved the fact that we had to come through from far behind . " Sebastian Vettel meanwhile was satisfied with his start , but lamented the red flag situation and said that Ferrari had not expected Mercedes to opt for the harder tyre compound and go until the end of the race . He later added that he was confident that Ferrari had closed the gap to Mercedes and would be able to compete for the championship throughout the season . Nico Rosberg later revealed that the team had been close to retiring his car due to persisting brake issues caused by debris caught in the brake caliper . However , he was able to manage the brake temperatures to secure victory . Rosberg also apologised to his teammate for making contact and forcing him wide at the start . 
 Following an inquiry into the incident between Alonso and Gutiérrez , the stewards took no action against either driver , deeming it a " racing incident " with no driver particularly to blame . Fernando Alonso shared the stewards ' opinion and was quick to express that he did not blame Gutiérrez . The accident was a talking point for days after the race , with former FIA president Max Mosley pointing out that Alonso 's impact might have been fatal about twenty years earlier . He praised the measures taken in terms of driver security ever since the fatal accident of Ayrton Senna at the 1994 San Marino Grand Prix , saying that due to these efforts , one was now able to " expect the driver to walk away " from a violent crash . 
 Particular praise after the race went to both newcomers Haas and debutant Jolyon Palmer , who delivered what The Guardian described as an " impressive " drive . Palmer had been able to hold off attacks by both Toro Rosso drivers for several laps in the closing stages of the race . Toro Rosso 's Max Verstappen was very unhappy with his team 's strategy in the race handling the situation , repeatedly complaining and swearing over the team radio . He lost several seconds in a rushed pitstop , after which he lamented that he had wanted to pit before his teammate Sainz . While driving behind Sainz when both where trailing Palmer , he asked for team orders to allow him to pass his teammate , which were denied , leading him to describe his team 's strategy as a " joke " . Verstappen received criticism for his outbursts , with Sky Sports describing him as sounding " like a teenager - and a sulky one at that " . He later apologised to his team for his outbursts . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Cy @-@ près doctrine in English law = 
 The cy @-@ près doctrine in English law is an element of trusts law dealing with charitable trusts . The doctrine provides that when such a trust has failed because its purposes are either impossible or cannot be fulfilled , the High Court of Justice or Charity Commission can make an order redirecting the trust 's funds to the nearest possible purpose . For charities with a worth under £ 5 @,@ 000 and no land , the trustees ( by a two @-@ thirds majority ) may make the decision to redirect the trust 's funds . The doctrine was initially an element of ecclesiastical law , coming from the Norman French cy près comme possible ( as close as possible ) , but similar and possibly ancestral provisions have been found in Roman law , both in the Corpus Juris Civilis and later Byzantine law . 
 Trusts where the doctrine is applicable are divided into two groups ; those with subsequent failure , where the trust 's purpose has failed after it came into operation , and initial failure , where the trust 's purposes are immediately invalid . Subsequent failure cases simply require the redirection of the funds to the nearest possible purpose , since there is no question of allowing the settlor 's next of kin to inherit the money . Initial failure cases , however , require not just a decision on whether the purpose has failed , but also on whether the funds should be subject to cy @-@ près or returned to the estate in a resulting trust . This is decided based on the charitable intention of the settlor , something determined on the facts of each individual case . 
 = = Definition and origin = = 
 The cy @-@ près doctrine is the idea that , where a charitable trust 's purposes are impossible or cannot be fulfilled for whatever reason , the funds should be reapplied to purposes as close as possible to the trust 's original goals . This is done through a formal application by the trustees , either to the High Court of Justice or the Charity Commission . This doctrine originated in ecclesiastical law , the name coming as a contraction of the Norman French cy près comme possible ( as close as possible ) , It was originally justified in an ecclesiastical way ; charitable gifts were provided to secure entry into heaven , and if the charitable gift failed , this would not be guaranteed . If it was re @-@ purposed , however , entry would be granted . The local bishop , therefore , would usually simply apply the gift to the nearest possible purpose to the testator 's original goals . 
 Some evidence suggests that the doctrine descends from Roman law . The Corpus Juris Civilis mentions a process that redirected money collected to celebrate a person 's life in some way that violated law to a purpose within the law . It also gives a similar justification : " [ I ] t would be unjust that the amount which [ the testator ] has destined to that end should revert to the heirs . Therefore , let ... an investigation be made to ascertain how the trust may be employed so that the memory of the deceased may be preserved in some other and lawful manner . " The Byzantine Empire used a system similar to cy @-@ près when dealing with <unk> causae , charitable corporations , whereby if the corporation fell its possessions were to be transferred to the Papal treasury and spent on a purpose as close as possible to that of the original corporation . 
 = = Requirements = = 
 Prior to the Charities Act 1960 , situations where the cy @-@ près doctrine applied were limited to cases where the trust 's purpose was either impossible or impracticable . The 1960 Act , however , provides in Section 13 ( 1 ) ( now part of the Charities Act 1993 ) that cy @-@ près can apply where the original purposes have : 
 ( a ) been as far as may be fulfilled ; or cannot be carried out , or not according to the directions given and to the spirit of the gift ; 
 ( b ) or where the original purposes provide a use for part only of the property available by virtue of the gift ; 
 ( c ) where the property available by virtue of the gift and other property applicable for similar purposes can be more effectively used in conjunction , and to that end can suitably , regard being had to the spirit of the gift , be made applicable to common purposes ; 
 ( d ) or where the original purposes were laid down by reference to an area which then was but has ceased to be a unit for some other purpose , or by reference to a class of persons or to an area which has for any reason since ceased to be suitable , regard being had to the spirit of the gift , or to be practical in administering the gift ; 
 ( e ) or where the original purposes , in whole or in part , have since they were laid down been adequately provided for by other means ; or ceased , as being useless or harmful to the community or for other reasons , to be in law charitable ; or ceased in any other way to provide a suitable and effective method of using the property available by virtue of the gift , regarding being had to the spirit of the gift . 
 This definition was amended by the Charities Act 2006 to replace " the spirit of the gift " with " the appropriate considerations , " which are defined as " ( on the one hand ) the spirit of the gift concerned , and ( on the other ) the social and economic circumstances prevailing at the time of the proposed alteration of the original purposes " . In the case of extremely small charitable trusts ( where the charity has an income of less than £ 5 @,@ 000 and holds no land ) the trustees may agree by a two @-@ thirds majority to transfer the property to another charity , without involving the High Court or Commission . This is contained in Sections 74 @-@ 5 of the 1993 Act . Once the decision is reached , public notice must be given , and the Commission informed . Cy @-@ près powers are now enacted in the Charities Act 2011 . 
 = = = Subsequent failure = = = 
 The cy @-@ près doctrine applies to two types of situations : subsequent failures and initial failures . Subsequent failures are where money has already been applied to a charitable purpose , and that purpose has failed . It does not allow the next of kin of the original donor to recover any money , as said in Re Wright : " Once money has been effectually dedicated to charity , whether in pursuance of a general or a particular charitable intent , the testator 's next of kin or residuary legatees are forever excluded " . The courts instead simply determine whether or not the reason for failure falls within Section 13 , based on the basic intention underlying the original gift . 
 = = = Initial failure = = = 
 Cases of initial failure are where , rather than an established charitable trust failing , a gift has failed at the moment of its creation by having an invalid purpose . This raises different questions , as it is a matter of deciding " has the original charitable gift failed , and , if it has , can the money be applied cy @-@ près or must it go on resulting trust to the settlor 's estate " ? 
 When deciding if a gift has failed , attention is first turned to the wording of the trust instrument . The terms of such documents are taken literally ; if a particular organisation or purpose is given , the settlor 's intention is considered to be no wider or narrower than this . A different approach is used when dealing with cases like Re <unk> , which dealt with a situation where the charity named in the gift had been amalgamated with others . The Court of Appeal held that the amalgamated charities were entitled to the gift , since the charity named effectively continued as part of the amalgamated one . Farwell LJ wrote that , " In all these cases one has to consider not so much the means to the end as the charitable end which is in view , and so long as the charitable end is well established the means are only machinery , and no alteration of the machinery can destroy the charitable trust for the benefit of which the machinery is provided . " 
 In Re Finger , Goff J made a distinction between gifts to incorporated bodies and gifts to unincorporated bodies . When a gift is to an unincorporated body , it must be treated , whatever the wording , as a gift to that body 's purpose . This is because unincorporated bodies cannot possess things . If the body has ceased to exist but the purpose continues , the gift has not failed . Incorporated bodies on the other hand can possess property , and as such , as said by Buckley J in Re Vernon 's Will Trust , " A bequest to a corporate body ... takes effect simply as a gift to that body <unk> , unless there are circumstances which show that the recipient is to take the gift as a trustee . " 
 Once it has been decided that the gift has failed , the courts consider whether the gift may be applied cy @-@ près . The gift must show charitable intention ; that the settlor intended not just a gift to a particular ( failed ) purpose or organisation , but a more general charitable intention . This is something decided on the facts of each individual case , but some general principles are in place ; external evidence is admissible to override any prima facie interpretation that a gift is for non @-@ charitable purposes , as in Re Satterthwaite 's Will Trusts , and charitable intention can be found in cases where a non @-@ existent charity is the recipient of the settlor 's gift , as in Re Harwood . 
 = Crash Bandicoot ( character ) = 
 Crash Bandicoot , or simply Crash , is the title character and primary protagonist of the Crash Bandicoot series . Introduced in the 1996 video game Crash Bandicoot , Crash is an eastern barred bandicoot who was genetically enhanced by the series ' main antagonist Doctor Neo Cortex and soon escaped from Cortex 's castle after a failed experiment in the " Cortex Vortex " . Throughout the series , Crash acts as the opposition against Cortex and his schemes for world domination . While Crash has a number of offensive maneuvers at his disposal , his most distinctive technique is one in which he spins like a tornado at high speeds and knocks away almost anything that he strikes . 
 Crash was created by Andy Gavin and Jason Rubin , and was originally designed by Charles Zembillas . Crash was intended to be a mascot character for Sony to use to compete against Nintendo 's Mario and Sega 's Sonic the Hedgehog . Before Crash was given his name ( which stems from the visceral reaction to the character 's destruction of boxes ) , he was referred to as " Willie the Wombat " for much of the duration of the first game 's production . Crash has drawn comparisons to Mario and Sonic the Hedgehog by reviewers . His animations have been praised , and his voice has been criticized , while his redesign in the Radical Entertainment games has drawn mixed reactions . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 One of the main reasons Naughty Dog chose to develop Crash Bandicoot ( at the time jokingly codenamed " Sonic 's Ass Game " ) for the Sony PlayStation was Sony 's lack of an existing mascot character that could compete with Sega 's Sonic the Hedgehog and Nintendo 's Mario . Naughty Dog desired to do what Sega and Warner Bros. did with the hedgehog ( Sonic ) and the Tasmanian devil ( Taz ) respectively and incorporate an animal that was " cute , real , and no one really knew about " . The team purchased a field guide on Tasmanian mammals and selected the wombat , potoroo and bandicoot as options . Andy Gavin and Jason Rubin went with " Willie the Wombat " as a temporary name for the starring character of the game . The name was never meant to be final , due both to the name sounding " too dorky " and to the existence of a non @-@ video game property of the same name . The character was effectively a bandicoot by October 1994 , but was still referred to as " Willie the Wombat " because a final name had not been formulated yet . Wanting their mascot game to be multi @-@ dimensional in character depth as well as gameplay , Gavin and Rubin chose not to base Willie around one attribute such as " fast " or " cute " . The team felt that Willie should be " goofy and fun @-@ loving , and never talk " ; the character 's muteness was based on the theory that voices for video game characters were always " lame , negative , and distracted from identification with them . " 
 American Exitus artist Charles Zembillas was hired ( alongside environmental artist Joe Pearson ) and met with weekly to design and develop Willie and the other characters of the game . It was decided early on that there would be no connection between the real animal and Willie 's final design . Instead the design of the character was determined " 51 % by technical and visual necessity and 49 % by inspiration " . To determine the color of Willie 's fur , Gavin created a list of popular characters and their colors , and then made a list of earthly background possibilities ( such as forests , deserts , beaches , etc . ) . Colors that wouldn 't look good on the screen were strictly outlawed , such as red , which would " bleed horribly " on older televisions . Orange was selected as the color of Willie 's fur as the last available color . Willie 's head was made large and <unk> to counter the low resolution of the screen and allow Willie 's facial expressions to be discernible . Jason Rubin noted the increased difficulty in turning Willie 's head with this type of design . Small details such as the gloves , the spots on Willie 's back and a light @-@ colored chest were added to help the player determine what side of Willie was visible based on color . Willie was not given a tail or any <unk> straps of clothing due to the PlayStation 's inability to properly display such pixels without flickering . The length of Willie 's pants was shortened to keep his ankles from flickering as they would with longer pants . Andy Gavin owns the original ink sketches of Crash by Charles Zembillas . 
 Willie 's final game model was made from 512 polygons with the only textures being for the spots on his back and his shoelaces . It took Andy Gavin a month to settle on that number of polygons . Because of the game 's use of vertex animation , Willie was capable of more facial expressions than other video game characters at or before the time . Willie 's jumping , spinning and <unk> mechanisms were refined as the Naughty Dog team developed the levels " Heavy Machinery " and " Generator Room " . While preparing for the game 's demonstration at the Electronic Entertainment Expo , the team decided to finally rename the titular character " Crash Bandicoot " ( the particular name being credited to Dave Baggett and Taylor Kurosaki ) , with his surname being based on his canonical species and his first name stemming from the visceral reaction to the character 's destruction of boxes ( " Dash " , " Smash " and " Bash " were other potential names ) . The marketing director of Universal Interactive Studios insisted that the game and character be named " Wez / <unk> / <unk> the Wombat " or " Ozzie the <unk> " . The name Crash Bandicoot prevailed after Naughty Dog threatened to leave the production . 
 After Naughty Dog presented Crash Bandicoot to Sony 's Japanese division , the executives of Sony Computer Entertainment Japan stated their dislike of the character and were unimpressed by the renderings of the character made specifically for the meeting . During a break following the initial meeting , Andy Gavin approached Charlotte Francis , the artist responsible for the renderings , and gave her fifteen minutes to close Crash 's huge , smiling mouth to make him seem less aggressive , change his eyes from green to " two small black " Pac @-@ Man " shapes " and make his spike of hair smaller . Sony Japan bought Crash Bandicoot for Japanese distribution after being shown the modified printout . 
 Crash served as a mascot for Sony Computer Entertainment from his creation until September 2000 when Universal Interactive Studios and Konami entered an agreement that would enable Konami to publish a Crash Bandicoot game ( which would later become Crash Bandicoot : The Wrath of Cortex ) for next @-@ generation game systems , with Universal Interactive handling the production of the games ; the agreement served to break the Crash Bandicoot franchise 's exclusivity to Sony @-@ produced consoles and effectively made Crash Bandicoot a mascot character for Universal rather than Sony . Crash 's game model in Crash Bandicoot : The Wrath of Cortex was composed of approximately 1 @,@ 800 polygons , which allowed an increase in detail compared to past models , including a more complex and realistic tuft of hair , a visible uvula , stitching on his jeans and shoes and a designer label on his pants . 
 Upon beginning development of Crash Nitro Kart , Vicarious Visions chief executive officer and chief creative officer Karthik Bala noted that Crash 's physical appearance had been inconsistent since his debut in 1996 and decided to " explore the original vision of the character " in an attempt to bring him back to his roots . Charles Zembillas and Joe Pearson were tracked down and enlisted for guidance during development of the game and were faced with the challenge of evolving the character and the franchise visually while retaining their " cartoon @-@ like charm " . To redesign Crash and the other mainstay characters of the series for Crash Nitro Kart , the Vicarious Visions team reviewed a number of original development sketches from Zembillas 's archives and then redesigned the main characters by incorporating details from the concept art and adding girth to the characters ; Crash 's appearance in the game , compared to the previous two games , sports a slightly larger nose , fuller eyebrows , and a far more textured body . Zembillas noted that " Crash is slimmer and more appealing now . There 's also more emphasis on his eyes , and you can see the craftiness in his personality . That 's Crash to me , and he 's alive again in Nitro Kart " . 
 Crash is voiced by Brendan O 'Brien in Crash Bandicoot , Cortex Strikes Back , Warped , Crash Bash , The Wrath of Cortex , The Huge Adventure , N. Tranced , and Ripto 's Rampage , by Billy Pope in Crash Team Racing , by Steven Blum in Nitro Kart and by Jess Harnell in Tag Team Racing , Crash of the Titans , Mind over Mutant , and Skylanders : Imaginators . In the Japanese versions of the games , he is voiced by Kappei Yamaguchi up to Crash Nitro Kart and by Makoto Ishii in Crash Boom Bang ! . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Crash was genetically engineered through the use of Cortex and Doctor Nitrus Brio 's Evolvo @-@ Ray . Before escaping from Doctor Neo Cortex 's island fortress , Crash became romantically attached to a female bandicoot named Tawna , who was another one of Cortex 's experiments . Crash 's separation from Tawna at the hands of Cortex serves as the primary root of Crash 's <unk> of Cortex . Crash is a very emotional character who is quick to laugh and quick to cry . While he has a danger @-@ loving , fearless nature and loves a good fight , he prefers relaxing in the sun and rarely seeks out trouble deliberately . Crash has an extremely limited vocabulary , preferring to speak in unintelligible gibberish ; the few English words he is capable of speaking include " Whoa ! " ( which he often exclaims upon being physically harmed ) , " Nina " and " pancakes " . To the ire of his friend Crunch , but the amusement of his sister Coco , Crash is prone to impolite personal habits such as belching or scratching his posterior . 
 In the beginning of the series , Crash 's sole offensive maneuvers were jumping onto his enemies and a distinctive technique in which he spins around like a tornado , kicking away anyone or anything that he strikes . In later games Crash can expand his range of abilities by defeating boss characters . The expanded abilities include a powerful splash , the ability to jump while in the air , the " Death Tornado Spin " ( a variation of his spinning technique that allows him to hover through the air for a limited time ) , a bazooka that fires Wumpa Fruit , increased running speed , the ability to safely tip @-@ toe on top of explosive crates , and the ability to jump at incredibly high heights . The games Crash of the Titans and Crash : Mind over Mutant allow Crash to further expand his offensive abilities with new fighting moves learned from collecting a magical substance known as " Mojo " . In Skylanders : Imaginators , Crash has the ability to throw TNT crates , and can use his Yo @-@ yo to bring in enemies to spin attack . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 As seen in Crash Bandicoot , Crash was once an ordinary eastern barred bandicoot before he was snatched from the wild by Doctor Neo Cortex and subjected to the Evolvo @-@ Ray as part of Cortex 's plan to make Crash the " general " of his " Cortex Commandos " , which would be used to dominate the world . However , he is later deemed unworthy of being in Cortex 's army and escapes from Cortex 's castle . As an act of revenge and to rescue a female bandicoot named Tawna , Crash travels through the Wumpa Islands , defeating Cortex 's henchmen along the way . He eventually steals Cortex 's airship , defeats Doctor Cortex , and escapes alongside Tawna . A year later in Crash Bandicoot 2 : Cortex Strikes Back , Crash is sent off to get a new laptop battery for his sister Coco , but is soon abducted by Doctor Neo Cortex , who claims to have changed his ways . Crash is then ordered to gather Crystals for Cortex while fighting off opposition from Doctor Nitrus Brio . Once Cortex reveals his hidden intentions , Crash sends Cortex flying off into space and aids Nitrus Brio in destroying Cortex 's space station . In Crash Bandicoot 3 : Warped , when the remains of the space station crash into Earth and set the demonic Uka Uka free , Crash is recruited by Aku Aku to use Doctor Nefarious Tropy 's Time @-@ Twisting Machine to gather the powerful Crystals in their original places before Cortex does . Crash eventually gathers all 25 Crystals and defeats Nefarious Tropy , causing the Time @-@ Twisting Machine to implode on itself . In Crash Bandicoot : The Wrath of Cortex , Crash is recruited to gather Crystals and return a group of destructive masks named the Elementals to a hibernation state and stop Cortex 's new superweapon Crunch Bandicoot . In Crash Twinsanity , after foiling another plot by Doctor Cortex to eliminate him , Crash teams up with Cortex in order to defeat the Evil Twins and restore the natural order of the universe . 
 In Crash of the Titans , Crash aids Coco in the development of a butter @-@ recycling device . This is interrupted when Neo Cortex arrives and kidnaps Aku Aku and Coco . Crash throws Coco 's machine at Cortex 's airship , severing the chain holding Aku Aku 's cage , which causes the cage to fall into the nearby forest . After Crash rescues Aku Aku , they discover that Cortex and Uka Uka are stealing Mojo from a nearby temple and decide to stop them . Crash is unable to rescue his sister but manages to defeat Cortex , and he begins his search for Coco , interrogating Dingodile , Tiny Tiger , N. Gin , and Uka Uka on her whereabouts . Crash finally confronts and defeats Nina Cortex inside of the Doominator robot , liberates his sister , and averts the destruction of Wumpa Island . Feeling happy for themselves , Crash and his family decide to celebrate their victory with pancakes , which he blurts out ( speaking for the first time ) in joy . Soon after , in Crash : Mind over Mutant , the NV , a personal digital assistant that everyone must possess , is released to the public . However , this turns out to be a plot by Doctor Cortex and his old partner Doctor Nitrus Brio , who use the NV 's Mojo @-@ transmitting powers to control everyone who uses the device . Because Crash is unaffected by the NV , he is able to free his friends from the control of the NV and stop Cortex 's and Brio 's plot . 
 = = = Other appearances in the series = = = 
 Crash appears as a playable character in Crash Team Racing and Crash Bash . The epilogue of Crash Team Racing states that Crash sold his life story , titled " The Color Orange " , to a major film studio , set to be released by the Christmas season . In Crash Bandicoot : The Huge Adventure , Crash is recruited to gather Crystals to power a device built by Coco that will reverse the effects of Cortex 's Planetary Minimizer , which has shrunken the Earth to the size of a grapefruit . In Crash Bandicoot 2 : N @-@ Tranced , Crash is awoken from his nap by the kidnapping of Coco and Crunch by Nefarious Tropy and N. Trance . Crash is almost kidnapped himself before being rescued by Aku Aku . He is then sent off to rescue Crunch and Coco , recruit Fake Crash , and defeat N. Trance and Nefarious Tropy . Crash is a playable character in Crash Nitro Kart , in which he is abducted ( along with other characters ) by Emperor Velo XXVII and forced to compete in the Galaxy Circuit . When Velo relinquishes his power to Crash , Crash seriously considers the possibility of ruling over Velo 's empire , but he refuses the offer and leaves Velo with his empire . In Crash Bandicoot Purple : Ripto 's Rampage , Crash is tricked into thinking that Spyro the Dragon is attacking the Wumpa Islands , but he discovers the truth after a fight on a bridge , and teams up with Spyro to defeat the combined forces of Doctor Neo Cortex and Ripto . In Crash Tag Team Racing , Crash is recruited ( along with other characters ) by Ebenezer Von Clutch to gather the stolen Power Gems of his amusement park and win the park 's ownership . He also finds Von Clutch 's lost Black Power Gem by the end of the game . Crash is a playable character in Crash Boom Bang ! , in which he interrupts the Viscount 's wish to the Super Big Power Crystal and wishes for a vast amount of Wumpa Fruit . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 Crash has been featured in two series of Crash Bandicoot action figures produced by the now @-@ defunct <unk> . For Crash Bandicoot 2 : Cortex Strikes Back , <unk> produced a " <unk> Crash " ( a Crash Bandicoot figure bundled with the <unk> seen in the game ) and a " Jet Pack Crash " ( a goggle @-@ wearing Crash Bandicoot figure bundled with the jet pack seen in the game ) . The Crash Bandicoot : Warped series featured three different figures of Crash , including one bundled with Aku Aku and Coco Bandicoot figures . A Crash figurine will be released as part of the Skylanders : Imaginators starter pack for PlayStation 3 and PlayStation 4 in October 2016 ; he will be playable across all platforms . 
 = = = Paleontology = = = 
 Paleontologists have named an extinct bandicoot from the Miocene of Australia after the video game character Crash Bandicoot , under the binomial Crash bandicoot — genus Crash , species bandicoot . Although somewhat unusual for the scientific community , the name was used in an entirely unaltered form , without attempting to return to Latin or Greek roots . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 As a mascot character , Crash has drawn numerous comparisons to competing mascots such as Mario and Sonic by reviewers . Dave Halverson of GameFan praised Crash 's animations , appearance and mannerisms as " 100 % perfection " . A reviewer for Game Revolution praised Crash 's " quirky mannerisms " as " always refreshing " , and John Broady of GameSpot described Crash as " disarmingly cute and fuzzy " . Doug Perry of IGN was critical of the character , seeing him as " insanely capitalistic " , negatively comparing his voice to Luigi of the Mario series and accusing him of being " the most see @-@ through , copycat mascot that ever existed . " Louis Bedigian of GameZone also disliked Crash 's voice , remarking " it is really annoying to hear a child say , ' Whoa ! ' every time you fall in the water , especially when you realize that the child 's voice is supposed to be Crash " . Crash 's animations , particularly in Crash Bandicoot : The Wrath of Cortex , have been praised as humorous by reviewers . Ryan Davis of GameSpot analyzed Crash 's " overextended running style and self @-@ punishing attacks " as establishing him as an " empty @-@ headed but enthusiastic character " , and compared his facial contortions to those of comedian Red Skelton . In a poll held by MSN in late 2008 to determine the most iconic video game character , Crash ranked at # 8 . In the Guinness World Records Gamer 's Edition from 2011 , he was voted as the eleventh best video game character . However , he also ranked eighth on IGN 's top 10 list of video game characters who should die , adding that it would be a mercy killing . IGN editor Colin Moriarty stated that his games add little to innovate the series over the years , rendering the character useless . 
 Crash 's aesthetic design in the games developed by Radical Entertainment has received mixed reactions from reviewers . Brian Rowe of Game Revolution noted that Crash 's fingerless gloves have been replaced with " equally outdated " tribal tattoos and that Crash 's personality had been altered from his " obnoxiously extreme attitude " to that of a " <unk> , googly @-@ eyed idiot " . Although Rowe wondered when and why the change happened , he concluded that " it 's better than the popular goatee @-@ of @-@ rage that so many other platform giants are sporting these days " . Arnold Katayev of PSX Extreme , while admitting that the character detail on Crash was " pretty nice " , expressed unhappiness with the artistic choices made for the character ; he described Crash 's tribal tattoos as " a little pretentious " and noted that the increased definition on his mohawk patch made Crash come off as " trying too hard to be cool " . He added that Crash 's new fighting style begot a stance that consists of Crash " putting up his dukes like a boxer " , which he deemed " out of character " for Crash . Finally , while critiquing the voice acting in Crash of the Titans , he remarked that Crash " especially sounds awful , largely because he doesn 't actually speak - he just <unk> annoying gibberish , which makes him sound like he 's an infant " . Matt Keller of PALGN also criticized Crash 's voice , which he said made Crash sound " like a confused baby " . Louis Bedigian of GameZone stated that " Crash 's character design has gone from cool to goofy and now to the dreaded place of being dorky " and said that the minute and gradual changes made to Crash 's design throughout the series " have really hurt Crash 's appearance as a leading game character " . GamePro named Crash 's new design as the second worst video game character makeover ever . Craig Harris of IGN was more positive on Crash 's new appearance and noted that Crash " looks a little <unk> and a lot edgier , gaining a spikier Mohawk and trading in his fingerless gloves for tribal ink all up and down his arms " while comparing his incoherent squawking vocalizations to Kazooie of the Banjo @-@ Kazooie series . He concluded that " ultimately he 's been changed for the better . He looks a little cooler and more appealing than his more ' Japanese @-@ inspired ' edits over the years " . 
 = Clarence Chesterfield Howerton = 
 Clarence Chesterfield Howerton ( February 9 , 1913 – November 18 , 1975 ) , also known as Major Mite , was an American circus performer who starred in the sideshow for over 25 years , 20 of which were with the Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Circus . He was 2 ft 4 in ( 0 @.@ 71 m ) tall and performed with several groups from the early 1920s through the late 1940s , billed as the smallest man in the world . His small physique was often contrasted alongside larger circus sideshow acts , such as the juvenile obese and the excessively tall . 
 Regarded as a " highly successful sideshow [ novelty ] " and celebrity , Howerton visited the White House and represented recruitment efforts of the United States Marine Corps . He was featured in multiple films , including a role as a Munchkin in 1939 's The Wizard of Oz . He retired in 1949 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Clarence Chesterfield Howerton was born on February 9 , 1913 , in Salem , Oregon , to Frank and Helen Howerton . He had five brothers , all of whom grew to 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 83 m ) tall . However , Howerton grew to a height of only 2 ft 4 in ( 0 @.@ 71 m ) . An expert said that he might have a " deranged <unk> gland " . Howerton 's mother was just over 4 ft 0 in ( 1 @.@ 22 m ) tall , which led some to wonder if his small stature was inherited . 
 At age six , Howerton was living in McCleary , Washington , with his parents and five brothers , Albert , Ernest , Forrest , LeRoy , and Charles . His father was employed at the time as a factory mechanic . Howerton never attended school , likely due to his physical size and associated emotional consequences . 
 In January 1926 , Frank Howerton shot himself , having been in poor health previously . His mother subsequently remarried to Robert Crawford . At the time of the 1930 United States Census , Howerton was living with Crawford and his mother in Manhattan . According to the Census listing , Crawford was a " showman " while Howerton and his mother were identified as performers . 
 = = Career = = 
 Howerton 's career began at a young age , when his father entered him into a local vaudeville show . In 1923 , at the age of ten , Howerton joined the Ringling Brothers and Barnum & Bailey Circus , where he starred as a major attraction . The circus was the largest of the kind , with 800 performers and over 1000 animals . Although he was only ten years old , the circus sought to exaggerate his diminutive size by claiming that he was 18 years old . He was billed as the smallest man in the world , exhibited and known to the public under the name , " Major Mite " . The " Major Mite " moniker had previously been used by an American comedian who died in 1900 , and a 19th @-@ century circus performer , William E. Jackson , who died in 1901 , at 24 , 2 ft 9 in ( 0 @.@ 84 m ) tall and weighing 26 pounds ( 12 kg ) . Accompanied by his mother , Howerton spent 20 years with Ringling <unk> and also worked with the Cole Brothers Circus , the Coney Island Dreamland Side Show , and the World Circus Sideshow . 
 In December 1922 , Howerton received national press coverage when he visited U.S. President Warren G. Harding at the White House and billed as " the world 's smallest man . " One newspaper noted at the time : " The smallest midget and the smallest Shriner in the world , known as Major Mite , caused more excitement when he called at the White House recently than many a notable has done . " 
 In 1927 , Howerton drew the attention of The New York Times when he led a " strange cavalcade " through the streets of Manhattan to the Hospital for Crippled and <unk> Children . Howerton led the parade in the original coach that had previously been used by General Tom Thumb . The coach was drawn by two Shetland ponies , and Howerton was accompanied by " Tiny Doll " , described as " the Major 's sweetheart " and other circus performers . He also drew the attention of the Chicago Tribune when he visited Chicago in 1928 . 
 In 1928 , Howerton was paired with an extraordinarily large circus sideshow performer known as " Tom Ton " and billed as the " Human Atom " and " Big Baby Elephant . " Howerton is said to have performed with numerous human oddities , also working with Ruth <unk> , a woman weighing 700 pounds ( 320 kg ) , in his career . 
 In advertising and film , Howerton found success beyond the sideshow . During the 1930s , he was used as a mascot for the recruitment side of the United States Marine Corps . His biggest role in acting was with 1939 's The Wizard of Oz , in which he played the part of a trumpet @-@ playing Munchkin , Herald # 3 , who announced the arrival of the mayor . He was one of the smallest Munchkins in Oz . Howerton also appeared in several shorts of the comedy program Our Gang , including the 1932 short , " Free Eats " . 
 By 1940 , he was living with his mother in Manhattan . His occupation was described as an " exhibitionist " in a circus , but a 1941 document states that he registered with " Clackamas County Local Board No. 2 " , located in <unk> , Oregon ; his registration prompted the Board to state " We believe we have the smallest registrant in the United States " . In the announcement of his registration , his weight and height are given , vastly contrasting to other sources : a height of 3 ft 6 in ( 1 @.@ 07 m ) , and a weight of 52 pounds ( 24 kg ) . His last performance was for Cole Bros. , in 1948 . 
 = = Reputation = = 
 Howerton was often seen with other human oddities , for example , in 1924 , he was photographed with Martin Feig , a four @-@ year @-@ old boy who weighed 104 pounds . Feig reportedly said to Howerton , " Aw , you 're nothing but a germ @-@ weight midget . " One newspaper referred to Howerton , who was in reality only 13 years old at the time , as " the Beau Brummel of the side shows " , noting that the Doll sisters ( two female small persons working with Ringling Brothers ) declared him " a regular sheik " . 
 In contrast to his public persona , Howerton reportedly enjoyed cigars and beer , " often yelled obscenities , " and was known to " run the length of a bar , kicking anything in his way " , sometimes whilst dressed in children 's clothes . While working with Ringling Brothers , Howerton befriended Jack Earle who was 7 ft 7 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 2 @.@ 32 m ) tall , but at the time was advertised as being 8 ft 7 in ( 2 @.@ 62 m ) . The two were often photographed together in promotional materials for Ringling Brothers , with it being said that " it is penny @-@ ante poker which has made pals of Jack and the major " . 
 = = = Size = = = 
 Reports of Howerton 's size range vastly , the upper boundary for both height and weight is given by the United States Selective Service System , who report a height of 3 ft 6 in ( 1 @.@ 07 m ) , and a weight of 52 pounds ( 24 kg ) . A height of 2 ft 4 in ( 0 @.@ 71 m ) is given in several more modern sources , including Ripley 's Believe It or Not ! : Howerton himself claimed that was his height at 22 , and that his weight was 20 pounds ( 9 @.@ 1 kg ) The Chicago Tribune gave his height as 2 ft 0 in ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) , and his weight as 20 pounds ( 9 @.@ 1 kg ) . At 18 , it was reported that he weighed 13 pounds ( 5 @.@ 9 kg ) . 
 = = Post entertainment industry and death = = 
 Howerton retired from the entertainment industry in 1949 , at the age of 35 . By 1970 he had moved back to Oregon and was living with a niece in the small town of Dayton . His diminutive size meant that he didn 't pay welfare to the state as it was " never collected from " children " less than 0 ft 30 in ( 0 @.@ 76 m ) tall " . His size , however , meant that he was forced to have tailor made clothing , which he additionally " demands it 's good standard " . 
 On November 18 , 1975 , at the age of 62 , Howerton died of pneumonia in a hospital in McMinnville , Oregon . He was buried in Mountainview Cemetery in nearby Oregon City . Aside from one brother , he outlived all of his immediate family . 
 = Bristol Customshouse and Post Office = 
 Bristol Customshouse and Post Office is a historic two @-@ story rectangular Italian palazzo style brick building that was used as a post office and <unk> in Bristol , Rhode Island , United States . The land for the site was acquired for $ 4 @,@ 400 . The building was designed by Ammi B. Young and completed in 1858 for a cost of $ 22 @,@ 135 @.@ 75 . The building roughly measures 46 feet ( 14 m ) by 32 feet ( 9 @.@ 8 m ) and is constructed of deep red brick and has three arched openings on each of its sides and stories that are lined with sandstone moldings . The archways protrude from the side of the building and the center archway serves as the first floor with the adjacent archways housing large windows that are barred with iron . As it typical of the style , the second floor is more elaborate with a shallow balcony of iron supported by iron brackets and the paneling of the upper facade 's surmounting entablature is elaborately decorative . The sides and rear are similar to the front facade , but include blind recesses and the molding is of a browner sandstone . 
 The building was abandoned in 1962 and acquired by the Young Men 's Christian Association ( YMCA ) in 1964 . The YMCA has an adjacent structure and used the building as an ante @-@ space until 1990 . Currently , the building is used as offices . The Bristol Customshouse and Post Office is historically significant as it is an example of the Italian palazzo mode of architecture . The building was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1972 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The land for the site was acquired on April 19 , 1856 for $ 4 @,@ 400 and constructed in 1857 for a cost of $ 22 @,@ 135 @.@ 75 . Completed in 1858 from the design by Ammi B. Young , the Bristol Customshouse and Post Office is a two @-@ story rectangular Italian palazzo style brick building that rests upon a raised granite base . The building is about 46 feet ( 14 m ) by 32 feet ( 9 @.@ 8 m ) and is heated by steam . The front facade is made of deep red brick that has three large arched openings on both stories and a " greyish sandstone molding outlines the arches on both floors and caps the piers which separate the first @-@ floor arches and a decisive molding of the same material forms a belt between the two stories . " The archways protrude from the side of the building and the center archway serves as the first floor with the adjacent archways housing large windows that are barred with iron . As it typical of the style , the second floor is more elaborate with a shallow balcony of iron supported by iron brackets and the paneling of the upper facade is " understated , but the surmounting entablature is heavy and elaborately decorated . " The cornice as the visual top of the building and conceals the low hipped roof that is only visible from a distance . The sides and rear are similar to the front facade , but include blind recesses and the molding is of a browner sandstone . 
 Alterations to the building are evident in an old photograph , dated to circa 1860 @-@ 1869 , which shows pedimented dormers in the center of the roof , that is believed to have been an addition that has since been removed , but at an unknown time . According to Bristol , Rhode Island : The Bristol renaissance , a photo of the building dated to circa 1900 shows the pedimented dormers . A postcard that was postmarked in 1920 also shows the dormers and the adjacent YMCA building . Also present in the photograph are two chimneys on the front facade and it is evidenced that the side chimney probably arose near the front , however , only one chimney is extant in the rear . The two front chimneys were absent in a circa 1907 @-@ 1913 post card . The rear chimney was described as " apparently altered " without future explanation in the National Register of Historic Places nomination . 
 The 1971 nomination form noted that the then @-@ current state of the building was in a state of neglect . After passing through the vestibule , the front area served as the postal sorting rooms , office and mail boxes . In this area , the original iron columns are visible between the wood panels of the clerks ' windows . The tile floors were noted to be an alteration , but the second floor stair landing likely had its original tiling remain . The second floor was accessible via cast iron stairs with iron railings , that lead up the customs quarters that had a large room with " seven sets of iron @-@ framed windows , with heavy iron sills and interior shutters . " This room was described as " impressively large " because of its 17 feet ( 5 @.@ 2 m ) high ceilings and 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) paneled door , the floor is made of hard wood and a " very plain marble fireplace is in one corner of the large room . " The supports of the building stem from the cellar where granite piers support horizontal iron beams that hold up iron columns on the first floor . 
 = = Use = = 
 The Bristol Customshouse and Post Office was used as a Post Office and Customs House , as its name implies , until it was abandoned in 1962 . Records show that $ 1 @,@ 071 @.@ 75 in repairs and $ 68 @.@ 36 for " mechanical equipment " was spent by the United States government between July 1908 and June 1909 . The Young Men 's Christian Association ( YMCA ) acquired the building in 1964 , the building was attached to a YMCA swimming pool structure and was used as an ante @-@ space until 1990 . It was remodeled and currently is used as offices . 
 = = Importance = = 
 The Bristol Customshouse and Post Office is historically significant as " an example of the rediscovery of the Italian palazzo mode of architecture after the long proliferation @-@ of the Greek Revival . " Though Young designed dozens of building for the United States Department of the Treasury , he was a master of the Greek Revival style and his designs varied throughout the years during the popularization of subsequent styles . Young also designed the United States Customshouse in Providence , Rhode Island a year prior , but its design reflected a more " classical , academic theme " in a more Tuscan style . The Bristol Customshouse and Post Office " serves as an excellent example of a style that is little represented in a town which has fine buildings of other styles and periods , and is a reminder of what was once one of the most active seaports in the northeast " . 
 = Mark Webber = 
 Mark Alan Webber ( born 27 August 1976 ) is an Australian professional racing driver , currently competing in the FIA World Endurance Championship as a Porsche works driver in LMP1 , in which he is one of the three reigning World Drivers ' Champions . 
 After some racing success in Australia driving Formula Ford and Formula Holden , Webber moved to the United Kingdom in 1995 to further his motorsport career . Webber began a partnership with fellow Australian Paul Stoddart , at that time owner of the European Racing Formula 3000 team , which eventually took them both into Formula One when Stoddart bought the Minardi team . He also beat future F1 World Champion Fernando Alonso , then 19 , in the 2000 International Formula 3000 season . 
 Webber made his Formula One debut in 2002 , scoring Minardi 's first points in three years at his and Stoddart 's home race . After his first season , Jaguar took him on as lead driver . During two years with the generally uncompetitive team , Webber qualified on the front two rows of the grid several times and outperformed his teammates . His first F1 win was with Red Bull at the 2009 German Grand Prix , which followed second places at the 2009 Chinese Grand Prix , 2009 Turkish Grand Prix and 2009 British Grand Prix . By the end of 2009 , Webber had scored eight podiums , including another victory in Brazil . His eight podiums in 2009 compares to only two podiums in the first seven years of his career . He added ten more podiums in 2010 , including victories in Spain , Monaco , Britain and Hungary . Webber finished the 2010 season in third place having led for a long period , losing out to teammate Sebastian Vettel in the final race of the season . Webber added another race victory in the 2011 Brazilian Grand Prix , as he once again finished third behind champion Vettel and runner @-@ up Jenson Button . Webber partnered Vettel again in the 2012 season , outperforming him in the early season and looked to be a major title contender but fell away with no wins in the second half of the season after two in the Monaco and British Grand Prix . He finished the season in sixth position . Webber was also a long @-@ term director of the Grand Prix Drivers ' Association , the Formula One drivers ' union . 
 On 27 June 2013 , Webber announced he would be retiring from Formula One at the end of the season . He began to race for Porsche in 2014 , on a long @-@ term deal , racing LMP1 <unk> in the FIA World Endurance Championship . Webber is one of six drivers of the Porsche 919 Hybrid , and in November 2015 he became World Endurance Champion in the # 17 car , alongside Timo Bernhard and Brendon Hartley . The trio race with the # 1 on their car in 2016 . After his retirement from F1 Webber joined the BBC F1 team as an occasional pundit and reporter from 2014 @-@ 2015 and has joined the Channel 4 F1 Team in the UK for their coverage in 2016 as a full @-@ time pundit . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Webber was born in Queanbeyan , New South Wales , son of Alan Webber , a local motorcycle dealer , and his wife Diane . Webber has one older sister , Leanne , and two nieces . He attended <unk> High School in Queanbeyan for his secondary education . He began his relationship with sport at a young age , working as a ball boy for premiership winning rugby league team , the Canberra Raiders , during the late 1980s . However , motorsport was where his interest lay , listing Formula One World Champion Alain Prost and Grand Prix motorcycle racer Kevin <unk> as his childhood heroes . Starting out racing motorcycles , Webber moved to four wheels in 1991 , taking up karting at age 14 . He won the New South Wales state championship in 1993 , and moved straight to the Australian Formula Ford Championship after his father bought him an ex @-@ Craig Lowndes Van Diemen <unk> . Working as a driving instructor at Sydney 's Oran Park Raceway between races , Webber finished 14th overall in his debut season . Continuing in the series in 1995 , Webber scored several victories , including a win in the support race for the Australian Grand Prix at Adelaide . He finished the series in fourth place , but perhaps more importantly , he teamed with Championship coordinator Ann Neal , who gained him a seven @-@ year sponsorship with Australian Yellow Pages , and would become his manager , accompanying him on a trip to England to try to start a career in Europe . 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 Webber was given a test at <unk> with the Van Diemen team , and subsequently earned a works drive for the team at the 1995 Formula Ford Festival , at Brands Hatch , where he finished third . That was good enough to prompt the team to signing him for the 1996 championship . Before moving to Europe permanently , Webber won the Formula Holden race at the 1996 Australian Grand Prix in Melbourne . During the 1996 British Formula Ford Championship , he took four victories on his way to second place overall , finishing a strong season with a win in the Formula Ford Festival . He also won the Spa @-@ Francorchamps race of the Formula Ford Euro Cup , taking third in the series despite competing in only two of the three rounds . His results throughout the year saw him voted as Australian motorsport 's " Young Achiever " and " International Achiever " of 1996 . Two days after his Festival victory Webber completed a successful test for Alan Docking Racing , and was signed by the team to graduate to Formula Three in 1997 . 
 = = = Formula Three and sportscar racing = = = 
 Without the financial backing he had enjoyed during his time in Formula Ford , Webber and his team struggled to find the money to fund their 1997 championship campaign . He was almost forced to quit halfway through the season , but was able to obtain significant financial and personal support from Australian rugby union legend David Campese , which helped him to complete the year . Mark has since stated he has been able to pay back the money Campese gave him . 
 Webber took victory in just his fourth ever F3 race , at Brands Hatch , leading from start to finish and setting a new lap record in the process . He took a further four podium finishes , including a second place in the support race for the 1997 British Grand Prix , and finished the season in fourth overall . Webber also took strong finishes in the Marlboro Masters at Zandvoort ( 3rd ) and the Macau Grand Prix ( 4th ) , both times making his circuit debut . 
 During the 1997 season , Webber was approached by Mercedes @-@ AMG to compete in sportscar racing . Although he initially declined the offer he was persuaded at the end of the year when invited to participate in a test session for the team at the A1 @-@ Ring in Austria . Mercedes @-@ AMG were suitably impressed with Webber , and he was signed as the official Mercedes works junior driver for the 1998 FIA GT Championship , alongside reigning champion Bernd Schneider . Travelling around the world , including the United States , Japan and Europe , the pair won five of the ten rounds on their way to second in the overall standings , beaten to the Championship by teammates Klaus Ludwig and Ricardo Zonta by just eight seconds in the final race at Laguna Seca . Webber remained with the Mercedes @-@ AMG team for 1999 , and was promoted to his own race car for the season . However , his sportscar career came to an early end after he flipped twice on the Mulsanne Straight during practice for the 1999 24 Hours of Le Mans race . An aerodynamic fault on the team 's Mercedes @-@ Benz CLRs caused Webber to become spectacularly airborne during both practice and race @-@ day warm up , with the same fate <unk> teammate Peter Dumbreck five hours into the race . Both drivers escaped uninjured , but the crashes forced Mercedes to shelve their sportscar program for the year and Webber to reconsider a return to open wheel racing . 
 = = = Formula One testing and signing = = = 
 Webber spoke to Formula One team owner Eddie Jordan , who introduced him to fellow Australian Paul Stoddart . Stoddart offered to underwrite the necessary $ 1 @.@ 1 million budget for Webber , and gave him a drive in his <unk> Arrows Formula 3000 team for 2000 . As a result , Webber also got his first taste of a Formula One car , completing a two @-@ day test at Barcelona in December 1999 for the Arrows F1 team . 
 Webber was signed as test driver for the Arrows F1 team for 2000 , and also gained sponsorship from Australian beer company Foster 's whilst competing in Formula 3000 . Webber took victory in round two of the season at Silverstone , and finished the series with two fastest laps and three podiums on his way to third overall — the highest position of any rookie that year . Contract issues meant that Webber was never able to drive the Arrows A21 car , and rejected a full contract offer for 2001 in July . However , he was offered a three @-@ day evaluation test for Benetton at the end of the year , outpacing F1 drivers Ralf Schumacher and Giancarlo Fisichella at Estoril . The results were good enough to earn him the test driver role with the team for 2001 , and he also agreed to take on team boss Flavio Briatore as manager in return for finance for a further F3000 season . Webber joined the championship @-@ winning Super Nova Racing team , and despite winning at Imola , Monaco and Magny @-@ Cours , he finished second overall to British driver Justin Wilson . Webber was replaced as test driver for Benetton for 2002 by Fernando Alonso , but Briatore managed to secure Webber a contract to race alongside Alex Yoong in the Stoddart @-@ owned Minardi team , making him the first Australian in Formula One since David Brabham in 1994 . 
 = = Formula One career = = 
 = = = Minardi ( 2002 ) = = = 
 Webber made his Formula One debut at his home race , the Australian Grand Prix . This was the first race of an initial three race contract and was extended until the end of the season after his first race . He qualified 18th of the 22 cars , over 4 seconds away from the pole position time , but 1 @.@ 4 seconds ahead of teammate Yoong . The start of the race featured a spectacular accident between Ralf Schumacher and Rubens Barrichello , the aftermath of which forced eight cars to retire from the race . Webber , who had a problem with his launch control at the start , battled with a broken differential to fend off the experienced Mika Salo in a much faster Toyota and finish fifth . The result made Webber just the fourth Australian F1 driver to score World Championship points , and the first Minardi driver to score points since Marc Gené in 1999 . 
 Webber was forced into retirement in the Malaysian Grand Prix , before picking up consecutive 11th @-@ place finishes in the following two races . He , along with Yoong , was forced to pull out of the Spanish Grand Prix due to potentially dangerous wing failures during the weekend . 
 Webber picked up two more 11th @-@ place finishes , but was unable to score points for the remainder of the year , his next best result coming in France , where he finished 8th . In the Hungarian Grand Prix , Webber lost two kilograms in weight over the length of the race as he was forced to drive without a drink after his water bottle broke . Webber was able to <unk> Yoong ( and Anthony Davidson , who replaced Yoong for the Hungarian and Belgian Grands Prix ) in every race , and his two points in Australia were the only points that Minardi scored all season , helping them to 9th in the Constructors ' Championship , ahead of Toyota and Arrows . Webber 's results earned him the " Rookie of the Year " award in F1 Racing magazine 's annual Man of the Year awards ( receiving 53 @.@ 70 % of public votes ) , the <unk> " Rookie of the Year " award and " F1 Newcomer of the Year " at the annual Grand Prix Party " Bernie " Awards . In light of his season , notable Formula One journalist Peter Windsor related Webber to 1992 World Champion Nigel Mansell , saying they had similar amounts of " raw talent " . In November 2002 it was announced that Webber would join Jaguar Racing for the following season alongside Brazilian Williams test driver Antônio Pizzonia . 
 = = = Jaguar ( 2003 – 2004 ) = = = 
 = = = = 2003 = = = = 
 Webber 's Jaguar career started disappointingly when he qualified in 14th place for the Australian Grand Prix before being forced to retire on lap 15 with a rear suspension failure . The following race in Malaysia was problematic for Webber ; Giancarlo Fisichella began reversing towards him on the starting grid and then Webber 's in @-@ car fire extinguisher discharged into his face . He was eventually forced to retire from 8th position with an oil consumption problem . 
 Webber took provisional pole position in Friday qualifying of the Brazilian Grand Prix , out @-@ qualifying local driver Rubens Barrichello by 0 @.@ 138 seconds during a rain @-@ affected session . He continued his good performance in the Saturday session taking a career @-@ best 3rd on the grid , Jaguar Racing 's best qualifying performance in their four @-@ year Formula One history . In the race , which was hit heavily by rain , Webber was in seventh place when he attempted to cool his tyres by driving through a puddle lying off @-@ line in the final corner . The resultant lack of grip caused Webber to crash heavily into the pit straight walls , leaving debris on the track which caused a second major crash ; Fernando Alonso hitting a stray tyre . The race was subsequently red @-@ flagged , and although Webber was originally classified in 7th , an FIA investigation found a timekeeping error which meant that Webber was placed 9th in the re @-@ classification . 
 Webber 's good qualifying form continued into the San Marino Grand Prix but at the start of the race he had dropped from 5th to 11th by the first corner because of a launch control failure that affected both Jaguars . He retired from the race after 54 laps with a driveshaft failure , his fourth consecutive non @-@ finish for the year . His luck improved in the following races though , taking his first points in Spain and signing a new 2 @-@ year contract with the team reportedly worth US $ 6 million per season . 
 He then went on to score points in five of the next six races on his way to moving into the top 10 in the World Drivers ' Championship , the run of results interrupted only by an engine failure in Monaco . One of his best races came in Austria where despite starting from the pitlane and suffering a drive @-@ through penalty he set the race 's third fastest lap , behind only the Ferraris of Michael Schumacher and Rubens Barrichello , finishing in 7th place . 
 At the British Grand Prix , as the procession of cars exited the <unk> corner onto the Hangar straight on lap 11 , now @-@ defrocked priest Neil Horan cleared the fence wearing a kilt whilst waving banners with the statements " Read the Bible " and " The Bible is always right " . Horan ran towards the sequence of cars forcing several cars to swerve to avoid him . Webber came closest to hitting Horan in a terrifying parallel to the accident at the 1977 South African Grand Prix where volunteer track marshal , Jansen Van Vuuren , ran across the main straight to aid a car and was hit at 274 km / h ( 170 mph ) by Welsh driver Tom Pryce . The safety car was deployed to remove Horan from the track , and Webber eventually finished 14th . 
 After Silverstone , Webber had scored 12 Championship points , compared to Pizzonia 's 0 , and after much speculation it was announced that Minardi driver Justin Wilson would replace the Brazilian for the remainder of the year . The German Grand Prix saw Webber 's sixth retirement of the season after he made a last lap lunge on Jenson Button in an attempt to salvage a point from the weekend . 
 Consecutive points finishes in Hungary and Italy saw Webber climb to ninth in the drivers ' standings with a 5 @-@ point margin over Button . He was unable to hold on to this position however , after one too many laps on dry tyres saw him spin out from the lead of the United States Grand Prix , and a disappointing 11th @-@ place result in Japan . These meant that he had finished on equal points with Button but lost out on a <unk> . 
 Although Wilson scored a point in the United States Grand Prix , Webber had still never been outqualified by a team @-@ mate and , late in the year , Jaguar announced that rookie Christian Klien would team up with Webber for the 2004 season . Webber 's results again earned him plaudits in the press , winning the 2003 " Driver of the Year " award from Autocar magazine . 
 = = = = 2004 = = = = 
 Continuing with Jaguar in 2004 , Webber qualified sixth for the first race of the season , the Australian Grand Prix , but faced his second consecutive retirement from his home race , this time as a result of a gearbox failure . At the following race , the Malaysian Grand Prix , Webber produced the best qualifying performance of his career up to that point by splitting the dominant Ferraris to line up second on the grid . The race was less rewarding with a near @-@ stall at the start meaning he was well outside the top 10 by the time the cars reached turn 1 . An aggressive lap saw him move up to ninth place but during an exciting battle with Ralf Schumacher , they collided , forcing Webber to pit with damage to his front wing and tyre . In his desperation to make up for the lost time , Webber exceeded the pitlane speed limit and was handed a drive @-@ through penalty which left him even further behind . More frustration eventually led to the end of his race as he spun into the gravel trap on the outside of the final corner on lap 23 . 
 The situation improved for the following race in Bahrain though , as Webber picked up his first point for the season despite a small mistake in qualifying which left him starting 14th and marked the first time he had been outqualified by his team @-@ mate in F1 . He was unable to continue his point scoring form , however , as intermittent electrical problems in San Marino and a lack of grip in Spain meant that he could do no better than 13th and 12th in those races . 
 Webber suffered two engine failures in practice for the Monaco Grand Prix , the first of which forced Webber to extinguish it himself after being unable to find a track @-@ side marshal willing to help . In the race , Webber was forced to retire because of a loss of engine power . He was able to pick up two Championship points in the following race with a seventh @-@ place finish in the European Grand Prix . Webber had lined up 14th on the grid , after being handed a one @-@ second penalty for yellow flag infringements during Friday practice , but was able to move through the field to take his points tally to 3 . After the race , he was criticised by Michael Schumacher for refusing to yield when Webber had emerged from his pit stop slightly ahead of ( but one lap behind ) Schumacher . Upon hearing the comments , Webber said he " would do exactly the same again " in the same situation . 
 There were consecutive retirements in Canada , where he was hit by Klien , and the United States where he suffered an oil leak . A change of luck gained him a 9th @-@ place finish in the French Grand Prix and preceded a further championship point in the British Grand Prix ; although his total of 4 points compared unfavourably to his 12 scored by the same time in the previous season . It was at this stage that former team @-@ mate Pizzonia returned to racing as a replacement for the injured Ralf Schumacher and accused Jaguar of favouritism towards Webber during their time as team @-@ mates saying that Webber received new car parts one or two races before Pizzonia . The claims were categorically denied by Jaguar boss David <unk> , and whilst Webber did not publicly comment on the situation at the time he had his best result of the season finishing sixth in the German Grand Prix , running ahead of Pizzonia for the entire race . Meanwhile , reports emerged that Jaguar could not guarantee that they would compete in Formula One for the 2005 season and on 28 July , it was announced that Webber would drive for <unk> for 2005 and beyond . He would later admit this was the team that his " heart was always set on " . Webber was unable to build on his points tally , however , and 10th place in Hungary followed by a first @-@ lap accident in Belgium with 9th in Italy and 10th in China saw him sitting 13th in the Championship . 
 The penultimate race of the season , the Japanese Grand Prix saw Webber produce another good qualifying effort as he set the third fastest time . His race ended prematurely though when he suffered from a badly overheating cockpit , the cause of which could not be determined by Jaguar . The Brazilian Grand Prix marked both Webber 's last race for Jaguar and Jaguar 's last race in Formula One , ending sadly for the team , as Klien turned into a corner colliding with Webber as the Australian attempted to make up for a pit stop delay earlier in the race . Webber was forced to retire due to the damage and watched the remainder of the race from the grass on the outside of turn 1 as Klien finished 14th . 
 = = = Williams ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = 
 Webber was granted an early release from his Jaguar contract to be allowed to test with his new team , Williams , over the winter . Williams had announced that Jenson Button would drive for the team in 2005 alongside Webber but , after claims that Button was still contracted to BAR , his contract with Williams was overturned . With his new team @-@ mate undecided and going down to a " shootout " between Nick Heidfeld and Pizzonia , Webber hit back at Pizzonia 's claims of unfair treatment during 2003 , claiming the Brazilian was lying and saying he was a " loser " for believing that there was favouritism towards Webber , comments which led to a reprimand from his new team . 
 Heidfeld was finally announced as Webber 's 2005 team @-@ mate at the Williams season launch on 31 January , with Webber admitting he was pleased with the eventual decision . Webber 's move to Williams brought about comparisons to Alan Jones , Australia 's last F1 World Champion , also in a Williams . Expectations were high as Webber 's former team boss Paul Stoddart predicted Webber would take his first victory in 2005 while Williams technical director Sam Michael said Webber would eventually win the World Championship with Williams . 
 = = = = 2005 = = = = 
 In his first race for the team , the Australian Grand Prix , Webber took 3rd on the grid but was beaten to the first corner by David Coulthard and eventually finished the race in fifth which finally matched his effort with Minardi in ' 02 . His best chance to do so though came in the following race in Malaysia . After qualifying fourth , Webber was defending third position having overtaken the Renault of Giancarlo Fisichella at turn 14 . An optimistic Fisichella ( who was struggling due to a lack of downforce and tyre grip ) slip streamed Webber on the back straight and attempted a counter @-@ pass down the inside of turn 15 . Unfortunately , Fisichella locked his brakes and slid into the side of Webber 's car , eliminating both drivers from the race . This allowed Heidfeld to inherit third place and Fisichella was later reprimanded by race stewards for causing the incident . It was later revealed that Webber had competed in the first two races suffering a fractured rib , from an injury he had sustained during pre @-@ season testing at Barcelona , though he " didn 't want to make a fuss " about it and would be fully fit in time for the Bahrain Grand Prix . 
 After qualifying fifth in Bahrain , Webber had been as high as third place in the race but he ultimately finished sixth , taking his points tally to 7 for the season . He followed this up by qualifying fourth and finishing a disappointing 10th after twice running wide off the track in the San Marino Grand Prix , although his position was revised to 7th after the disqualification of the BAR team and a resulting penalty to Ralf Schumacher . The race was a poor one for Williams ( Heidfeld was 9th before the reclassification ) , but Webber hit back at the Spanish Grand Prix , qualifying 2nd and finishing 6th – his fourth points scoring finish in the first five races . 
 The following race in Monaco saw Webber take third place , the first podium finish of his career . On the rostrum Webber looked noticeably disappointed with the result after losing second place to team @-@ mate Heidfeld due to the Williams team pitting Heidfeld before Webber causing Webber to lose time behind the slow Alonso . Webber had been ahead of Heidfeld for most of the race and would probably still have been second had the team pitted them in the more regular sequence . This best result of Webber 's career was followed by one of his worst at the European Grand Prix when , after qualifying third , he locked his brakes in the very first corner of the race and collided with Juan Pablo Montoya , forcing him to retire . Heidfeld started from pole position to finish in second place overtaking Webber in championship points in the process . 
 The race in Canada was affected by this previous result , as Webber was only able to qualify 14th , but he was pleased with an eventual 5th @-@ place finish and a further 4 Championship points . The United States Grand Prix was the beginning of a lean streak for Webber with just one point @-@ scoring finish in the next seven races , a seventh in Hungary , and by this stage he had slipped from 6th to 10th in the World Championship . Webber had another poor race in Turkey where he collided with Michael Schumacher after the German changed lines in the braking area , causing extensive damage to both cars . 
 With Heidfeld injured , Webber 's former Jaguar team @-@ mate Antônio Pizzonia stepped into the second Williams seat adding pressure on Webber to perform well given the public argument the pair had towards the end of 2004 . The Italian Grand Prix saw Pizzonia driving to seventh whilst Webber was caught up in a first @-@ corner incident which led to him finishing 14th . The roles were reversed for the following race in Belgium as Webber finished in fourth place and Pizzonia retired after a collision with Juan Pablo Montoya in the closing laps . With rumours spreading that Heidfeld had in fact signed with BMW Sauber for the 2006 season , Pizzonia continued in the race seat , and in the Brazilian Grand Prix , was clipped by David Coulthard in turn one . The contact caused Pizzonia to spin into the path of Webber forcing extensive repairs to the Australian 's car . Webber took 17th place , setting the 8th fastest lap of the race , but was not classified as a finisher . 
 The final two races of the season saw Webber take 4th and 7th to consolidate his 10th place in the Drivers ' Championship . Webber described the 2005 season as " frustrating " and acknowledged that his reputation had somewhat diminished but opted to stay on with Williams despite an offer from BMW Sauber . Webber 's team @-@ mate for 2006 would be German Nico Rosberg , becoming the seventh driver to partner Webber since 2002 . 
 Webber was awarded the Lorenzo Bandini Trophy in 2006 for his 2005 season . 
 = = = = 2006 = = = = 
 For the first time in Webber 's career the first race of the season was not held in Melbourne , but in Bahrain , due to the original date clashing with the Commonwealth Games . Webber qualified 7th and had a solid race to finish 6th and pick up 3 Championship points . Although Webber was considered by some to have the better race performance , this was generally overlooked when Rosberg set the fastest lap in his debut race and moved up through the field despite a first @-@ lap incident . 
 Webber 's two following races in Malaysia and Australia were cut short due to mechanical problems . In Malaysia , Webber started 4th on the grid and was still running in that position before a hydraulics failure ended his race on lap 14 . In his home race , Webber qualified seventh and was leading the race before his gearbox failed on lap 22 . Webber had taken the lead of the race on lap 21 , becoming the first Australian to lead the Australian Grand Prix since John Bowe had done so in the early laps of the non @-@ championship 1984 Australian Grand Prix . A sixth @-@ place finish in San Marino saw Webber move up to 9th in the Championship . In the European Grand Prix , hydraulics failure struck again ending his race after he had fought his way back to 12th from his 19th place start on the grid due to a mid @-@ weekend engine change . 
 The Spanish Grand Prix marked the first time Webber failed to make the top 10 cut @-@ off in the new qualifying system and he struggled during the race finishing ninth . Monaco , however , saw a huge improvement with Webber qualifying on the front row , after Michael Schumacher 's grid penalty , holding third for a large part of the race before retiring when his exhaust burned a wiring loom . Webber 's car was not as disadvantaged as at most other venues , as aerodynamic efficiency is not as important at Monaco . 
 At the British Grand Prix , Webber was taken out on the first lap after an incident with Ralf Schumacher and Scott Speed . In France , Webber suffered a spectacular tyre blowout at maximum speed which he managed to control and return to the pits , parking in the garage . Germany was one of Webber 's strongest races of the year where he was on target for a podium finish until mechanical failure stopped him with only 9 laps to go . The Hungarian Grand Prix was another retirement for Webber as he slid into a barrier in the wet conditions and crushed his front wing under the chassis of the Williams . He finished only 10th in Turkey , where despite running fourth after a first @-@ lap accident , he struggled from then on . 
 After another disappointing qualifying session at the Italian Grand Prix where he qualified 19th , he finished in tenth place . In China , Webber scored Williams ' first point since Rosberg 's 7th in the European Grand Prix by finishing eighth , after passing the struggling David Coulthard in the closing stages of the race , after qualifying 14th . He qualified in the same position in Japan , but a lack of grip from his Bridgestone tyres saw him crash out of the race after 39 laps . His last race for Williams and the final race of 2006 at the Brazilian Grand Prix ended in disappointment . After starting 11th , he collided with his team @-@ mate Rosberg on the first lap and suffered terminal damage to the rear of the car . Overall , it was a generally dismal season for Webber , scoring only 7 points to finish 14th overall in the drivers championship . 
 = = = Red Bull ( 2007 – 2013 ) = = = 
 Webber 's two @-@ year contract with Williams ended at the end of 2006 . The team held an option on his services for 2007 which they chose not to take up on its original terms and although Webber had expressed his desire to stay with the team , Williams offered Webber a considerably smaller salary than had been stipulated in the original contract for the option year . Under advice from his manager , Flavio Briatore , Webber then sought another drive . Williams quickly elected to promote current test driver Alexander Wurz to a race seat . Williams team boss Sir Frank Williams stated that he was reluctant to wait for Webber to commit to the team once the option for future years had expired , though he did not blame Webber for waiting to see if there was a seat available at another team . 
 After some speculation of Webber joining the Renault team , which was run by Briatore , it was announced on 7 August 2006 that Webber would join Red Bull Racing for 2007 to partner David Coulthard , replacing former Jaguar Racing teammate Christian Klien . It is rumoured that Briatore arranged an agreement with Red Bull that , if they offered Webber a race seat , Renault would supply them with engines . On 26 January 2007 the new Red Bull RB3 challenger was unveiled in Spain , and Webber drove the car in a shakedown in Barcelona on the same day . The car featured heavy revisions to the team 's previous cars and looked very much like designer Adrian Newey 's previous cars which had either won or come close to the World Title . The car was fitted with a Renault <unk> engine . 
 = = = = 2007 = = = = 
 At the first race of the season in Melbourne , Webber qualified in 7th place and held that position for the early part of the race , managing to finish in 13th position after the RB3 suffered from a throttle @-@ related malfunction and a jammed fuel flap . At the Malaysian Grand Prix , he again out @-@ qualified his more experienced team @-@ mate Coulthard and finished tenth , which was encouraging for the team in such a new and radical car . Bahrain was also going well for both drivers , who were running in sixth and seventh positions , until both cars retired due to mechanical malfunctions . Webber again was hampered by the aforementioned jammed fuel flap , radically affecting the aerodynamic drag , a vital set @-@ up consideration for the Sakhir circuit . 
 The potential of both the car and Webber , who had certainly worked well to out @-@ qualify his vastly more experienced team @-@ mate , was highlighted by the closeness they had to other teams which ran the Renault engine and although the Adrian Newey @-@ designed car had flaws which contributed to Webber 's scoreless season to that point . Though the pace of the car seemed to be picking up , with Coulthard qualifying in the top @-@ 10 for the Spanish Grand Prix , Webber was unable to convert his early weekend pace into a competitive grid position due to hydraulic problems . His race was much the same with a similar hydraulic problem leading to him retiring early in the race whilst team @-@ mate Coulthard notched up the team 's first points with a fifth @-@ place finish . 
 Webber finally recorded the second podium of his career at the European Grand Prix after qualifying in 6th position . A rain spiced race and the retirement of Kimi Räikkönen , who was running third at the time , allowed Webber to claim third on the podium despite almost losing the position on the penultimate corner as he battled with Alexander Wurz . 
 His best chance at winning a race occurred at the Japanese Grand Prix where , in the wet conditions , Webber ran in 2nd place , setting the 3rd fastest lap of the race after the two McLarens . Towards the end of the race , Webber was running 2nd behind Lewis Hamilton , with no further pit stops to make , when Sebastian Vettel , driver for sister team Scuderia Toro Rosso , ran into the back of him when Hamilton suddenly reduced his speed in poor visibility and heavy rain under a safety car , taking both cars out of the race . He had been lapping faster than Hamilton due to damage on the McLaren 's sidepod from contact with Robert Kubica . Out of the current Formula One drivers , until his win at the 2009 German Grand Prix , Webber has had the second highest number of starts without a win , and is often referred to as the " unluckiest man in modern Formula One " , a title that was reinforced in Japan as Webber started the race suffering from food poisoning and vomited inside his helmet during the first safety car period . When questioned by ITV 's Louise Goodman about the race ending collision Webber commented : " Well it 's kids , isn 't it . Kids with not enough experience , doing a good job then they fuck it all up , " Webber was particularly critical of Hamilton 's driving that led to the accident , describing his antics as " shit " . Webber also stated the British press attacked him for criticising their " golden boy " Hamilton . 
 Webber again looked strong at the final race of the season in Brazil . Webber qualified fifth in front of both BMW Saubers and behind only the Ferraris and McLarens . Webber looked strong in the race , running as high as fourth , before yet another mechanical failure brought an end to a disappointing but promising season for the Australian . 
 = = = = 2008 = = = = 
 As per his contract , Webber started the year in Melbourne with Red Bull Racing . He recorded top @-@ six lap times in each of the three practice sessions , and was on his way to the top ten in the qualifying session when the front right brake disc in his car failed going into turn 6 during Q2 , sending him spinning off into the sand trap ending his qualifying session , and resulting in 15th position on the grid . Although starting well , he momentarily went off the track at turn 1 to avoid being involved in contact that had already erupted . Webber made several positions by turn 3 but an incident involving himself , Kazuki Nakajima and Anthony Davidson when he was slightly contacted by Davidson whilst trying to avoid the struggle between the other two drivers , ended his race . 
 Despite the retirement in Australia , the next 5 rounds saw a string of point @-@ scoring positions , including a 4th at Monaco in the wet , one of the few finishers not to have made a mistake and subsequent pit @-@ in , however his performance was overshadowed by Hamilton 's win . Until 2009 , this was Webber 's best start to an F1 season since 2005 with Williams , managing five consecutive points scoring races . 
 On the Thursday of the British Grand Prix weekend , it was announced that Webber had agreed to a one @-@ year extension to his contract at Red Bull Racing , leaving him contracted there until the end of the 2009 season . During qualifying for the Grand Prix , Webber equalled his best qualifying position with 2nd position on the grid , in front of Kimi Räikkönen and behind pole position @-@ holder Heikki Kovalainen . As a result of Timo Glock 's penalty from the Belgian Grand Prix for illegally passing Webber under yellow flags in the final lap ( s ) of the race , Webber was awarded 8th place and the point that came with it . 
 At the first night race in Formula One , the Singapore Grand Prix , Webber qualified in 13th position . Red Bull pulled in both Webber and David Coulthard for their pit stops as soon as they could when the safety car came on track , due to Nelson Piquet , Jr. crashing , giving them both great track position . This led to Webber running in 2nd place before a gearbox issue put him out of the race on lap 29 . 
 Webber qualified 13th at the Japanese Grand Prix . After some first corner incidents he was stranded in last place ; from there he progressed up the order , at one point in time sitting in fourth . Following his pit stop he emerged in 10th , with Nick Heidfeld and Nico Rosberg yet to pit , from where he continued to push , regained 8th once the two drivers in 8th and 9th both went in for their final pit stops . With two laps to go , Webber 's tyres were close to bald – being compared to slicks . Losing almost 3 seconds a lap to the chasing Ferrari of Felipe Massa , who was on fresh tyres , he defended his point vigorously . Pressured by the Ferrari , he was out @-@ powered by the superior engine of Massa and although great attempts at saving his place were shown , he finished in a hard @-@ fought 9th position , on a one stop strategy which was then upgraded to 8th position after a post @-@ race penalty to Sébastien Bourdais . 
 In China , Webber 's engine failed on the home straight during the final practice session leaving him with a ten @-@ place grid penalty . During qualifying on Saturday afternoon , he ended in 6th after Heidfeld was demoted for impeding Webber 's team @-@ mate Coulthard , and so Webber had to start from 16th after his penalty . Webber was on the grid in 16th and managed to end the first lap up four places in 12th before taking the 11th position off Glock on the second lap . By the first pit stop , Webber had overtaken Rubens Barrichello and Piquet Jr. for 9th place , but inevitably dropped back once he had entered the pits . The two @-@ stop strategy that the team had adopted was not successful and Webber finished in 14th place . The Brazilian Grand Prix was team @-@ mate Coulthard 's last race before his retirement from F1 . Practice was close with the leading seven cars , including Webber in 7th , being less than a second apart . In Saturday afternoon qualifying , Webber managed 10th on the grid , and finished the race in 9th position . 
 Webber finished the season in 11th place in the Drivers ' Championship with a total of 21 points , his most successful season after 2005 at Williams at that point in time . 
 = = = = 2009 = = = = 
 Webber remained with Red Bull for 2009 , where he was joined by Sebastian Vettel after David Coulthard 's retirement at the end of 2008 . After sustaining a broken leg in a road accident during his charity event in Tasmania in the off @-@ season , he returned to testing on 11 February with steel rods in his leg . 
 At the opening round in Australia , an error in qualifying left him in 10th on the grid for the start of the race . On the second lap of the race , Webber crashed with Heikki Kovalainen , Adrian Sutil and Nick Heidfeld following their efforts to avoid a collision with Rubens Barrichello , causing all except Barrichello to pit . 
 The Malaysian Grand Prix saw Webber qualify seventh and gain two positions due to penalties to other drivers . The race , which was halted early due to monsoonal rains , ended under the safety car with Webber in fourth . He was provisionally placed eighth , but further investigation brought his position up to sixth . He was awarded 1 @.@ 5 points due to the half @-@ points decision at the conclusion of the race . The Chinese Grand Prix proved a breakthrough for Webber . Starting in third position , the race began under the safety car due to heavy rain . Webber eventually brought his car home in second position , marking Webber 's career @-@ best finish and was also the first win ( and 1 – 2 finish ) for the Red Bull team . 
 The Spanish Grand Prix saw Webber qualify fifth fastest and finish third , and he took fifth in Monaco . He followed this up with his equal career best second place in Turkey , equalling this result in the subsequent British Grand Prix at Silverstone . 
 Webber qualified on pole for the first time in Formula One at the Nürburgring for the German Grand Prix . This was the first time an Australian driver had claimed pole position since Alan Jones in 1980 . He went on to achieve his first Formula One victory despite receiving a drive through penalty early in the race for causing an avoidable collision at the start when he hit the Brawn GP of Rubens Barrichello . Webber went on to dominate the race and win ahead of his teammate Vettel , heading a Red Bull 1 – 2 and closing the gap to the <unk> in the Constructors ' Championship . Webber moved up to third in the drivers ' championship after his win , at that time his best position in Formula One , passing Barrichello in the championship standings . 
 On 23 July , Webber signed a new contract committing him to the Red Bull team for the 2010 Formula One season . Three days later , he finished third in Hungary , moving into second place in the Drivers ' Championship . Webber also set his first ever fastest lap in Formula One . On 21 September 2009 the FIA banned Webber 's manager , Flavio Briatore , from all FIA related activities and announced that it would not renew the <unk> for any driver managed or otherwise associated with Briatore . Since then , Briatore has been reinstated into Formula One and negotiations concerning management has since been declared legal . 
 Following his podium at the Hungarian Grand Prix , two ninth placings , two retirements and an unlucky Japanese Grand Prix saw Webber drop to fourth in the Championship , collecting no points . However , he went on to win his second Formula One race in Brazil , starting from second position on the grid , securing fourth place in the 2009 Championship . In the final race of the season , Webber managed second behind teammate Vettel . The result was Red Bull Racing 's fourth 1 – 2 result of the season . 
 = = = = 2010 = = = = 
 In 2010 , Webber continued to race with Red Bull . He qualified for pole position five times ( in Malaysia , Spain , Monaco Turkey and Belgium ) ; won four races ( Spain , Monaco , Britain and Hungary ) ; finished second in Malaysia , Belgium , Japan and Brazil and third in Turkey and Singapore . After the Monaco Grand Prix , Webber led the drivers ' championship , the first Australian to do so since Alan Jones in 1981 . In June 2010 , Red Bull Racing announced that Webber had signed a one @-@ year extension to his contract , meaning that he would remain with the team for the 2011 season . 
 At the European Grand Prix , Webber crashed into the back of Heikki Kovalainen 's Lotus , sending the car flying through the air , collecting a track advertising board and landing upside down . The car then bounced back and crashed into the tyre barrier at high speed . Webber received only minor injuries , but retired from the race . 
 At season 's end , Webber was third in the drivers ' championship , behind Vettel and Alonso . He had led the championship until the Korean Grand Prix , when he did not complete the race . Webber could still have won the championship if , in the final race at Abu Dhabi he had won the race and Alonso had finished no higher than third . Vettel won the race and the drivers ' championship and Red Bull Racing the constructors ' championship . 
 Webber drove the last four races of the season with a small fracture in his right shoulder , the result of a mountain bike accident . 
 At the 2011 British Grand Prix , Webber was presented with the Hawthorn Memorial Trophy for 2010 . 
 = = = = 2011 = = = = 
 Webber started the 2011 season with a fifth @-@ place finish at the Australian Grand Prix , having started from third on the grid , after struggling to keep up with teammate Vettel due to a damaged chassis . In Malaysia , he qualified third but his KERS completely failed at the start and as a result , dropped down over 10 places but staged a strong recovery back to 4th , with fastest lap . In China he qualified eighteenth after another KERS failure , but passed 15 cars on track to finish third . In Turkey , Webber qualified second – his best qualifying result of the season at that point – but lost the position to Nico Rosberg at the start . After passing Rosberg and reclaiming second , he then spent the rest of the race battling with Fernando Alonso , ultimately finishing second after passing Alonso with 8 laps to go . In Spain , Webber secured pole , but lost ground at the start again and had to settle for fourth . Webber qualified third in Monaco but dropped a place at the start and later a pit stop delay dropped Webber outside the top ten , however he recovered to fourth by passing Kamui Kobayashi on the penultimate lap , and set his fourth fastest lap of the season . 
 Webber claimed pole position in a drying qualifying session at Silverstone , beating Vettel by 0 @.@ 032 seconds . The race however did not go as well , as a slow start followed by slow pitstops meant that Webber found himself running fourth behind Alonso , Vettel and Lewis Hamilton . Towards the end of the race , a strong charge saw Webber pass Hamilton and then close the gap to Vettel 's second position , when his team asked him to " maintain the gap " and not try to make a move on Vettel . Although Webber ignored his team 's requests and tried to pass Vettel , Vettel was able to hold him off and finish second , with Webber taking third place . 
 Webber took his only victory of the season at Brazilian Grand Prix , taking the lead from team @-@ mate Vettel after he developed a gearbox issue . With this result , he moved into third place in the championship , ahead of Fernando Alonso . Webber also achieved his seventh fastest lap of the season at the race , with no other drivers scoring more than three in the season . This resulted in him winning the DHL Fastest Lap Award for the first time . 
 = = = = 2012 = = = = 
 On 27 August 2011 , it was announced that Webber would remain with Red Bull into the 2012 season , alongside team @-@ mate Vettel . Webber qualified fifth for the Australian Grand Prix , ahead of team @-@ mate Vettel – sixth – and achieved his best result at his home race with fourth place . 
 Webber followed this result with three more fourth @-@ place finishes in succession , at the Malaysian , Chinese and Bahrain Grands Prix . He inherited pole position for the 2012 Monaco Grand Prix ; having set the second fastest time in Q3 , he was elevated to first position owing to Michael Schumacher 's five place grid penalty for an incident at the 2012 Spanish Grand Prix . He won the race ahead of Nico Rosberg and Fernando Alonso , who were second and third , respectively . This was the third win in a row for a Red Bull Racing driver at Monaco , and the first time that six different drivers won the first six races of a World Championship season . In doing this also , he became the first Australian to achieve two wins at Monaco . 
 Webber achieved his second win of the season at the British Grand Prix , passing Alonso late in the race . Following the victory , Webber signed a one @-@ year contract extension with Red Bull , for the 2013 season . Webber later qualified on pole for the Korean Grand Prix , ahead of team @-@ mate Vettel , but apart from this he struggled in the second half of the season with his only podiums after his win in Britain coming in Korea and India where Red Bull were unbeatable . 
 = = = = 2013 = = = = 
 Webber was retained by Red Bull Racing for 2013 , which was to be his last season with the team . At the opening leg in Australia , he qualified on the front row but only managed a sixth @-@ place finish in the race . Tensions between himself and teammate Vettel rose after the German overtook Webber in the closing stages of the Malaysian Grand Prix to take the win despite the team 's order to hold positions . Webber took another podium in Monaco . In June 2013 , Webber announced that he would be leaving Red Bull at the end of the season , having signed for Porsche to drive their new LMP1 car in 2014 in the FIA World Endurance Championship ( WEC ) including the Le Mans 24 hour race . Webber took another podium in Britain after a battle for victory with Nico Rosberg during the last lap . He finished third in Italy , his fourth podium of the season . Consecutive retirements in Singapore and Korea ended his contention for second place in the championship . Webber scored his first pole of the season in Japan , <unk> his team @-@ mate for the first time in the year , and finished second in the race . Webber scored his thirteenth pole position to equal Jack Brabham 's qualifying record for Australian F1 drivers at the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix . In November , Webber admitted that he had been ' very close ' to signing a deal with Ferrari for 2013 and 2014 . 
 Webber started from fourth place in his final Formula One Grand Prix at the Interlagos circuit for the Brazilian Grand Prix held on 24 November . After a race @-@ long duel with the Ferrari of close friend Fernando Alonso , Webber finished his final race in second place behind team mate Sebastian Vettel , setting the fastest lap of the race . By finishing second , Webber jumped from fifth to third in the final championship standings , overtaking both Lewis Hamilton and Kimi Räikkönen , who did not compete in the final two races of the season . Despite their frosty relationship and winning his thirteenth race of the year ( and ninth in succession ) , Vettel was happy to hand the spotlight on the podium in Brazil to his retiring team mate , congratulating him on his career . 
 Webber finished his Formula One career with nine wins , forty @-@ two podiums , thirteen pole positions and nineteen fastest laps from 215 race starts . 
 = = Sportscar racing = = 
 = = = Porsche ( 2014 – ) = = = 
 In 2013 Webber announced his return to sportscar racing , racing for Porsche as one of their drivers for the 2014 FIA World Endurance Championship as the marque returned to the top category of sportscar racing after a 16 @-@ year absence . Driving the Porsche 919 Hybrid Webber finished his first World Endurance Championship race in third at the 2014 6 Hours of Silverstone two laps behind the winning Toyota . At Le Mans , although still running at the finish , the team were thirty three laps down and were therefore listed as Not Classified . Two more third @-@ place finishes followed at Fuji and Bahrain . At the 6 Hours of São Paulo , Webber 's Porsche took pole position , but was involved in a heavy crash towards the end of the race whilst passing the Ferrari of the 8 Star Motorsports team . Webber 's car split in two , but he avoided serious injury . Webber therefore finished his first season in 9th place . 
 In November 2015 he became World Endurance Champion in the # 17 car , alongside Timo Bernhard and Brendon Hartley . The trio race with the # 1 on their car in 2016 . 
 = = Outside motorsport = = 
 Webber lives in Aston Clinton , Buckinghamshire , England with partner Ann Neal and her grown @-@ up son from a previous relationship , Luke Barrett . Outside motorsport , Webber enjoys " most outdoor pursuits " including road cycling , mountain biking , tennis and fitness training . He has won the annual F1 Pro @-@ Am tennis tournament in Barcelona three times ( 2002 , 2004 and 2005 ) and was also runner @-@ up to Juan Pablo Montoya in 2003 . Webber is an avid rugby league football fan , supporting the Canberra Raiders , as well as being a football fan , supporting English Premier League club Sunderland . His favourite musical acts are Pink , Oasis , INXS , Dizzee Rascal , U2 and Feeder . 
 Webber is also a keen fan of motorcycle racing , and has made several trips to the Isle of Man TT Races . On Saturday 2 June 2012 , he was a guest at the Superbike TT , and was on hand to congratulate his close friend John McGuinness as he secured victory , and his 18th Isle of Man TT triumph . 
 In July 2015 , Mark Webber released his long @-@ awaited autobiography , Aussie Grit . The book covers his journey from Queanbeyan to the pinnacle of Formula 1 and during his book tour he candidly discusses his relationship with former Red Bull teammate Sebastian Vettel and how the media portrayed things differently to how they actually were . 
 Webber supports the North Melbourne Kangaroos in the Australian Football League . 
 = = = Charity Challenge = = = 
 In November 2003 , Webber organised and competed in a 10 @-@ day trek across Tasmania to raise funds for children 's cancer research charities . Starting in <unk> on the state 's west coast , the trek involved 1 @,@ 000 km of cycling , kayaking and trekking along the southern coast and finished at Coles Bay in the east . Four teams of four competitors each started the trek , with only two teams ( including Webber 's ) completing the entire journey . Along the way , Australian sporting stars Pat Rafter ( tennis ) , Steve Waugh ( cricket ) , Cathy Freeman ( athletics ) , James Tomkins ( rowing ) , Guy Andrews ( iron man ) , and actor Joel Edgerton completed certain parts of the trek . The challenge concluded with a black tie dinner and auction to raise funds . Webber said he was driven to organise the event after the death of his grandfather to cancer , as well as his experiences with friends whose children had battled the disease . 
 With Webber 's switch from Jaguar to Williams at the end of 2004 , the challenge was postponed until 2006 , when he was able to secure a three @-@ year deal with the Tasmanian Government to hold the event . The 2006 event ( now named the " Mark Webber Pure Tasmania Challenge " ) was held over six days and covered nearly 600 km . Twelve teams competed in the event , and it raised A $ 500 @,@ 000 for children 's charities . 
 The 2007 Mark Webber Pure Tasmania Challenge was launched at the 2007 Australian Grand Prix in Melbourne when Webber was joined by sports stars and Kylie Minogue , and Hollywood star Anthony Edwards . The trek was another gruelling physical and mental adventure race about Tasmania in aid of charity but albeit with a new format . Teams competed for honours in two unique categories : the Van Diemen Cup – designed exclusively for corporate teams of four people , and the <unk> Cup – a two @-@ person elite team entry . Both categories trekked , <unk> and cycled alongside each other as they covered approximately 450 km through World Heritage wilderness and along the idyllic coast of the Freycinet National Park . It was held from 17 – 23 November , and for the first time , one of Webber 's fellow Formula One drivers , Heikki Kovalainen , joined him in the challenge . 
 During the 2008 event , Webber broke his leg when his bike collided with a car . He did not suffer any other injuries , but had a pin inserted into his broken bone . 
 The event was not held in 2009 or 2010 . 
 In December 2010 , it was announced that the Challenge would return in 2011 . It was subsequently held in 2012 and 2013 as well . 
 = = Racing record = = 
 = = = Career summary = = = 
 * Season still in progress . 
 = = = Complete FIA GT Championship results = = = 
 = = = Complete 24 Hours of Le Mans results = = = 
 = = = Complete International Formula 3000 results = = = 
 ( key ) ( Races in bold indicate pole position ) ( Races in italics indicate fastest lap ) 
 = = = Complete Formula One results = = = 
 ( key ) ( Races in bold indicate pole position ) ( Races in italics indicate fastest lap ) 
 ‡ Half points awarded as less than 75 % of race distance was completed by the winner . † Did not finish , but was classified as he had completed more than 90 % of the race distance . 
 = = = Complete FIA World Endurance Championship results = = = 
 * Season still in progress . 
 = Netball = 
 Netball is a ball sport played by two teams of seven players . Its development , derived from early versions of basketball , began in England in the 1890s . By 1960 , international playing rules had been standardised for the game , and the International Federation of Netball and Women 's Basketball ( later renamed the International Netball Federation ( INF ) ) was formed . As of 2011 , the INF comprises more than 60 national teams organized into five global regions . 
 Games are played on a rectangular court with raised goal rings at each end . Each team attempts to score goals by passing a ball down the court and shooting it through its goal ring . Players are assigned specific positions , which define their roles within the team and restrict their movement to certain areas of the court . During general play , a player with the ball can hold on to it for only three seconds before shooting for a goal or passing to another player . The winning team is the one that scores the most goals . Netball games are 60 minutes long . Variations have been developed to increase the game 's pace and appeal to a wider audience . 
 Netball is most popular in Commonwealth nations , specifically in schools , and is predominantly played by women . According to the INF , netball is played by more than 20 million people in more than 80 countries . Major transnational competitions take place , including the Netball Superleague in Great Britain and the ANZ Championship in Australia and New Zealand . Three major competitions take place internationally : the quadrennial World Netball Championships , the Commonwealth Games , and the yearly World Netball Series . In 1995 , netball became an International Olympic Committee recognised sport , but it has not been played at the Olympics . 
 = = History = = 
 Netball emerged from early versions of basketball and evolved into its own sport as the number of women participating in sports increased . Basketball was invented in 1891 by James Naismith in the United States . The game was initially played indoors between two teams of nine players , using an association football that was thrown into closed @-@ end peach baskets . Naismith 's game spread quickly across the United States and variations of the rules soon emerged . Physical education instructor Senda Berenson developed modified rules for women in 1892 ; these eventually gave rise to women 's basketball . Around this time separate intercollegiate rules were developed for men and women . The various basketball rules converged into a universal set in the United States . 
 Martina Bergman @-@ <unk> introduced a version of basketball in 1893 to her female students at the Physical Training College in Hampstead , London . The rules of the game were modified at the college over several years : the game moved outdoors and was played on grass ; the baskets were replaced by rings that had nets ; and in 1897 and 1899 , rules from women 's basketball in the United States were incorporated . Madame <unk> 's new sport acquired the name " net ball " . The first codified rules of netball were published in 1901 by the Ling Association , later the Physical Education Association of the United Kingdom . From England , netball spread to other countries in the British Empire . Variations of the rules and even names for the sport arose in different areas : " women 's ( outdoor ) basketball " arrived in Australia around 1900 and in New Zealand from 1906 , while " netball " was being played in Jamaican schools by 1909 . 
 From the start , it was considered socially appropriate for women to play netball ; netball 's restricted movement appealed to contemporary notions of women 's participation in sports , and the sport was distinct from potential rival male sports . Netball became a popular women 's sport in countries where it was introduced and spread rapidly through school systems . School leagues and domestic competitions emerged during the first half of the 20th century , and in 1924 the first national governing body was established in New Zealand . International competition was initially hampered by a lack of funds and varying rules in different countries . Australia hosted New Zealand in the first international game of netball in Melbourne on 20 August 1938 ; Australia won 40 – 11 . Efforts began in 1957 to standardise netball rules globally : by 1960 international playing rules had been standardised , and the International Federation of Netball and Women 's Basketball , later the International Netball Federation ( INF ) , was formed to administer the sport worldwide . 
 Representatives from England , Australia , New Zealand , South Africa , and the West Indies were part of a 1960 meeting in Sri Lanka that standardised the rules for the game . The game spread to other African countries in the 1970s . South Africa was prohibited from competing internationally from 1969 to 1994 due to apartheid . In the United States , Netball 's popularity also increased during the 1970s , particularly in the New York area , and the United States of America Netball Association was created in 1992 . The game also became popular in the Pacific Island nations of the Cook Islands , Fiji and Samoa during the 1970s . Netball Singapore was created in 1962 , and the Malaysian Netball Association was created in 1978 . 
 In Australia , the term women 's basketball was used to refer to both netball and basketball . During the 1950s and 1960s , a movement arose to change the Australian name of the game from women 's basketball to netball in order to avoid confusion between the two sports . The Australian Basketball Union offered to pay the costs involved to alter the name , but the netball organisation rejected the change . In 1970 , the Council of the All Australia Netball Association officially changed the name to " netball " in Australia . 
 In 1963 , the first international tournament was held in Eastbourne , England . Originally called the World Tournament , it later became known as the World Netball Championships . Following the first tournament , one of the organisers , Miss R. Harris , declared , 
 England could learn from the mistakes in the past from the empty stands at Eastbourne . To get the right publicity and the right status desired , the game must emerge from the school playground . Netball should be part of a sports centre where social events could also be held . 
 The World Netball Championships have been held every four years since , most recently in 2011 . The World Youth Netball Championships started in Canberra in 1988 , and have been held roughly every four years since . In 1995 , the International Olympic Committee designated netball as an Olympic recognised sport . Three years later it debuted at the 1998 Commonwealth Games in Kuala Lumpur . Other international competitions also emerged in the late 20th century , including the Nations Cup and the Asian Netball Championship . 
 = = = Gender = = = 
 As of 2006 , the IFNA recognises only women 's netball . Men 's netball teams exist in some areas but attract less attention from sponsors and spectators . Men 's netball started to become popular in Australia during the 1980s , and the first men 's championship was held in 1985 . In 2004 , New Zealand and Fiji sent teams to compete in the Australian Mixed and Men 's National Championships . By 2006 , mixed netball teams in Australia had as many male participants as rugby union . Other countries with men 's national teams include Canada , Fiji , Jamaica , Kenya , Pakistan and the United Arab Emirates . Unlike women 's netball at elite and national levels , men 's and mixed gendered teams are largely self @-@ funded . 
 An all @-@ transgender netball team from Indonesia competed at the 1994 Gay Games in New York City . The team had been the Indonesian national champions . At the 2000 Gay Games VI in Sydney , netball and volleyball were the two sports with the highest rates of transgender athletes participating . There were eight teams of indigenous players , with seven identifying as transgender . They came from places like Palm Island in northern Queensland , Samoa , Tonga and Papua New Guinea . Teams with transgender players were allowed to participate in several divisions including men 's , mixed and transgender ; they were not allowed to compete against the cisgender women 's teams . 
 = = Description and rules = = 
 The objective of a game is to score more goals than the opposition . Goals are scored when a team member positioned in the attacking shooting circle shoots the ball through the goal ring . The goal rings are 380 millimetres ( 15 in ) in diameter and sit atop 3 @.@ 05 @-@ metre ( 10 @.@ 0 ft ) -high goal posts that have no <unk> . A 4 @.@ 9 @-@ metre ( 16 ft ) <unk> semi @-@ circular " shooting circle " is an area at each end of the court . The goal posts are located within the shooting circle . Each team defends one shooting circle and attacks the other . The netball court is 30 @.@ 5 metres ( 100 ft ) long , 15 @.@ 25 metres ( 50 @.@ 0 ft ) wide , and divided lengthwise into thirds . The ball is usually made of leather or rubber , measures 680 to 710 millimetres ( 27 to 28 in ) in circumference , and weighs 397 to 454 grams ( 14 @.@ 0 to 16 @.@ 0 oz ) . A normal game consists of four 15 @-@ minute quarters and can be played outdoors or in a covered stadium . 
 Each team is allowed seven players on the court . Each player is assigned a specific position , which limits their movement to a certain area of the court . A " bib " worn by each player contains a two @-@ letter abbreviation indicating this position . Only two positions are permitted in the attacking shooting circle , and can therefore shoot for a goal . Similarly , only two positions are permitted in the defensive shooting circle ; they try to prevent the opposition from shooting goals . Other players are restricted to two thirds of the court , with the exception of the Centre , who may move anywhere on the court except for a shooting circle . 
 At the beginning of every quarter and after a goal has been scored , play starts with a player in the centre position passing the ball from the centre of the court . These " centre passes " alternate between the teams , regardless of which team scored the last goal . When the umpire blows the whistle to restart play , four players from each team can move into the centre third to receive the pass . The centre pass must be caught or touched in the centre third . The ball is then moved up and down the court through passing and must be touched by a player in each adjacent third of the court . Players can hold the ball for only three seconds at any time . It must be released before the foot they were standing on when they caught it touches the ground again . Contact between players is only permitted if it does not impede an opponent or the general play . When defending a pass or shot players must be at least 90 centimetres ( 35 in ) away from the player with the ball . If illegal contact is made , the player who contacted cannot participate in play until the player taking the penalty has passed or shot the ball . If the ball is held in two hands and either dropped or a shot at goal is missed , the same player cannot be the first to touch it unless it first rebounds off the goal . 
 = = Variants = = 
 = = = Indoor netball = = = 
 Indoor netball is a variation of netball , played exclusively indoors , in which the playing court is surrounded on each side and overhead by a net . The net prevents the ball from leaving the court , permitting faster play by reducing playing stoppages . 
 Different forms of indoor netball exist . In a seven @-@ per @-@ side version called " action netball " , seven players per team play with rules similar to netball . However , a game is split into 15 @-@ minute halves with a three @-@ minute break in between . This version is played in Australia , New Zealand , South Africa and England . 
 A six @-@ per @-@ side version of the sport is also played in New Zealand . Two Centres per team can play in the whole court except the shooting circles ; the remaining attacking and defending players are each restricted to one half of the court , including the shooting circles . The attacking and Centre players may shoot from outside the shooting circle for a two @-@ point goal . 
 A five @-@ per @-@ side game is also common in indoor netball . Players can move throughout the court , with the exception of the shooting circles , which are restricted to certain attacking or defending players . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> ( originally called Fastnet ) is a variation on the rules of netball designed to make games faster and more television @-@ friendly . The World Netball Series promotes it to raise the sport 's profile and attract more spectators and greater sponsorship . The game is much shorter , with each quarter lasting only six minutes and only a two @-@ minute break between quarters . The coaches can give instructions from the sideline during play , and unlimited substitutions are allowed . Like six @-@ per @-@ side indoor netball , attacking players may shoot two @-@ point goals from outside the shooting circle . Each team can separately nominate one " power play " quarter , in which each goal scored by that team is worth double points and the centre pass is taken by the team that conceded the goal . 
 = = = For children = = = 
 Netball has been adapted in several ways to meet children 's needs . The rules for children are similar to those for adults , but various aspects of the game ( such as the length of each quarter , goal height , and ball size ) are modified . 
 Fun Net is a version of netball developed by Netball Australia for five- to seven @-@ year @-@ olds . It aims to improve basic netball skills using games and activities . The Fun Net program runs for 8 – 16 weeks . There are no winners or losers . The goal posts are 2 @.@ 4 metres ( 7 ft 10 in ) high , and a smaller ball is used . 
 Netball Australia also runs a modified game called Netta aimed at 8- to 11 @-@ year @-@ olds . The goal height and ball size are the same as for adults , but players rotate positions during the game , permitting each player to play each position . Netta was created to develop passing and catching skills . Its rules permit six seconds between catching and passing the ball , instead of the three seconds permitted in the adult game . Most players under 11 play this version at netball clubs . 
 A version called High Five Netball is promoted by the All England Netball Association . It is aimed at 9- to 11 @-@ year @-@ old girls and includes only five positions . The players swap positions during the game . When a player is not on the court , she is expected to help the game in some other way , such as being the timekeeper or scorekeeper . High Five Netball has four six @-@ minute quarters . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The recognised international governing body of netball is the International Federation of Netball Associations ( IFNA ) , based in Manchester , England . Founded in 1960 , the organisation was initially called the International Federation of Netball and Women 's Basketball . The IFNA is responsible for compiling world rankings for national teams , maintaining the rules for netball and organising several major international competitions . 
 As of July 2012 , the IFNA has 49 full and 24 associate national members in five regions . Each region has an IFNA Regional Federation . 
 The IFNA is affiliated with the General Association of International Sports Federations , the International World Games Association and the Association of IOC Recognised International Sports Federations . It is also a signatory to the World Anti @-@ Doping Code . 
 = = International competition = = 
 Netball is a popular participant sport in countries of the Commonwealth of Nations . Non @-@ Commonwealth entities with full IFNA membership include Switzerland , Taiwan , Thailand , Argentina , Bermuda , the Cayman Islands and the United States , along with former Commonwealth members Zimbabwe , Ireland and Hong Kong . According to the IFNA , over 20 million people play netball in more than 80 countries . International tournaments are held among countries in each of the five IFNA regions , either annually or every four years . School leagues and national club competitions have been organised in England , Australia , New Zealand and Jamaica since the early 20th century . Franchise @-@ based netball leagues did not emerge until the late 1990s . These competitions sought to increase the profile of the sport in their respective countries . Despite widespread local interest , participation was largely amateur . 
 Netball was one of three new sports included in the 1998 Commonwealth Games and has been a fixture ever since . Twelve teams competed there in 2010 . Australia and New Zealand have won two golds and two silvers each , while England has three bronzes and Jamaica one bronze . 
 The major international tournament in Africa is organised by the Confederation of Southern African Netball Associations , which invites teams from Botswana , Namibia , Zambia , Malawi , South Africa , Lesotho , Swaziland , Zimbabwe and the Seychelles to take part . The tournament is hosted by a country within the region ; senior and under 21 teams compete . The tournament has served as a qualifier for the World Championships . South Africa launched a new domestic competition in 2011 called Netball Grand Series . It features eight regional teams from South Africa and is aimed at increasing the amount of playing time for players . It runs for 17 weeks and replaces the National Netball League , which was played over only two weeks . According to <unk> captain <unk> <unk> , it was hoped that the competition would create an opportunity for players to become professional . 
 The American Federation of Netball Associations ( AFNA ) hosts two tournaments each year : the Caribbean Netball Association ( CNA ) Under 16 Championship and the AFNA Senior Championship . The CNA championship involves two divisions of teams from the Caribbean islands . In 2010 five teams competed in two rounds of round robin matches in the Championship Division , while four teams competed in the Developmental Division . Jamaica , which has lost only once in the tournament , decided not to play the 2011 tournament . The AFNA Senior Championship includes Canada and the USA along with the Caribbean nations . The tournament serves as a qualifier for the World Championship . Jamaica , with its high ranking , does not have to qualify ; this leaves two spots to the other teams in the tournament . 
 The Asian Netball Championship is held every four years . The seventh Asian games were held in 2009 and featured Singapore , Thailand , Maldives , Taiwan , Malaysia , Sri Lanka , Hong Kong , India and Pakistan . There is also an Asian Youth Netball Championship for girls under 21 years of age , the seventh of which was held in 2010 . 
 The major netball competition in Europe is the Netball Superleague , which features nine teams from England , Wales and Scotland . The league was created in 2005 . Matches are broadcast on Sky Sports . 
 Netball has been featured at the Pacific Games , a multi @-@ sport event with participation from 22 countries from around the South Pacific . The event is held every four years and has 12 required sports ; the host country chooses the other four . Netball is not a required sport and has missed selection , particularly when former French or American territories host the games . 
 The ANZ Championship is a Trans @-@ Tasman competition that has been broadcast on television in both New Zealand and Australia since 2008 . It is contested among ten teams from Australia and New Zealand . It began in April 2008 , succeeding Australia 's Commonwealth Bank Trophy and New Zealand 's National Bank Cup as the pre @-@ eminent netball league in those countries . The competition is held annually between April and July , consisting of 69 matches played over 17 weeks . The ANZ Championship saw netball become a semi @-@ professional sport in both countries , with increased media coverage and player salaries . 
 = = Major championships = = 
 There are three major international netball competitions . 
 Netball 's important competition is the World Netball Championships , held every four years . It was first held in 1963 at the Chelsea College of Physical Education at Eastbourne , England , with 11 nations competing . Since its inception the competition has been dominated primarily by the Australian and New Zealand teams , which hold ten and four titles , respectively . Trinidad and Tobago is the only other team to win a championship title . That title , won in 1979 , was shared with New Zealand and Australia ; all three teams finished with equal points at the end of the round robin , and there were no finals . 
 The World Series is a competition among the top six national netball teams , as ranked by the INF World Rankings . It is organised by the INF in conjunction with the national governing bodies of the six competing nations , UK Sport , and the host city 's local council . The All England Netball Association covers air travel , accommodation , food and local travel expenses for all teams , while the respective netball governing bodies cover player allowances . It is held over three days , with each team playing each other once during the first two days in a round @-@ robin format . The four highest @-@ scoring teams advance to the semi @-@ finals ; the winners face each other in the Grand Final . The competition features modified <unk> rules and has been likened to Twenty20 cricket and rugby sevens . A new format featuring shorter matches with modified rules was designed to make the game more appealing to spectators and television audiences . The World Netball Series was held annually in England from 2009 to 2011 . 
 Netball gained Olympic recognition in 1995 after 20 years of lobbying . Although it has never been played at the Summer Olympics , politicians and administrators have been campaigning to have it included in the near future . Its absence from the Olympics has been seen by the netball community as a hindrance in the global growth of the game by limiting access to media attention and funding sources . Some funding sources became available with recognition in 1995 , including the International Olympic Committee , national Olympic committees , national sport organisations , and state and federal governments . 
 = Clan Maclachlan = 
 Clan Maclachlan , also known as Clan Lachlan and Clann <unk> , is a Highland Scottish clan that historically centred on the lands of Strathlachlan on Loch Fyne , Argyll on the west coast of Scotland . The clan claims descent from Lachlan Mor , who lived on Loch Fyne in the 13th century , and who has left his name upon the countryside he once controlled : places such as Strathlachlan , Castle Lachlan and Lachlan Bay . Tradition gives Lachlan Mor a descent from an Irish prince of the O 'Neill dynasty , <unk> Ua Néill , son of Áed , son of Flaithbertach Ua Néill , King of <unk> and Cenél nEógain , died 1036 . Clan Maclachlan has been associated with other clans , such as Clan Lamont , Clan Ewen of Otter , Clan MacNeil of Barra , and the MacSweens : as all claim descent from Anrothan O 'Neill who left Ireland for Kintyre in the 11th century . From this descent the clan claims a further descent from the legendary Niall <unk> , High King of Ireland , who lived from the mid 4th century to the early 5th century . 
 The clan took part in the Jacobite Risings as loyal supporters of the Stuart kings of Scotland . The seventeenth chief of the clan was killed in the Battle of Culloden in 1746 . Following the Jacobite defeat , a Government warship is said to have damaged the clan seat of old Castle Lachlan . 
 Today the clan is alive and lives as the Clan Maclachlan Society and the Lachlan Trust . The Lachlan Trust is a registered Scottish charitable organisation which takes donations to preserve the heritage of Clan Maclachlan . The Clan Maclachlan Society consists of eight branches around the world , including Australia , Britain & Ireland , Canada , New Zealand , and the United States of America . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Clan Maclachlan claims descent from Lachlan Mor , who lived on the shores of Loch Fyne in the 13th century . Lachlan belonged to the family who originally emigrated from Ireland to Scotland in the 11th century . The progenitor of this family , Anrothan , son of <unk> O 'Neil , king of the north of Ireland , is said to have married the heiress of the King of Scots and gained lands campaigning there . Moncreiffe wrote that it was more likely Anrothan married a daughter of the local king of Argyll or a sub @-@ king of Cowal and through this marriage , Anrothan 's descendants gained control of the lands of Knapdale and Cowal , and several Scottish clans claim a descent from him including Clan MacNeil of Barra , Clan Lamont , Clan MacEwen of Otter , and the MacSweens who became the Irish Sweeney Clan who left Scotland and returned to Ireland in the 14th century as leaders of <unk> . 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 In about 1230 Gilchrist Maclachlan was witness to a charter of <unk> granted by <unk> , ancestor of Clan Lamont . The first documentary evidence of the clan 's ownership of lands was recorded in 1292 , when <unk> <unk> received a charter of his lands in Ergadia from John , King of Scots . 
 According to the historian G. W. S. Barrow , Gillespie Maclachlan appears in the Ragman Rolls , when the magnates of Scotland signed their allegiance to Edward I of England , in 1296 , " clerks of this period writing Anglo @-@ French documents often had difficulty with the name Lachlan , and rendered it by some form of the more familiar name <unk> , or Roland . Thus , unnoticed by historians of Clan Lachlan , Gillespie MacLachlan figures on the Ragman Roll as ' <unk> <unk> <unk> , de <unk> de Perth ' " . 
 Sometime between 1306 and 1322 Gillespie received , in charter from Robert I of Scotland , the ten <unk> of " <unk> " ( Strathlachlan ) and other lands . He also appears on the list of Scottish magnates who sat at the first Parliament of the king of Scots at St Andrews , in 1309 . Gillespie was one of the sixteen Scottish magnates who signed a letter to Philip IV of France in 1309 . The King of France had asked for Scottish assistance in a Crusade he was forming , with the Scots answering that they were at war with England and had their hands full . His name appears on one of the seal tags with that letter , though the actual seal that had been attached to the tag has since been lost . 
 In 1314 " <unk> <unk> in Ergadia " ( Gillespie Maclachlan of Argyll ) granted forty shillings sterling to the Preaching Friars of Glasgow , the sum of which were to be paid from his pennylands of <unk> near Castle Lachlan . ( " juxta castrum meum quod <unk> <unk> " ) . Gillespie was dead by 1322 and was succeeded by Patrick his brother . Patrick married a daughter of James the Steward of Scotland , and had a son , Lachlan , who later succeeded him . In 1410 Iain Maclachlan , lord of Strathlachlan , ( " <unk> <unk> domino de <unk> " ) , witnessed a Lamont charter . In 1456 Lachlan 's son , " <unk> <unk> dominus de <unk> " ( " <unk> " , or Castle Lachlan ) , like his ancestor Gillespie , granted the Preaching Friars of Glasgow six shillings and eight pence per year , from the same pennylands of <unk> beside his home Castle Lachlan . 
 One tradition of the Maclachlan lairds was thought to date from the era of the Crusades . The tradition was that the laird of Strathlachlan ( Maclachlan of Strathlachlan ) and the laird of <unk> ( Campbell of <unk> ) would attend the funerals of each other and " lay his neighbour 's head in the grave " . This tradition was thought to originate from the Crusades because , " it is said the heads of these two families went together to the war , and each solemnly engaged with the other to lay him in his family burying @-@ place if he should fall in battle " . 
 = = = Late 15th century onwards = = = 
 In 1487 Iain Maclachlan of Strathlachlan , witnessed a bond by Dougall Stewart of Appin to Colin Campbell , 1st Earl of Argyll . Iain died sometime around 1509 and his son <unk> ( or alternately Archibald ) married a daughter of Iain Lamont of <unk> , the chief of Clan Lamont . Iain was succeeded by his son , Lachlan , who later on forcibly ejected Archibald Lamont of <unk> from his lands . For this , the Maclachlan chief was summoned before the Privy Council , which ruled that even though Lachlan claimed Lamont lands through his maternal grandfather ( the chief of Clan Lamont ) , that a Lamont heir was more preferable to a Maclachlan heir . Lachlan died sometime between 1557 and 1559 , and was succeeded by his second son , Archibald . In 1587 , the chief of the clan , " M <unk> " , appears on the roll of names of the landlords in the highlands and the isles , on whose land broken men dwelt . Archibald had only daughters and in turn was succeeded by his nephew Lachlan Og ( " <unk> <unk> <unk> his brothers sone " ) . 
 Not long after assuming the chiefship , Lachlan Og was forced to resign some of his lands to the chief of the <unk> , because of the murder of Robert Lamont of <unk> by Lachlan Maclachlan of <unk> . Lachlan Og led the clan in the Archibald Campbell , 7th Earl of Argyll 's campaign against Sir James Macdonald of Islay and his rebellion in 1615 . 
 Lachlan Maclachlan of that Ilk was succeeded by his son Archibald , who is reckoned as the fifteenth chief of the clan . In 1680 Archibald had his lands erected into a Barony by Charles II of England called the Barony of Strathlachlan which was centred on Castle Lachlan . To this day the chief of the clan is styled as Baron of Strathlachlan . 
 = = = Jacobite Risings = = = 
 The <unk> were loyal Jacobites . They were said to have been present at the Battle of Killiecrankie in 1689 . In the Jacobite Rising of 1715 Lachlan Maclachlan of that Ilk " signed the Address of Welcome to the Old Chevalier , the rightful King James VIII Stuart , on his landing in Scotland " . Archibald Brown , in The History of Cowal , wrote , " The chief of MacLachlan appeared with the Earl of Mar at <unk> as Colonel in the Pretender 's army , and for this act it is said Campbell of <unk> followed MacLachlan like a <unk> for five years and shot him dead in 1720 " . 
 Lachlan , the seventeenth chief of Clan Maclachlan played a part in the Jacobite Rising of 1745 , and lost his life leading the clan at the Battle of Culloden . Lord President Duncan Forbes estimated that the Maclachlan force of that time was about 200 men . In 1748 , Rev. John MacLachlan of <unk> , in a letter to Rev. Robert Forbes , wrote , 
 Following the Jacobite defeat a Government ship sailed up Loch Fyne and shelled Castle Lachlan , forcing the chief 's family to abandon their residence , and in Edinburgh the Maclachlan colours were burned on the orders of the Duke of Cumberland . It had been assumed that the chiefs lands had been forfeited for his support of the Young Pretender and the Jacobite cause , but it was ruled that he had been killed before he could be attainted . The chief of the Campbells , the Archibald Campbell , 3rd Duke of Argyll , who although helped crush the Jacobite forces , aided Donald , son of the deceased Maclachlan chief , and helped saved his lands . On 12 February 1747 Donald Maclachlan of that Ilk received a charter for his lands " at the intercession of the Duke of Argyll " , though it was considerably unpopular decision at the time , and Maclachlan 's estates were " surveyed but afterwards found not to be forfeited " . 
 = = = The modern clan = = = 
 In the early 19th century , a new Castle Lachlan was built for the chiefs of the clan , and it remains the seat of the clan to this day . The last of the male line chiefs of Clan Maclachlan was John Maclachlan who died in 1942 . He was succeeded by his daughter , the twenty @-@ fourth chief of the clan , Marjorie Maclachlan of Maclachlan . Under her the Clan Maclachlan Society was formed in 1979 , and on her death in 1996 , she was succeeded by her eldest son Euan John Maclachlan of Maclachlan , Chief of Clan Maclachlan , 25th of Maclachlan and Baron of Strathlachlan , who is a member of the Standing Council of Scottish Chiefs . 
 Today the clan is alive and lives as the Clan Maclachlan Society and the Lachlan Trust . The Clan Maclachlan Society consists of eight branches around the world , including Australia , Britain & Ireland , Canada , New Zealand , and the United States of America . The Lachlan Trust is a registered Scottish charitable organisation which takes donations to preserve the heritage of Clan Maclachlan . The trust , in part with Historic Scotland and the Heritage Lottery Fund , helped raise £ 100 @,@ 000 for the preservation of <unk> Chapel , the traditional burying place of the chiefs . The project was completed in 2006 , as a memorial to the twenty @-@ fourth chief ( the present chief 's mother ) . Further funding from Historic Scotland and the Heritage Lottery Fund has since been approved for the conservation of the old castle and the construction of a new footbridge over the River Lachlan . Work began in the spring of 2013 with the erection of scaffolding around the west corner of the old castle . The plan is to develop the site for the enjoyment of visitors , with improved pathways , a nature trail and information points about the heritage of the area . 
 = = Castle Lachlan = = 
 Old Castle Lachlan lies on the eastern shore of Loch Fyne , near Newton . The ruinous castle dates to the 15th century , and lies about 70 feet ( 21 @.@ 3 m ) north to south , 54 feet ( 16 @.@ 5 m ) east to west , and at its highest point 43 feet ( 13 @.@ 1 m ) high . 
 In the late 18th century , Donald Maclachlan oversaw the construction of New Castle Lachlan , a mansion which stands about a ten @-@ minute walk away from the ruinous old castle . This new house was first built in the Queen Anne Style , then later at the end of the 19th century it was transformed into the Scottish baronial house that stands today . The building , upon the 1 @,@ 500 acres ( 2 @.@ 3 sq mi ; 6 @.@ 1 km2 ) estate , has been divided in two with the chief residing in one part and the second available for rent . 
 = = Clan profile = = 
 = = = Clan chief = = = 
 The current chief of Clan Maclachlan is Euan John Maclachlan of Maclachlan , Chief of Clan Maclachlan , 25th of Maclachlan and Baron of Strathlachlan . The chief 's seat is new Castle Lachlan . 
 = = = Origin of the name = = = 
 Clan Maclachlan claims as its eponymous ancestor Lachlan Mor . The surname Maclachlan is an Anglicised form of the Gaelic Mac <unk> which is the patronymic form of the Gaelic personal name Lochlann meaning " stranger " . Lochlann was originally a term to describe Scandinavia , composed of the elements loch ( meaning " lake " or " fjord " ) + <unk> ( meaning " land " ) . 
 = = = Clan symbolism = = = 
 Members of Scottish clans show their allegiance to their clan and chief by wearing crest badges . These are usually worn on a bonnet . Crest badges are usually made up of the chief 's heraldic crest surrounded by a strap and buckle with the chief 's heraldic motto or slogan . The crest badge used by members of Clan Maclachlan contains the Latin motto <unk> ET <unk> , which translates to " strong and faithful " . The blazon of the crest within the badge is ( <unk> from a crest coronet of four ( three visible ) strawberry leaves Or ) a castle set upon a rock all Proper . Another clan symbol used to show a clan member 's affiliation is a clan badge or plant badge . Consisting of a particular plant , these badges are sometimes said to be the original means of identification used by Scottish clans . Clan Maclachlan has two clan badges attributed to it . These include : rowan ( or mountain ash ) and lesser periwinkle . 
 Many clans are also attributed pipe tunes . Clan Maclachlan 's pipe music is <unk> <unk> ( translation from Gaelic : " In Praise of Mary " ) . 
 = = = Tartans = = = 
 = New York State Route 376 = 
 New York State Route 376 ( NY 376 ) is a state highway located entirely within Dutchess County in the Hudson Valley region of New York in the United States . The route begins at an intersection with NY 52 in East Fishkill and passes north through Hopewell Junction and Red Oaks Mill on its way to the city of Poughkeepsie . It ends at a junction with U.S. Route 44 ( US 44 ) and NY 55 east of the city limits in Arlington , a hamlet in the town of Poughkeepsie . NY 376 was originally designated as part of NY 39 in the mid @-@ 1920s . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , the East Fishkill – Poughkeepsie portion of NY 39 was renumbered to New York State Route 202 . NY 202 was renumbered to NY 376 in 1934 to avoid numerical duplication with the new US 202 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 376 begins at an intersection with NY 52 in the hamlet of East Fishkill . It proceeds north about 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) , crossing over Fishkill Creek and continuing into the hamlet of Hopewell Junction , where it overlaps with NY 82 for 450 feet ( 140 m ) . NY 376 leaves NY 82 and continues northwest , crossing railroad tracks and following a sharp 90 ° S @-@ curve with a 5 @-@ mile @-@ per @-@ hour ( 8 @.@ 0 km / h ) advisory speed . Soon after , the route traverses another curve , but at 20 miles per hour ( 32 km / h ) . After this , the speed limit returns to 45 miles per hour ( 72 km / h ) . NY 376 passes by the Dogwood Knolls Country Club before meeting County Route 29 ( CR 29 ) in the hamlet of Fishkill Plains , at which point NY 376 proceeds west . 
 Immediately after crossing from the town of East Fishkill into the town of Wappinger , NY 376 turns north at an intersection with CR 93 . It continues north for about 1 @.@ 2 miles ( 1 @.@ 9 km ) through the hamlet of <unk> , where it turns west again towards the hamlet of New Hackensack . Here , the route meets CR 94 and CR 104 . NY 376 turns north at this intersection , running along the eastern perimeter of and providing access to the passenger terminal of Dutchess County Airport . North of the airport , NY 376 runs closely parallel to Wappinger Creek , briefly entering the town limits of La Grange before crossing the Wappinger Creek into the town of Poughkeepsie . 
 In the Poughkeepsie hamlet of Red Oaks Mill , NY 376 meets the eastern end of NY 113 ( <unk> Road ) and the northern end of CR 77 ( Vassar Road ) at the center of the community . NY 376 approaches the intersection at a 45 @-@ degree angle , resulting in a series of sharp traffic movements between the three roads — the sharpest being the 135 @-@ degree turn between NY 376 northbound and Vassar Road southbound . Past the junction , NY 376 continues north on New Hackensack Road , the northward continuation of Vassar Road . After heading north and northwest for 2 @.@ 3 miles ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) , NY 376 turns right onto Raymond Avenue at Vassar College . Its continuation on New Hackensack Road is known as Hooker Avenue and is designated NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route , to the Poughkeepsie town / city line about 100 feet ( 30 m ) from its junction with Cedar Avenue ( known as CR 74 south of the city limits ) . 
 NY 376 follows Raymond Avenue for about a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the hamlet of Arlington . Here , it meets US 44 and NY 55 , both of which follow a one @-@ way couplet along Haight Street ( eastbound ) and Maple Street ( westbound ) through the city of Poughkeepsie . In between the two streets , NY 376 intersects Main Street ( CR 114 ) . The route ends upon intersecting westbound US 44 and NY 55 , at which point the routing of NY 376 becomes an unnumbered town road named Van Wagner Road . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Route designation = = = 
 NY 376 was originally designated as part of NY 39 , a route extending from Patterson to Poughkeepsie by way of West Patterson and East Fishkill , in the mid @-@ 1920s . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , NY 39 was reassigned to another highway in western New York while its former routing in the Hudson Valley was broken up into several routes . One of these was NY 202 , a new route that began in East Fishkill and ended in Poughkeepsie . The rest of NY 39 became part of NY 52 from East Fishkill to the western fringe of Patterson , and NY 311 for the rest of the routing . In 1934 , US 202 was designated by AASHO . In order to avoid a numbering conflict , NY 202 was renumbered to NY 376 . 
 = = = Roundabouts = = = 
 In 2006 , the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) converted NY 376 's intersections with the main gate of Vassar College and College Avenue into roundabouts . Both of the roundabouts replaced traffic lights . A traffic signal used to control traffic for a pedestrian crosswalk was also removed as part of their construction . Another roundabout was constructed in 2008 at Fulton and <unk> Avenues . NYSDOT has called the installation of roundabouts a success , stating that it has significantly calmed traffic , decreased congestion and increased traffic flow . 
 The construction of the roundabouts was controversial from the outset . The first two roundabouts were installed by NYSDOT even though both the town and city of Poughkeepsie declared that they were opposed to the roundabouts . Additionally , the roundabouts have drawn much controversy from local residents because they remove a lane of traffic in each direction , reducing Raymond Avenue ( NY 376 ) from a four @-@ lane road to a divided two @-@ lane boulevard and significantly altering pre @-@ existing traffic patterns . A moderate amount of traffic has diverted onto alternate local routes as a result . In response , NYSDOT installed traffic calming measures on these parallel roads prior to the construction of the Fulton Avenue roundabout . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Dutchess County . 
 = Maria Theresa = 
 Maria Theresa Walburga Amalia Christina ( German : Maria Theresia [ <unk> <unk> ̯ a ] ; 13 May 1717 – 29 November 1780 ) was the only female ruler of the Habsburg dominions and the last of the House of Habsburg . She was the sovereign of Austria , Hungary , Croatia , Bohemia , Transylvania , Mantua , Milan , Lodomeria and Galicia , the Austrian Netherlands and Parma . By marriage , she was Duchess of Lorraine , Grand Duchess of Tuscany and Holy Roman Empress . 
 She started her 40 @-@ year reign when her father , Emperor Charles VI , died in October 1740 . Charles VI paved the way for her accession with the Pragmatic Sanction of 1713 and spent his entire reign securing it . Upon the death of her father , Saxony , Prussia , Bavaria , and France all repudiated the sanction they had recognised during his lifetime . Prussia proceeded to invade the affluent Habsburg province of Silesia , sparking a nine @-@ year conflict known as the War of the Austrian Succession , and subsequently conquered it . Maria Theresa would later unsuccessfully try to reconquer Silesia during the Seven Years ' War . 
 Maria Theresa and her husband , Francis I , Holy Roman Emperor , had sixteen children , including the Queen of France , the Queen of Naples and Sicily , the Duchess of Parma and two Holy Roman Emperors , Joseph II and Leopold II . Of the sixteen , ten survived to adulthood . She had eleven daughters and five sons . Though she was expected to cede power to Francis and Joseph , both of whom were officially her co @-@ rulers in Austria and Bohemia , Maria Theresa was the absolute sovereign who ruled by the counsel of her advisers . She criticised and disapproved of many of Joseph 's actions . Although she is considered to have been intellectually inferior to both Joseph and Leopold , Maria Theresa understood the importance of her public persona and was able to simultaneously evoke both esteem and affection from her subjects . 
 Maria Theresa promulgated financial and educational reforms , with the assistance of Count Friedrich Wilhelm von Haugwitz and Gerard van Swieten , promoted commerce and the development of agriculture , and reorganised Austria 's ramshackle military , all of which strengthened Austria 's international standing . However , she refused to allow religious toleration and contemporaneous travellers thought her regime was bigoted and superstitious . As a young monarch who fought two dynastic wars , she believed that her cause should be the cause of her subjects , but in her later years she would believe that their cause must be hers . 
 = = Birth and background = = 
 The second and eldest surviving child of Holy Roman Emperor Charles VI and Elisabeth Christine of Brunswick @-@ Wolfenbüttel , Archduchess Maria Theresa was born early in the morning of 13 May 1717 , at the Hofburg Palace , Vienna , shortly after the death of her elder brother , Archduke Leopold , and was baptised on that same evening . The dowager empresses , her aunt Wilhelmine Amalia of Brunswick @-@ Lüneburg and grandmother <unk> Magdalene of the Palatinate @-@ Neuburg , were her godmothers . Most descriptions of her baptism stress that the infant was carried ahead of her cousins , Maria Josepha and Maria Amalia , the daughters of Charles VI 's elder brother and predecessor , Joseph I , before the eyes of their mother , Wilhelmine Amalia . It was clear that Maria Theresa would outrank them , even though their grandfather , Holy Roman Emperor Leopold I , had his sons sign the Mutual Pact of Succession , which gave precedence to the daughters of the elder brother . Her father was the only surviving male member of the House of Habsburg and hoped for a son who would prevent the extinction of his dynasty and succeed him . Thus , the birth of Maria Theresa was a great disappointment to him and the people of Vienna ; Charles never managed to overcome this feeling . 
 Maria Theresa replaced Maria Josepha as heiress presumptive to the Habsburg realms the moment she was born ; Charles VI had issued the Pragmatic Sanction of 1713 which had placed his nieces behind his own daughters in the line of succession . Charles sought the other European powers ' approval for disinheriting his nieces . They exacted harsh terms : in the Treaty of Vienna ( 1731 ) , Great Britain demanded that Austria abolish the Ostend Company in return for its recognition of the Pragmatic Sanction . In total , Great Britain , France , Saxony @-@ Poland , United Provinces , Spain , Venice , States of the Church , Prussia , Russia , Denmark , Savoy @-@ Sardinia , Bavaria and the Diet of the Holy Roman Empire recognised the sanction . France , Spain , Saxony @-@ Poland , Bavaria and Prussia later reneged . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Little more than a year after her birth , Maria Theresa was joined by a sister , Maria Anna , and another one , named Maria Amalia , was born in 1724 . The portraits of the imperial family show that Maria Theresa resembled Elisabeth Christine and Maria Anna . The Prussian ambassador noted that she had large blue eyes , fair hair with a slight tinge of red , a wide mouth and a notably strong body . Unlike many other members of the House of Habsburg , neither Maria Theresa 's parents nor her grandparents were closely related to each other . 
 Maria Theresa was a serious and reserved child who enjoyed singing and archery . She was barred from horse riding by her father , but she would later learn the basics for the sake of her Hungarian coronation ceremony . The imperial family staged opera productions , often conducted by Charles VI , in which she relished participating . Her education was overseen by Jesuits . Contemporaries thought her Latin to be quite good , but in all else , the Jesuits did not educate her well . Her spelling and punctuation were unconventional and she lacked the formal manner and speech which had characterized her Habsburg predecessors . Maria Theresa developed a close relationship with Countess Marie Karoline von Fuchs @-@ Mollard , who taught her etiquette . She was educated in drawing , painting , music and dancing – the disciplines which would have prepared her for the role of queen consort . Her father allowed her to attend meetings of the council from the age of 14 but never discussed the affairs of state with her . Even though he had spent the last decades of his life securing Maria Theresa 's inheritance , Charles always expected a son and never prepared his daughter for her future role as sovereign . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 The question of Maria Theresa 's marriage was raised early in her childhood . She was first engaged to be married to Leopold Clement of Lorraine , who was supposed to visit Vienna and meet the Archduchess in 1723 . However , news reached Vienna that he had died of smallpox . 
 Leopold Clement 's younger brother , Francis Stephen , was invited to Vienna . Even though Francis Stephen was his favourite candidate for Maria Theresa 's hand , the Emperor considered other possibilities . Religious differences prevented him from arranging his daughter 's marriage to the Calvinist prince Frederick of Prussia . In 1725 , he betrothed her to Charles of Spain and her sister , Maria Anna , to Philip of Spain . However , other European powers compelled him to renounce the pact he had made with the Queen of Spain , Elisabeth Farnese , as the marriage of heirs to the thrones of Spain and Austria would have destroyed the European balance of power . Maria Theresa , who had become close to Francis Stephen , was relieved . 
 Francis Stephen remained at the imperial court until 1729 , when he ascended the throne of Lorraine , but was not formally promised Maria Theresa 's hand until 31 January 1736 , during the War of the Polish Succession . Louis XV of France demanded that Maria Theresa 's fiancé surrender his ancestral Duchy of Lorraine to accommodate his father @-@ in @-@ law , Stanisław I , who had been deposed as King of Poland . Francis Stephen was to receive the Grand Duchy of Tuscany upon the death of childless Grand Duke Gian Gastone de ' Medici . The couple were married on 12 February 1736 . 
 The Duchess of Lorraine 's love for her husband was strong and possessive . The letters she sent to him shortly before their marriage expressed her eagerness to see him ; his letters , on the other hand , were stereotyped and formal . She was very jealous of her husband and his infidelity was the greatest problem of their marriage , with Maria Wilhelmina , Princess of Auersperg , as his best @-@ known mistress . 
 Upon Gian Gastone 's death on 9 July 1737 , Francis Stephen ceded Lorraine and became Grand Duke of Tuscany . In 1738 , Charles VI sent the young couple to make their formal entry into Tuscany . A triumphal arch was erected at the Porta Galla in celebration , where it remains today . Their stay in Florence was brief . Charles VI soon recalled them , as he feared he might die while his heiress was miles away in Tuscany . In the summer of 1738 , Austria suffered defeats during the ongoing Russo @-@ Turkish War . The Turks reversed Austrian gains in Serbia , Wallachia and Bosnia . The Viennese rioted at the cost of the war . Francis Stephen was popularly despised , as he was thought to be a cowardly French spy . The war was concluded the next year with the Treaty of Belgrade . 
 = = Accession = = 
 Charles VI died on 20 October 1740 , probably of mushroom poisoning . He had ignored the advice of Prince Eugene of Savoy who had urged him to concentrate on filling the treasury and equipping the army rather than on acquiring signatures of fellow monarchs . The Emperor , who spent his entire reign securing the Pragmatic Sanction , left Austria in an impoverished state , bankrupted by the recent Turkish war and the War of the Polish Succession ; the treasury contained only 100 @,@ 000 florins , which were claimed by his widow . The army numbered only 80 @,@ 000 men , most of whom had not been paid in months ; they were nevertheless remarkably loyal and devoted to their new sovereign . 
 Maria Theresa found herself in a difficult situation . She did not know enough about matters of state and she was unaware of the weakness of her father 's ministers . She decided to rely on her father 's advice to retain his councillors and defer to her husband , whom she considered to be more experienced , on other matters . Both decisions , though natural , later gave cause for regret . Ten years later , Maria Theresa recalled in her Political Testament the circumstances under which she had ascended : " I found myself without money , without credit , without army , without experience and knowledge of my own and finally , also without any counsel because each one of them at first wanted to wait and see how things would develop . " 
 She dismissed the possibility that other countries might try to seize her territories and immediately started ensuring the imperial dignity for herself ; since a woman could not be elected Holy Roman Empress , Maria Theresa wanted to secure the imperial office for her husband . However , Francis Stephen did not possess enough land or rank within the Holy Roman Empire . In order to make him eligible for the imperial throne and to enable him to vote in the imperial elections as elector of Bohemia ( which she couldn 't because of her sex ) , Maria Theresa made Francis Stephen co @-@ ruler of the Austrian and Bohemian lands on 21 November 1740 . However , it took more than a year for the Diet of Hungary to accept Francis Stephen as co @-@ ruler . Despite her love for him and his position as co @-@ ruler , Maria Theresa never allowed her husband to decide matters of state and often dismissed him from council meetings when they disagreed . 
 The first display of the new queen 's authority was the formal act of homage of the Lower Austrian Estates to her on 22 November 1740 . It was an elaborate public event which served as a formal recognition and legitimation of her accession . The oath of fealty to Maria Theresa was taken on the same day in Hofburg . 
 = = War of the Austrian Succession = = 
 Immediately after her accession , a number of European sovereigns who had recognised Maria Theresa as heiress broke their promises ; Queen Elisabeth of Spain and Elector Charles Albert of Bavaria , married to Maria Theresa 's deprived cousin Maria Amalia and supported by Empress Wilhelmine Amalia , wanted portions of her inheritance . Maria Theresa secured the recognition of King Charles Emmanuel III of Sardinia , who hadn 't accepted the Pragmatic Sanction during her father 's lifetime , in November 1740 . 
 In December , King Frederick II of Prussia invaded the Duchy of Silesia and requested that Maria Theresa cede it , threatening to join her enemies if she refused . Maria Theresa decided to fight for the mineral @-@ rich province . Frederick even offered a compromise : he would defend Maria Theresa 's rights if she agreed to cede him at least a part of Silesia . Francis Stephen was inclined to consider such an arrangement , but the Queen and her advisers were not , fearing that any violation of the Pragmatic Sanction would invalidate the entire document . Maria Theresa 's firmness soon assured Francis Stephen that they should fight for Silesia and she was confident that she would retain " the jewel of the House of Austria " . The invasion of Silesia by Frederick was the start of a lifelong enmity ; she referred to him as " that evil man " . 
 As Austria was short of experienced military commanders , Maria Theresa released Marshall <unk> , who had been imprisoned by her father for his poor performance in the Turkish War . <unk> took command of the Austrian troops in March . The Austrians suffered a crushing defeat at the Battle of <unk> in April 1741 . France drew up a plan to partition Austria between Prussia , Bavaria , Saxony and Spain . Marshall Belle @-@ Isle joined Frederick at Olmütz . Vienna was in a panic , as none of Maria Theresa 's advisors expected France to betray them . Francis Stephen urged Maria Theresa to reach a rapprochement with Prussia , as did Great Britain . Maria Theresa reluctantly agreed to negotiations . 
 Contrary to all expectations , a significant amount of support for the young Queen came from Hungary . Her coronation as queen of Hungary took place in St. Martin 's Cathedral , Pressburg on 25 June 1741 after she had spent months honing the equestrian skills necessary for the ceremony and negotiating with the Diet . To appease those who considered her sex to be the most serious obstacle , Maria Theresa assumed masculine titles . Thus , in nomenclature , Maria Theresa was archduke and king ; normally , however , she was styled as queen . No 18th @-@ century commentary saw this crossing of gendered titles as inappropriate or impossible . 
 By July , attempts at conciliation had completely collapsed . Maria Theresa 's ally , the Elector of Saxony , now became her enemy and George II declared the Electorate of Brunswick @-@ Lüneburg to be neutral . The Queen was once again in need of help from Hungary . In order to obtain it , she granted favours to the Hungarian noblemen and flattered them without conceding to all of their demands . She had already won their support when she appeared in Pressburg in September 1741 , hoping to persuade the Diet to call a mass conscription and recognise Francis Stephen as co @-@ ruler . Upon achieving both goals , she showed her gift for theatrical displays by triumphantly holding her son and heir , Joseph , before the Diet , thereby gaining sympathy of the noblemen . 
 In 1741 , the Austrian authorities informed Maria Theresa that Bohemian populace would prefer Charles Albert to her as sovereign . Maria Theresa , desperate and burdened by pregnancy , wrote plaintively to her sister : " I don 't know if a town will remain to me for my delivery . " She bitterly vowed to spare nothing and no one to defend her kingdom when she wrote to the Bohemian chancellor , Count Philip Kinsky : " My mind is made up . We must put everything at stake to save Bohemia . " On 26 October , the Elector of Bavaria captured Prague and declared himself King of Bohemia . Maria Theresa , then in Hungary , wept on learning of the loss of Bohemia . Charles Albert was unanimously elected Holy Roman Emperor on 24 January 1742 . The Archduchess , who regarded the election as a catastrophe , caught her enemies unprepared by insisting on a winter campaign ; the same day he was elected emperor , Austrian troops under Ludwig Andreas von <unk> captured Munich , Charles Albert 's capital . 
 The Treaty of Breslau of June 1742 ended hostilities between Austria and Prussia . The Archduchess soon made the recovery of Bohemia her priority . French troops fled Bohemia in the winter of the same year . On 12 May 1743 , Maria Theresa had herself crowned Queen of Bohemia in St. Vitus Cathedral . 
 Prussia became anxious at Austrian advances on the Rhine frontier , and Frederick sacked Prague in August 1744 . The French plans fell apart when Charles Albert died in January 1745 . The French overran the Austrian Netherlands in May . 
 Francis Stephen was elected Holy Roman Emperor on 13 September 1745 . Prussia recognised Francis as emperor , and Maria Theresa once again recognised the loss of Silesia by the Treaty of Breslau in December 1745 . The war dragged on for another three years , with fighting in northern Italy and the Austrian Netherlands . The Treaty of Aix @-@ La @-@ Chapelle , which concluded the eight @-@ year conflict , recognised Prussia 's possession of Silesia and Maria Theresa ceded the Duchy of Parma to Philip of Spain . 
 = = Seven Years ' War = = 
 Frederick of Prussia 's invasion of Saxony in August 1756 began the Seven Years ' War . Empress Maria Theresa and Kaunitz wished to exit the war with possession of Silesia . Austria was aligned with France and Russia , Great Britain with Prussia and Portugal . Giving Austria huge subsidies came back to haunt France . It could not bolster defences in New France ; the British easily captured Louisbourg in 1758 , and went on to conquer all of New France . 
 Maximilian von Browne commanded the Austrian troops . Following the indecisive Battle of <unk> in 1756 , he was replaced by Prince Charles Alexander of Lorraine , Maria Theresa 's brother @-@ in @-@ law . Frederick was startled by <unk> ; he eventually re @-@ grouped for another attack in June 1757 . The Battle of Kolin that followed was a decisive victory for Austria . Frederick lost one third of his troops , and before the battle was over , he had left the scene . However , later that year he won a spectacular victory against the Austrians at Leuthen , which secured Prussian control of Silesia for the rest of the war . 
 Maria Theresa openly lamented French losses in 1758 . France , having secured the Anglo @-@ Hanoverian neutrality for the rest of the conflict , in September 1757 , lost it in January of the next year . That June she suffered a crushing defeat at Krefeld and French forces withdrew to the Rhine . 
 In 1759 , peace negotiations at The Hague came to nothing . The series of Franco @-@ Austrian losses were reversed until , in 1762 , the Empress Elizabeth of Russia died . Her successor Peter III greatly admired Frederick , and at once withdrew Russia 's support from the French coalition . Prussia began a drive to expel the Austrians from Saxony , and the French from Hesse @-@ Kassel . Though she was only partially successful as her own forces were exhausted , the conflict had essentially descended into a costly stalemate , with Maria Theresa no longer believing that she could retake Silesia . The peace treaties of <unk> and Paris exacted harsh terms from France , as she was forced to relinquish most of her American colonies . For Austria , though , the result was the status quo ante bellum . 
 = = Family life = = 
 Over the course of twenty years , Maria Theresa gave birth to sixteen children , thirteen of whom survived infancy . The first child , Maria Elisabeth ( 1737 – 1740 ) , was born a little less than a year after the wedding . Again , the child 's gender caused great disappointment and so would the births of Maria Anna , the eldest surviving child , and Maria Carolina ( 1740 – 1741 ) . While fighting to preserve her inheritance , Maria Theresa gave birth to a son named after Saint Joseph , to whom she had repeatedly prayed for a male child during the pregnancy . Maria Theresa 's favourite child , Maria Christina , was born on her 25th birthday , four days before the defeat of the Austrian army in <unk> . Five more children were born during the war : Maria Elisabeth , Charles , Maria Amalia , Leopold and Maria Carolina ( 1748 – 1748 ) . During this period , there was no rest for Maria Theresa during pregnancies or around the births ; the war and child @-@ bearing were carried on simultaneously . Five children were born during the peace between the War of the Austrian Succession and the Seven Years ' War : Maria Johanna , Maria Josepha , Maria Carolina , Ferdinand and Maria Antonia . She delivered her last child , Maximilian Francis , during the Seven Years ' War , aged 39 . Maria Theresa asserted that , had she not been almost always pregnant , she would have gone into battle herself . 
 Maria Theresa 's mother , Empress Elisabeth Christine , died in 1750 . Four years later , Maria Theresa 's governess , Marie Karoline von Fuchs @-@ Mollard , died . The Empress showed her gratitude to Countess Fuchs by having her buried in the Imperial Crypt along with the members of the imperial family . 
 Shortly after giving birth to the younger children , Maria Theresa was confronted with the task of marrying off the elder ones . She led the marriage negotiations along with the campaigns of her wars and the duties of state . She treated her children with affection but used them as pawns in dynastic games and sacrificed their happiness for the benefit of the state . A devoted but self @-@ conscious mother , she wrote to all of her children at least once a week and believed herself entitled to exercise authority over her children regardless of their age and rank . 
 Following her fiftieth birthday in May 1767 , Maria Theresa contracted smallpox from her daughter @-@ in @-@ law , Maria Josepha of Bavaria . She survived , but the new empress did not . Maria Theresa then forced her daughter , Archduchess Maria Josepha , to pray with her in the Imperial Crypt next to the unsealed tomb of Empress Maria Josepha . The Archduchess started showing smallpox rash two days after visiting the crypt and soon died . Maria Carolina was to replace her as the pre @-@ determined bride of King Ferdinand IV of Naples . Maria Theresa blamed herself for her daughter 's death for the rest of her life because , at the time , the concept of an extended incubation period was largely unknown and it was believed that Maria Josepha had caught smallpox from the body of the late empress . 
 In April 1770 , Maria Theresa 's youngest daughter , Maria Antonia , married Louis , Dauphin of France , by proxy in Vienna . Maria Antonia 's education was neglected , and when the French showed an interest in her , her mother went about educating her as best she could about the court of Versailles and the French . Maria Theresa kept up a fortnightly correspondence with Maria Antonia , now called Marie Antoinette , in which she often reproached her for laziness and frivolity and scolded her for failing to conceive a child . 
 Maria Theresa was not just critical of Marie Antoinette . She disliked Leopold 's reserve and often blamed him for being cold . She criticised Maria Carolina for her political activities , Ferdinand for his lack of organisation , and Maria Amalia for her poor French and haughtiness . The only child she did not constantly scold was Maria Christina , who enjoyed her mother 's complete confidence , though she failed to please her mother in one aspect – she did not produce any surviving children . 
 One of Maria Theresa 's greatest wishes was to have as many grandchildren as possible , but she had only about two dozen at the time of her death , of which all the eldest surviving daughters were named after her , with the exception of Caroline of Parma , her eldest granddaughter by Maria Amalia . 
 = = Religious views and policies = = 
 Like all members of the House of Habsburg , Maria Theresa was a Roman Catholic , and a devout one as well . She believed that religious unity was necessary for a peaceful public life and explicitly rejected the idea of religious toleration . However , she never allowed the Church to interfere with what she considered to be prerogatives of a monarch and kept Rome at arm 's length . She controlled the selection of archbishops , bishops and abbots . 
 Her approach to religious piety differed from the approach of her predecessors , as she was influenced by <unk> ideas . The empress actively supported conversion to Roman Catholicism by securing pensions to the converts . She tolerated Greek Catholics and emphasised their equal status with Roman Catholics . 
 Besides her devotion to Christianity , she was widely known for her ascetic lifestyle , especially during her 15 @-@ year @-@ long widowhood . 
 = = = Jesuits = = = 
 Her relationship with the Jesuits was complex . Members of this order educated her , served as her confessors , and supervised the religious education of her eldest son . The Jesuits were powerful and influential in the early years of Maria Theresa 's reign . However , the queen 's ministers convinced her that the order posed a danger to her monarchical authority . Not without much hesitation and regret , she issued a decree which removed them from all the institutions of the monarchy , and carried it out thoroughly . She forbade the publication of Pope Clement XIII 's bull which was in favour of the Jesuits and promptly confiscated their property when Pope Clement XIV suppressed the order . 
 = = = Jews and Protestants = = = 
 Though she eventually gave up trying to convert her non @-@ Catholic subjects to Roman Catholicism , Maria Theresa regarded both the Jews and Protestants as dangerous to the state and actively tried to suppress them . The empress was probably the most anti @-@ Semitic monarch of her time , having inherited the traditional prejudices of her ancestors and acquired new ones . This was a product of deep religious devotion and was not kept secret in her time . In 1777 , she wrote of the Jews : " I know of no greater plague than this race , which on account of its deceit , usury and avarice is driving my subjects into beggary . Therefore as far as possible , the Jews are to be kept away and avoided . " 
 She imposed extremely harsh taxes on her Jewish subjects , and in December 1744 proposed to her ministers the expulsion of Jews from her hereditary dominions . Her first intention was to deport all Jews by 1 January , but having accepted the advice of her ministers , who were concerned by the number of future deportees , had the deadline slipped to June . She also transferred Protestants from Austria to Transylvania and reduced the number of religious holidays and monastic orders . In 1777 , she abandoned the idea of expelling Moravian Protestants after Joseph , who was opposed to her intentions , threatened to abdicate as emperor and co @-@ ruler . Finally , she was forced to grant them some toleration by allowing them to worship privately . Joseph regarded his mother 's religious policies as " unjust , impious , impossible , harmful and ridiculous " . 
 In the third decade of her reign , influenced by her Jewish courtier Abraham Mendel <unk> , Maria Theresa issued edicts which offered some state protection to her Jewish subjects . She forbade the forcible conversion of Jewish children to Christianity in 1762 , and in 1763 she forbade Catholic clergy from extracting surplice fees from her Jewish subjects . In 1764 , she ordered the release of those Jews who had been jailed for a blood libel in the village of <unk> . Notwithstanding her strong dislike of Jews , Maria Theresa supported Jewish commercial and industrial activity . 
 = = Reforms = = 
 Maria Theresa was as conservative in manners of state as in those of religion , but implemented significant reforms to strengthen Austria 's military and bureaucratic efficiency . She employed Count Friedrich Wilhelm von Haugwitz , who modernised the empire by creating a standing army of 108 @,@ 000 men , paid for with 14 million gulden extracted from each crown @-@ land . The central government was responsible for the army , although Haugwitz instituted taxation of the nobility , who never before had to pay taxes . Maria Theresa oversaw the unification of the Austrian and Bohemian <unk> in May 1749 . 
 Maria Theresa doubled the state revenue between 1754 and 1764 , though her attempt to tax clergy and nobility was only partially successful . These financial reforms greatly improved the economy . 
 In 1760 , Maria Theresa created the council of state , composed of the state chancellor , three members of the high nobility and three knights , which served as a committee of experienced people who advised her . The council of state lacked executive or legislative authority , but nevertheless showed the difference between the form of government employed by Frederick II of Prussia . Unlike the latter , Maria Theresa was not an autocrat who acted as her own minister . Prussia would adopt this form of government only after 1807 . 
 = = = Medicine = = = 
 Gerard van Swieten , whom Maria Theresa had recruited following the death of her sister , Archduchess Maria Anna , founded the Vienna General Hospital , revamped Austria 's educational system and served as the Empress 's personal physician . After calling in van Swieten , Maria Theresa asked him to study the problem of infant mortality in Austria . Following his recommendation , she made a decree that autopsies would be mandatory for all hospital deaths in the city of Graz , Austria 's second largest city . This law – still in effect today – combined with the relatively stable population of Graz , resulted in one of the most important and complete autopsy records in the world . Maria Theresa banned the creation of new burial grounds without prior government permission , thus countering wasteful and unhygienic burial customs . Her decision to have her children inoculated after the smallpox epidemic of 1767 was responsible for changing Austrian physicians ' negative view of inoculation . The empress herself inaugurated inoculation in Austria by hosting a dinner for the first sixty @-@ five inoculated children in Schönbrunn Palace , waiting on the children herself . 
