 The two brigades had a combined field strength of about 2 @,@ 000 ( 2 @,@ 651 official strength ) ; they charged with the 47 @-@ year @-@ old Uxbridge leading them and a very inadequate number of squadrons held in reserve . There is evidence that Uxbridge gave an order , the morning of the battle , to all cavalry brigade commanders to commit their commands on their own initiative , as direct orders from himself might not always be forthcoming , and to " support movements to their front " . It appears that Uxbridge expected the brigades of Sir John Ormsby Vandeleur , Hussey Vivian and the Dutch cavalry to provide support to the British heavies . Uxbridge later regretted leading the charge in person , saying " I committed a great mistake " , when he should have been organising an adequate reserve to move forward in support . 
 The Household Brigade crossed the crest of the Allied position and charged downhill . The cuirassiers guarding d 'Erlon 's left flank were still dispersed , and so were swept over the deeply sunken main road and then routed . The sunken lane acted as a trap , funnelling the flight of the French cavalry to their own right and away from the British cavalry . Some of the cuirassiers then found themselves hemmed in by the steep sides of the sunken lane , with a confused mass of their own infantry in front of them , the 95th Rifles firing at them from the north side of the lane , and Somerset 's heavy cavalry still pressing them from behind . The novelty of fighting armoured foes impressed the British cavalrymen , as was recorded by the commander of the Household Brigade . 
 The blows of the sabres on the <unk> sounded like braziers at work . 
 Continuing their attack , the squadrons on the left of the Household Brigade then destroyed <unk> 's brigade . Despite attempts to recall them , they continued past La Haye Sainte and found themselves at the bottom of the hill on blown horses facing Schmitz 's brigade formed in squares . 
 To their left , the Union Brigade suddenly swept through the infantry lines ( giving rise to the legend that some of the 92nd Gordon Highland Regiment clung onto their stirrups and accompanied them into the charge ) . From the centre <unk> , the Royal Dragoons destroyed Bourgeois ' brigade , capturing the eagle of the 105th Ligne . The Inniskillings routed the other brigade of Quoit 's division , and the Scots Greys came upon the lead French regiment , 45th Ligne , as it was still reforming after having crossed the sunken road and broken through the hedge row in pursuit of the British infantry . The Greys captured the eagle of the 45th Ligne and overwhelmed Grenier 's brigade . These would be the only two eagles captured from the French during the battle . On Wellington 's extreme left , Durutte 's division had time to form squares and fend off groups of Greys . 
 As with the Household Cavalry , the officers of the Royals and Inniskillings found it very difficult to rein back their troops , who lost all cohesion . Having taken casualties , and still trying to reorder themselves , the Scots Greys and the rest of the Union Brigade found themselves before the main French lines . Their horses were blown , and they were still in disorder without any idea of what their next collective objective was . Some attacked nearby gun batteries of the Grande Battery . Though the Greys had neither the time nor means to disable the cannon or carry them off , they put very many out of action as the gun crews were killed or fled the battlefield . Sergeant Major Dickinson of the Greys stated that his regiment was rallied before going on to attack the French artillery : Hamilton , the regimental commander , rather than holding them back cried out to his men " Charge , charge the guns ! " . Napoleon promptly responded by ordering a counter @-@ attack by the cuirassier brigades of <unk> and Travers and Jaquinot 's two Chevau @-@ léger ( lancer ) regiments in the I Corps light cavalry division . Disorganized and milling about the bottom of the valley between Hougoumont and La Belle Alliance , the Scots Greys and the rest of the British heavy cavalry were taken by surprise by the countercharge of Milhaud 's cuirassiers , joined by lancers from Baron Jaquinot 's 1st Cavalry Division . 
 As Ponsonby tried to rally his men against the French <unk> , he was attacked by Jaquinot 's lancers and captured . A nearby party of Scots Greys saw the capture and attempted to rescue their brigade commander . However , the French lancer who had captured Ponsonby killed him and then used his lance to kill three of the Scots Greys who had attempted the rescue . By the time Ponsonby died , the momentum had entirely returned in favour of the French . Milhaud 's and Jaquinot 's cavalrymen drove the Union Brigade from the valley . The result was very heavy losses for the British cavalry . A countercharge , by British light dragoons under Major @-@ General Vandeleur and Dutch – Belgian light dragoons and hussars under Major @-@ General <unk> on the left wing , and Dutch – Belgian carabiniers under Major @-@ General Trip in the centre , repelled the French cavalry . 
 All figures quoted for the losses of the cavalry brigades as a result of this charge are estimates , as casualties were only noted down after the day of the battle and were for the battle as a whole . Some historians , Barbero for example , believe the official rolls tend to overestimate the number of cavalrymen present in their squadrons on the field of battle and that the proportionate losses were , as a result , considerably higher than the numbers on paper might suggest . The Union Brigade lost heavily in both officers and men killed ( including its commander , William Ponsonby , and Colonel Hamilton of the Scots Greys ) and wounded . The 2nd Life Guards and the King 's Dragoon Guards of the Household Brigade also lost heavily ( with Colonel Fuller , commander of the King 's DG , killed ) . However , the 1st Life Guards , on the extreme right of the charge , and the Blues , who formed a reserve , had kept their cohesion and consequently suffered significantly fewer casualties . On the rolls the official , or paper strength , for both Brigades is given as 2 @,@ 651 while Barbero and others estimate the actual strength at around 2 @,@ 000 and the official recorded losses for the two heavy cavalry brigades during the battle was 1 @,@ 205 troopers and 1 @,@ 303 horses . 
 Some historians , such as Chandler and Weller , assert that the British heavy cavalry were destroyed as a viable force following their first , epic charge . Barbero states that the Scots Grey were practically wiped out and that the other two regiments of the Union Brigade suffered comparable losses . Other historians , such as Clark @-@ Kennedy and Wood , citing British eyewitness accounts , describe the continuing role of the heavy cavalry after their charge . The heavy brigades , far from being ineffective , continued to provide valuable services . They countercharged French cavalry numerous times ( both brigades ) , halted a combined cavalry and infantry attack ( Household Brigade only ) , were used to bolster the morale of those units in their vicinity at times of crisis , and filled gaps in the Anglo @-@ allied line caused by high casualties in infantry formations ( both brigades ) . This service was rendered at a very high cost , as close combat with French cavalry , carbine fire , infantry musketry and — more deadly than all of these — artillery fire steadily eroded the number of effectives in the two brigades . At 6 o 'clock in the afternoon the whole Union Brigade could field only 3 squadrons , though these countercharged French cavalry , losing half their number in the process . At the end of the fighting the two brigades , by this time combined , could muster one squadron . 
 14 @,@ 000 French troops of D 'Erlon 's I Corps had been committed to this attack . The I Corps had been driven in rout back across the valley costing Napoleon 3 @,@ 000 casualties including over 2 @,@ 000 prisoners taken . Also some valuable time was lost , the charge had dispersed numerous units and it would take until 16 : 00 hours for D 'Erlon 's shaken corps to reform . And although elements of the Prussians now began to appear on the field to his right , Napoleon had already ordered Lobau 's VI corps to move to the right flank to hold them back before D 'Erlon 's attack began . 
 = = = The French cavalry attack = = = 
 A little before 16 : 00 , Ney noted an apparent exodus from Wellington 's centre . He mistook the movement of casualties to the rear for the beginnings of a retreat , and sought to exploit it . Following the defeat of d 'Erlon 's Corps , Ney had few infantry reserves left , as most of the infantry had been committed either to the futile Hougoumont attack or to the defence of the French right . Ney therefore tried to break Wellington 's centre with cavalry alone . Initially Milhaud 's reserve cavalry corps of cuirassiers and Lefebvre @-@ <unk> ' light cavalry division of the Imperial Guard , some 4 @,@ 800 sabres , were committed . When these were repulsed , Kellermann 's heavy cavalry corps and Guyot 's heavy cavalry of the Guard were added to the massed assault , a total of around 9 @,@ 000 cavalry in 67 squadrons . When Napoleon saw the charge he said it was an hour too soon . 
 Wellington 's infantry responded by forming squares ( hollow box @-@ formations four ranks deep ) . Squares were much smaller than usually depicted in paintings of the battle – a 500 @-@ man battalion square would have been no more than 60 feet ( 18 m ) in length on a side . Vulnerable to artillery or infantry , squares that stood their ground were deadly to cavalry , because they could not be outflanked and because horses would not charge into a hedge of bayonets . Wellington ordered his artillery crews to take shelter within the squares as the cavalry approached , and to return to their guns and resume fire as they retreated . 
 Witnesses in the British infantry recorded as many as 12 assaults , though this probably includes successive waves of the same general attack ; the number of general assaults was undoubtedly far fewer . Kellermann , recognising the futility of the attacks , tried to reserve the elite carabinier brigade from joining in , but eventually Ney spotted them and insisted on their involvement . 
 A British eyewitness of the first French cavalry attack , an officer in the Foot Guards , recorded his impressions very lucidly and somewhat poetically : 
 About four p.m. , the enemy 's artillery in front of us ceased firing all of a sudden , and we saw large masses of cavalry advance : not a man present who survived could have forgotten in after life the awful grandeur of that charge . You discovered at a distance what appeared to be an overwhelming , long moving line , which , ever advancing , glittered like a stormy wave of the sea when it catches the sunlight . On they came until they got near enough , whilst the very earth seemed to vibrate beneath the thundering tramp of the mounted host . One might suppose that nothing could have resisted the shock of this terrible moving mass . They were the famous cuirassiers , almost all old soldiers , who had distinguished themselves on most of the battlefields of Europe . In an almost incredibly short period they were within twenty yards of us , shouting " Vive l 'Empereur ! " The word of command , " Prepare to receive cavalry " , had been given , every man in the front ranks knelt , and a wall bristling with steel , held together by steady hands , presented itself to the infuriated cuirassiers . 
 In essence this type of massed cavalry attack relied almost entirely on psychological shock for effect . Close artillery support could disrupt infantry squares and allow cavalry to penetrate ; at Waterloo , however , co @-@ operation between the French cavalry and artillery was not impressive . The French artillery did not get close enough to the Anglo @-@ allied infantry in sufficient numbers to be decisive . Artillery fire between charges did produce mounting casualties , but most of this fire was at relatively long range and was often indirect , at targets beyond the ridge . If infantry being attacked held firm in their square defensive formations , and were not panicked , cavalry on their own could do very little damage to them . The French cavalry attacks were repeatedly repelled by the steadfast infantry squares , the harrying fire of British artillery as the French cavalry recoiled down the slopes to regroup , and the decisive countercharges of Wellington 's light cavalry regiments , the Dutch heavy cavalry brigade , and the remaining effectives of the Household Cavalry . At least one artillery officer disobeyed Wellington 's order to seek shelter in the adjacent squares during the charges . Captain Mercer , who commanded ' G ' Troop , Royal Horse Artillery , thought the Brunswick troops on either side of him so shaky that he kept his battery of six nine @-@ pounders in action against the cavalry throughout , to great effect : 
 I thus allowed them to advance unmolested until the head of the column might have been about fifty or sixty yards from us , and then gave the word , " Fire ! " The effect was terrible . Nearly the whole leading rank fell at once ; and the round shot , penetrating the column carried confusion throughout its extent ... the discharge of every gun was followed by a fall of men and horses like that of grass before the mower 's scythe . 
 For reasons that remain unclear , no attempt was made to spike other allied guns while they were in French possession . In line with Wellington 's orders , gunners were able to return to their pieces and fire into the French cavalry as they withdrew after each attack . After numerous costly but fruitless attacks on the Mont @-@ Saint @-@ Jean ridge , the French cavalry was spent . Their casualties cannot easily be estimated . Senior French cavalry officers , in particular the generals , experienced heavy losses . Four divisional commanders were wounded , nine brigadiers wounded , and one killed – testament to their courage and their habit of leading from the front . <unk> , Houssaye reports that the Grenadiers à Cheval numbered 796 of all ranks on 15 June , but just 462 on 19 June , while the Empress Dragoons lost 416 of 816 over the same period . Overall Guyot 's Guard heavy cavalry division lost 47 % of its strength . 
 = = = Second French infantry attack = = = 
 Eventually it became obvious , even to Ney , that cavalry alone were achieving little . Belatedly , he organised a combined @-@ arms attack , using <unk> 's division and Tissot 's regiment of Foy 's division from Reille 's II Corps ( about 6 @,@ 500 infantrymen ) plus those French cavalry that remained in a fit state to fight . This assault was directed along much the same route as the previous heavy cavalry attacks ( between Hougoumont and La Haye Sainte ) . It was halted by a charge of the Household Brigade cavalry led by Uxbridge . The British cavalry were unable , however , to break the French infantry , and fell back with losses from musketry fire . 
 Uxbridge recorded that he tried to lead the Dutch Carabiniers , under Major @-@ General Trip , to renew the attack and that they refused to follow him . Other members of the British cavalry staff also commented on this occurrence . However , there is no support for this incident in Dutch or Belgian sources . Meanwhile , <unk> 's and Tissot 's men and their cavalry supports were being hard hit by fire from artillery and from Adam 's infantry brigade , and they eventually fell back . Although the French cavalry caused few direct casualties to Wellington 's centre , artillery fire onto his infantry squares caused many . Wellington 's cavalry , except for Sir John Vandeleur 's and Sir Hussey Vivian 's brigades on the far left , had all been committed to the fight , and had taken significant losses . The situation appeared so desperate that the Cumberland Hussars , the only Hanoverian cavalry regiment present , fled the field spreading alarm all the way to Brussels . 
 = = = French capture of La Haye Sainte = = = 
 At approximately the same time as Ney 's combined @-@ arms assault on the centre @-@ right of Wellington 's line , rallied elements of D 'Erlon 's I Corps , spearheaded by the 13th Légère , renewed the attack on La Haye Sainte and this time were successful , partly because the King 's German Legion 's ammunition ran out . However , the Germans had held the centre of the battlefield for almost the entire day , and this had stalled the French advance . Ney then moved horse artillery up towards Wellington 's centre and began to <unk> the infantry squares at short range with canister . The 30th and 73rd Regiments suffered such heavy losses that they had to combine to form a viable square . 
 The possession of La Haye Sainte by the French was a very dangerous incident . It uncovered the very centre of the Anglo @-@ Allied army , and established the enemy within 60 yards of that centre . The French lost no time in taking advantage of this , by pushing forward infantry supported by guns , which enabled them to maintain a most destructive fire upon Alten 's left and Kempt 's right ... 
 The success Napoleon needed to continue his offensive had occurred . Ney was on the verge of breaking the Allied centre . 
 Along with this artillery fire a multitude of French tirailleurs occupied the dominant positions behind La Haye Sainte and poured an effective fire into the squares . The situation was now so dire that the 33rd Regiment 's colours and all of Halkett 's brigade 's colours were sent to the rear for safety , described by historian Alessandro Barbero as , " ... a measure that was without precedent " . Wellington , noticing the slackening of fire from La Haye Sainte , with his staff rode closer to it . French skirmishers appeared around the building and fired on the British command as it struggled to get away through the hedgerow along the road . Alten ordered a single battalion , the Fifth KGL to recapture the farm . Their Colonel <unk> obeyed and chased off some French skirmishers until French cuirassiers fell on his open flank , killed him , destroyed his battalion and took its colour . A Dutch – Belgian cavalry regiment ordered to charge , retreated from the field instead , fired on by their own infantry . <unk> 's Light Cavalry Brigade charged the French artillery taking position near La Haye Sainte but were shot to pieces and the brigade fell apart . The Netherlands Cavalry Division , Wellington 's last cavalry reserve behind the centre having lost half their strength was now useless and the French cavalry , despite its losses , were masters of the field compelling the allied infantry to remain in square . More and more French artillery was brought forward . 
 A French battery advanced to within 300 yards of the 1 / 1st Nassau square causing heavy casualties . When the Nassauers attempted to attack the battery they were ridden down by a squadron of cuirassiers . Yet another battery deployed on the flank of Mercer 's battery and shot up its horses and limbers and pushed Mercer back . Mercer later recalled , " The rapidity and precision of this fire was quite <unk> . Every shot almost took effect , and I certainly expected we should all be annihilated . ... The saddle @-@ bags , in many instances were torn from horses ' backs ... One shell I saw explode under the two finest wheel @-@ horses in the troop down they dropped " . 
 French tirailleurs occupied the dominant positions , especially one on a knoll overlooking the square of the 27th . Unable to break square to drive off the French infantry because of the presence of French cavalry and artillery , they had to remain in that formation and endure the fire of the tirailleurs . That fire nearly annihilated the 27th Foot , the Inniskillings , who lost two @-@ thirds of their strength within that three or four hours . 
 The banks on the road side , the garden wall , the knoll and sandpit swarmed with skirmishers , who seemed determined to keep down our fire in front ; those behind the artificial bank seemed more intent upon destroying the 27th , who at this time , it may literally be said , were lying dead in square ; their loss after La Haye Sainte had fallen was awful , without the satisfaction of having scarcely fired a shot , and many of our troops in rear of the ridge were similarly situated . 
 During this time many of Wellington 's generals and aides were killed or wounded including Somerset , Canning , de Lancey , Alten and Cooke . The situation was now critical and Wellington , trapped in an infantry square and ignorant of events beyond it , was desperate for the arrival of help from the Prussians . He later wrote , 
 The time they occupied in approaching seemed interminable . Both they and my watch seemed to have stuck fast . 
 = = = Arrival of the Prussian IV Corps : Plancenoit = = = 
 Night or the Prussians must come . 
 The first Prussian corps to arrive in strength was Bülow 's IV Corps . Bülow 's objective was Plancenoit , which the Prussians intended to use as a springboard into the rear of the French positions . Blücher intended to secure his right upon Frichermont using the Bois de Paris road . Blücher and Wellington had been exchanging communications since 10 : 00 and had agreed to this advance on Frichermont if Wellington 's centre was under attack . General Bülow noted that the way to Plancenoit lay open and that the time was 16 : 30 . 
 At about this time , as the French cavalry attack was in full spate , the 15th Brigade IV Corps was sent to link up with the Nassauers of Wellington 's left flank in the Frichermont @-@ La Haie area with the brigade 's horse artillery battery and additional brigade artillery deployed to its left in support . Napoleon sent Lobau 's corps to intercept the rest of Bülow 's IV Corps proceeding to Plancenoit . The 15th Brigade threw Lobau 's troops out of Frichermont with a determined bayonet charge , then proceeded up the Frichermont heights , battering French Chasseurs with 12 @-@ pounder artillery fire , and pushed on to Plancenoit . This sent Lobau 's corps into retreat to the Plancenoit area , driving Lobau past the rear of the Armee Du Nord 's right flank and directly threatening its only line of retreat . Hiller 's 16th Brigade also pushed forward with six battalions against Plancenoit . 
 Napoleon had dispatched all eight battalions of the Young Guard to reinforce Lobau , who was now seriously pressed . The Young Guard counter @-@ attacked and , after very hard fighting , secured Plancenoit , but were themselves counter @-@ attacked and driven out . Napoleon sent two battalions of the Middle / Old Guard into Plancenoit and after ferocious bayonet fighting — they did not deign to fire their muskets — this force recaptured the village . 
 = = = Zieten 's flank march = = = 
 Throughout the late afternoon , Zieten 's I Corps had been arriving in greater strength in the area just north of La Haie . General Müffling , Prussian liaison to Wellington , rode to meet I Corps . Zieten had by this time brought up his 1st Brigade , but had become concerned at the sight of stragglers and casualties from the Nassau units on Wellington 's left and from the Prussian 15th Brigade . These troops appeared to be withdrawing and Zieten , fearing that his own troops would be caught up in a general retreat , was starting to move away from Wellington 's flank and towards the Prussian main body near Plancenoit . Zieten had also received a direct order from Blücher to support Bülow , Zieten obeyed and marched to Bülow 's aid . Müffling saw this movement away and persuaded Zieten to support Wellington 's left flank . Müffling warned Zieten that " The battle is lost if the corps does not keep on the move and immediately support the English army " . Zieten resumed his march to support Wellington directly , and the arrival of his troops allowed Wellington to reinforce his crumbling centre by moving cavalry from his left . 
 The French were expecting Grouchy to march to their support from Wavre , and when Zieten 's I Corps appeared at Waterloo instead of Grouchy , " the shock of disillusionment shattered French morale " and " the sight of Zieten 's arrival caused turmoil to rage in Napoleon 's army " . I Corps proceeded to attack the French troops before Papelotte and by 19 : 30 the French position was bent into a rough horseshoe shape . The ends of the line were now based on Hougoumont on the left , Plancenoit on the right , and the centre on La Haie . Durutte had taken the positions of La Haie and Papelotte in a series of attacks , but now retreated behind Smohain without opposing the Prussian 24th Regiment as it retook both . The 24th advanced against the new French position , was repulsed , and returned to the attack supported by Silesian <unk> ( riflemen ) and the F / 1st Landwehr . The French initially fell back before the renewed assault , but now began seriously to contest ground , attempting to regain Smohain and hold on to the ridgeline and the last few houses of Papelotte . 
 The 24th Regiment linked up with a Highlander battalion on its far right and along with the 13th Landwehr regiment and cavalry support threw the French out of these positions . Further attacks by the 13th Landwehr and the 15th Brigade drove the French from Frichermont . Durutte 's division , finding itself about to be charged by massed squadrons of Zieten 's I Corps cavalry reserve , retreated from the battlefield . The soldiers of D ’ <unk> ’ s Corps alongside this attack on Durutte 's division also broke and fled in panic , while to the west the French Middle Guard were assaulting Wellington ’ s centre . The Prussian I Corps then advanced towards the Brussels road and the only line of retreat available to the French . 
 = = = Attack of the Imperial Guard = = = 
 Meanwhile , with Wellington 's centre exposed by the fall of La Haye Sainte and the Plancenoit front temporarily stabilised , Napoleon committed his last reserve , the hitherto @-@ undefeated Imperial Guard infantry . This attack , mounted at around 19 : 30 , was intended to break through Wellington 's centre and roll up his line away from the Prussians . Although it is one of the most celebrated passages of arms in military history , it had been unclear which units actually participated . It appears that it was mounted by five battalions of the Middle Guard , and not by the grenadiers or chasseurs of the Old Guard . Three Old Guard battalions did move forward and formed the attack 's second line , though they remained in reserve and did not directly assault the allied line . 
 ... I saw four regiments of the middle guard , conducted by the Emperor , arriving . With these troops , he wished to renew the attack , and penetrate the centre of the enemy . He ordered me to lead them on ; generals , officers and soldiers all displayed the greatest intrepidity ; but this body of troops was too weak to resist , for a long time , the forces opposed to it by the enemy , and it was soon necessary to renounce the hope which this attack had , for a few moments , inspired . 
 Napoleon himself oversaw the initial deployment of the Middle and Old Guard . The Middle Guard formed in battalion squares , each about 550 men strong , with the 1st / 3rd Grenadiers , led by Generals Friant and Poret de Morvan , on the right along the road , to their left and rear was General <unk> leading the square of the 4th Grenadiers , then the 1st / 3rd Chasseurs under General Michel , next the 2nd / 3rd Chasseurs and finally the large single square of two battalions of 800 soldiers of the 4th Chasseurs led by General Henrion . Two batteries of Imperial Guard Horse Artillery accompanied them with sections of two guns between the squares . Each square was led by a general and Marshal Ney , mounted on his 5th horse of the day , led the advance . 
 Behind them , in reserve , were the three battalions of the Old Guard , right to left 1st / 2nd Grenadiers , 2nd / 2nd Chasseurs and 1st / 2nd Chasseurs . Napoleon left Ney to conduct the assault , however Ney led the Middle Guard on an oblique towards the Allied centre right instead of attacking straight up the centre , Napoleon would send Ney 's senior ADC Colonel <unk> to order Ney to adjust . But <unk> was unable to get there in time . Other troops rallied to support the advance of the Guard . On the left infantry from Reille 's corps that was not engaged with Hougoumont and cavalry advanced . On the right all the now rallied elements of D <unk> 's corps once again ascended the ridge and engaged the allied line . Of these , <unk> 's brigade broke into skirmish order and moved north and west of La Haye Sainte and provided fire support to Ney , once again unhorsed , and Friant 's 1st / 3rd Grenadiers . The Guards first received fire from some Brunswick battalions , but the return fire of the grenadiers forced them to retire . Next , Colin <unk> 's brigade front line consisting of the 30th Foot and 73rd traded fire but they were driven back in confusion into the 33rd and 69th regiments , <unk> was shot in the face and seriously wounded and the whole brigade retreated in a mob . Other allied troops began to give way as well . A counter attack by the Nassauers and the remains of <unk> 's brigade from the allied second line , led by the Prince of Orange , was also thrown back and the Prince of Orange was seriously wounded . General <unk> brought up the 4th Grenadiers and the allied centre was now in serious danger of breaking . It was at this moment that the timely arrival of the Dutch General Chassé turned the tide in favour of the allies . 
 Chassé 's relatively fresh Dutch division was sent against them , led by a battery of Dutch horse @-@ artillery commanded by Captain <unk> de <unk> . The battery opened a destructive fire into the victorious 1st / 3rd Grenadiers ' flank . This still did not stop the Guard 's advance , so Chassé ordered his first brigade ( Colonel Hendrik Detmers ) to charge the outnumbered French with the bayonet , who faltered and broke . 
 The 4th Grenadiers , seeing their comrades retreat and having suffered heavy casualties themselves , now wheeled right about and retired . 
 To the left of the 4th Grenadiers were the two squares of the 1st / and 2nd / 3rd Chasseurs who angled further to the west and had suffered more from artillery fire than the grenadiers . But as their advance mounted the ridge they found it apparently abandoned and covered with dead . Suddenly 1 @,@ 500 British Foot Guards under Maitland who had been lying down to protect themselves from the French artillery rose and devastated them with point @-@ blank volleys . The chasseurs deployed to answer the fire , but began to waver , some 300 falling from the first volley , killing General Michel . A bayonet charge by the Foot Guards then broke them , the British losing order in their pursuit . 
 The 4th Chasseurs battalion , 800 strong , now came up on the flank of the British guardsmen and the two battalions of British Foot Guards lost all cohesion and dashed back up the slope as a disorganized crowd with the chasseurs in pursuit . At the crest the chasseurs came upon the battery that had caused severe casualties on the 1st and 2nd / 3rd Chasseurs , they opened fire and swept away the gunners . The left flank of the square now came under fire from a heavy formation of British skirmishers , the chasseurs drove them back , but the skirmishers were replaced as the 52nd Light Infantry , led by John Colborne , wheeled in line onto the chasseurs ' flank and poured a devastating fire into them , the chasseurs returned a very sharp fire killing or wounding some 150 men of the 52nd . The 52nd then charged . Under this onslaught , the chasseurs broke . 
 The last of the Guard retreated headlong . A ripple of panic passed through the French lines as the astounding news spread : " La Garde <unk> . Sauve qui peut ! " ( " The Guard is retreating . Every man for himself ! " ) Wellington now stood up in Copenhagen 's stirrups and waved his hat in the air to signal a general advance . His army rushed forward from the lines and threw themselves upon the retreating French . 
 The surviving Imperial Guard rallied on their three reserve battalions ( some sources say four ) just south of La Haye Sainte for a last stand . A charge from Adam 's Brigade and the Hanoverian Landwehr Osnabrück Battalion , plus Vivian 's and Vandeleur 's relatively fresh cavalry brigades to their right , threw them into confusion . Those left in semi @-@ cohesive units retreated towards La Belle Alliance . It was during this retreat that some of the Guards were invited to surrender , eliciting the famous , if apocryphal , retort " La Garde <unk> , elle ne se rend pas ! " ( " The Guard dies , it does not surrender ! " ) 
 = = = Prussian capture of Plancenoit = = = 
 At about the same time , the Prussian 5th , 14th , and 16th Brigades were starting to push through Plancenoit , in the third assault of the day . The church was by now on fire , while its graveyard — the French centre of resistance — had corpses strewn about " as if by a whirlwind " . Five Guard battalions were deployed in support of the Young Guard , virtually all of which was now committed to the defence , along with remnants of Lobau 's corps . The key to the Plancenoit position proved to be the <unk> woods to the south . Pirch 's II Corps had arrived with two brigades and reinforced the attack of IV Corps , advancing through the woods . 
 The 25th Regiment 's musketeer battalions threw the 1 / 2e Grenadiers ( Old Guard ) out of the <unk> woods , outflanking Plancenoit and forcing a retreat . The Old Guard retreated in good order until they met the mass of troops retreating in panic , and became part of that rout . The Prussian IV Corps advanced beyond Plancenoit to find masses of French retreating in disorder from British pursuit . The Prussians were unable to fire for fear of hitting Wellington 's units . This was the fifth and final time that Plancenoit changed hands . 
 French forces not retreating with the Guard were surrounded in their positions and eliminated , neither side asking for nor offering quarter . The French Young Guard Division reported 96 per cent casualties , and two @-@ thirds of Lobau 's Corps ceased to exist . 
 Despite their great courage and stamina , the French Guards fighting in the village began to show signs of wavering . The church was already on fire with columns of red flame coming out of the windows , aisles and doors . In the village itself — still the scene of bitter house @-@ to @-@ house fighting — everything was burning , adding to the confusion . However , once Major von Witzleben 's manoeuvre was accomplished and the French Guards saw their flank and rear threatened , they began to withdraw . The Guard Chasseurs under General <unk> formed the rearguard . The remnants of the Guard left in a great rush , leaving large masses of artillery , equipment and ammunition wagons in the wake of their retreat . The evacuation of Plancenoit led to the loss of the position that was to be used to cover the withdrawal of the French Army to Charleroi . The Guard fell back from Plancenoit in the direction of Maison du Roi and Caillou . Unlike other parts of the battlefield , there were no cries of " Sauve qui peut ! " here . Instead , the cry " <unk> nos <unk> ! " ( " Let 's save our eagles ! " ) could be heard . 
 = = = French disintegration = = = 
 The French right , left , and centre had all now failed . The last cohesive French force consisted of two battalions of the Old Guard stationed around La Belle Alliance ; they had been so placed to act as a final reserve and to protect Napoleon in the event of a French retreat . He hoped to rally the French army behind them , but as retreat turned into rout , they too were forced to withdraw , one on either side of La Belle Alliance , in square as protection against Coalition cavalry . Until persuaded that the battle was lost and he should leave , Napoleon commanded the square to the left of the inn . Adam 's Brigade charged and forced back this square , while the Prussians engaged the other . 
 As dusk fell , both squares withdrew in relatively good order , but the French artillery and everything else fell into the hands of the allies . The retreating Guards were surrounded by thousands of fleeing , broken French troops . Coalition cavalry harried the fugitives until about 23 : 00 , with Gneisenau pursuing them as far as Genappe before ordering a halt . There , Napoleon 's abandoned carriage was captured , still containing diamonds left behind in the rush to escape . These became part of King Friedrich Wilhelm of Prussia 's crown jewels ; one Major Keller of the F / 15th received the Pour le Mérite with oak leaves for the feat . By this time 78 guns and 2 @,@ 000 prisoners had also been taken , including more generals . 
 There remained to us still four squares of the Old Guard to protect the retreat . These brave grenadiers , the choice of the army , forced successively to retire , yielded ground foot by foot , till , overwhelmed by numbers , they were almost entirely annihilated . From that moment , a retrograde movement was declared , and the army formed nothing but a confused mass . There was not , however , a total rout , nor the cry of sauve qui peut , as has been <unk> stated in the bulletin . 
 In the middle of the position occupied by the French army , and exactly upon the height , is a farm ( sic ) , called La Belle Alliance . The march of all the Prussian columns was directed towards this farm , which was visible from every side . It was there that Napoleon was during the battle ; it was thence that he gave his orders , that he flattered himself with the hopes of victory ; and it was there that his ruin was decided . There , too , it was that , by happy chance , Field Marshal Blücher and Lord Wellington met in the dark , and mutually saluted each other as victors . 
 Other sources agree that that the meeting of the commanders took place near La Belle Alliance , with this occurring at around 21 : 00 . However , historian Peter <unk> has written that Wellington and Blücher met at Genappe around 22 : 00 , signifying the end of the battle . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Waterloo cost Wellington around 15 @,@ 000 dead or wounded and Blücher some 7 @,@ 000 ( 810 of which were suffered by just one unit : the 18th Regiment , which served in Bülow 's 15th Brigade , had fought at both Frichermont and Plancenoit , and won 33 Iron Crosses ) . Napoleon 's losses were 24 @,@ 000 to 26 @,@ 000 killed or wounded and included 6 @,@ 000 to 7 @,@ 000 captured with an additional 15 @,@ 000 deserting subsequent to the battle and over the following days . 
 22 June . This morning I went to visit the field of battle , which is a little beyond the village of Waterloo , on the plateau of Mont @-@ Saint @-@ Jean ; but on arrival there the sight was too horrible to behold . I felt sick in the stomach and was obliged to return . The multitude of carcasses , the heaps of wounded men with mangled limbs unable to move , and perishing from not having their wounds dressed or from hunger , as the Allies were , of course , obliged to take their surgeons and waggons with them , formed a spectacle I shall never forget . The wounded , both of the Allies and the French , remain in an equally deplorable state . 
 At 10 : 30 on 19 June General Grouchy , still following his orders , defeated General Thielemann at Wavre and withdrew in good order — though at the cost of 33 @,@ 000 French troops that never reached the Waterloo battlefield . Wellington sent his official dispatch describing the battle to England on 19 June 1815 ; it arrived in London on 21 June 1815 and was published as a London Gazette Extraordinary on 22 June . Wellington , Blücher and other Coalition forces advanced upon Paris . 
 Napoleon announced his second abdication on 24 June 1815 . In the final skirmish of the Napoleonic Wars , Marshal Davout , Napoleon 's minister of war , was defeated by Blücher at Issy on 3 July 1815 . Allegedly , Napoleon tried to escape to North America , but the Royal Navy was blockading French ports to forestall such a move . He finally surrendered to Captain Frederick Maitland of HMS Bellerophon on 15 July . There was a campaign against French fortresses that still held out ; Longwy capitulated on 13 September 1815 , the last to do so . The Treaty of Paris was signed on 20 November 1815 . Louis XVIII was restored to the throne of France and Napoleon was exiled to Saint Helena , where he died in 1821 . 
 Royal Highness , – Exposed to the factions which divide my country , and to the enmity of the great Powers of Europe , I have terminated my political career ; and I come , like Themistocles , to throw myself upon the hospitality ( m <unk> sur le foyer ) of the British people . I claim from your Royal Highness the protections of the laws , and throw myself upon the most powerful , the most constant , and the most generous of my enemies . 
 Maitland 's 1st Foot Guards , who had defeated the Chasseurs of the Guard , were thought to have defeated the Grenadiers , although they had only faced Chasseurs of the newly raised Middle Guard . They were nevertheless awarded the title of Grenadier Guards in recognition of their feat and adopted bearskins in the style of the Grenadiers . Britain 's Household Cavalry likewise adopted the cuirass in 1821 in recognition of their success against their armoured French counterparts . The effectiveness of the lance was noted by all participants and this weapon subsequently became more widespread throughout Europe ; the British converted their first light cavalry regiment to lancers in 1816 , their uniforms , of Polish origin , were based on those of the Imperial Guard lancers . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 = = = Historical importance = = = 
 Waterloo was a decisive battle in more than one sense . Every generation in Europe up to the outbreak of the First World War looked back at Waterloo as the turning point that dictated the course of subsequent world history . In retrospect , it was seen as the event that ushered in the Concert of Europe , an era characterised by relative peace , material prosperity and technological progress . The battle definitively ended the series of wars that had convulsed Europe , and involved many other regions of the world , since the French Revolution of the early 1790s . It also ended the First French Empire and the political and military career of Napoleon Bonaparte , one of the greatest commanders and statesmen in history . 
 It was followed by almost four decades of international peace in Europe . No further major conflict occurred until the Crimean War . Changes to the configuration of European states , as refashioned after Waterloo , included the formation of the Holy Alliance of reactionary governments intent on repressing revolutionary and democratic ideas , and the reshaping of the former Holy Roman Empire into a German Confederation increasingly marked by the political dominance of Prussia . The bicentenary of Waterloo has prompted renewed attention to the geopolitical and economic legacy of the battle and the century of relative transatlantic peace which followed . 
 = = = Views on the reasons for Napoleon 's defeat = = = 
 General Antoine @-@ Henri , Baron Jomini , one of the leading military writers on the Napoleonic art of war , had a number of very cogent explanations of the reasons behind Napoleon 's defeat at Waterloo . 
 In my opinion , four principal causes led to this disaster : 
 The first , and most influential , was the arrival , skilfully combined , of Blücher , and the false movement that favoured this arrival ; the second , was the admirable firmness of the British infantry , joined to the sang @-@ froid and aplomb of its chiefs ; the third , was the horrible weather , that had softened the ground , and rendered the offensive movements so <unk> , and retarded till one o 'clock the attack that should have been made in the morning ; the fourth , was the inconceivable formation of the first corps , in masses very much too deep for the first grand attack . 
 Wellington himself wrote in his official dispatch back to London : " I should not do justice to my own feelings , or to Marshal Blücher and the Prussian army , if I did not attribute the successful result of this arduous day to the cordial and timely assistance I received from them . The operation of General Bülow upon the enemy 's flank was a most decisive one ; and , even if I had not found myself in a situation to make the attack which produced the final result , it would have forced the enemy to retire if his attacks should have failed , and would have prevented him from taking advantage of them if they should unfortunately have succeeded " . 
 Despite their differences on other matters , discussed at length in Carl von Clausewitz 's study of the Campaign of 1815 and Wellington 's famous 1842 essay in reply to it , the Prussian theorist and historian Clausewitz agreed with Wellington on this assessment . Indeed , Clausewitz viewed the battle prior to the Prussian intervention more as a mutually exhausting stalemate than as an impending French victory , with the advantage , if any , leaning towards Wellington . 
 Many modern authors , however , share the view that Wellington faced imminent defeat without Prussian help . For example , Parkinson ( 2000 ) writes : " Neither army beat Napoleon alone . But whatever the part played by Prussian troops in the actual moment when the Imperial Guard was repulsed , it is difficult to see how Wellington could have staved off defeat , when his centre had been almost shattered , his reserves were almost all committed , the French right remained unmolested and the Imperial Guard intact . … . Blücher may not have been totally responsible for victory over Napoleon , but he deserved full credit for preventing a British defeat " . Steele ( 2014 ) writes : " Blücher ’ s arrival not only diverted vital reinforcements , but also forced Napoleon to accelerate his effort against Wellington . The tide of battle had been turned by the hard @-@ driving Blücher . As his Prussians pushed in Napoleon 's flank . Wellington was able to shift to the offensive " . 
 = = Battlefield today = = 
 Some portions of the terrain on the battlefield have been altered from their 1815 appearance . Tourism began the day after the battle , with Captain Mercer noting that on 19 June " a carriage drove on the ground from Brussels , the inmates of which , alighting , proceeded to examine the field " . In 1820 , the Netherlands ' King William I ordered the construction of a monument . The Lion 's Hillock , a giant mound , was constructed here using 300 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 390 @,@ 000 cu yd ) of earth taken from the ridge at the centre of the British line , effectively removing the southern bank of Wellington 's sunken road . 
 Every one is aware that the variously inclined undulations of the plains , where the engagement between Napoleon and Wellington took place , are no longer what they were on 18 June 1815 . By taking from this mournful field the wherewithal to make a monument to it , its real relief has been taken away , and history , disconcerted , no longer finds her bearings there . It has been disfigured for the sake of glorifying it . Wellington , when he beheld Waterloo once more , two years later , exclaimed , " They have altered my field of battle ! " Where the great pyramid of earth , surmounted by the lion , rises to @-@ day , there was a hillock which descended in an easy slope towards the Nivelles road , but which was almost an escarpment on the side of the highway to Genappe . The elevation of this escarpment can still be measured by the height of the two knolls of the two great sepulchres which enclose the road from Genappe to Brussels : one , the English tomb , is on the left ; the other , the German tomb , is on the right . There is no French tomb . The whole of that plain is a sepulchre for France . 
 The alleged remark by Wellington about the alteration of the battlefield as described by Hugo was never documented , however . 
 Other terrain features and notable landmarks on the field have remained virtually unchanged since the battle . These include the rolling farmland to the east of the Brussels – Charleroi Road as well as the buildings at Hougoumont , La Haye Sainte , and La Belle Alliance . 
 Apart from the Lion Mound , there are several more conventional but noteworthy monuments throughout the battlefield . A cluster of monuments at the Brussels – Charleroi and Braine L 'Alleud – Ohain crossroads marks the mass graves of British , Dutch , Hanoverian and King 's German Legion troops . A monument to the French dead , entitled L <unk> <unk> ( " The Wounded Eagle " ) , marks the location where it is believed one of the Imperial Guard units formed a square during the closing moments of the battle . 
 A monument to the Prussian dead is located in the village of Plancenoit on the site where one of their artillery batteries took position . The Duhesme mausoleum is one among the few graves of the fallen . It is located at the side of Saint Martin 's Church in Ways , a hamlet in the municipality of Genappe . Seventeen fallen officers are buried in the crypt of the British Monument in the Brussels Cemetery in Evere . The remains of a 23 @-@ year @-@ old soldier named Friederich Brandt were discovered in 2012 . He was a slightly hunchbacked infantryman , 1 @.@ 60 metres ( 5 @.@ 2 ft ) tall , and was hit in the chest by a French bullet . His rifle , coins , and position on the battlefield identified him as an Hanoverian fighting in the King 's German Legion . 
 = = Coin controversy = = 
 As part of the bicentennial celebration of the battle , in 2015 Belgium minted a 2 Euro coin depicting the Lion monument over a map of the field of battle . France officially protested this issue , while the Belgian government noted that the French mint sells souvenir medals at Waterloo . After 180 @,@ 000 coins were minted but not released , the issue was melted . Instead , Belgium issued an identical commemorative coin in the non @-@ standard value of 2 ½ Euros . Legally only valid within the issuing country ( but unlikely to circulate ) it was minted in brass , packaged , and sold by the Belgian mint for 6 Euros . A 10 Euro coin , showing Wellington , Blücher , their troops and the silhouette of Napoleon , was also available in silver for 42 Euros . 
 = Snake scales = 
 Snakes , like other reptiles , have a skin covered in scales . Snakes are entirely covered with scales or scutes of various shapes and sizes , known as snakeskin as a whole . Scales protect the body of the snake , aid it in locomotion , allow moisture to be retained within , alter the surface characteristics such as roughness to aid in camouflage , and in some cases even aid in prey capture ( such as Acrochordus ) . The simple or complex colouration patterns ( which help in camouflage and anti @-@ predator display ) are a property of the underlying skin , but the folded nature of scaled skin allows bright skin to be concealed between scales then revealed in order to startle predators . 
 Scales have been modified over time to serve other functions such as ' eyelash ' fringes , and protective covers for the eyes with the most distinctive modification being the rattle of the North American rattlesnakes . 
 Snakes periodically moult their scaly skins and acquire new ones . This permits replacement of old worn out skin , disposal of parasites and is thought to allow the snake to grow . The arrangement of scales is used to identify snake species . 
 Snakes have been part and parcel of culture and religion . Vivid scale patterns have been thought to have influenced early art . The use of snake @-@ skin in manufacture of purses , apparel and other articles led to large @-@ scale killing of snakes , giving rise to advocacy for use of artificial snake @-@ skin . Snake scales are also to be found as motifs in fiction , art and films . 
 = = Functions of scales = = 
 The scales of a snake primarily serve to reduce friction as it moves , since friction is the major source of energy loss in snake locomotion . 
 The ventral ( or belly ) scales , which are large and oblong , are especially low @-@ friction , and some arboreal species can use the edges to grip branches . Snake skin and scales help retain moisture in the animal 's body . Snakes pick up vibrations from both the air and the ground , and can differentiate the two , using a complex system of internal resonances ( perhaps involving the scales ) . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 Reptiles evolved from amphibious ancestors which left the aquatic lifestyle and became terrestrial . To prevent loss of moisture reptilian skin lost the softness and moisture of amphibian skin and developing a thick stratum corneum with multiple layers of lipids which served as an impermeable barrier as well as provided protection from the ultraviolet . Over time , reptilian skin cells became highly keratinised , horny , sturdy and desiccated . The surfaces of the dermis and epidermis of all reptilian scales form a single contiguous sheet , as can be seen when the snake sheds its skin as a whole . 
 = = Morphology of scales = = 
 Snake scales are formed by the differentiation of the snake 's underlying skin or epidermis . Each scale has an outer surface and an inner surface . The skin from the inner surface hinges back and forms a free area which overlaps the base of the next scale which emerges below this scale . A snake hatches with a fixed number of scales . The scales do not increase in number as the snake matures nor do they reduce in number over time . The scales however grow larger in size and may change shape with each moult . 
 Snakes have smaller scales around the mouth and sides of the body which allow expansion so that a snake can consume prey of much larger width than itself . Snake scales are made of keratin , the same material that hair and fingernails are made of . They are cool and dry to touch . 
 = = = Surface and shape = = = 
 Snake scales are of different shapes and sizes . Snake scales may be granular , have a smooth surface or have a longitudinal ridge or keel on it . Often , snake scales have pits , tubercles and other fine structures which may be visible to the naked eye or under a microscope . Snake scales may be modified to form fringes , as in the case of the <unk> Bush Viper , <unk> <unk> , or rattles as in the case of the rattlesnakes of North America . 
 Certain primitive snakes such as boas , pythons and certain advanced snakes such as vipers have small scales arranged irregularly on the head . Other more advanced snakes have special large symmetrical scales on the head called shields or plates . 
 Snake scales occur in variety of shapes . They may be cycloid as in family Typhlopidae , long and pointed with pointed tips , as in the case of the Green Vine Snake <unk> <unk> , broad and leaf @-@ like , as in the case of green pit vipers <unk> spp or as broad as they are long , for example , as in Rat snake <unk> <unk> . In some cases , scales may be keeled weakly or strongly as in the case of the Buff @-@ striped <unk> <unk> <unk> . They may have bidentate tips as in some spp of Natrix . Some snakes , such as the Short <unk> Lapemis curtus , may have <unk> and juxtaposed scales while others may have large and non @-@ overlapping knobs as in the case of the Javan <unk> <unk> javanicus . 
 Another example of differentiation of snake scales is a transparent scale called the brille or spectacle which covers the eye of the snake . The brille is often referred to as a fused eyelid . It is shed as part of the old skin during moulting . 
 = = = Rattles = = = 
 The most distinctive modification of the snake scale is the rattle of rattlesnakes , such as those of the genera Crotalus and <unk> . The rattle is made up of a series of loosely linked , interlocking chambers that when shaken , vibrate against one another to create the warning signal of a rattlesnake . Only the bottom button is firmly attached to the tip of the tail . 
 At birth , a rattlesnake hatchling has only a small button or ' primordial rattle ' which is firmly attached to the tip of the tail . The first segment is added when the hatchling sheds its skin for the first time . A new section is added each time the skin is shed until a rattle is formed . The rattle grows as the snake ages but segments are also prone to breaking off and hence the length of a rattle is not a reliable indicator of the age of a snake . 
 = = = Colour = = = 
 Scales , more specifically , mostly consist of hard beta keratins which are basically transparent . The colours of the scale are due to pigments in the inner layers of the skin and not due to the scale material itself . Scales are hued for all colours in this manner except for blue and green . Blue is caused by the ultrastructure of the scales . By itself , such a scale surface <unk> light and gives a blue hue , while , in combination with yellow from the inner skin it gives a beautiful iridescent green . 
 Some snakes have the ability to change the hue of their scales slowly . This is typically seen in cases where the snake becomes lighter or darker with change in season . In some cases , this change may take place between day and night . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The shedding of scales is called ecdysis , or , in normal usage moulting or sloughing . In the case of snakes , the complete outer layer of skin is shed in one layer . Snake scales are not discrete but extensions of the epidermis hence they are not shed separately , but are ejected as a complete contiguous outer layer of skin during each moult , akin to a sock being turned inside out . 
 Moulting serves a number of functions – firstly , the old and worn skin is replaced , secondly , it helps get rid of parasites such as mites and ticks . Renewal of the skin by moulting is supposed to allow growth in some animals such as insects , however this view has been disputed in the case of snakes . 
 Moulting is repeated periodically throughout a snake 's life . Before a moult , the snake stops eating and often hides or moves to a safe place . Just before shedding , the skin becomes dull and dry looking and the eyes become cloudy or blue @-@ colored . The inner surface of the old outer skin liquefies . This causes the old outer skin to separate from the new inner skin . After a few days , the eyes clear and the snake " crawls " out of its old skin . The old skin breaks near the mouth and the snake wriggles out aided by rubbing against rough surfaces . In many cases the cast skin peels backward over the body from head to tail , in one piece like an old sock . A new , larger , and brighter layer of skin has formed underneath . 
 An older snake may shed its skin only once or twice a year , but a younger , still @-@ growing snake , may shed up to four times a year . The discarded skin gives a perfect imprint of the scale pattern and it is usually possible to identify the snake if this discard is reasonably complete and intact . 
 = = Arrangement of scales = = 
 Scale arrangements are important , not only for taxonomic utility , but also for forensic reasons and conservation of snake species . Excepting for the head , snakes have imbricate scales , overlapping like the tiles on a roof . Snakes have rows of scales along the whole or part of their length and also many other specialised scales , either singly or in pairs , occurring on the head and other regions of the body . 
 The dorsal ( or body ) scales on the snake 's body are arranged in rows along the length of their bodies . Adjacent rows are diagonally offset from each other . Most snakes have an odd number of rows across the body though certain species have an even number of rows e.g. <unk> spp . In the case of some aquatic and marine snakes , the scales are granular and the rows cannot be counted . 
 The number of rows range from ten in Tiger <unk> <unk> <unk> ; thirteen in <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Asian coral snakes of genus <unk> ; 65 to 75 in pythons ; 74 to 93 in <unk> and 130 to 150 in Acrochordus . The majority of the largest family of snakes , the Colubridae have 15 , 17 or 19 rows of scales . The maximum number of rows are in mid @-@ body and they reduce in count towards the head and on the tail . 
 = = Nomenclature of scales = = 
 The various scales on a snake 's head and body are indicated in the following paragraphs with annotated photographs of Buff @-@ striped <unk> <unk> <unk> , a common grass @-@ snake of South Asia and a member of Colubridae , the largest snake family . 
 = = = Head scales = = = 
 Identification of cephalic scales is most conveniently begun with reference to the nostril , which is easily identified on a snake . There are two scales enclosing the nostril which are called the nasals . In <unk> , the nostril lies between the nasals , while in vipers it lies in the centre of a single nasal scale . The outer nasal ( near the snout ) is called the <unk> while the inner nasal ( near the eye ) is called the <unk> . Along the top of the snout connecting the nasals on both sides of the head are scales called <unk> . Between the two <unk> is a scale at the tip of the snout called the rostral scale . 
 The scales around the eye are called circumorbital scales and are named as ocular scales but with appropriate prefixes . The ocular scale proper is a transparent scale covering the eye which is called the spectacle , brille or <unk> . The circumorbital scales towards the snout or the front are called preocular scales , those towards the rear are called postocular scales , and those towards the upper or dorsal side are called supraocular scales . <unk> scales towards the ventral or lower side , if any , are called <unk> scales . Between the preocular and the <unk> scales are one or two scales called loreal scales . <unk> scales are absent in elapids . 
 The scales along the lips of the snake are called labials . Those on the upper lip are called supralabials or upper labials , while those on the lower lip are called infralabials or lower labials . On top of the head , between the eyes , adjacent to the supraoculars is the frontal scale . The prefrontal scales are the scales connected to the frontal towards the tip of the snout which are in contact with the <unk> . They may have a scale in between them . The back of the top of the head has scales connected to the frontal scale called the parietal scales . At the sides of the back of the head between the parietals above and the supralabials below are scales called temporal scales . 
 On the underside of the head , a snake has an anterior scale called the mental scale . Connected to the mental scale and all along the lower lips are the infralabials or lower labials . Along the chin connected to the infralabials is a pair of shields called the anterior chin shields . Next to the anterior chin shields , further back along the chin is another pair of shields called the posterior chin shields . In some texts the <unk> are referred to as submaxillary scales . 
 Scales in the central or throat region , which are in contact with the first ventral scales of a snake 's body and are flanked by the chin shields , are called gular scales . The mental groove is a longitudinal groove on the underside of the head between the large , paired chin shields and continuing between the smaller gular scales . 
 = = = Body scales = = = 
 The scales on the body of the snake are called the dorsal or costal scales . Sometimes there is a special row of large scales along the top of the back of the snake , i.e. , the uppermost row , called the vertebral scales . The enlarged scales on the belly of the snake are called ventral scales or <unk> . The number of ventral scales can be a guide to the species . In " advanced " ( <unk> ) snakes , the broad belly scales and rows of dorsal scales correspond to the vertebrae , allowing scientists to count the vertebrae without dissection . 
 = = = Tail scales = = = 
 At the end of the ventral scales of the snake is an anal plate which protects the opening to the cloaca ( a shared opening for waste and reproductive material to pass ) on the underside near the tail . This anal scale may be single or divided into a pair . The part of the body beyond the anal scale is considered to be the tail . 
 Sometimes snakes have enlarged scales , either single or paired , under the tail ; these are called subcaudals or <unk> . These subcaudals may be smooth or keeled as in Bitis arietans somalica . The end of the tail may simply taper into a tip ( as in the case of most snakes ) , it may form a spine ( as in Acanthophis ) , end in a bony spur ( as in Lachesis ) , a rattle ( as in Crotalus ) , or a rudder as seen in many sea snakes . 
 Sources . Details for this section have been sourced from scale diagrams in Malcolm Smith . Details of scales of Buff @-@ striped <unk> have been taken from Daniels . 
 = = Glossary of scales = = 
 Scales on the head . 
 <unk> . 
 <unk> . 
 Nasal . 
 <unk> . 
 <unk> . 
 <unk> . 
 Fronto @-@ nasal . 
 <unk> . 
 <unk> , spectacle , ocular scale , <unk> . 
 <unk> . 
 <unk> . 
 <unk> . 
 <unk> . 
 <unk> . 
 <unk> . 
 <unk> , <unk> . 
 Frontal . 
 <unk> . 
 <unk> . 
 <unk> . 
 <unk> . 
 Temporal . 
 Labial . 
 <unk> , Upper labial . 
 <unk> , <unk> , Lower labial . 
 Mental or <unk> . 
 Chin shield . 
 Anterior chin shield , Anterior <unk> . 
 Posterior chin shield , Posterior <unk> . 
 <unk> . 
 <unk> . 
 Scales on the body . 
 Dorsal . 
 Vertebral . 
 Ventral , <unk> . 
 Scales on the tail . 
 Anal . 
 <unk> , <unk> . 
 = = = Other pertinent terms = = = 
 <unk> , or <unk> <unk> , the angle between the supraocular scale and the rostral scale . 
 Mental groove . 
 = = Taxonomic importance = = 
 Scales do not play an important role in distinguishing between the families but are important at generic and specific level . There is an elaborate scheme of nomenclature of scales . Scales patterns , by way of scale surface or texture , pattern and colouration and the division of the anal plate , in combination with other morphological characteristics , are the principal means of classifying snakes down to species level . 
 In certain areas in North America , where the diversity of snakes is not too large , easy keys based on simple identification of scales have been devised for the lay public to distinguish venomous snakes from non @-@ venomous snakes . In other places with large biodiversity , such as Myanmar , publications caution that venomous and non @-@ venomous snakes cannot be easily distinguished apart without careful examination . 
 The scales patterning may also be used for individual identification in field studies . Clipping of specific scales , such as the subcaudals , to mark individual snakes is a popular approach to population estimation by mark and recapture techniques . 
 = = = Distinguishing between venomous and non @-@ venomous snakes = = = 
 There is no simple way of differentiating a venomous snake from a non @-@ venomous one merely by using a scale character . Finding out whether a snake is venomous or not is correctly done by identification of the species of a snake with the help of experts , or in their absence , close examination of the snake and using authoritative references on the snakes of the particular geographical region to identify it . Scale patterns help to indicate the species and from the references , it can be verified if the snake species is known to be venomous or not . 
 Species identification using scales requires a fair degree of knowledge about snakes , their taxonomy , snake @-@ scale nomenclature as well as familiarity with and access to scientific literature . Distinguishing by using scale diagrams whether a snake is venomous or not in the field cannot be done in the case of uncaught specimens . It is not advisable to catch a snake to check whether it is venomous or not using scale diagrams . Most books or websites provide an array of traits of the local herpetofauna , other than scale diagrams , which help to distinguish whether a snake in the field is venomous or not . 
 In certain regions , presence or absence of certain scales may be a quick way to distinguish non @-@ venomous and venomous snakes , but used with care and knowledge of exceptions . For example , in Myanmar , the presence or absence of loreal scales can be used to distinguish between relatively harmless <unk> and lethally venomous <unk> . The rule of hand for this region is that the absence of a loreal scale between the nasal scale and pre @-@ ocular scale indicates that the snake is an <unk> and hence lethal . This rule @-@ of @-@ thumb cannot be used without care as it cannot be applied to vipers , which have a large number of small scales on the head . A careful check would also be needed to exclude known poisonous members of the <unk> family such as <unk> . 
 In South Asia , it is advisable to take the snake which has bitten a person , if it has been killed , and carry it along to the hospital for possible identification by medical staff using scale diagrams so that an informed decision can be taken them as to whether and which anti @-@ venom is to be administered . However , attempts to catch it or kill the venomous snake are not advised as the snake may bite more people . 
 = = Cultural significance = = 
 Snakes have been a motif in human culture and religion and an object of dread and fascination all over the world . The vivid patterns of snake scales , such as the Gaboon Viper , both repel and fascinate the human mind . Such patterns have inspired dread and awe in humans from pre @-@ historic times and these can be seen in the art prevalent to those times . Studies of fear imagery and psychological arousal indicate that snake scales are a vital component of snake imagery . Snake scales also appear to have affected Islamic art in the form of <unk> mosaic patterns which show great similarity to snake @-@ scale patterns . 
 Snakeskin , with its highly periodic cross @-@ hatch or grid patterns , appeals to people 's aesthetics and have been used to manufacture many leather articles including fashionable accessories . The use of snakeskin has however endangered snake populations and resulted in international restrictions in trade of certain snake species and populations in the form of CITES provisions . Animal lovers in many countries now propagate the use of artificial snakeskin instead , which are easily produced from embossed leather , patterned fabric , plastics and other materials . 
 Snake scales occur as a motif regularly in computer action games . A snake scale was portrayed as a clue in the 1982 film Blade Runner . Snake scales also figure in popular fiction , such as the Harry Potter series ( desiccated <unk> skin is used as a raw material for concocting the Polyjuice potion ) , and also in teen fiction . 
 = Issy Smith = 
 Issy Smith VC ( c . 18 September 1890 – 11 September 1940 ) was a British @-@ Australian recipient of the Victoria Cross , the highest award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that can be awarded to eligible forces of the Commonwealth and United Kingdom . In recognition of his VC , he was also awarded the French Croix de Guerre and Russian Cross of St. George ( 4th class ) by the respective governments . 
 Born <unk> <unk> ( and other renderings ) , to parents residing in Egypt , Smith travelled to Britain as a child stowaway and first volunteered to serve in the British Army in 1904 . He emigrated to Australia after discharge , where he remained until mobilised as a reservist in 1914 . As a corporal in the 1st Battalion , The Manchester Regiment , Smith was engaged in the Second Battle of Ypres . On 26 April 1915 , Smith , on his own initiative , recovered wounded soldiers while exposed to sustained fire and attended to them " with the greatest devotion to duty regardless of personal risk " . His conduct secured a recommendation for the Victoria Cross , which was awarded to Smith in August 1915 . 
 After his demobilisation , Smith returned to Australia with his wife and daughter . He became a prominent figure in Melbourne 's Jewish community , was appointed a Justice of the Peace , and unsuccessfully stood as a candidate for the United Australia Party in the 1931 general election . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Smith was born in Alexandria , the son of French citizens Moses and Eva <unk> , who were of Russian origin . His father was employed by the French Consulate @-@ General as a clerk . Aged 11 , Smith embarked as a stowaway aboard a vessel proceeding to London . Undaunted by this unfamiliar environment , Smith attended Berner Street School , Commercial Street , and worked as a deliverer in the East End , then an impoverished ghetto where Yiddish was the predominant spoken language . Persecution and extreme deprivation had compelled millions of Eastern European Jews to migrate to Western Europe , the Americas , and elsewhere . By the time of Issy Smith 's arrival , Jewish immigration to Britain had peaked and was further curtailed by the enactment of the Aliens Act in 1905 . 
 He joined the British Army in 1904 , becoming a private in the Manchester Regiment . The pseudonym Issy Smith was adopted in the process of enlisting at the behest of a recruiting sergeant . Smith completed his training , serving in South Africa and India with the 1st Battalion . He boxed competitively , winning the British Army 's middleweight championship , and played football . While in India , Smith was present at the Delhi Durbar parade , in which the 1st Manchesters participated , and was thus awarded the Delhi Durbar Medal . 
 Accepting his discharge in 1912 , Smith emigrated to Australia after brief employment in London . He lived in the Melbourne suburb of Ascot Vale while working for the city 's gas company . Retained as a reservist , Smith was mobilised by the British Army after the commencement of hostilities in August 1914 . Some sources state that Smith was present at the capture of German New Guinea by the Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force . 
 = = World War I = = 
 The 1st Manchester Regiment , stationed in India , sailed from Karachi for France on 29 August 1914 as the constituent British battalion of the <unk> Brigade , 3rd ( Lahore ) Division . The battalion disembarked at Marseilles in late September , but was not deployed to the front until 26 October 1914 , when it occupied trenches east of Festubert . 
 Actively engaged in the battles of Givenchy and Neuve Chapelle , the 1st Manchesters had incurred hundreds of casualties by the beginning of " Second Ypres " on 22 April 1915 . Chemical warfare first emerged on the Western Front during the German offensive , and Smith himself would be temporarily incapacitated by gas . The 1st Manchesters were involved in an initially successful counter @-@ attack conducted by the <unk> and <unk> brigades on 26 April 1915 , near Wieltje , in conjunction with other Allied units . Rudimentary forms of protection against the chlorine gas proved ineffectual , limiting the advance and causing many soldiers to succumb to its effects . 
 During the Allied counter @-@ attack , Smith , of his own volition , ventured towards a German position to attend to a severely wounded soldier . He carried him some 250 yards ( 230 m ) to relative safety while exposed to intense German fire . According to the Victoria Cross citation , he brought in " many more wounded men " throughout the day under similarly perilous conditions " regardless of personal risk " . Recounting his own rescue by Smith to a Daily Mail correspondent , Sergeant Rooke said of the corporal : " He behaved with wonderful coolness and presence of mind the whole time , and no man deserved a Victoria Cross more thoroughly than he did " . 
 Smith was hospitalised in Dublin , where he recuperated from his gassing . His Victoria Cross was later presented to him at Buckingham Palace by King George V. He was feted by publications such as The Jewish Chronicle , and his status as a recipient of the VC was utilised by the British government for the purposes of stimulating further recruitment . His visits to Jewish communities in the United Kingdom generated much interest , attracting dignitaries and large crowds in the process . On one such occasion , in September 1915 , he was invited back to his old school in the East End to receive a gold watch and chain in honour of his Victoria Cross from his former schoolmates . Also that month , Smith was received at Mansion House , Dublin , by the Under @-@ Secretary for Ireland , Matthew Nathan , who took advantage of the occasion to reaffirm loyalty to both Britain and Ireland . Contemporaries , however , continued to report instances of discrimination against Jewish servicemen , including an incident involving Issy Smith in Leeds . While documenting his recruitment drive , The Jewish Chronicle reported that the proprietor of the Grand Restaurant had refused to serve Smith during his tour of Yorkshire because he was Jewish , while indicating the staff were prepared to accept his non @-@ Jewish acquaintance . Smith 's tour continued without disruption , taking him to Edinburgh , Scotland . 
 Meanwhile , on the Western Front , the demoralised and depleted Indian Corps fought its final European battle at Loos . With the exception of two cavalry divisions , the Indian Corps in Europe redeployed to the Middle East theatre , sailing from Marseilles on 10 December 1915 and arriving in Basra on 8 January 1916 to be integrated into the Mesopotamian Expeditionary Force . Smith returned to active duty as a sergeant , serving in Mesopotamia and Palestine until the cessation of hostilities with the Ottoman Empire and Germany on 30 October and 11 November respectively . He had been wounded five times . 
 Demobilised after the war , Smith returned to London . As a war hero , he was intermittently invited to social functions . In June 1920 , he attended a garden party at Buckingham Palace , given by the king for all surviving Victoria Cross recipients . They included veterans of the Indian Mutiny , Rorke 's Drift , Relief of General Gordon , the First and Second Boer Wars , countless campaigns on the borders of the empire , and dozens from the Great War . In October 1921 , with Harry Kenny VC , he unveiled the Hackney War Memorial . In 1922 , he attended " The Pilgrimage to Ypres " , in Belgium , laying a wreath at the Cloth Hall there . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Despite his fame and popularity , like many former servicemen contending with post @-@ war economic hardship , Smith struggled financially – a predicament compounded by illness . As a consequence he pawned his medals for £ 20 , only for them to be recovered by the Jewish Historical Society on the urging of the wife of Chief Rabbi Joseph H. Hertz and ultimately reunited with Smith . Smith 's varied occupations in post @-@ war Britain included work as an actor with a theatre troupe . He emigrated to Australia in 1925 with his wife Elsie ( née McKechnie ) , whom he had married at Camberwell Register Office . Marriage to Elsie produced two children ( Olive and Maurice ) and reputedly angered his parents despite the couple 's later observance of Jewish religious tradition in a formal ceremony held at Central Synagogue , Hallam Street . 
 The family settled in <unk> Ponds , Melbourne , where Smith 's standing in the Jewish community became high . He was appointed manager of British International Pictures in Melbourne , in 1928 , worked for Dunlop Rubber Company , and was finally employed by the Civil Aviation Board at Essendon Airport . Appointed a Justice of the Peace in 1930 , Smith tried politics as a candidate in the 1931 federal election for the United Australia Party contesting the seat of Melbourne in the House of Representatives , and " seriously challenged the hitherto unassailable Dr Maloney " . 
 Smith died of coronary thrombosis in September 1940 . He was buried in the Jewish section of Fawkner Cemetery with full military honours . His Victoria Cross was sold by his family in 1990 and later auctioned as part of a collection of Smith 's medals , selling for approximately £ 30 @,@ 000 ( $ 60 @,@ 000 ) . 
 Following representations from the Association of Jewish Ex @-@ Servicemen and Women , in September 2013 Communities Secretary Eric Pickles announced that the plan to memorialise British @-@ born First World War Victoria Cross medal holders by laying commemorative paving stones in their home towns would be extended to include Smith , who was born in Egypt . 
 = Mike Kafka = 
 Michael John " Mike " Kafka ( born July 25 , 1987 ) is a former American football quarterback and current offensive graduate assistant for the Northwestern Wildcats football team . He was drafted by the Philadelphia Eagles in the fourth round of the 2010 National Football League ( NFL ) draft . He played college football at Northwestern . 
 Kafka attended St. Rita of Cascia High School in Chicago , Illinois , where he played both football and baseball . Kafka led St. Rita Cascia to three conference championships . He ended his high school football career with 1 @,@ 816 total yards and 16 touchdowns . After his senior season , he moved on to Northwestern University . 
 In 2007 , Kafka was the backup to C. J. Bachér and played in only two games . Despite being the backup quarterback again in 2008 , Kafka threw for 330 yards and finished second on the team in rushing yards with 321 . Following Bachér 's graduation after the 2008 season , Kafka became the starter for 2009 . Against Syracuse he set the school record for most consecutive pass completions with 16 . In the same game , he became the first Big Ten Conference player to score a passing , receiving , and rushing touchdown since Zack Mills from Penn State in 2004 . He was named Big Ten Co @-@ Offensive Player of the Week for his performance . Kafka received second @-@ team All @-@ Big Ten honors in 2009 . In the 2010 Outback Bowl against Auburn , Kafka set the all @-@ time bowl record with 47 completions and 78 passing attempts . He set Northwestern and Outback Bowl records with 532 passing yards and an Outback Bowl record with five interceptions . During his career at Northwestern , Kafka threw for 4 @,@ 265 yards with a completion percentage of 64 @.@ 1 % , 19 touchdowns and 20 interceptions . He rushed for 891 yards and 11 touchdowns on 268 carries , and caught a pass for 24 yards and a touchdown . 
 Kafka spent two seasons as a member of the Eagles . In 2010 he was the third @-@ string quarterback behind Michael Vick and Kevin Kolb but did not see playing time . He was mainly the third @-@ string quarterback again in 2011 behind Vick and Vince Young , but saw some playing time in two games early in the season , both of which resulted in losses . He was expected to be the backup quarterback behind Vick in 2012 but a broken hand caused him to miss time in the preseason and was ultimately released in favor of rookie Nick Foles and veteran Trent Edwards . Kafka spent time on offseason rosters with the New England Patriots and Jacksonville Jaguars in 2013 , before he was signed by the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in 2014 . He spent the majority of the 2014 season on the Buccaneers ' practice squad , but was not re @-@ signed following the conclusion of the season . He participated in the first NFL veteran combine in 2015 and was subsequently signed by the Vikings . After playing in the preseason , the team released him . He spent one week with the Tennessee Titans ' practice squad in December 2015 , before signing with the Cincinnati Bengals ' practice squad one week later . He was not re @-@ signed following the season . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Kafka was born on July 25 , 1987 , in Chicago , Illinois , to Michael and Sandra Kafka . He attended St. Rita of Cascia High School in Chicago where he played football ( coached by Todd <unk> ) and baseball . He was the team captain for both teams . In football , he led the Mustangs to three conference championships and had a career record of 35 – 8 . As a senior in 2004 , Kafka completed 75 of 129 passes . In the season @-@ opener against Homewood @-@ <unk> High School , Kafka went up against H @-@ F 's quarterback Freddie Barnes and won the game , 52 – 28 . Against Mt . Carmel High School , he ran for 164 yards and passed for 126 yards . Kafka passed for 1 @,@ 004 yards and 10 touchdowns in 2004 . He ran for 806 yards with a 5 @.@ 6 yards per carry average , and five touchdowns on 144 carries . His career stats at St. Rita were 1 @,@ 816 total offensive yards and 16 touchdowns . 
 Kafka made the school 's Silver Honor Roll all four years of high school and was an Academic All @-@ State . He was an All @-@ area selection by Tom Lemming 's Prep Football Report and was an honorable mention all @-@ state selection . SuperPrep named him All @-@ Midwest Region and Rivals.com placed him on the Top 25 dual @-@ threat quarterbacks list . SuperPrep ranked him 25th among players from Illinois at all positions and 50th nationally among quarterbacks . He was ranked 20th in Illinois by Rivals.com and 25th nationally among dual @-@ threat quarterbacks . Kafka was named Team Offensive MVP and Catholic Metro Blue Offensive MVP . He was an honorable mention all @-@ area honoree by Chicago Sun @-@ Times and Daily Southtown . 
 Kafka committed to Northwestern University on December 10 , 2004 . He also received offers from Florida Atlantic University , the University of Pittsburgh and Stanford University . 
 = = College career = = 
 = = = 2005 season = = = 
 During the 2005 season , his first year , Kafka redshirted in order for him to learn the Northwestern Wildcats ' offensive system . 
 = = = 2006 season = = = 
 In his Northwestern career debut on September 1 versus Miami University , Kafka threw for 106 yards and one touchdown on 13 completions out of 17 attempts . His first touchdown was a 19 @-@ yard pass to running back Tyrell Sutton . He led all players with 89 yards rushing on 17 rushing attempts . His passer rating for that game was 148 @.@ 26 as Northwestern went on to win 21 – 3 . The following week against New Hampshire on September 9 , Kafka went 19 – 32 and threw for 173 yards along with one interception and a fumble . He rushed for 42 yards . The Wildcats ended up losing the game , 34 – 17 . Kafka played the first half of the game against Eastern Michigan in the third week of the season and rushed for 33 yards with a 6 @.@ 6 yards per run average , along with his first career rushing touchdown , a 6 @-@ yard run . He passed for 76 yards and completed 10 out of 18 passes with an interception . 
 Days before Northwestern faced Nevada in the fourth game of the season , head coach Pat Fitzgerald confirmed that Kafka would remain the starter despite his poor prior performances . In the game , Kafka ran for a career @-@ high 111 yards , which included a 13 @-@ yard touchdown rush , and averaged 9 @.@ 2 yards per run . He passed for 122 yards , completing 9 out of 21 passes and three interceptions . His 111 yards rushing were the most by a Northwestern quarterback since Zak <unk> ran for 111 yards in a November 21 , 2001 , game versus Bowling Green . Kafka suffered a hamstring injury during the game , which kept him out of the next three games of the season . One of the games he missed was the biggest comeback in NCAA Division 1 @-@ A history , an eventual 41 – 38 loss to Michigan State on October 21 . Kafka made his first appearance since the injury against Ohio State on November 11 , in which he passed for 17 yards and completed four out of eight passes . 
 = = = 2007 season = = = 
 In 2007 , Kafka was a backup and only played in two games , where he passed for 11 yards on two completions and rushed for eight yards . 
 = = = 2008 season = = = 
 Kafka entered the 2008 season as a backup quarterback behind C. J. Bachér . Against Syracuse , Kafka entered the game in the fourth quarter and rushed twice for 18 yards . Against Southern Illinois , he threw two passes , completing one for one yard , in addition to rushing for three yards . He played in the final series at Indiana and completed a pass , which went for nine yards . 
 Starting in place of the injured Bachér for the game against Minnesota , Kafka ran for 217 yards on 27 attempts , which included a 53 @-@ yard run , and passed for 143 yards and two touchdowns on 12 completions out of 16 throws . His 217 rushing yards set a school and Big Ten Conference record for quarterback rushing yards in a game . The Big Ten record was later beaten in 2010 by Michigan quarterback Denard Robinson on September 11 , 2010 . Kafka began the game by completing his first eight throws , which included a 36 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Jeremy Ebert . He was named the team 's offensive player of the week after that game , along with being named the Big Ten Co @-@ Offensive Player of the Week . Kafka earned an ESPN College Gameday Helmet Sticker and was named an AT & T All @-@ America Player of the Week candidate . 
 The next week , Kafka started in his second straight game against Ohio State , and passed for 177 yards while completing 18 out of 27 throws . He ran for 83 yards and a touchdown on 29 attempts . He ran for 300 yards in his two starts against Ohio State , which is the most by a Northwestern quarterback in successive contests . He was named the team 's offensive big playmaker for the game . 
 Against Michigan , he entered the game in Northwestern 's second series on offense and rushed for 20 yards on three carries before he was forced to leave the game after suffering a concussion . He ran for one yard on three carries against Illinois . 
 Kafka passed for 330 yards during the season along with two touchdowns on 32 completions and 46 total attempts . He finished second on the team in rushing with 321 yards . 
 = = = 2009 season = = = 
 Kafka entered his senior season as Northwestern 's starting quarterback after C. J. Bachér graduated . He was named to the Johnny Unitas Golden Arm Award watch list , along with 19 other players nationally , with two others in the Big Ten Conference . Texas quarterback Colt McCoy eventually won the award . In the offseason , Kafka was tutored by offensive coordinator Mick McCall and former Northwestern quarterback Brett <unk> . Kafka was named co @-@ captain for the 2009 season . 
 At home against Towson on September 5 to start the 2009 season , Kafka threw 15 completions of 20 attempts for 192 yards , setting a career @-@ high for passing yards in a game . He ran for six yards on six carries in a blowout 47 – 14 win . Against Eastern Michigan at home on September 12 , he threw for 158 yards and one interception on 14 completions out of 24 attempts . He ran for 21 yards on five runs in the close 27 – 24 win over the Eagles . 
 During the Syracuse game , Kafka set a school record for consecutive completions in a game with 16 , breaking the 47 @-@ year @-@ old record set by Tom Myers in 1962 . He set a new career @-@ high in passing yards in a game by passing for 390 yards , breaking his previous career @-@ high in the season opener . Kafka also ran for a three @-@ yard touchdown and threw three touchdown passes along with an interception . He caught a receiving touchdown when he tossed a lateral to Andrew Brewer who threw it back to Kafka for a 24 @-@ yard touchdown . Kafka became the first Big Ten Conference player to score at least one passing , receiving and rushing touchdown in a game since Zack Mills from Penn State accomplished it on September 4 , 2004 against Akron . Kafka finished the game with 35 completions on 42 attempts . However , despite his record @-@ breaking performance , the Wildcats lost 37 – 34 . He was named Big Ten Co @-@ Offensive Player of the Week on September 20 for his performance . 
 Kafka passed for 309 yards , two touchdowns and an interception against Minnesota . He took four sacks and during a desperation drive to win the game , fumbled the football , which helped end the game and give the Golden Gophers the win . In the Purdue game , Kafka went 28 @-@ of @-@ 44 and threw for 224 yards . He rushed for a season @-@ high 39 yards on 18 carries and ran for the game @-@ winning two @-@ yard touchdown . After leading after the touchdown 25 – 21 , Kafka threw a successful two @-@ point conversion pass to Drake Dunsmore to increase the lead by six to win the game after Purdue failed to score on the final drive of the game . 
 Kafka went 15 completions of 31 attempts for 191 yards and one interception to lead Northwestern to a 16 – 6 win over Miami ( OH ) in the sixth game of the season . He was the leading rusher for Northwestern , rushing for 53 yards on 15 carries and two touchdowns . In the 24 – 14 loss at Michigan State on October 17 , Kafka went 34 @-@ for @-@ 47 and threw for 291 yards and two touchdowns . He was the leading rusher for the second straight week for Northwestern , rushing for 42 yards on 18 carries . 
 In a come @-@ from @-@ behind win against Indiana , the Wildcats trailed 28 – 3 during the second quarter before Kafka ran for a one @-@ yard touchdown and later passed for two touchdowns to lead Northwestern to a 29 – 28 win . The Wildcats overcame a 25 @-@ point deficit , which was the biggest comeback in school history . He went 26 @-@ of @-@ 46 and passed for 312 yards , along with two touchdowns and a career @-@ tying three interceptions . He rushed for 65 yards on 17 carries and one touchdown . Kafka totaled 377 yards of total offense , which was second @-@ best in his career . Against 12th ranked Penn State , Kafka went 14 @-@ for @-@ 18 and passed for 128 yards , along with rushing for 42 yards on eight carries and a touchdown before leaving the game with a leg injury during the second quarter . He was replaced by backup Dan Persa . 
 Kafka shared time at quarterback with Persa due to his strained hamstring on November 7 against the 4th @-@ ranked , and previously undefeated , Iowa Hawkeyes . Northwestern coming into the game was a 16 @-@ point underdog , but still beat Iowa 17 – 10 in Northwestern 's first win over a nationally ranked top @-@ ten team since they won against Ohio State in 2004 . Persa had to leave the game early to receive X @-@ rays for a hand injury , which forced Kafka to play more than original planned . He finished as Northwestern ’ s leading passer with 72 yards on ten completions . 
 Against Illinois on November 14 , Kafka threw for 305 yards and went 23 @-@ of @-@ 37 , along with a 28 @-@ yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Zeke Markshausen . He rushed seven times for 12 yards and a one @-@ yard touchdown to beat the Fighting Illini 21 – 16 . Kafka threw for 300 or more yards for the fourth time that season . Against 16th @-@ ranked Wisconsin on November 21 , Kafka went 26 @-@ of @-@ 40 for 326 yards and two touchdowns , both to converted wide receiver Andrew Brewer . He rushed for 17 yards on seven carries to upset the Badgers with a 33 – 31 win . Kafka threw for 300 or more yards for the fifth time in the season and for the second straight game . He was named Big Ten Co @-@ Offensive Player of the Week for his performance against Wisconsin . 
 Kafka ranked third in the Big Ten Conference in passing yards with 241 @.@ 5 passing yards per game and he ranked second in total offense . He finished the season tied for first in the Big Ten in rushing touchdowns by a quarterback with seven . His 65 @.@ 7 completion percentage for 2009 ranked first in the Big Ten . His 414 pass attempts ranked third in the Big Ten and eighth among all quarterbacks nationally . 
 Kafka was named second @-@ team All @-@ Big Ten following the 2009 season . He was named first @-@ team All @-@ Big Ten by Rivals.com. He finished fourth in the Chicago Tribune 's Silver Football voting , given out to the Big Ten 's Most Valuable Player , behind Brandon Graham , Daryll Clark and John Clay . Hall of Fame quarterback Bob Griese said Kafka " has the three qualities I look for . One , he 's a good decision @-@ maker , he knows when to throw the ball away . Two , he 's accurate . Three , he makes plays . This is where Kafka really jumps out . If he has a playmaker downfield , he gets the ball to him . " Kafka graduated from Northwestern in December . 
 In the 2010 Outback Bowl against Auburn on January 1 , Kafka set the all @-@ time bowl record with 47 completions and 78 passing attempts . He set Northwestern and Outback Bowl records with 532 passing yards , a career @-@ high . He set an Outback Bowl record with five interceptions . He tied the Outback Bowl record with four touchdown passes . His 98 plays and 566 total yards were also Outback Bowl records . He threw four touchdown passes in the 38 – 35 loss that went to overtime , with two going to Andrew Brewer ( 39 and 35 yards ) , one to Drake Dunsmore for 66 yards , and one to Sidney Stewart for 18 yards . He finished second in rushing for Northwestern with 20 carries for 34 yards and a two @-@ yard touchdown . He was named to ESPN.com 's All @-@ Big Ten Bowl team as an honorable mention . 
 Kafka was named Northwestern 's Most Valuable Player on offense following the season . Kafka led the Big Ten in passing yards with 3 @,@ 430 yards , total offense with 286 @.@ 8 yards per game , completions with 24 @.@ 5 per game , and fewest interceptions with 2 @.@ 44 of all passes being intercepted . He was seventh nationally in completions , 16th in passing yards and 12th in total offensive yards . His 3 @,@ 430 passing yards are third @-@ most in school history . His 3 @,@ 729 total offensive yards are second @-@ most in school history . 
 In the 2010 East – West Shrine Game on January 23 , Kafka started at quarterback for the East squad and , despite a slow start , led the East squad to a comeback victory . On the final drive of the game , Kafka threw a two @-@ yard touchdown pass to Penn State tight end Andrew Quarless to win the game for the East squad , 13 – 10 . After the game , Kafka was named Offensive MVP after he went 18 @-@ of @-@ 27 , passed for 150 yards and threw the winning touchdown pass . 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 His win / loss ratio for his career as the starting quarterback for Northwestern was 11 – 8 . He finished his career as the third all @-@ time leading quarterback rusher at Northwestern with 887 yards rushing , and as the eighth all @-@ time leading passer with 4 @,@ 265 yards passing . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ draft = = = 
 Prior to the 2010 NFL Draft , Kafka was projected to be drafted in the sixth round by NFLDraftScout.com and as high as the fourth round . He was rated as the eleventh @-@ best quarterback in the draft . Northwestern head coach Pat Fitzgerald said at the time that 85 NFL scouts , general managers and personnel directors who watched film or came to see a game or a practice said about Kafka was that he " throws a lot better than our No. 3 [ quarterback ] does right now . " Fitzgerald also said that he would be " shocked " if Kafka was not drafted in the 2010 NFL Draft . After the Outback Bowl loss to Auburn on January 1 , in which Kafka threw 78 passes for 532 yards , Fitzgerald said , " I hope the NFL sees the same thing that I see , a man with a big @-@ time arm . " An NFL general manager said at the 2010 Senior Bowl that Kafka could be drafted as high as the third round . 
 Kafka was invited to the 2010 NFL Scouting Combine in Indianapolis , which started on February 24 , along with teammates Corey Wootton and Sherrick McManis . Kafka chose Mike McCartney of Priority Sports of Chicago as his agent , who also represents Wootton . Priority hired former Chicago Bears quarterback Erik Kramer and a trainer in Phoenix , Arizona to help Kafka prepare for the NFL Scouting Combine . To prepare for the Combine , Kafka worked out twice a day in Arizona , and held practice sessions with Notre Dame wide receiver Golden Tate . At the Combine , Kafka said , " I want to be an NFL starter . I 'm not going to the league to be a No. 2 . I think my whole game can go to another level . I 'm ready to take it up another notch . " 
 Kafka chose not to bench press at the NFL Combine . On February 28 , Kafka answered 35 out of the 50 questions on the <unk> test , and was " 99 percent sure " that he answered all 35 correctly . Draft analyst Mike Mayock said that Kafka was " a developmental guy " who should stay on a team 's practice squad for a year . Kafka had some of the best measurements in the vertical jump , broad jump , 60 @-@ yard shuttle , and three @-@ cone drill among all quarterbacks . 
 At Northwestern 's Pro Day on March 11 , Kafka passed to his former teammates Andrew Brewer and Zeke Markshausen , and , according to Gil Brandt , only missed one pass during the entire workout . 25 NFL teams attended the workout , including the Cincinnati Bengals quarterbacks coach Ken <unk> and the Arizona Cardinals quarterback coach Chris Miller . 
 Northwestern held its second Pro Day workout on March 29 . He passed to his former teammates Brewer , Markshausen , and Brendan Mitchell during the workout . He was reportedly not as accurate on the second Pro Day as he was on the first , but still " very accurate . " 24 NFL team representatives attended the Pro Day . 
 Kafka worked out for the Cincinnati Bengals , Cleveland Browns , New England Patriots and Oakland Raiders prior to the draft . Mike Mayock called Kafka the " sleeper " of the quarterback class , projecting him to be drafted in the sixth round . Mayock also said , " He 's a really smart kid . Has a better arm than people think . I don 't even think he 's sleeping anymore . He was a month @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half ago , but he 's on the rise . He 's a kid who could surprise people at the end of the day . " Former NFL quarterback Ron Jaworski concurred , saying that Kafka " knows how to play the quarterback position . There 's a real feel for hitting the open receiver , good anticipation . I can see him being one of those sleeper type guys . " A scout before the draft said that Kafka " throws a lot of picks , but at least he 's willing to pull the trigger . You don 't see that from a lot of young kids . " 
 = = = Philadelphia Eagles = = = 
 = = = = 2010 = = = = 
 Kafka was selected by the Philadelphia Eagles in the fourth round ( 122nd overall ) in the 2010 NFL Draft . He was the fifth quarterback taken in the draft , behind Sam Bradford ( 1st overall ) , Tim Tebow ( 25th overall ) , Jimmy Clausen ( 48th overall ) and Colt McCoy ( 85th overall ) . Kafka was expected to be the team 's third @-@ string quarterback behind Kevin Kolb and Michael Vick . Eagles head coach Andy Reid said of Kafka , " I think once you meet him , I think you 'll see he 's a smart guy . He has some of the intangible things – the leadership , he 's a tough kid . Inner city , Chicago kid . He 's got a little grit to him . I think that 's important . You have to be wired right to handle you guys and play in the city of Philadelphia . I think he 's wired right . He likes to compete . " Kafka was signed to a four @-@ year contract worth $ 2 @.@ 256 million with $ 467 @,@ 000 guaranteed on June 15 , 2010 . 
 In the final practice of rookie and selected veterans training camp on July 29 , Kafka took all the snaps at quarterback after Kolb and Vick got practice off . After practice , offensive coordinator Marty <unk> said Kafka was " the best rookie that I 've ever had in 15 , 16 , 17 years or something like that . So , he 's really sharp . Now , he 's sharp book @-@ wise , but he 's also very intelligent in a football sense . He 's really picked [ the playbook ] up very quickly . " 
 In the first preseason game on August 14 against the Jacksonville Jaguars , Kafka went 3 @-@ for @-@ 7 for 76 yards and threw a 57 @-@ yard pass to wide receiver Chad Hall after taking over for Vick late in the third quarter . Kafka began the second preseason game on August 20 against the Cincinnati Bengals in the fourth quarter . He went 4 @-@ for @-@ 12 for 29 yards and two interceptions ( both to cornerback Morgan Trent ) with a passer rating of 2 @.@ 4 . He also had one carry for 24 yards . On August 27 against the Kansas City Chiefs , Kafka came into the game in the fourth quarter and went 9 @-@ for @-@ 13 for 93 yards and one touchdown . He led the Eagles on the winning drive with an 18 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Riley Cooper with 23 seconds left in the game to win , 20 – 17 . In the final preseason game on September 2 , Kafka replaced Vick during the second quarter and played for almost three quarters . He went 9 @-@ for @-@ 27 for 76 yards and an interception against the New York Jets . 
 During the 2010 regular season and playoffs , Kafka was inactive as the team 's third quarterback for all but five games . In week two Kafka was the backup to Vick against the Detroit Lions after Kolb suffered a concussion in week one against the Green Bay Packers . In week five against the San Francisco 49ers , week six against the Atlanta Falcons and week seven against the Tennessee Titans , Kafka was the backup to Kolb after Vick , who took over as the starting quarterback for the remainder of the season , suffered a rib injury in week four against the Washington Redskins . In the week seventeen game against the Dallas Cowboys , Kafka was the backup quarterback to Kolb in a decision to rest Vick and the team 's starters before the playoffs . 
 Kafka said of his rookie year that he " learned a lot about football . I learned a lot about being a professional , especially being around [ Vick ] and [ Kolb ] . Those guys have been great mentors , and obviously the coaching staff that I have has been really great as far as developing me to learn the west coast system . " 
 = = = = 2011 = = = = 
 Following the 2010 season , Kafka said that his goal for the 2011 offseason was to " continue to learn the offense . I haven 't mastered it by any means , the more study and preparation I can get the better . Physically , I can work on my feet , my arm strength , and my timing and rhythm . There 's a bunch of things I can work on , and I 'm really excited to get to it . " Eagles general manager Howie Roseman said Kafka is the hardest working player in the NFL , but needs to get bigger and stronger . The Eagles reportedly received trade offers from other teams for Kafka prior to the 2011 NFL Draft but declined due to his potential . Kafka , in response , laughed and did not believe the rumors . 
 Because of the NFL lockout , Kafka and his teammates organized informal workouts in Marlton , New Jersey . After one of the workout sessions , Vick said Kafka was " ready for " the backup role and would embrace it should Kolb leave after the lifting of the lockout . Kolb was traded to the Arizona Cardinals on July 28 following the lifting of the NFL lockout , and Kafka was temporarily elevated to the backup behind Vick before the Eagles signed former Tennessee Titan Vince Young on July 29 . Kafka took second @-@ team reps at the start of training camp , but on the first official depth chart that was released on August 9 , Kafka was listed as the third @-@ stringer behind Young . 
 Against the Baltimore Ravens in the preseason opener on August 11 , Kafka replaced Young at quarterback during the second quarter and played into the fourth quarter . He went 13 @-@ of @-@ 19 for 132 yards with one interception thrown to Ravens safety Bernard Pollard in the game . In the second week of the preseason on August 18 against the Pittsburgh Steelers , Kafka entered the game in the fourth quarter and led the Eagles to two scoring drives in a 24 – 14 loss . With less than four minutes remaining in the game , he threw a 14 @-@ yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Gerald Jones , and with only 19 seconds left on the following drive , threw a second touchdown pass to Jones for seven yards . He finished the game going 14 @-@ for @-@ 19 for 160 yards along with the two scores . Kafka played in garbage time in the next preseason game against the Cleveland Browns , handing the ball off twice and kneeling down twice . Against the New York Jets in the preseason finale , he filled in for the injured Young , who started the game , to start the third quarter . Kafka had the wind knocked out of him on a sack , but was able to play the rest of the game despite a rib contusion . He finished the game 7 @-@ for @-@ 11 for 76 yards and one interception . He went 34 @-@ for @-@ 49 for 369 yards , two touchdowns , and two interceptions in the preseason overall . 
 Young suffered a hamstring injury in the final preseason game , and was subsequently inactive for the team 's first two games . Kafka was active as the backup to Vick in both games , but was forced to play in the second game when Vick suffered a concussion in the second half . Kafka went 7 @-@ of @-@ 9 passing for 72 yards in relief during the 35 – 31 loss to the Atlanta Falcons . Vick broke his hand during a week 3 game against the New York Giants on September 25 , so Kafka again replaced him . Kafka threw for 35 yards and two interceptions as he went 4 @-@ for @-@ 7 passing . Both Kafka and Young were active as Vick 's backups in week 4 , with neither seeing playing time . Kafka was declared inactive for week 5 , but returned as active for weeks 6 and 8 . He was inactive again for weeks 9 and 10 , before he was activated for the rest of the season 's games . Young started at quarterback in weeks 11 , 12 , and 13 in place of an injured Vick , elevating Kafka to backup . Kafka saw playing action in two of the final games of the season with no pass attempts . 
 = = = = 2012 = = = = 
 With Young not returning to the Eagles with his contract expiring after the 2011 season , Kafka was expected to be the backup quarterback behind Vick for the 2012 season . Trent Edwards was signed to a one @-@ year contract on February 23 , 2012 , and the team drafted Nick Foles in the third round of the 2012 NFL draft to compete with Kafka for spots on the roster . Kafka was considered the favorite to win the backup job during training camp . According to Adam Caplan from <unk> , Kafka showed during OTAs that " his arm strength has noticeably improved " since his previous two seasons . In the first preseason game on August 9 against the Pittsburgh Steelers , Kafka suffered a fracture in his non @-@ throwing hand after passing for 31 yards and an interception . Foles was named the backup quarterback over Kafka and Edwards on August 29 , and Kafka was released in favor of Edwards during final roster cuts on August 31 , having sat out the remaining three preseason games for the Eagles . 
 = = = New England Patriots = = = 
 The Kansas City Chiefs and Green Bay Packers reportedly had interest in signing Kafka immediately after his release from the Eagles . The New England Patriots worked Kafka out on September 4 , and the Pittsburgh Steelers worked him out on November 20 . The Patriots signed him to a reserve / future contract on January 4 , 2013 , after he sat out the entire 2012 regular season . Kafka was expected to compete with Ryan Mallett for the backup job behind Tom Brady , but he was released on June 10 in favor of newly signed Tim Tebow . 
 = = = Jacksonville Jaguars = = = 
 The Jacksonville Jaguars claimed Kafka off waivers on June 11 , 2013 , one day after his release by the Patriots . The Dallas Cowboys had also put in a claim for him . The general manager for the Jaguars , Dave Caldwell , said on June 13 that Kafka had as good of a chance at being named the starting quarterback as Blaine Gabbert , Chad Henne , or Matt Scott had . Kafka was the third quarterback to play in the first preseason game for the Jaguars on August 9 against the Miami Dolphins after Henne and Gabbert . He went 4 @-@ of @-@ 8 for 19 yards and an interception in the game . In the second week of the preseason , he went 1 @-@ for @-@ 3 for − 4 yards . He did not play in the team 's third preseason game , but passed for 46 yards and a touchdown in the fourth game . The Jaguars signed Ricky Stanzi on August 27 for additional competition for the team 's third quarterback job . Kafka and Scott were both released in favor of Stanzi during final roster cuts on August 30 , 2013 . 
 = = = Tampa Bay Buccaneers = = = 
 After his release from the Jaguars , the Chicago Bears worked out Kafka on October 25 , 2013 , the Tampa Bay Buccaneers worked him out on November 5 , the Atlanta Falcons worked him out on November 19 , and the Dallas Cowboys worked him out on February 6 , 2014 . He signed with the Buccaneers on February 10 . During training camp , Kafka competed against Alex Tanney for the third @-@ string quarterback spot behind Josh McCown and Mike Glennon . Kafka went 2 @-@ of @-@ 7 for 14 yards in the first preseason game , 4 @-@ of @-@ 11 for 55 yards and a touchdown in the second preseason game , and 7 @-@ of @-@ 14 for 86 yards and a touchdown in the fourth preseason game . He was released during final roster cuts with Tanney on August 30 , 2014 , but was subsequently re @-@ signed to the team 's practice squad on August 31 . After spending the first three weeks of the season on the practice squad , Kafka was promoted to the active roster on September 25 due to an injury suffered by starter McCown . He was active but did not play in the first three weeks he was on the active roster . He was declared inactive in week 8 with McCown healthy again , and he was waived on October 28 . He was re @-@ signed to the practice squad on October 30 . At the conclusion of the 2014 NFL season , Kafka 's practice squad contract expired and he was not re @-@ signed by the team . 
 = = = Minnesota Vikings = = = 
 Kafka was invited to work out at the first NFL veteran combine on March 22 , 2015 . The veteran combine was created as a way for unemployed players to potentially work their way back into the league by going through drills in front of NFL scouts and coaches . Daniel Jeremiah of NFL Network said that he has " never seen [ Kafka ] throw it as well as he did on the field " and that he expected Kafka to sign with a team following his workout . The Minnesota Vikings signed Kafka to a one @-@ year contract worth $ 660 @,@ 000 on April 1 , 2015 . He was expected to compete with rookie undrafted signee Taylor Heinicke for the third quarterback job behind starter Teddy Bridgewater and backup Shaun Hill . 
 In the 2015 Pro Football Hall of Fame Game , in which the Vikings played the Pittsburgh Steelers , Kafka replaced Bridgewater as a member of the team 's backup offense in the middle of the second quarter . Kafka threw a 34 @-@ yard touchdown pass to rookie tight end <unk> Pruitt , before he was substituted for Heinicke in the third quarter . Kafka did not play in the team 's second preseason game , against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers , and he was the fourth quarterback to play in the third game against the Oakland Raiders . He played one drive in the fourth preseason game , throwing an incomplete pass against the Dallas Cowboys , before suffering a hamstring strain . The Vikings waived / injured him on September 1 , and he was placed on season @-@ ending injured reserve on September 2 after he cleared waivers . He was waived off of the injured reserve list on September 15 . 
 = = = Tennessee Titans = = = 
 The Tennessee Titans gave Kafka a workout after week 14 , and he signed with their practice squad on December 16 , as the third quarterback on the roster behind Marcus Mariota and Zach Mettenberger . After Mariota suffered a knee injury in a week 15 game against the Patriots , the team re @-@ signed Alex Tanney to the active roster to serve as the backup quarterback to Mettenberger in week 16 . The Titans released Kafka from the practice squad and signed Bryn Renner in his place on December 22 , 2015 . 
 = = = Cincinnati Bengals = = = 
 The Cincinnati Bengals ' starting quarterback , Andy Dalton , suffered a thumb injury in week 14 , and the team 's backup , A. J. McCarron injured his wrist in week 16 , leaving the team with one fully healthy quarterback on the roster , third @-@ stringer Keith Wenning . The team signed Kafka to their practice squad on December 29 , 2015 , one week after his release from the Titans . After the Bengals were defeated in the first round of the 2015 – 16 NFL playoffs , his practice squad contract with the team expired and he was not re @-@ signed . His acceptance of a college coaching position after the season effectively ended his playing career . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 The Northwestern Wildcats football team hired Kafka as an offensive graduate assistant , with a focus on wide receivers , on March 29 , 2016 . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Kafka majored in communication studies at Northwestern University . Mike 's brother , Jason , is a pitcher for the independent Windy City <unk> and attended St. Rita of Cascia High School . Both <unk> were recruited by Ken <unk> , who is now an assistant at San Jose State . Mike Kafka is married to his wife , Allison . 
 Kafka worked as an instructor at former Northwestern teammate Brett <unk> 's prep quarterback development camps in Woodbury , Minnesota and Minnetonka , Minnesota , in mid @-@ 2011 . Kafka worked at a Pop Warner Football passing camp , <unk> , with former Northwestern teammate Chris <unk> in July 2011 . On November 13 , 2014 , Kafka started a Kickstarter campaign for his product , the Roo Inferno , a type of hand warmer for both athletes and outdoor enthusiasts . The campaign successfully gained $ 15 @,@ 974 from 124 backers on December 18 , 2014 . With help from the NFL and the University of Miami , Kafka began an executive Master of Business Administration program catered towards NFL players in 2015 . 
 <unk> trained at EVO <unk> in Phoenix , AZ throughout his career . 
 = Hurricane Beth = 
 Hurricane Beth was a short @-@ lived tropical cyclone which traveled from Florida to Nova Scotia in the middle of August 1971 . The second named storm of the 1971 Atlantic hurricane season , Beth 's genesis was impeded by a cold environment surrounding the storm . However , as it continued on its northeastward course , it achieved fully tropical characteristics and peaked as a modest Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . The cyclone struck Nova Scotia on August 16 before dissipating shortly after . Beth produced substantial precipitation , and the resultant flooding inflicted severe damage to infrastructure and crops . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On August 9 , a low pressure system in the upper levels of the atmosphere formed off the east coast of Florida . It became a surface low by the next day and acquired the characteristics of a tropical cyclone ; it is officially stated to have become a tropical depression at 1200 UTC on August 10 . The depression slowly advanced northeastward within a relatively cold environment , and as such , it did not intensify for several days . The system turned more toward the east as it approached the coast of North Carolina , at which time its structure became conducive to further development . On August 14 , the depression was declared a tropical storm and assigned the name Beth following recent data from a reconnaissance aircraft . 
 Several hundred miles off the U.S. East Coast , Beth accelerated somewhat – reaching forward speeds of up to 19 mph ( 31 km / h ) as it resumed a northeastward course . Its minimum central pressure deepened to 990 millibars ( 29 inHg ) , and correspondingly , maximum sustained winds increased . In response , the cyclone was recognized as a Category 1 hurricane . It continued to mature as it passed east of Cape Cod , achieving peak winds of 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) and a pressure of 977 mb ( 28 @.@ 9 inHg ) . Subsequently , the hurricane weakened slightly while nearing Nova Scotia . On August 16 , it made landfall near Copper Lake before crossing Cape Breton Island . Shortly thereafter , Beth was swept up by a nearby cold front and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 In advance of Hurricane Beth , hurricane warnings were issued for coastal and marine areas of Nova Scotia and Newfoundland . In Halifax , bus service was disrupted by the storm , and in Antigonish , business owners closed their stores and filled sandbags to prepare . 
 The hurricane left extensive damage in its wake , especially to crops and infrastructure . Halifax International Airport reported 10 @.@ 49 in ( 266 mm ) of rainfall over 30 hours . The heavy precipitation throughout the country triggered severe flooding , stranding hundreds of travelers . The mayor of Dartmouth reported that the area was a " disaster " , as 500 homes were reportedly inundated . Antigonish also experienced significant flooding ; waters there approached the top of parking meters . <unk> crops in the region included cereal grain , corn , and tobacco , whose inundated fields resembled vast lakes . 
 Transport suffered severely : several main roads , including part of the Trans @-@ Canada Highway and Nova Scotia Highway 102 , in northeastern Nova Scotia received flood damage and were temporarily blocked off . Additionally , the rising waters washed out several bridges in the region and swept away automobiles . Railways were covered by water , forcing trains to suspend their operation . Drinking water in Dartmouth was contaminated due to excessive runoff into Lake Antigonish , and a trailer park in Antigonish flooded , prompting 600 residents to evacuate . Overall monetary damage from Beth is estimated at between $ 3 @.@ 5 million and $ 5 @.@ 1 million USD . One person was indirectly killed by the hurricane in a traffic accident induced by heavy rain . 
 = Margaret Murray = 
 Margaret Alice Murray ( 13 July 1863 – 13 November 1963 ) was an Anglo @-@ Indian Egyptologist , archaeologist , anthropologist , historian , and folklorist . The first woman to be appointed as a lecturer in archaeology in the United Kingdom , she worked at University College London ( UCL ) from 1898 to 1935 . She served as President of the Folklore Society from 1953 to 1955 , and published widely over the course of her career . 
 Born to a wealthy middle @-@ class English family in Calcutta , British India , Murray divided her youth between India , Britain , and Germany , training as both a nurse and a social worker . Moving to London , in 1894 she began studying Egyptology at UCL , developing a friendship with department head Flinders Petrie , who encouraged her early academic publications and appointed her Junior Professor in 1898 . In 1902 – 03 she took part in Petrie 's excavations at Abydos , Egypt , there discovering the Osireion temple and the following season investigated the Saqqara cemetery , both of which established her reputation in Egyptology . Supplementing her UCL wage by giving public classes and lectures at the British Museum and Manchester Museum , it was at the latter in 1908 that she led the unwrapping of Khnum @-@ nakht , one of the mummies recovered from the Tomb of the Two Brothers – the first time that a woman had publicly unwrapped a mummy . Recognising that British Egyptomania reflected the existence of a widespread public interest in Ancient Egypt , Murray wrote several books on Egyptology targeted at a general audience . 
 Murray also became closely involved in the first @-@ wave feminist movement , joining the Women 's Social and Political Union and devoting much time to improving women 's status at UCL . Unable to return to Egypt due to the First World War , she focused her research on the witch @-@ cult hypothesis , the theory that the witch trials of Early Modern Christendom were an attempt to extinguish a surviving pre @-@ Christian , pagan religion devoted to a Horned God . Although later academically discredited , the theory gained widespread attention and proved a significant influence on the emerging new religious movement of Wicca . From 1921 to 1931 Murray undertook excavations of prehistoric sites on Malta and Minorca and developed her interest in folkloristics . Awarded an honorary doctorate in 1927 , she was appointed assistant professor in 1928 and retired from UCL in 1935 . That year she visited Palestine to aid Petrie 's excavation of Tall al @-@ Ajjul and in 1937 she led a small excavation at Petra in Jordan . Taking on the presidency of the Folklore Society in later life , she lectured at such institutions as the University of Cambridge and City Literary Institute , and continued to publish in an independent capacity until her death . 
 Murray 's work in Egyptology and archaeology was widely acclaimed and earned her the moniker of " The Grand Old Woman of Egyptology " , although after her death many of her contributions to the field were overshadowed by those of Petrie . Conversely , Murray 's work in folkloristics and the history of witchcraft has been academically discredited and her methods in these areas heavily criticised . The influence of her witch @-@ cult theory in both religion and literature has been examined by various scholars , and she herself has been dubbed the " Grandmother of Wicca " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Youth : 1863 – 93 = = = 
 Margaret Murray was born on 13 July 1863 in Calcutta , Bengal Presidency , then a major military city in British India . A member of the wealthy British imperial elite , she lived in the city with her family : parents James and Margaret Murray , an older sister named Mary , and her paternal grandmother and great @-@ grandmother . James Murray , born in India of English descent , was a businessman and manager of the Serampore paper mills who was thrice elected President of the Calcutta Chamber of Commerce . His wife , Margaret ( née Carr ) , had moved to India from Britain in 1857 to work as a missionary , preaching Christianity and educating Indian women . She continued with this work after marrying James and giving birth to her two daughters . Although most of their lives were spent in the European area of Calcutta , which was walled off from the indigenous sectors of the city , Murray encountered members of indigenous society through her family 's employment of 10 Indian servants and through childhood holidays to Mussoorie . The historian Amara Thornton has suggested that Murray 's Indian childhood continued to exert an influence over her throughout her life , expressing the view that Murray could be seen as having a hybrid transnational identity that was both British and Indian . During her childhood , Murray never received a formal education , and in later life expressed pride in the fact that she had never had to sit an exam before entering university . 
 In 1870 , Margaret and her sister Mary were sent to Britain , there moving in with their uncle John , a vicar , and his wife Harriet at their home in Lambourn , Berkshire . Although John provided them with a strongly Christian education and a belief in the inferiority of women , both of which she would reject , he awakened Murray 's interest in archaeology through taking her to see local monuments . In 1873 , the girls ' mother arrived in Europe and took them with her to Bonn in Germany , where they both became fluent in German . In 1875 they returned to Calcutta , staying there till 1877 . They then moved with their parents back to England , where they settled in Sydenham , South London . There , they spent much time visiting The Crystal Palace , while their father worked at his firm 's London office . In 1880 , they returned to Calcutta , where Margaret remained for the next seven years . She became a nurse at the Calcutta General Hospital , which was run by the Sisters of the Anglican Sisterhood of Clower , and there was involved with the hospital 's attempts to deal with a cholera outbreak . In 1887 , she returned to England , moving to Rugby , Warwickshire , where her uncle John had moved , now widowed . Here she took up employment as a social worker dealing with local underprivileged people . When her father retired and moved to England , she moved into his house in Bushey Heath , Hertfordshire , living with him until his death in 1891 . In 1893 she then travelled to Madras , Tamil Nadu , where her sister had moved to with her new husband . 
 = = = Early years at University College London : 1894 – 1905 = = = 
 Encouraged by her mother and sister , Murray decided to enroll at the newly opened department of Egyptology at University College London ( UCL ) in Bloomsbury , Central London . Having been founded by an endowment from Amelia Blanford Edwards , one of the co @-@ founders of the Egypt Exploration Fund ( EEF ) , the department was run by the pioneering early archaeologist Sir William Flinders Petrie , and based in the Edwards Library of UCL 's South Cloisters . Murray began her studies at UCL at age 30 in January 1894 , as part of a class composed largely of other women and older men . There , she took courses in the Ancient Egyptian and Coptic languages which were taught by Francis Llewellyn Griffith and Walter Ewing Crum respectively . 
 Murray soon got to know Petrie , becoming his copyist and illustrator and producing the drawings for the published report on his excavations at <unk> , <unk> . In turn , he aided and encouraged her to write her first research paper , " The Descent of Property in the Early Periods of Egyptian History " , which was published in the Proceedings of the Society for Biblical Archaeology in 1895 . Becoming Petrie 's de facto though unofficial assistant , Murray began to give some of the linguistic lessons in Griffith 's absence . In 1898 she was appointed to the position of Junior Lecturer , responsible for teaching the linguistic courses at the Egyptology department ; this made her the first female lecturer in archaeology in the United Kingdom . In this capacity , she spent two days a week at UCL , devoting the other days to caring for her ailing mother . As time went on , she came to teach courses on Ancient Egyptian history , religion , and language . Among Murray 's students — to whom she referred as " the Gang " — were several who went on to produce noted contributions to Egyptology , including Reginald <unk> , Georgina Aitken , Guy Brunton , and Myrtle Broome . She supplemented her UCL salary by teaching evening classes in Egyptology at the British Museum . 
 At this point , Murray had no experience in field archaeology , and so during the 1902 – 03 field season , she travelled to Egypt to join Petrie 's excavations at Abydos . Petrie and his wife , Hilda Petrie , had been excavating at the site since 1899 , having taken over the archaeological investigation from French Coptic scholar Émile Amélineau . Murray at first joined as site nurse , but was subsequently taught how to excavate by Petrie and given a senior position . This led to some issues with some of the male excavators , who disliked the idea of taking orders from a woman . This experience , coupled with discussions with other female excavators ( some of whom were active in the feminist movement ) led Murray to adopt openly feminist viewpoints . While excavating at Abydos , Murray uncovered the Osireion , a temple devoted to the god Osiris which had been constructed by order of Pharaoh Seti I during the period of the New Kingdom . She published her site report as The Osireion at Abydos in 1904 ; in the report , she examined the inscriptions that had been discovered at the site to discern the purpose and use of the building . 
 During the 1903 – 04 field season , Murray returned to Egypt , and at Petrie 's instruction began her investigations at the Saqqara cemetery near to Cairo , which dated from the period of the Old Kingdom . Murray did not have legal permission to excavate the site , and instead spent her time transcribing the inscriptions from ten of the tombs that had been excavated during the 1860s by Auguste Mariette . She published her findings in 1905 as Saqqara Mastabas I , although would not publish translations of the inscriptions until 1937 as Saqqara Mastabas II . Both The Osireion at Abydos and Saqqara Mastabas I proved to be very influential in the Egyptological community , with Petrie recognising Murray 's contribution to his own career . 
 = = = Feminism , the First World War , and folklore : 1905 – 20 = = = 
 On returning to London , Murray took an active role in the feminist movement , volunteering and financially donating to the cause and taking part in feminist demonstrations , protests , and marches . Joining the Women 's Social and Political Union , she was present at large marches like the Mud March of 1907 and the Women 's Coronation Procession of June 1911 . She concealed the militancy of her actions in order to retain the image of respectability within academia . Murray also pushed the professional boundaries for women throughout her own career , and mentored other women in archaeology and throughout academia . As women could not use the men 's common room , she successfully campaigned for UCL to open a common room for women , and later ensured that a larger , better @-@ equipped room was converted for the purpose ; it was later renamed the Margaret Murray Room . At UCL , she became a friend of fellow female lecturer Winifred Smith , and together they campaigned to improve the status and recognition of women in the university , with Murray becoming particularly annoyed at female staff who were afraid of upsetting or offending the male university establishment with their demands . Feeling that students should get nutritious yet affordable lunches , for many years she sat on the UCL Refectory Committee . 
 Various museums around the United Kingdom invited Murray to advise them on their Egyptological collections , resulting in her cataloguing the Egyptian artefacts owned by the Dublin National Museum , the National Museum of Antiquities in Edinburgh , and the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland , being elected a Fellow of the latter in thanks . Petrie had established connections with the Egyptological wing of Manchester Museum in Manchester , and it was there that many of his finds had been housed . Murray thus often travelled to the museum to catalogue these artefacts , and during the 1906 – 07 school year regularly lectured there . In 1907 , Petrie excavated the Tomb of the Two Brothers , a Middle Kingdom burial of two Egyptian priests , <unk> @-@ ankh and Khnum @-@ nakht , and it was decided that Murray would carry out the public unwrapping of the latter 's mummified body . Taking place at the museum in May 1908 , it represented the first time that a woman had led a public mummy unwrapping and was attended by over 500 onlookers , attracting press attention . Murray was particularly keen to emphasise the importance that the unwrapping would have for the scholarly understanding of the Middle Kingdom and its burial practices , and lashed out against members of the public who saw it as immoral ; she declared that " every vestige of ancient remains must be carefully studied and recorded without sentimentality and without fear of the outcry of the ignorant " . She subsequently published a book about her analysis of the two bodies , The Tomb of the Two Brothers , which remained a key publication on Middle Kingdom mummification practices into the 21st century . 
 Murray was dedicated to public education , hoping to infuse Egyptomania with solid scholarship about Ancient Egypt , and to this end authored a series of books aimed at a general audience . In 1905 she published Elementary Egyptian Grammar which was followed in 1911 by Elementary Coptic ( Sahidic ) Grammar . In 1913 , she published Ancient Egyptian Legends for John Murray 's " The Wisdom of the East " series . She was particularly pleased with the increased public interest in Egyptology that followed Howard Carter 's discovery of the tomb of Pharaoh Tutankhamun in 1922 . From at least 1911 until his death in 1940 , Murray was a close friend of the anthropologist Charles Gabriel Seligman of the London School of Economics , and together they co @-@ authored a variety of papers on Egyptology that were aimed at an anthropological audience . Many of these dealt with subjects that Egyptological journals would not publish , such as the " Sa " sign for the uterus , and thus were published in Man , the journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute . It was at Seligman 's recommendation that she was invited to become a member of the Institute in 1916 . 
 In 1914 , Petrie launched the academic journal Ancient Egypt , published through his own British School of Archaeology in Egypt ( <unk> ) , which was based at UCL . Given that he was often away from London excavating in Egypt , Murray was left to operate as de facto editor much of the time . She also published many research articles in the journal and authored many of its book reviews , particularly of the German @-@ language publications which Petrie could not read . 
 The outbreak of the First World War in 1914 , in which the United Kingdom went to war against Germany and the Ottoman Empire , meant that Petrie and other staff members were unable to return to Egypt for excavation . Instead , Petrie and Murray spent much of the time reorganising the artefact collections that they had attained over the past decades . To aid Britain 's war effort , Murray enrolled as a volunteer nurse in the Volunteer Air Detachment of the College Women 's Union Society , and for several weeks was posted to Saint @-@ Malo in France . After being taken ill herself , she was sent to recuperate in Glastonbury , Somerset , where she became interested in Glastonbury Abbey and the folklore surrounding it which connected it to the legendary figure of King Arthur and to the idea that the Holy Grail had been brought there by Joseph of <unk> . Pursuing this interest , she published the paper " Egyptian Elements in the Grail Romance " in the journal Ancient Egypt , although few agreed with her conclusions and it was criticised for making unsubstantiated leaps with the evidence by the likes of Jessie Weston . 
 = = Later life = = 
 = = = The witch @-@ cult , Malta , and Minorca : 1921 – 35 = = = 
 Murray 's interest in folklore led her to develop an interest in the witch trials of Early Modern Europe . In 1917 , she published a paper in Folklore , the journal of the Folklore Society , in which she first articulated her version of the witch @-@ cult theory , arguing that the witches persecuted in European history were actually followers of " a definite religion with beliefs , ritual , and organization as highly developed as that of any cult in the end " . She followed this up with papers on the subject in the journals Man and the Scottish Historical Review . She articulated these views more fully in her 1921 book The Witch @-@ Cult in Western Europe , published by Oxford University Press after receiving a positive peer review by Henry Balfour , and which received both criticism and support on publication . Many reviews in academic journals were critical , with historians claiming that she had distorted and misinterpreted the contemporary records that she was using , but the book was nevertheless influential . 
 As a result of her work in this area , she was invited to provide the entry on " witchcraft " for the fourteenth edition of the Encyclopædia Britannica in 1929 . She used the opportunity to propagate her own witch @-@ cult theory , failing to mention the alternate theories proposed by other academics . Her entry would be included in the encyclopedia until 1969 , becoming readily accessible to the public , and it was for this reason that her ideas on the subject had such a significant impact . It received a particularly enthusiastic reception by occultists such as Dion Fortune , Lewis Spence , Ralph Shirley , and J. W. Brodie Innes , perhaps because its claims regarding an ancient secret society chimed with similar claims common among various occult groups . Murray joined the Folklore Society in February 1927 , and was elected to the society 's council a month later , although stood down in 1929 . Murray reiterated her witch @-@ cult theory in her 1933 book , The God of the Witches , which was aimed at a wider , non @-@ academic audience . In this book , she cut out or toned down what she saw as the more unpleasant aspects of the witch @-@ cult , such as animal and child sacrifice , and began describing the religion in more positive terms as " the Old Religion " . 
 From 1921 to 1927 , Murray led archaeological excavations on Malta , assisted by Edith Guest and Gertrude Caton Thompson . She excavated the Bronze Age megalithic monuments of Santa Sofia , Santa Maria tal @-@ <unk> , <unk> Dalam , and Borġ in @-@ Nadur , all of which were threatened by the construction of a new aerodrome . In this she was funded by the Percy Sladen Memorial Fund . Her resulting three @-@ volume excavation report came to be seen as an important publication within the field of Maltese archaeology . During the excavations , she had taken an interest in the island 's folklore , resulting in the 1932 publication of her book Maltese Folktales , much of which was a translation of earlier stories collected by Father <unk> and her friend Liza Galea . In 1932 Murray returned to Malta to aid in the cataloguing of the Bronze Age pottery collection held in Malta Museum , resulting in another publication , Corpus of the Bronze Age Pottery of Malta . 
 On the basis of her work in Malta , Louis C. G. Clarke , the curator of the Cambridge Museum of Ethnology and Anthropology , invited her to lead excavations on the island of Minorca from 1930 to 1931 . With the aid of Guest , she excavated the megalithic sites of <unk> and Sa <unk> , resulting in the publication of Cambridge Excavations in Minorca . Murray also continued to publish works on Egyptology for a general audience , such as Egyptian Sculpture ( 1930 ) and Egyptian Temples ( 1931 ) , which received largely positive reviews . In the summer of 1925 she led a team of volunteers to excavate Homestead Moat in <unk> Wood near to Stevenage , Hertfordshire ; she did not publish an excavation report and did not mention the event in her autobiography , with her motives for carrying out the excavation remaining unclear . 
 In 1924 , UCL promoted Murray – then aged sixty @-@ two – to the position of assistant professor , and in 1927 she was awarded an honorary doctorate for her career in Egyptology . That year , Murray was tasked with guiding Mary of Teck , the Queen consort , around the Egyptology department during the latter 's visit to UCL . The pressures of teaching had eased by this point , allowing Murray to spend more time travelling internationally ; in 1920 she returned to Egypt and in 1929 visited South Africa , where she attended the meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science , whose theme was the prehistory of southern Africa . In the early 1930s she travelled to the Soviet Union , where she visited museums in Leningrad , Moscow , Kharkov , and Kiev , and then in late 1935 she undertook a lecture tour of Norway , Sweden , Finland , and Estonia . Although having reached legal retirement age in 1927 , and thus unable to be offered another five @-@ year contract , Murray was reappointed on an annual basis each year until 1935 . At this point , she retired , expressing the opinion that she was glad to leave UCL , for reasons that she did not make clear . In 1933 , Petrie had retired from UCL and moved to Jerusalem in Mandatory Palestine with his wife ; Murray therefore took over as editor of the Ancient Egypt journal , renaming it Ancient Egypt and the East to reflect its increasing research interest in the ancient societies that surrounded and interacted with Egypt . The journal folded in 1935 , perhaps due to Murray 's retirement . Murray then spent some time in Jerusalem , where she aided the Petries in their excavation at Tall al @-@ Ajjul , a Bronze Age mound south of Gaza . 
 = = = Petra , Cambridge , and London : 1935 – 53 = = = 
 During Murray 's 1935 trip to Palestine , she had taken the opportunity to visit Petra in neighbouring Jordan . Intrigued by the site , in March and April 1937 she returned in order to carry out a small excavation in several cave dwellings at the site , subsequently writing both an excavation report and a guidebook on Petra . Back in England , from 1934 to 1940 , Murray aided the cataloguing of Egyptian antiquities at Girton College , Cambridge , and also gave lectures in Egyptology at the university until 1942 . During the Second World War , Murray evaded the Blitz of London by moving to Cambridge , where she volunteered for a group ( probably the Army Bureau of Current Affairs or The British Way and Purpose ) who educated military personnel to prepare them for post @-@ war life . Based in the city , she embarked on research into the town 's Early Modern history , examining documents stored in local parish churches , Downing College , and Ely Cathedral ; she never published her findings . 
 After the war ended she returned to London , settling into a bedsit room in <unk> Street , which was close to University College London ( UCL ) and the Institute of Archaeology ( then an independent institution , now part of UCL ) ; she continued her involvement with the former and made use of the latter 's library . On most days she visited the British Museum in order to consult their library , and twice a week she taught adult education classes on Ancient Egyptian history and religion at the City Literary Institute ; upon her retirement from this position she nominated her former pupil , Veronica Seton @-@ Williams , to replace her . 
 Murray 's interest in popularising Egyptology among the wider public continued ; in 1949 she published Ancient Egyptian Religious Poetry , her second work for John Murray 's " The Wisdom of the East " series . That same year she also published The Splendour That Was Egypt , in which she collated many of her UCL lectures . The book adopted a diffusionist perspective that argued that Egypt influenced Greco @-@ Roman society and thus modern Western society . This was seen as a compromise between Petrie 's belief that other societies influenced the emergence of Egyptian civilisation and Grafton Elliot Smith 's highly unorthodox and heavily criticised hyperdiffusionist view that Egypt was the source of all global civilisation . The book received a mixed reception from the archaeological community . 
 = = = Final years : 1953 – 63 = = = 
 In 1953 , Murray was appointed to the presidency of the Folklore Society following the resignation of former president Allan Gomme . The Society had initially approached John <unk> for the post , but he had declined , with Murray accepting the nomination several months later . Murray remained President for two terms , until 1955 . In her 1954 presidential address , " England as a Field for Folklore Research " , she lamented what she saw as the English people 's disinterest in their own folklore in favour of that from other nations . For the autumn 1961 issue of Folklore , the society published a festschrift to Murray to commemorate her 98th birthday . The issue contained contributions from various scholars paying tribute to her – with papers dealing with archaeology , fairies , Near Eastern religious symbols , Greek folk songs – but notably not about witchcraft , potentially because no other folklorists were willing to defend her witch @-@ cult theory . 
 In May 1957 , Murray had championed the archaeologist Thomas Charles Lethbridge 's controversial claims that he had discovered three pre @-@ Christian chalk hill figures on Wandlebury Hill in the Gog Magog Downs , Cambridgeshire . Privately she expressed concern about the reality of the figures . Lethbridge subsequently authored a book championing her witch @-@ cult theory in which he sought the cult 's origins in pre @-@ Christian culture . In 1960 , she donated her collection of papers – including correspondences with a wide range of individuals across the country – to the Folklore Society Archive , where it is now known as " the Murray Collection " . 
 Crippled with arthritis , Murray had moved into a home in North Finchley , north London , where she was cared for by a retired couple who were trained nurses ; from here she occasionally took taxis into central London to visit the UCL library . Amid failing health , in 1962 Murray moved into the Queen Victoria Memorial Hospital in Welwyn , Hertfordshire , where she could receive 24 @-@ hour care ; she lived here for the final 18 months of her life . To mark her hundredth birthday , on 13 July 1963 a group of her friends , former students , and doctors gathered for a party at nearby Ayot St. Lawrence . Two days later , her doctor drove her to UCL for a second birthday party , again attended by many of her friends , colleagues , and former students ; it was the last time that she visited the university . In Man , the journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute , it was noted that Murray was " the only Fellow of the Institute to [ reach their centenary ] within living memory , if not in its whole history " . That year she published two books ; one was The Genesis of Religion , in which she argued that humanity 's first deities had been goddesses rather than male gods . The second was her autobiography , My First Hundred Years , which received predominantly positive reviews . She died on 13 November 1963 , and her body was cremated . 
 = = Murray 's witch @-@ cult hypotheses = = 
 The later folklorists Caroline Oates and Juliette Wood have suggested that Murray was best known for her witch @-@ cult theory , with biographer Margaret S. Drower expressing the view that it was her work on this subject which " perhaps more than any other , made her known to the general public " . It has been claimed that Murray 's was the " first feminist study of the witch trials " , as well as being the first to have actually " empowered the witches " by giving the ( largely female ) accused both free will and a voice distinct from that of their interrogators . The theory was faulty , in part because all of her academic training was in Egyptology , with no background knowledge in European history , but also because she exhibited a " tendency to generalize wildly on the basis of very slender evidence " . Oates and Wood , however , noted that Murray 's interpretations of the evidence fitted within wider perspectives on the past that existed at the time , stating that " Murray was far from isolated in her method of reading ancient ritual origins into later myths " . In particular , her approach was influenced by the work of the anthropologist James Frazer , who had argued for the existence of a pervasive dying @-@ and @-@ resurrecting god myth , and she was also influenced by the interpretative approaches of E. O. James , Karl Pearson , Herbert Fleure , and Harold Peake . 
 = = = Argument = = = 
 In The Witch @-@ Cult in Western Europe , Murray stated that she had restricted her research to Great Britain , although made some recourse to sources from France , Flanders , and New England . She drew a division between what she termed " Operative Witchcraft " , which referred to the performance of charms and spells with any purpose , and " Ritual Witchcraft " , by which she meant " the ancient religion of Western Europe " , a fertility @-@ based faith that she also termed " the Dianic cult " . She claimed that the cult had " very probably " once been devoted to the worship of both a male deity and a " Mother Goddess " but that " at the time when the cult is recorded the worship of the male deity appears to have superseded that of the female " . In her argument , Murray claimed that the figure referred to as the Devil in the trial accounts was the witches ' god , " manifest and incarnate " , to whom the witches ' offered their prayers . She claimed that at the witches ' meetings , the god would be personified , usually by a man or at times by a woman or an animal ; when a human personified this entity , Murray claimed that they were usually dressed plainly , though they appeared in full costume for the witches ' Sabbaths . 
 Members joined the cult either as children or adults through what Murray called " admission ceremonies " ; Murray asserted that applicants had to agree to join of their own free will , and agree to devote themselves to the service of their deity . She also claimed that in some cases , these individuals had to sign a covenant or were baptised into the faith . At the same time , she claimed that the religion was largely passed down hereditary lines . Murray described the religion as being divided into covens containing thirteen members , led by a coven officer who was often termed the " Devil " in the trial accounts , but who was accountable to a " Grand Master " . According to Murray , the records of the coven were kept in a secret book , with the coven also disciplining its members , to the extent of executing those deemed traitors . 
 Describing this witch @-@ cult as " a joyous religion " , she claimed that the two primary festivals that it celebrated were on May Eve and November Eve , although that other dates of religious observation were 1 February and 1 August , the winter and summer solstices , and Easter . She asserted that the " General Meeting of all members of the religion " were known as Sabbaths , while the more private ritual meetings were known as Esbats . The Esbats , Murray claimed , were nocturnal rites that began at midnight , and were " primarily for business , whereas the Sabbath was purely religious " . At the former , magical rites were performed both for malevolent and benevolent ends . She also asserted that the Sabbath ceremonies involved the witches paying homage to the deity , renewing their " vows of fidelity and obedience " to him , and providing him with accounts of all the magical actions that they have conducted since the previous Sabbath . Once this business had been concluded , admissions to the cult or marriages were conducted , ceremonies and fertility rites took place , and then the Sabbath ended with feasting and dancing . 
 Deeming Ritual Witchcraft to be " a fertility cult " , she asserted that many of its rites were designed to ensure fertility and rain @-@ making . She claimed that there were four types of sacrifice performed by the witches : blood @-@ sacrifice , in which the neophyte writes their name in blood , the sacrifice of animals , the sacrifice of a non @-@ Christian child to procure magical powers , and the sacrifice of the witches ' god by fire to ensure fertility . She interpreted accounts of witches ' shapeshifting into various animals as being representative of a rite in which the witches dressed as specific animals which they took to be sacred . She asserted that accounts of familiars were based on the witches ' use of animals , which she divided into " divining familiars " used in divination and " domestic familiars " used in other magic rites . 
 Murray asserted that a pre @-@ Christian fertility @-@ based religion had survived the Christianization process in Britain , although that it came to be " practised only in certain places and among certain classes of the community " . She believed that folkloric stories of fairies in Britain were based on a surviving race of dwarfs , who continued to live on the island up until the Early Modern period . She asserted that this race followed the same pagan religion as the witches , thus explaining the folkloric connection between the two . In the appendices to the book , she also alleged that Joan of Arc and Gilles de Rais were members of the witch @-@ cult and were executed for it , a claim which has been refuted by historians , especially in the case of Joan of Arc . 
 The later historian Ronald Hutton commented that The Witch @-@ Cult in Western Europe " rested upon a small amount of archival research , with extensive use of printed trial records in 19th @-@ century editions , plus early modern pamphlets and works of demonology " . He also noted that the book 's tone was generally " dry and clinical , and every assertion was meticulously footnoted to a source , with lavish quotation " . It was not a bestseller ; in its first thirty years , only 2 @,@ 020 copies were sold . However , it led many people to treat Murray as an authority on the subject ; in 1929 , she was invited to provide the entry on " Witchcraft " for the Encyclopædia Britannica , and used it to present her interpretation of the subject as if it were universally accepted in scholarship . It remained in the encyclopedia until being replaced in 1968 . 
 Murray followed The Witch @-@ Cult in Western Europe with The God of the Witches , published by the popular press Sampson Low in 1931 ; although similar in content , unlike her previous volume it was aimed at a mass market audience . The tone of the book also differed strongly from its predecessor , containing " emotionally inflated [ language ] and coloured with religious phraseology " and repeatedly referring to the witch @-@ cult as " the Old Religion " . In this book she also " cut out or toned down " many of the claims made in her previous volume which would have painted the cult in a bad light , such as those which discussed sex and the sacrifice of animals and children . 
 In this book she began to refer to the witches ' deity as the Horned God , and asserted that it was an entity who had been worshipped in Europe since the Palaeolithic . She further asserted that in the Bronze Age , the worship of the deity could be found throughout Europe , Asia , and parts of Africa , claiming that the depiction of various horned figures from these societies proved that . Among the evidence cited were the horned figures found at Mohenjo @-@ Daro , which are often interpreted as depictions of Pashupati , as well as the deities Osiris and Amon in Egypt and the Minotaur of Minoan Crete . Within continental Europe , she claimed that the Horned God was represented by Pan in Greece , Cernunnos in Gaul , and in various Scandinavian rock carvings . Claiming that this divinity had been declared the Devil by the Christian authorities , she nevertheless asserted that his worship was testified in officially Christian societies right through to the Modern period , citing folkloric practices such as the Dorset Ooser and the Puck Fair as evidence of his veneration . 
 In 1954 , she published The Divine King in England , in which she greatly extended on the theory , taking in an influence from Frazer 's The Golden Bough , an anthropological book that made the claim that societies all over the world sacrificed their kings to the deities of nature . In her book , she claimed that this practice had continued into medieval England , and that , for instance , the death of William II was really a ritual sacrifice . No academic took the book seriously , and it was ignored by many of her supporters . 
 = = = Academic reception = = = 
 = = = = Early support = = = = 
 Upon initial publication , Murray 's thesis gained a favourable reception from many readers , including some significant scholars , albeit none who were experts in the witch trials . Historians of Early Modern Britain like George Norman Clark and Christopher Hill incorporated her theories into their work , although the latter subsequently distanced himself from the theory . For the 1961 reprint of The Witch @-@ Cult in Western Europe , the Medieval historian Steven Runciman provided a foreword in which he accepted that some of Murray 's " minor details may be open to criticism " , but in which he was otherwise supportive of her thesis . Her theories were recapitulated by Arno Runeberg in his 1947 book Witches , Demons and Fertility Magic as well as Pennethorne Hughes in his 1952 book Witches . As a result , a commentator writing in 1962 could claim that the Murrayite interpretations of the witch trials " seem to hold , at the time of writing , an almost undisputed sway at the higher intellectual levels " , being widely accepted among " educated people " . 
 The Canadian historian Elliot Rose suggested that the reason that Murray 's theory gained such support was partly because of her " imposing credentials " as a member of staff at UCL , a position that lent her theory greater legitimacy in the eyes of many readers . He further suggested that the Murrayite view was attractive to many as it confirmed " the general picture of pre @-@ Christian Europe a reader of Frazer or [ Robert ] Graves would be familiar with " . Similarly , Hutton suggested that the cause of the Murrayite theory 's popularity was because it " appealed to so many of the emotional impulses of the age " , including " the notion of the English countryside as a timeless place full of ancient secrets " , the literary popularity of Pan , the widespread belief that the majority of British had remained pagan long after the process of Christianisation , and the idea that folk customs represented pagan survivals . At the same time , Hutton suggested , it seemed more plausible to many than the previously dominant rationalist idea that the witch trials were the result of mass delusion . Related to this , the folklorist Jacqueline Simpson suggested that part of the Murrayite theory 's appeal was that it appeared to give a " sensible , demystifying , liberating approach to a longstanding but sterile argument " between the rationalists who denied that there had been any witches and those , like Montague Summers , who insisted that there had been a real Satanic conspiracy against Christendom in the Early Modern period replete with witches with supernatural powers . " How refreshing " , noted the historian Hilda Ellis Davidson , " and exciting her first book was at that period . A new approach , and such a surprising one . " 
 = = = = Early criticism = = = = 
 Murray 's theories never received support from experts in the Early Modern witch trials , and from her early publications onward many of her ideas were challenged by those who highlighted her " factual errors and methodological failings " . Indeed , the majority of scholarly reviews of her work produced during the 1920s and 1930s were largely critical . George L. Burr reviewed both of her initial books on the witch @-@ cult for the American Historical Review . He stated that she was not acquainted with the " careful general histories by modern scholars " and criticised her for assuming that the trial accounts accurately reflected the accused witches ' genuine experiences of witchcraft , regardless of whether those confessions had been obtained through torture and coercion . He also charged her with selectively using the evidence to serve her interpretation , for instance by omitting any supernatural or miraculous events that appear in the trial accounts . W. R. Halliday was highly critical in his review for Folklore , as was E. M. Loeb in his review for American Anthropologist . 
 Soon after , one of the foremost specialists of the trial records , L 'Estrange Ewen , brought out a series of books which rejected Murray 's interpretation . Rose suggested that Murray 's books on the witch @-@ cult " contain an incredible number of minor errors of fact or of calculation and several inconsistencies of reasoning " . He accepted that her case " could , perhaps , still be proved by somebody else , though I very much doubt it " . Highlighting that there is a gap of about a thousand years between the Christianisation of Britain and the start of the witch trials there , he argues that there is no evidence for the existence of the witch @-@ cult anywhere in the intervening period . He further criticises Murray for treating pre @-@ Christian Britain as a socially and culturally monolithic entity , whereas in reality , it contained a diverse array of societies and religious beliefs . He also challenges Murray 's claim that the majority of Britons in the Middle Ages remained pagan as " a view grounded on ignorance alone " . 
 Murray did not respond directly to the criticisms of her work , but reacted to her critics in a hostile manner ; in later life she asserted that she eventually ceased reading reviews of her work , and believed that her critics were simply acting out of their own Christian prejudices to non @-@ Christian religion . Simpson noted that despite these critical reviews , within the field of British folkloristics Murray 's theories were permitted " to pass unapproved but unchallenged , either out of politeness or because nobody was really interested enough to research the topic " . As evidence , she noted that no substantial research articles on the subject of witchcraft were published in Folklore between Murray 's in 1917 and Rossell Hope Robbins ' in 1963 . She also highlighted that when regional studies of British folklore were published in this period by folklorists like Theo Brown , Ruth Tongue , or Enid Porter , none adopted the Murrayite framework for interpreting witchcraft beliefs , thus evidencing her claim that Murray 's theories were widely ignored by scholars of folkloristics . 
 = = = = Academic rejection = = = = 
 Murray 's work was increasingly criticised following her death in 1963 , with the definitive academic rejection of the Murrayite witch @-@ cult theory occurring during the 1970s . During these decades , a variety of scholars across Europe and North America – such as Alan Macfarlane , Erik <unk> , William Monter , Robert <unk> , Gerhard <unk> , Bente <unk> and Bengt <unk> – published in @-@ depth studies of the archival records from the witch trials , leaving no doubt that those tried for witchcraft were not practitioners of a surviving pre @-@ Christian religion . In 1971 , the English historian Keith Thomas stated that on the basis of this research , there was " very little evidence to suggest that the accused witches were either devil @-@ worshippers or members of a pagan fertility cult " . He stated that Murray 's conclusions were " almost totally groundless " because she ignored the systematic study of the trial accounts provided by Ewen and instead used sources very selectively to argue her point . 
 In 1975 , the historian Norman Cohn commented that Murray 's " knowledge of European history , even of English history , was superficial and her grasp of historical method was non @-@ existent " , adding that her ideas were " firmly set in an exaggerated and distorted version of the <unk> mould " . That same year , the historian of religion Mircea Eliade described Murray 's work as " hopelessly inadequate " , containing " numberless and appalling errors " . In 1996 , the feminist historian Diane Purkiss stated that although Murray 's thesis was " intrinsically improbable " and commanded " little or no allegiance within the modern academy " , she felt that male scholars like Thomas , Cohn , and Macfarlane had unfairly adopted an androcentric approach by which they contrasted their own , male and methodologically sound interpretation against Murray 's " feminised belief " about the witch @-@ cult . 
 Hutton stated that Murray had treated her source material with " reckless abandon " , in that she had taken " vivid details of alleged witch practices " from " sources scattered across a great extent of space and time " and then declared them to be normative of the cult as a whole . Simpson outlined how Murray had selected her use of evidence very specifically , particularly by ignoring and / or rationalising any accounts of supernatural or miraculous events in the trial records , thereby distorting the events that she was describing . Thus , Simpson pointed out , Murray rationalised claims that the cloven @-@ hoofed Devil appeared at the witches ' Sabbath by stating that he was a man with a special kind of shoe , and similarly asserted that witches ' claims to have flown through the air on broomsticks were actually based on their practice of either hopping along on broomsticks or smearing hallucinogenic salves onto themselves . Concurring with this assessment , the historian Jeffrey Burton Russell , writing with the independent author Brooks Alexander , stated that " Murray 's use of sources , in general , is appalling " . The pair went on to claim that " today , scholars are agreed that Murray was more than just wrong – she was completely and embarrassingly wrong on nearly all of her basic premises " . 
 The Italian historian Carlo Ginzburg has been cited as being willing to give " some slight support " to Murray 's theory . Ginzburg stated that although her thesis had been " formulated in a wholly uncritical way " and contained " serious defects " , it did contain " a kernel of truth " . He stated his opinion that she was right in claiming that European witchcraft had " roots in an ancient fertility cult " , something that he argued was vindicated by his work researching the benandanti , an agrarian visionary tradition recorded in the Friuli district of Northeastern Italy during the 16th and 17th centuries . Several historians and folklorists have pointed out that Ginzburg 's arguments are very different to Murray 's : whereas Murray argued for the existence of a pre @-@ Christian witches ' cult whose members physically met during the witches ' Sabbaths , Ginzburg argued that some of the European visionary traditions that were conflated with witchcraft in the Early Modern period had their origins in pre @-@ Christian fertility religions . Moreover , other historians have expressed criticism of Ginzburg 's interpretation of the benandanti ; Cohn stated that that there was " nothing whatsoever " in the source material to justify the idea that the benandanti were the " survival of an age @-@ old fertility cult " . Echoing these views , Hutton commented that Ginzburg 's claim that the benandanti 's visionary traditions were a survival from pre @-@ Christian practices was an idea resting on " imperfect material and conceptual foundations " . He added that Ginzburg 's " assumption " that " what was being dreamed about in the sixteenth century had in fact been acted out in religious ceremonies " dating to " pagan times " , was entire " an inference of his own " and not one supported by the documentary evidence . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 On researching the history of UCL 's Egyptology department , the historian Rosalind M. Janssen stated that Murray was " remembered with gratitude and immense affection by all her former students . A wise and witty teacher , two generations of Egyptologists have forever been in her debt . " Alongside teaching them , Murray was known to socialise with her UCL students outside of class hours . The archaeologist Ralph Merrifield , who knew Murray through the Folklore Society , described her as a " diminutive and kindly scholar , who radiated intelligence and strength of character into extreme old age " . Davidson , who also knew Murray through the Society , noted that at their meetings " she would sit near the front , a bent and seemingly guileless old lady dozing peacefully , and then in the middle of a discussion would suddenly intervene with a relevant and penetrating comment which showed that she had missed not one word of the argument " . The later folklorist Juliette Wood noted that many members of the Folklore Society " remember her fondly " , adding that Murray had been " especially keen to encourage younger researchers , even those who disagreed with her ideas " . 
 One of Murray 's friends in the Society , E. O. James , described her as a " mine of information and a perpetual inspiration ever ready to impart her vast and varied stores of specialised knowledge without reserve , or , be it said , much if any regard for the generally accepted opinions and conclusions of the experts ! " Davidson described her as being " not at all assertive ... [ she ] never thrust her ideas on anyone . [ In relation to her witch @-@ cult theory , ] she behaved in fact rather like someone who was a fully convinced member of some unusual religious sect , or perhaps , of the Freemasons , but never on any account got into arguments about it in public . " The archaeologist Glyn Daniel observed that Murray remained mentally alert into her old age , commenting that " her vigour and forthrightness and ruthless energy never deserted her " . 
 Murray never married , instead devoting her life to her work , and for this reason , Hutton drew comparisons between her and two other prominent female British scholars of the period , Jane Harrison and Jessie Weston . Murray 's biographer Kathleen L. Sheppard stated that she was deeply committed to public outreach , particularly when it came to Egyptology , and that as such she " wanted to change the means by which the public obtained knowledge about Egypt 's history : she wished to throw open the doors to the scientific laboratory and invite the public in " . She considered travel to be one of her favourite activities , although due to restraints on her time and finances she was unable to do this regularly ; her salary remained small and the revenue from her books was meagre . 
 Raised a devout Christian by her mother , Murray had initially become a Sunday School teacher to preach the faith , but after entering the academic profession she rejected religion , gaining a reputation among other members of the Folklore Society as a noted sceptic and a rationalist . She was openly critical of organised religion , although continued to maintain a personal belief in a God of some sort , relating in her autobiography that she believed in " an unseen over @-@ ruling Power " , " which science calls Nature and religion calls God " . She was also a believer and a practitioner of magic , performing curses against those whom she felt deserved it : in one case she cursed a fellow academic , Jaroslav Černý , when she felt that his promotion to the position of Professor of Egyptology over her friend Walter Bryan Emery was unworthy . Her curse entailed mixing up ingredients in a frying pan , and was undertaken in the presence of two colleagues . In another instance , she was claimed to have created a wax image of Kaiser Wilhelm II and then melted it during the First World War . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = In academia = = = 
 Hutton noted that Murray was one of the earliest women to " make a serious impact upon the world of professional scholarship " , and the archaeologist Niall Finneran described her as " one of the greatest characters of post @-@ war British archaeology " . Upon her death , Daniel referred to her as " the Grand Old Woman of Egyptology " , with Hutton noting that Egyptology represented " the core of her academic career " . In 2014 , Thornton referred to her as " one of Britain 's most famous Egyptologists " . However , according to the archaeologist Ruth Whitehouse , Murray 's contributions to archaeology and Egyptology were often overlooked as her work was overshadowed by that of Petrie , to the extent that she was often thought of primarily as one of Petrie 's assistants rather than as a scholar in her own right . By her retirement she had come to be highly regarded within the discipline , although , according to Whitehouse , Murray 's reputation declined following her death , something that Whitehouse attributed to the rejection of her witch @-@ cult theory and the general erasure of women archaeologists from the discipline 's male @-@ dominated history . 
 In his obituary for Murray in Folklore , James noted that her death was " an event of unusual interest and importance in the annals of the Folk @-@ Lore Society in particular as well as in the wider sphere in which her influence was felt in so many directions and disciplines " . However , later academic folklorists , such as Simpson and Wood , have cited Murray and her witch @-@ cult theory as an embarrassment to their field , and to the Folklore Society specifically . Simpson suggested that Murray 's position as President of the Society was a causal factor in the mistrustful attitude that many historians held toward folkloristics as an academic discipline , as they erroneously came to believe that all folklorists endorsed Murray 's ideas . Similarly , Catherine Noble stated that " Murray caused considerable damage to the study of witchcraft " . 
 In 1935 , UCL introduced the Margaret Murray Prize , awarded to the student who is deemed to have produced the best dissertation in Egyptology ; it continued to be presented annually into the 21st century . In 1969 , UCL named one of their common rooms in her honour , but it was converted into an office in 1989 . In June 1983 , Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother visited the room and there was gifted a copy of Murray 's My First Hundred Years . UCL also hold two busts of Murray , one kept in the Petrie Museum and the other in the library of the UCL Institute of Archaeology . This sculpture was commissioned by one of her students , Violet MacDermot , and produced by the artist Stephen Rickard . UCL also possess a watercolour painting of Murray by Winifred Brunton ; formerly exhibited in the Petrie Gallery , it was later placed into the Art Collection stores . In 2013 , on the 150th anniversary of Murray 's birth and the 50th of her death , the UCL Institute of Archaeology 's Ruth Whitehouse described Murray as " a remarkable woman " whose life was " well worth celebrating , both in the archaeological world at large and especially in UCL " . 
 The historian of archaeology Rosalind M. Janssen titled her study of Egyptology at UCL The First Hundred Years " as a tribute " to Murray . Murray 's friend Margaret <unk> Drower authored a short biography of her , which was included as a chapter in the 2004 edited volume on Breaking Ground : Pioneering Women Archaeologists . In 2013 , Lexington Books published The Life of Margaret Alice Murray : A Woman 's Work in Archaeology , a biography of Murray authored by Kathleen L. Sheppard , then an assistant professor at Missouri University of Science and Technology ; the book was based upon Sheppard 's doctoral dissertation produced at the University of Oklahoma . Although characterising it as being " written in a clear and engaging manner " , one reviewer noted that Sheppard 's book focuses on Murray the " scientist " and as such neglects to discuss Murray 's involvement in magical practices and her relationship with Wicca . 
 = = = In Wicca = = = 
 Murray 's witch @-@ cult theories provided the blueprint for the contemporary Pagan religion of Wicca , with Murray being referred to as the " Grandmother of Wicca " . The Pagan studies scholar Ethan Doyle White stated that it was the theory which " formed the historical narrative around which Wicca built itself " , for on its emergence in England during the 1940s and 1950s , Wicca claimed to be the survival of this witch @-@ cult . Wicca 's theological structure , revolving around a Horned God and Mother Goddess , was adopted from Murray 's ideas about the ancient witch @-@ cult , and Wiccan groups were named covens and their meetings termed <unk> , both words that Murray had popularised . As with Murray 's witch @-@ cult , Wicca 's practitioners entered via an initiation ceremony ; Murray 's claims that witches wrote down their spells in a book may have been an influence on Wicca 's Book of Shadows . Wicca 's early system of seasonal festivities were also based on Murray 's framework . 
 Noting that there is no evidence of Wicca existing before the publication of Murray 's books , Merrifield commented that for those in 20th century Britain who wished to form their own witches ' covens , " Murray may have seemed the ideal fairy godmother , and her theory became the pumpkin coach that could transport them into the realm of fantasy for which they longed " . The historian Philip Heselton suggested that the New Forest coven – the oldest alleged Wiccan group – was founded circa 1935 by esotericists aware of Murray 's theory and who may have believed themselves to be reincarnated witch @-@ cult members . It was Gerald Gardner , who claimed to be an initiate of the New Forest coven , who established the tradition of Gardnerian Wicca and popularised the religion ; according to Simpson , Gardner was the only member of the Folklore Society to " wholeheartedly " accept Murray 's witch @-@ cult hypothesis . The duo knew each other , with Murray writing the foreword to Gardner 's 1954 book Witchcraft Today , although in that foreword she did not explicitly specify whether she believed Gardner 's claim that he had discovered a survival of her witch @-@ cult . In 2005 , Noble suggested that " Murray 's name might be all but forgotten today if it were not for Gerald Gardner " . 
 Murray 's witch @-@ cult theories were likely also a core influence on the non @-@ Gardnerian Wiccan traditions that were established in Britain and Australia between 1930 and 1970 by the likes of Bob Clay @-@ Egerton , Robert Cochrane , Charles Cardell , and Rosaleen Norton . The prominent Wiccan Doreen Valiente eagerly searched for what she believed were other surviving remnants of the Murrayite witch @-@ cult around Britain . Valiente remained committed to a belief in Murray 's witch @-@ cult after its academic rejection , and she described Murray as " a remarkable woman " . In San Francisco during the late 1960s , Murray 's writings were among the sources used by Aidan A. Kelly in the creation of his Wiccan tradition , the New Reformed Orthodox Order of the Golden Dawn . In Los Angeles during the early 1970s , they were used by Zsuzsanna Budapest when she was establishing her feminist @-@ oriented tradition of Dianic Wicca . The Murrayite witch @-@ cult theory also provided the basis for the ideas espoused in Witchcraft and the Gay Counterculture , a 1978 book written by the American gay liberation activist Arthur Evans . 
 Members of the Wiccan community gradually became aware of academia 's rejection of the witch @-@ cult theory . Accordingly , belief in its literal truth declined during the 1980s and 1990s , with many Wiccans instead coming to view it as a myth that conveyed metaphorical or symbolic truths . Others insisted that the historical origins of the religion did not matter and that instead Wicca was legitimated by the spiritual experiences it gave to its participants . In response , Hutton authored The Triumph of the Moon , a historical study exploring Wicca 's early development ; on publication in 1999 the book exerted a strong impact on the British Pagan community , further eroding belief in the Murrayite theory among Wiccans . Conversely , other practitioners clung on to the theory , treating it as an important article of faith and rejecting post @-@ Murrayite scholarship on European witchcraft . Several prominent practitioners continued to insist that Wicca was a religion with origins stretching back to the Palaeolithic , but others rejected the validity of historical scholarship and emphasised intuition and emotion as the arbiter of truth . A few " counter @-@ revisionist " Wiccans – among them Donald H. Frew , Jani Farrell @-@ Roberts , and Ben Whitmore – published critiques in which they attacked post @-@ Murrayite scholarship on matters of detail , but none defended Murray 's original hypothesis completely . 
 = = = In literature = = = 
 Simpson noted that the publication of the Murray thesis in the Encyclopaedia Britannica made it accessible to " journalists , film @-@ makers popular novelists and thriller writers " , who adopted it " enthusiastically " . It influenced the work of Aldous Huxley and Robert Graves . It was also an influence on the American horror author H. P. Lovecraft , who cited The Witch @-@ Cult in Western Europe in his writings about the fictional cult of Cthulhu . 
 The author Sylvia Townsend Warner cited Murray 's work on the witch @-@ cult as an influence on her 1926 novel Lolly <unk> , and sent a copy of her book to Murray in appreciation , with the two meeting for lunch shortly after . There was nevertheless some difference in their depictions of the witch @-@ cult ; whereas Murray had depicted an organised pre @-@ Christian cult , Warner depicted a vague family tradition that was explicitly Satanic . In 1927 , Warner lectured on the subject of witchcraft , exhibiting a strong influence from Murray 's work . Analysing the relationship between Murray and Warner , the English literature scholar Mimi Winick characterised both as being " engaged in imagining new possibilities for women in modernity " . 
 = Harley J. Earl Trophy = 
 The Harley J. Earl Trophy is the trophy presented to the winner of the premier – and season @-@ opening – event of the National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing ( NASCAR ) , the Daytona 500 . It is named after influential automobile designer Harley Earl , who served as the second commissioner of NASCAR . Earl has been known as the so @-@ called " father of the Corvette " and designer of the Firebird I prototype that adorns the trophy . The trophy is kept on display at the Daytona International Speedway , while a small replica is given to each Daytona 500 winner . 
 = = Description and history = = 
 The Harley J. Earl Trophy is named after General Motors car designer Harley Earl . Earl , the second commissioner of NASCAR , was the designer of the Chevrolet Corvette ; his Firebird I concept car provides the basis of the automobile that sits atop the trophy ; the car is often misidentified as Sir Malcolm Campbell 's " Blue Bird " land speed record car . Earl was a friend of NASCAR founder Bill France , Sr. , who named the trophy after him as a sign of respect . 
 The trophy is awarded to the winner of the annual Daytona 500 , known as " The Great American Race " , which acts as the season @-@ opening event for the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series ( formerly known as the Nextel Cup Series , Winston Cup Series , and Grand National Series ) , and is also considered the most prestigious and important event on the NASCAR schedule . The trophy is considered to be the most coveted award with which a NASCAR driver can be presented . 
 The Harley J. Earl Perpetual Trophy , the " official " version of the award , is housed at the Daytona International Speedway . It stands about four feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) tall , five feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) wide and is in the same triangular " tri @-@ oval " shape of Daytona International Speedway . It 's removed from its display once a year to appear in victory lane with the winner of the Daytona 500 . In 2010 , the trophy was removed from the Daytona International Speedway , transported to the Indianapolis Motor Speedway and put on display alongside the Borg @-@ Warner Trophy – awarded to the winner of the Indianapolis 500 – in the Indianapolis Motor Speedway Hall of Fame Museum during the Indianapolis 500 race week . 
 = = The Trophy and the Award = = 
 Winners of the Daytona 500 through 1997 received the Harley Earl Award , a wooden trophy approximately three feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) tall , adorned with silver figurines . Starting in 1998 , to celebrate the 40th running , individual winners of the Daytona 500 have been presented with a miniature replica of the Harley J. Earl Trophy , which was recreated by John <unk> , a sculptor from Omaha , Nebraska . Previously commissioned to craft a sculpture of Bill France and his wife , Ann France , for display in front of NASCAR corporate headquarters in Daytona Beach , Florida , <unk> 's work on each replica trophy requires six weeks of 12 @-@ hour days to create the Firebird I automobile , with all the work done by hand , before it gets plated in silver by A & J <unk> , also located in Omaha . The first replica trophy , won in 1998 by Dale Earnhardt was originally on a marble base , but has since been switched to an acrylic stand , making it lighter . For the 2008 Daytona 500 , the 50th anniversary of the first race , the replica of the trophy , presented to winner Ryan Newman , was plated in gold rather than silver . 
 The replica trophies weigh 54 pounds ( 24 kg ) , measures 18 inches ( 46 cm ) tall , 22 inches ( 56 cm ) wide and 12 inches ( 30 cm ) deep . 
 = = = Additional Daytona 500 trophies = = = 
 The Harley J. Earl Trophy is not the only trophy awarded at the conclusion of the annual Daytona 500 . The crew chief of the winning team receives the Cannonball Baker Trophy , named after the first commissioner of NASCAR ; the winning team owner is awarded the Governor 's Cup . 
 = = = Winners of the Harley J. Earl Trophy = = = 
 The most Harley Earl Awards and Harley J. Earl Trophy Replicas have been won by Richard Petty , often referred to as " The King " of NASCAR . Petty 's seven victories lead the four Daytona 500 wins of Cale Yarborough , and three each by Bobby Allison , Dale Jarrett and Jeff Gordon . Bill Elliott , Sterling Marlin , Michael Waltrip , Matt Kenseth , Jimmie Johnson and Dale Earnhardt , Jr. have won the Daytona 500 and Harley J. Earl Trophy twice ; twenty @-@ five other drivers have been awarded the trophy once . As of 2015 , Trevor Bayne was the youngest winner of the trophy when he won it at age 20 years , 1 day in 2011 ; Allison was the oldest winner ( 50 years , 2 months , 11 days ) in 1988 . 
 = European polecat = 
 The European polecat ( Mustela putorius ) — also known as the black or forest polecat , or fitch ( as well as some other names ) — is a species of mustelid native to western Eurasia and North Africa . It is of a generally dark brown colour , with a pale underbelly and a dark mask across the face . Occasionally , colour mutations , including albinos and <unk> , occur . Compared to minks and other weasels — also fellow members of the genus Mustela — the polecat has a shorter , more compact body ; a more powerfully built skull and dentition ; is less agile ; and it is well known for having the characteristic ability to secrete a particularly foul @-@ smelling liquid to mark its territory . 
 It is much less territorial than other mustelids , with animals of the same sex frequently sharing home ranges . Like other mustelids , the European polecat is polygamous , though pregnancy occurs directly after mating , with no induced ovulation . It usually gives birth in early summer to litters consisting of five to 10 kits , which become independent at the age of two to three months . The European polecat feeds on small rodents , birds , amphibians and reptiles . It occasionally cripples its prey by piercing its brain with its teeth and stores it , still living , in its burrow for future consumption . 
 The European polecat originated in Western Europe during the Middle Pleistocene , with its closest living relatives being the steppe polecat , the black @-@ footed ferret and the European mink . With the two former species , it can produce fertile offspring , though hybrids between it and the latter species tend to be sterile , and are distinguished from their parent species by their larger size and more valuable pelts . 
 The European polecat is the sole ancestor of the ferret , which was domesticated more than 2000 years ago for the purpose of hunting vermin . The species has otherwise been historically viewed negatively by humans . In the British Isles especially , the polecat was persecuted by gamekeepers , and became synonymous with promiscuity in early English literature . During modern times , the polecat is still <unk> represented in popular culture when compared to other rare British mammals , and misunderstandings of its behaviour still persist in some rural areas . As of 2008 , it is classed by the IUCN as Least Concern due to its wide range and large numbers . 
 = = Etymology and naming = = 
 The word " polecat " first appeared after the Norman Conquest of England , written as <unk> . While the second syllable is largely self @-@ explanatory , the origin of the first is unclear . It is possibly derived from the French <unk> , meaning " chicken " , likely in reference to the species ' fondness for poultry , or it may be a variant of the Old English ful , meaning " foul " . In Middle English , the species was referred to as <unk> , meaning " foul marten " , in reference to its strong odour . In Old French , the polecat was called <unk> , which was derived from the Low German and Scandinavian verb for " to make a disagreeable smell " . This was later corrupted in English as <unk> or <unk> , which itself became the word " fitch " , which is used for the polecat 's pelt . The word <unk> is the root word for the North American fisher , which was named by Dutch colonists in America who noted similarities between the two species . In some countries such as New Zealand , the term " fitch " has taken on a wider use to refer to related creatures such as ferrets , especially when farmed for their fur . 
 A 2002 article in The Mammal Society 's Mammal Review contested the European polecat 's status as an animal indigenous to the British Isles on account of a scarce fossil record and linguistic evidence . Unlike most native British mammals , the polecat 's Welsh name ( <unk> , derived from the Middle English <unk> ) is not of Celtic origin , much as the Welsh names of invasive species such as the European rabbit and fallow deer ( <unk> , derived from the Middle English <unk> and <unk> , derived from the Old French <unk> , respectively ) are of Middle English or Old French origin . Polecats are not mentioned in Anglo @-@ Saxon or Welsh literature prior to the Norman conquest of England in 1066 , with the first recorded mention of the species in the Welsh language occurring in the 14th century 's <unk> Coch <unk> and in English in Chaucer ’ s The Pardoner ’ s Tale ( 1383 ) . In contrast , attestations of the Welsh word for pine marten ( bele ) , date back at least to the 10th century Welsh Laws and possibly much earlier in northern England . 
 = = = Local and indigenous names = = = 
 = = = = <unk> English names = = = = 
 Probably no other animal on the British list has had as many colloquial names as the polecat . In southern England it was generally referred to as ' <unk> ' whereas in the north it was ' <unk> or <unk> ... However there were a host of others including endless spelling variations : <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , poll cat , etc . Charles Oldham identified at least 20 different versions of the name in the Hertfordshire / Bedfordshire area alone . 
 = = = Latin name = = = 
 As well as the several indigenous names referring to smell ( see above ) , the scientific name Mustela putorius is also derived from this species ' foul smell . The Latin putorius translates to stench or stink , from which the English word putrid is derived . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 The earliest true polecat was Mustela <unk> , which appeared during the late Villafranchian period . It was considerably smaller than the present form , thus indicating polecats evolved at a relatively late period . The oldest modern polecat fossils occur in Germany , Britain and France , and date back to the Middle Pleistocene . The European polecat 's closest relatives are the steppe polecat and black @-@ footed ferret , with which it is thought to have shared Mustela <unk> as a common ancestor . The European polecat is , however , not as maximally adapted in the direction of carnivory as the steppe polecat , being less specialised in skull structure and dentition . The European polecat likely diverged from the steppe polecat 1 @.@ 5 million years ago based on IRBP , though cytochrome b <unk> indicate a younger date of 430 @,@ 000 years . It is also closely related to the European mink , with which it can hybridise . 
 = = = Domestication = = = 
 Morphological , cytological and molecular studies confirm the European polecat is the sole ancestor of the ferret , thus disproving any connection with the steppe polecat , which was once thought to have contributed to the ferret 's creation . <unk> were first mentioned by Aristophanes in 450 BC and by Aristotle in 350 BC . Greek and Roman writers in the first century AD were the first to attest on the ferret 's use in bolting rabbits from their burrows . The first accurate descriptions of ferrets come from Strabo during 200 AD , when ferrets were released onto the Balearic Islands to control rabbit populations . As the European rabbit is native to the Iberian Peninsula and northwest Africa , the European polecat likely was first domesticated in these regions . 
 The ferret and European polecat are similar in both size and portions , to the point that dark @-@ coloured ferrets are almost indistinguishable from their wild cousins , though the ferret 's skull has a smaller cranial volume , and has a narrower postorbital constriction . Compared to the European polecat , the ferret has a much smaller brain , though this comparison has not been made with Mediterranean polecats , from which ferrets likely derive . The theory of a Mediterranean origin is further strengthened because the ferret is less tolerant of cold than northern polecat subspecies . The ferret is also more fertile than the polecat , producing two or more litters annually , as opposed to just one . Unlike other subspecies , which are largely solitary , the ferret will readily live in social groups . The ferret is also slower in all its movements than the polecat , and hardly ever makes any use of its anal scent glands . Overall , the ferret represents a neotenous form of polecat . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 As of 2005 , seven subspecies are recognised . 
 = = Physical description = = 
 = = = Build = = = 
 The appearance of the European polecat is typical of members of the genus Mustela , though it is generally more compact in conformation and , although short @-@ legged , has a less elongated body than the European mink or steppe polecat . The tail is short , about ⅓ its body length . The eyes are small , with dark brown irises . The hind toes are long and partially webbed , with weakly curved 4 mm @-@ long , <unk> claws . The front claws are strongly curved , partially retractable , and measure 6 mm in length . The feet are moderately long and more robust than in other members of the genus . The polecat 's skull is relatively coarse and massive , more so than the mink 's , with a strong , but short and broad facial region and strongly developed projections . In comparison to other similarly sized mustelids , the polecat 's teeth are very strong , large and massive in relation to skull size . Sexual dimorphism in the skull is apparent in the lighter , narrower skull of the female , which also has weaker projections . The polecat 's running gait is not as complex and twisting as that of the mink or stoat , and it is not as fast as the mountain weasel ( <unk> ) , stoat or least weasel , as it can be outrun by a conditioned man . Its sensory organs are well developed , though it is unable to distinguish between colours . 
 The dimensions of the European polecat vary greatly . The species does not conform to Bergmann 's rule , with the pattern of size variation seeming to follow a trend of size increase along an east @-@ west axis . Males measure 350 – 460 mm in body length and females are 290 – 394 mm . The tail measures 115 – 167 mm in males and 84 – 150 mm in females . Adult males in middle Europe weigh 1 @,@ 000 @-@ 1 @,@ 500 grams and females 650 @-@ 815 grams . Gigantism is known among polecats , but specimens exhibiting this are likely the products of polecat @-@ mink hybridisation . 
 = = = Fur = = = 
 The winter fur of the European polecat is brownish @-@ black or blackish @-@ brown , the intensity of which is determined by the colour of the long guard hairs . On the back and flanks , the dark tone is brightened by bright whitish @-@ yellowish , sometimes yellowish @-@ greyish underfur which shows through . The lightly coloured underfur is not equally visible on different parts of the body . On the back and hindquarters , the underfur is almost completely covered by the dark guard hairs . On the flanks , though , the lightening is well defined , and contrasts sharply with the general tone of the back . The throat , lower neck , chest and abdomen are black or blackish @-@ brown . The limbs are pure black or black with brown tints , while the tail is black or blackish @-@ brown , completely lacking light underfur . The area around and between the eyes is black @-@ brown , with a longitudinal stripe of similar colour along the top of the nose . The ears are dark brown and edged with white . The summer fur is short , sparse and coarse . It is greyer , duller and lacking in the lustre of the winter fur . The underfur is more weakly developed in the summer fur , and has a brownish @-@ grey or rusty @-@ grey colour . The polecat is a good swimmer , but its fur is not as well insulated against cold water as the American mink 's ; while a mink will take 118 minutes to cool in a water temperature of 8 ° C , the polecat cools down much faster at 26 – 28 minutes . 
 Polecats were found in two major phenotypes a <unk> one and a dark fur one with no black mask . Colour mutations include albinos and <unk> . In typical <unk> individuals , the underfur is usually bright reddish . The guard hairs on the trunk are bright reddish or reddish @-@ brown . Black guard hairs are absent on the lower body and head . In some rare cases , the guard hairs are so light , they are almost indistinguishable from the pale @-@ yellow underfur . In these cases , the whole animal is a very light golden @-@ yellow colour . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Social and territorial behaviours = = = 
 Unlike the steppe polecat , the European polecat has a much more settled way of life , with definite home ranges . The characteristics of polecat home ranges vary according to season , habitat , sex and social status . Breeding females settle in discrete areas , whereas breeding males and dispersing juveniles have more fluid ranges , being more mobile . Males typically have larger territories than females . Each polecat uses several den sites distributed throughout its territory . Occasionally , abandoned European badger or red fox burrows are used . Rabbit warrens are often areas of intense polecat activity . In winter , the polecat may use farm buildings or haystacks as daytime resting sites . The polecat is not as territorial as other small mustelids , having been known to share territories with other members of the same sex . Evidence of polecats marking their territories is sparse . Like other mustelids , the polecat is usually a silent animal , though it will growl fiercely when angered , and squeak when distressed . It also emits a low , mewling cry to its mate or offspring . 
 = = = Reproduction and development = = = 
 The European polecat is a seasonal breeder , with no courtship rituals . During the mating season , the male grabs the female by the neck and drags her about to stimulate ovulation , then copulates for up to an hour . The species is polygamous , with each male polecat mating with several females . Unlike with other small mustelids , ovulation is not induced , and pregnancy occurs immediately after mating . The gestation period lasts 40 – 43 days , with litters usually being born in May @-@ early June . Each litter typically consists of five to 10 kits . At birth , the kits weigh 9 @-@ 10 g and measure 55 – 70 mm in body length ; they are blind and deaf . At the age of one week , the kits are covered in silky , white fur , which is replaced with a cinnamon brown @-@ greyish woolly coat at the age of 3 – 4 wk . Weaning begins at three weeks of age , while the permanent dentition erupts after 7 – 8 wk . The kits become independent after two to three months . Females are very protective of their young , and have even been known to confront humans approaching too closely to their litters . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The European polecat 's diet consists of mouse @-@ like rodents , followed by amphibians and birds . Its most frequent prey item in the former Soviet Union is the common vole and rarely the red @-@ backed vole . In large river floodlands , water vole are common prey . In spring and winter , amphibians ( especially grass frogs and green toads ) become important food items . Selective predation on male frogs by the polecat decreases the occurrence of polyandry in frog populations . However , because amphibians have little calorific value , the polecat never grows fat on them , no matter how many it consumes . In Central Europe , the diet in winter months is dominated by birds including quail , grey partridges , grouse , chickens , pigeons and passerines . Seasonal changes in the activity rhythm is synchronised with the activity of the main prey . Some species only rarely preyed upon by the polecat include European hedgehogs , asp vipers , grass snakes and insects . In the British Isles , it commonly kills brown rats and European rabbits , and is capable of killing larger prey , such as geese and hares . One polecat was reported to frequently wait at a riverbank and catch eels , which it took back to its burrow . The polecat feeds on eels mostly during lengthy frosts when eels , unable to breathe air at regular intervals because of the ice , congregate at breathing holes . Unlike the stoat and weasel , the polecat readily eats carrion , including that of large ungulates . The European polecat hunts its prey by stalking it and seizing it with its canine teeth , killing the animal with a bite to the neck . This killing method is instinctive , but perfected with practice . The polecat sometimes caches its food , particularly during seasonal <unk> of frogs and toads . Sometimes , the polecat does not kill these , but bites them at the base of the skull , thus paralyzing them and keeping them fresh for later consumption . Though they are normally shy around humans , naturalist Alfred Brehm in his <unk> <unk> mentions an exceptional case in which three polecats attacked a baby in Hesse . During the winter period , when live prey is scarce , the European polecat may raid beehives and feed on the honey . 
 = = = Enemies and competitors = = = 
 The polecat may be preyed upon by red foxes , and both wild and domestic cats . Although the polecat can coexist with the European mink ( though there is one record of a polecat attacking a European mink and dragging it to its burrow ) , it suffers in areas where the invasive American mink also occurs , as the latter species feeds on the same mammalian species as the polecat much more frequently than the European mink , and has been known to drive the polecat out of wetland habitats . In areas where the European polecat is sympatric with the steppe polecat , the two species overlap greatly in choice of food , though the former tends to consume more household foods and birds , while the latter preys on mammals more frequently . There is at least one record of a beech marten killing a polecat . The European polecat may prey on the much smaller least weasel . 
 = = Hybridisation = = 
 In some parts of the British Isles , the abandoning of domestic ferrets has led to ferret @-@ polecat crossbreeds living in the wild . <unk> were likely first brought to Britain after the Norman Conquest of England , or as late as the fourteenth century . It is currently impossible to distinguish pure polecats from hybrids through DNA analysis , as the two forms are too closely related and intermixed to be separated through modern genetic methods . <unk> between the two animals typically have a distinct white throat patch , white feet and white hairs interspersed among the fur . Typically , first generation crossbreeds between polecats and ferrets develop their wild parents ' fear of humans if left with their mothers during the critical socialisation period between 7 ½ and 8 ½ weeks of age . Occasionally , supposed ferret @-@ polecat crossbreeds are advertised as superior to pure ferrets for the purposes of <unk> , though actual crossbreeds are very likely to be less <unk> , less willing to familiarise themselves with dogs , and are more likely to kill their quarry outright rather than simply flush it from its burrow . 
 Polecats are able to hybridise with the rare European mink , producing offspring termed khor ' <unk> by furriers and <unk> ( from Russian words for ferret and mink ) by fanciers . Such hybridisation is very rare in the wild , and typically only occurs where European minks are declining . A polecat @-@ mink hybrid has a poorly defined facial mask , yellow fur on the ears , grey @-@ yellow underfur and long , dark brown guard hairs . It is fairly large , with a male attaining the peak sizes known for European polecats ( weighing 1 @,@ 120 @-@ 1 @,@ 746 g and measuring 41 – 47 cm in length ) , and a female is much larger than female European minks ( weighing 742 g and measuring 37 cm in length ) . The majority of polecat @-@ mink hybrids have skulls bearing greater similarities to those of polecats than to minks . Hybrids can swim well like minks and burrow for food like polecats . They are very difficult to tame and breed , as males are sterile , though females are fertile . The first captive polecat @-@ mink hybrid was created in 1978 by Soviet zoologist Dr. Dmitry <unk> of Novosibirsk . Originally bred for their fur ( which was more valuable than that of either parent species ) , the breeding of these hybrids declined as European mink populations decreased . Studies on the behavioural ecology of free @-@ ranging polecat @-@ mink hybrids in the upper reaches of the Lovat River indicate hybrids will stray from aquatic habitats more readily than pure minks , and will tolerate both parent species entering their territories , though the hybrid 's larger size ( especially the male 's ) may deter intrusion . During the summer period , the diets of wild polecat @-@ mink hybrids are more similar to those of minks than to the polecats , as they feed predominantly on frogs . During the winter , their diets overlap more with those of polecats , and will eat a larger proportion of rodents than in the summer , though they still rely heavily on frogs and rarely scavenge ungulate carcasses as polecats do . 
 The European polecat can also hybridise with the Asian steppe polecat or the North American black @-@ footed ferret to produce fertile offspring . European @-@ steppe polecat hybrids are very rare , despite their sympatry in several areas . Nevertheless , hybrids have been recorded in southern Ukraine , the Kursk and Voronezh Oblasts , the Trans @-@ Carpathians and several other localities . 
 = = Range , history and conservation = = 
 The European polecat is widespread in the western Palaearctic to the Urals in the Russian Federation , though it is absent from Ireland , northern Scandinavia , and much of the Balkans and eastern Adriatic coast . It occurs only marginally in northern Greece . It is found in Morocco in the Rif Mountains , from sea level to 2400 m . Its domesticated form , the ferret , was introduced in Britain , and some Mediterranean islands and New Zealand . 
 = = = The British Isles = = = 
 There are ... some extreme examples , but the fact remains that throughout England and Wales polecats were consistently persecuted at a greater intensity than any other species of mustelid . Did this level of persecution have an effect on overall numbers or did it purely satisfy local vengeance ? ... The polecat may be the best example of a species for which the level of killing really did make a difference to the population . The developing sporting estates then administered the coup de grâce . 
 In Britain , the European polecat was regarded as a serious poultry predator prior to the introduction of wire netting , therefore eliminating it was considered the only option to protect stock . In Kent , for example , at least 42 parishes paid bounties for polecats , of which three extended into the 19th century , though by this time only single individuals were recorded , and usually after gaps of many years . In the Kingdom of Scotland , during the reign of David II , an export duty of <unk> was imposed on each polecat fur trimmer , which was raised to <unk> in 1424 . The species held an important place in Scotland 's fur markets ; the annual Dumfries Fur Fair ( 1816 – 1874 ) sold 400 polecat pelts in 1829 and 600 in 1831 . The following year , a contemporary account described polecat skins as " a drug on the market " . In 1856 , the number of sold pelts decreased to 240 , 168 in 1860 , 12 in 1866 and none in 1869 . The decline was halted with the decrease in the intensity of <unk> during the 20 year interval between the First and Second World Wars . 
 In modern times , the European polecat is found throughout most of rural Wales and in England from Cheshire south to Somerset , and east to Leicestershire and Northamptonshire . The species was reintroduced into the Cumberland and Westmorland , Argyll and on Speyside during the 1970s and 1980s , though the current status of these populations is unknown . Its modern distribution is unclear to a certain extent because of the presence of polecat @-@ ferret hybrids . Aside from the reintroductions , factors aiding the recovery of British polecat populations include an increase in rabbit populations and a lessening of persecution by gamekeepers . Its population has been considered viable since the mid @-@ 1990s . The European polecat is afforded both national and European protection ; it is listed on Schedule 6 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 and Regulation 41 of the Conservation ( Natural Habitats , & c . ) Regulations 1994 and is listed on Annex V of the Habitats Directive . A survey carried out by the Vincent Wildlife Trust in 2015 found that the polecat had spread into areas ( such as East Anglia and South Yorkshire ) where they had not been seen for 100 years . Naturalist Chris Packham termed the spread " ... one of the great natural recoveries . " 
 = = = France = = = 
 The European polecat is present in all of France 's territories , excepting Corsica , and has been in a state of decline for several decades . Nevertheless , it is listed as Least Concern on France 's Red Data Book . The European polecat is rare in numerous regions or départements . In the Rhone @-@ Alps region , its population has undergone a sizeable decline since the 1990s , largely as a consequence of poisoning campaigns against muskrats . A 1999 study on the decline of polecats in this region indicated the species has little chance of surviving there . Elsewhere , it is considered either rare or sporadic in 22 districts and absent or extirpated in 22 others . In Drôme , for example , polecat populations have been decreasing since 1975 , and have disappeared in 27 communes in Isère . Its numbers are declining in Morvan and Ariège , and is thinly distributed in Brittany . Though present in Aquitaine , its numbers have been dropping since the 1950s , and is very rare in the mountain regions . In Normandy , the speed of the polecat 's decline has somewhat decreased . In the alpine départements , its range is limited by altitude , as the species relies on more Mediterranean climates to thrive . It is , however , especially abundant in the irrigated <unk> , but is absent on the eastern part of the area , apparently being restricted by the valleys of the Durance and Rhone Rivers . The largest populations occur in Northern France : Pas de Calais , Central France ; Alsace , Lorraine and the areas of the Loire with the Vendée , which holds the largest record of polecat observations . It is common in all the départements of Champagne @-@ Ardenne . 
 = = = Former Soviet Union = = = 
 The western border of the European polecat 's range in the former Soviet Union begins from the mouth of the Danube in the south approximately to northwest of <unk> , on the Finnish border in the north . In Karelia , its northern border extends from the former point towards the southeast to the <unk> Bay of Lake Onega , thereby passing around the West Karelian uplands from the south and then , passing around these uplands from the east , it suddenly ascends directly to the north passing in particular , near the western shore of <unk> and reaches <unk> . From there , the border line turns northeast , crossing the <unk> and reaching Kem on the White Sea . From Archangelsk , the border reaches Mezen , thus attaining the species ' most northerly range . From the Mezen River 's mouth , the border abruptly returns south , approaching closer to the upper Mezen near 64 ° lat . From there , the polecat 's northern border goes on to the upper <unk> River , and descends further on southwards and in the Urals . Its eastern range apparently extends along the Urals , embracing Sverdlovsk from the west . It is probably absent in the southern Urals , where the steppe polecat occurs . The southern border of the polecat 's range starts in the west of the Danube 's mouth and extends eastward along the coast of the Black Sea reaching the mouth of the Dnepr , from which it moves back from the shore of the Azov Sea and , along it , goes to the mouth of the Don . From the mouth and lower course of the Don , its range passes into the steppe region of western and middle <unk> . The European polecat is absent from the Saratov steppes of <unk> , instead being encountered only in the extreme lower Bolshoy and Maly <unk> Rivers . Further on , the border goes to the north along the Volga River . It steeply returns east somewhat south at the Samara bend , passing around <unk> <unk> , reaching the Urals at the latitude of Magnitogorsk . The range of the polecat within the former Soviet Union has expanded northwards . From 1930 @-@ 1952 for example , the polecat colonised northwestern Karelia and southern Finland . 
 Prior to the First World War , the Russian Empire produced more than 50 % of global polecat skins . The harvesting of polecats in Russia increased substantially after the October Revolution , which coincided with Western Europe 's decline in polecat numbers . The Russian population of polecats decreased somewhat after the Second World War , and their hunting was subsequently discouraged , as polecats were acknowledged to limit harmful rodent populations . 
 = = Diseases and parasites = = 
 The European polecat may suffer from distemper , influenza , the common cold and pneumonia . Occasionally , it is affected by malignant tumours and <unk> . It commonly has broken teeth and , on rarer occasions , fatal abscesses on the jaw , head and neck . In mainland Europe , it is a carrier of trichinosis , leptospirosis , toxoplasmosis and <unk> . Incidences of polecats carrying rabies are high in some localized areas . 
 Ectoparasites known to infest polecats include flea species such as Ctenocephalides felis , <unk> <unk> , <unk> fasciatus and <unk> melis . The tick Ixodes hexagonus is the polecat 's most common ectoparasite , which is sometimes found in large numbers on the neck and behind the ears . Another , less common species to infest polecats is I. <unk> . The biting louse Trichodectes <unk> is also known to infest polecats . 
 Endoparasites carried by polecats include the cestodes Taenia <unk> and T. <unk> and the nematodes <unk> patens , Strongyloides <unk> , <unk> putorii , <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Relationships with humans = = 
 = = = Hunting and fur use = = = 
 European polecat hunting was once a favourite sport of the Westmorland <unk> and the Scots , who hunted them at night in midwinter . However , the majority of polecat deaths caused by humans have been accidental , having mostly been caused by steel traps set for rabbits . Hunting polecats by moonlight was also a popular diversion among midland schoolboys . Until the mid @-@ 19th century , polecats in Britain were hunted from early February to late April with mixed packs of hunting dogs on the Welsh hills and Lakeland fells , though <unk> were used on the fells , the Border country and the Scottish Lowlands . John Tucker Edwardes , the creator of the Sealyham terrier , used captured wild male polecats to test the <unk> of yearling terriers . In the former Soviet Union , polecats are hunted chiefly in late autumn and early winter with guns and hunting dogs , as well as foothold traps and wooden snares . However , even in season , hunters rarely catch more than 10 @-@ 15 polecats . The species does not constitute an important element in former Soviet commercial hunting , and is usually only caught incidentally . 
 The European polecat is a valuable fur bearer , whose pelt ( fitch ) is more valuable than the steppe polecat 's . Its skin is used primarily in the production of jackets , capes and coats . It is particularly well suited for trimmings for women 's clothing . The tail is sometimes used for the making of paintbrushes . One disadvantage of polecat skin , however , is its unpleasant odour , which is difficult to remove . The European polecat was first commercially farmed for its fur in Great Britain during the 1920s , but was only elevated to economic importance in Finland in 1979 . It never became popular in the United States and Canada , due to import laws regarding non @-@ native species . It did gain economic importance in the USSR , though . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Unlike the stoat and least weasel , the European polecat is easy to breed in captivity . According to Aubyn Trevor @-@ <unk> , the European polecat is difficult to tame , but is superior to its domesticated form , the ferret , in bolting rats from their holes due to its greater agility . It is prone to attempting escape once finished bolting rats , but can be easily outrun . Polecat kits can be successfully raised and suckled by mother cats . According to Owen 's Welsh Dictionary , the <unk> ( early Irish settlers in northern Wales ) kept polecats as pets . Attempts to tame the European polecat are generally hampered by the adult 's nervous and unsociable disposition . First generation hybrids between polecats and ferrets , conceived to improve the latter 's bloodlines , produce animals with personalities similar to their wild parents . 
 = = = In culture = = = 
 In the British Isles , the polecat historically has had a negative reputation . References to the polecat in early English literature are often vilifying , usually being synonymous with prostitutes and generally immoral people , as is the case in Shakespeare 's The Merry Wives of Windsor : " Out of my door , you witch , you hag , you baggage , you polecat , you <unk> ! " In some rural areas , the belief persists that the polecat chews off the ears of sleeping sheep and can paralyse or kill men by jumping on them from behind and biting their necks . However , in some regions , it was widely believed among farmers that allowing a polecat to nest in a chicken coop would ensure the animal would not kill the poultry out of gratitude , and instead kill vermin . Cases in which polecats did kill poultry were attributed to animals which were guests at other farms . In Wales , polecats were widely believed to migrate in large numbers every spring to the great peat bog of Tregaron to feed on the breeding frogs there . This was later proven to be incorrect , as the climate in Tregaron is too wet for the European polecat , and it does not hold large frog populations . Compared to other British carnivores , such as otters and badgers , the polecat has received little exposure in popular media . A study conducted on rural school children showed only 3 @.@ 8 % of the surveyed children could identify polecats on photographs , whereas 83 @.@ 7 % correctly identified otters . 
 A caged polecat appears as a key character of Saki 's short story " <unk> <unk> " . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = HMS King George V ( 41 ) = 
 HMS King George V ( pennant number 41 ) was the lead ship of the five British King George V @-@ class battleships of the Royal Navy . Laid down in 1937 and commissioned in 1940 , King George V operated during the Second World War as part of the British Home and Pacific Fleets . In May 1941 , along with HMS Rodney , King George V was involved in the hunt for and pursuit of the German battleship Bismarck , eventually inflicting severe damage which led to the German vessel sinking . On 1 May 1942 destroyer HMS Punjabi sank after a collision with King George V in foggy conditions . King George V took part in Operation Husky ( the allied landings in Sicily ) and bombarded the island of Levanzo and the port of Trapani . She also escorted part of the surrendered Italian Fleet , which included the battleships Andrea Doria and Caio Duilio , to Malta . In 1945 King George V took part in operations against the Japanese in the Pacific . 
 Following the war , King George V spent three years as the flagship of the British Home Fleet , was placed in reserve in 1949 , and scrapped eight years later . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 King George V was built by Vickers @-@ Armstrong at Walker Naval Yard , Newcastle upon Tyne ; she was laid down on 1 January 1937 , launched on 21 February 1939 and commissioned on 11 December 1940 . The ship had an overall length of 745 ft ( 227 @.@ 08 m ) , a beam of 112 ft ( 34 @.@ 24 m ) and a draught of 34 ft ( 10 @.@ 41 m ) . She displaced 38 @,@ 031 tons at normal load and 42 @,@ 237 tons at full load . After her refit in 1944 , she displaced 44 @,@ 460 tons at full load . She could carry 3 @,@ 918 tons of fuel oil , 192 tons of diesel oil , 256 tons of reserve feed water and 444 tons of freshwater . Based on the designed fuel consumption , range was : 4000 nautical miles at 25 knots , 10 @,@ 250 nautical miles at 15 knots and 14 @,@ 400 nautical miles at 10 knots . However , in practice fuel consumption was much higher , and at 10 knots the actual range was about 7000 nautical miles . Designed within the tight 35 @,@ 000 ton limitations of the Washington Naval Treaty , wartime service necessitated increases over the design displacement , seriously reducing freeboard and affecting seaworthiness . This was most acute at the already low bow . With too little buoyancy forward the bows were easily buried even in moderate seas , with spray washing up over both forward turrets . Heavy seas could flood ‘ A ’ turret , drenching both men and machinery within . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 King George V was equipped with eight Admiralty boilers . This configuration was a little more conventional than the Nelson class , with boiler rooms placed side by side and with each pair associated with a turbine room astern of them . The total heating surface of the boiler plants in King George V was 78 @,@ 144 sq. ft . The 416 ton boiler installation produced more than 100 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower , giving a top speed of 28 knots . The eight boilers were more economic in space and fuel than the twenty @-@ four boilers in the battlecruiser HMS Hood . Fewer , but larger , boilers lowered the weight per unit of heat delivered , as did increased boiler efficiency and consumption of fuel per unit area of heating surface . This made King George V the fastest battleship in the British fleet but slower than the German , French or the new Italian capital ships , or the battlecruisers HMS Hood , Repulse and HMS Renown . 
 King George V had four sets of Parsons geared turbines . Two main turbines were arranged in series and drove a shaft through double helical gears . An astern turbine was incorporated in the exhaust casing of the low @-@ pressure turbine , and a cruising turbine was coupled directly to the high @-@ pressure turbine . A speed of 28 @.@ 5 knots was expected at standard displacement and 27 @.@ 5 knots at full @-@ load displacement on normal output ; corresponding speeds at overload condition were 29 @.@ 25 and 28 @.@ 25 knots respectively . The turbine unit was a low @-@ speed type ( 2 @,@ 257 rpm ) coupled to a single reduction gear which produced 236 rpm at the propeller shaft . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 = = = = Main battery = = = = 
 The tight limitations of the Washington Naval Treaty raised many challenges and required difficult compromises if they were to be met . To avoid the class being outgunned by the new ships of foreign navies , especially as by the mid @-@ 1930s the Treaty had been renounced by Japan and Italy , Churchill wrote to the First Lord of the Admiralty in 1936 , voicing strong objections to the proposed armament of 10 14 @-@ inch guns . His proposal was for 9 16 @-@ inch guns . However , when completed King George V mounted ten 14 @-@ inch ( 360 mm ) guns . They were mounted in one Mark II twin turret forward and two Mark III quadruple turrets , one forward and one aft . They could be elevated 40 degrees and depressed 3 degrees . Training arcs were : " A " turret , 286 degrees ; " B " turret , 270 degrees and " Y " turret , 270 degrees . Training and elevating was achieved through a hydraulic drive , with rates of two and eight degrees per second , respectively . A full gun broadside weighed 15 @,@ 950 pounds ; a salvo could be fired every 40 seconds . The quadruple turrets weighed 1 @,@ 582 tons , the twin turret 915 tons . The turrets were designed by the Vickers Armstrong 's Elswick Works , but sets of each type of equipment were manufactured by Vickers Armstrongs in Barrow . A considerable amount of design effort was expended to make the turrets as <unk> as possible . This complicated the mechanical design of the turrets , particularly the quadruple mountings . Due to insufficient clearances and slightly distorted link mechanisms , failures in the intricate safety interlocks in the loading sequence for antiflash precautions caused jams during drills and practice firing . King George V used an Admiralty Fire Control Table Mark IX to control her main armament . 
 = = = = Secondary battery = = = = 
 The secondary armament consisted of 16 × 5 @.@ 25 @-@ inch ( 133 mm ) guns in eight twin mounts , weighing 81 tons each . They were grouped at the four corners of the citadel , with a twin mount on the main deck and another superimposed above it nearer amidships . This disposition gave better arcs of fire , freedom from blast , more separation of the magazines and a better arrangement of the ammunition supply . The cupolas for these mounts revolved on either the upper or superstructure deck ; between deck mountings travelled on roller paths on the armoured deck . This permitted a flat @-@ trajectory or high @-@ angle fire . Loading was semi @-@ automatic , normal rate of fire was ten to twelve rounds per minute . The maximum range of the Mk I guns was 24 @,@ 070 yards ( 22 @,@ 009 @.@ 6 m ) at a 45 @-@ degree elevation , the anti @-@ aircraft ceiling was 49 @,@ 000 feet ( 14 @,@ 935 @.@ 2 m ) . The guns could be elevated to 70 degrees and depressed to 5 degrees . However , the guns could only practically fire seven to eight rounds per minute , due to the heavy weight of the shell and the fact that the 5 @.@ 25 @-@ inch round was semi @-@ fixed , requiring the crew to separately load the cartridge and shell into the breech . King George V introduced the High Angle Control System Mark <unk> anti @-@ aircraft fire control system to the Royal Navy , which , along with the Mk IV Pom @-@ Pom Director , pioneered the use of the <unk> Rate Unit . 
 = = = = Anti @-@ aircraft battery = = = = 
 The King George V design had four 0 @.@ 5 @-@ inch quadruple machine gun mounts , but in 1939 these were replaced by two Mark VI pom @-@ pom mounts . In 1940 , to combat air attack , four Unrotated Projectile mountings were fitted , on " B " turret , two on " Y " turret , one replaced a pom @-@ pom mount added in 1939 at the stern . The pom @-@ poms mounted in the King George V were designed and produced by Vickers Armstrongs as a result of a post @-@ First World War requirement for a multiple mounting which was effective against close @-@ range bombers or torpedo planes . The first model , tested in 1927 , was superior to anything developed in other countries at the time and in 1938 the Mark VI * had a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 400 feet per second , a 1 @.@ 594 @-@ inch bore and a barrel length of 40 calibres . They fired a 1 @.@ 8 @-@ pound shell at a rate of 96 – 98 rounds per minute for controlled fire and 115 rounds per minute for automatic fire . The range of the Mark VI * was 6 @,@ 800 yards , at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 300 feet per second . The Mark VI octuple mount weighed 16 tons . The Mark VII quadruple mount weighed 10 @.@ 8 tons if power operated ; it could be elevated to 80 degrees and depressed to 10 degrees at a rate of 25 degrees per second which was also the rate of train . The normal ammunition supply on board for the Mark VI was 1 @,@ 800 rounds per barrel . King George V introduced the Mk IV Pom @-@ pom director to the Royal Navy in 1940 , becoming the first ship in the world to feature gyroscopic target tracking in <unk> anti @-@ aircraft directors . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 The first of her class to be completed , King George V was commissioned at her shipyard and sailed for Rosyth in Scotland on 16 October 1940 ; there she took on board her ammunition and began her sea trials . By the end of the year she had joined the Home Fleet at Scapa Flow . She crossed the Atlantic early in 1941 to take Lord Halifax , the Ambassador to the United States , to Annapolis and covered an east @-@ bound convoy on her return , arriving back at Scapa Flow on 6 February . Her next task was to provide distant cover for Operation Claymore , the Royal Marines raid on the Lofoten islands off the north @-@ west coast of Norway . She escorted further Atlantic convoys , HX 104 and HX 115 during March . 
 = = = Action with Bismarck = = = 
 When Bismarck along with the heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen broke out into the Atlantic Ocean , King George V sailed on 22 May with HMS Victorious and eleven cruisers and destroyers in support of the cruiser patrols off Iceland . King George V was the flagship of Admiral Sir John Tovey , who commanded the force . King George V was still 300 to 400 miles away on the morning of 24 May , when HMS Prince of Wales and Hood engaged both Bismarck and Prinz Eugen . Hood was sunk and Prince of Wales was damaged when taking fire from both Bismarck and Prinz Eugen and forced to retire . The German Battleship Bismarck , although damaged , and Prinz Eugen continued south . 
 The British re @-@ located Bismarck at 10 : 30 on 26 May , when a Catalina flying boat of RAF Coastal Command sighted her , heading for the French port of Brest . Rodney and King George V were still about 125 miles away . The aircraft carrier HMS Ark Royal was ordered to launch an air attack , and at 22 : 25 her torpedo bombers , a flight of Fairey <unk> damaged Bismarck , slowing her down and jamming her rudder , forcing her to turn back out into the Atlantic , away from the safety of port . At 15 : 00 Rodney joined King George V and they maintained 22 knots – which was nearly maximum speed for Rodney . King George V had only 32 percent of her fuel left while Rodney had only enough fuel to continue the chase at high speed until 8 : 00 the following day . 
 Admiral Tovey signalled his battle plan to Rodney just before sunrise on 27 May ; she was free to <unk> independently as long as she conformed generally to the movements of King George V. Both ships were to close the range to 15 @,@ 000 yards as quickly as possible , then turn for broadside fire . 
 At 08 : 15 HMS Norfolk spotted Bismarck and turned away out of range . She soon sighted the other British ships off her starboard quarter , and informed them that Bismarck was roughly 50 @,@ 000 yards to the southwest . By 08 : 43 King George V had Bismarck in sight , at 20 @,@ 500 yards . Four minutes later Rodney opened fire . King George V followed suit in less than a minute . Bismarck answered almost immediately , straddling Rodney on her second salvo . By 08 : 59 King George V had closed to 16 @,@ 000 yards and all her 14 @-@ inch guns were firing ; Rodney was firing full 16 @-@ inch salvoes . Bismarck concentrated all her remaining guns on King George V , but only an occasional shell came close . At 09 : 14 King George V , at 12 @,@ 000 yards , had opened fire with her 5 @.@ 25 @-@ inch guns , and Rodney had moved to 8 @,@ 500 – 9 @,@ 000 yards . 
 At 09 : 27 a shell hitting Bismarck penetrated the hydraulic machinery in turret ' Anton ' and disabled it , causing the guns to run down to maximum depression . Her topsides were wrecked , and a large fire burned amidships . After firing steadily for over 30 minutes , without any problems , King George V , by 09 : 27 , began having trouble with her main battery , and from that point onward every salvo missed at least one gun due to failures in the safety interlocks for antiflash protection and from ammunition feed jams . At 10 : 21 , with Bismarck silenced and obviously sinking , Admiral Tovey detailed the cruiser Dorsetshire to finish her off with torpedoes . King George V fired 339 <unk> ( <unk> ) and over 700 <unk> ( <unk> ) shells during the action . As both Rodney and King George V were low on fuel they returned to port at 19 knots ( 35 km / h ) , escorted by eleven destroyers to guard against German air or submarine attack . The next day , after the escort was reduced to three destroyers , four German aircraft did attack but scored no hits . Both King George V and Rodney returned to port safely , but the destroyer HMS Mashona , sent ahead to refuel , was bombed and sunk . 
 = = = Collision damage = = = 
 After repairs and adjustments to her guns , King George V attacked German shipping in the <unk> Fjord , Norway , in October 1941 . She then covered convoys to Russia . On 1 May 1942 she was operating with USS Washington as an escort to Convoy PQ 15 , and collided with the destroyer HMS Punjabi , which had manoeuvred to avoid a mine and crossed her bow in dense fog . Punjabi was cut in two and King George V had 40 feet of her bow badly damaged . King George V entered the Gladstone Dock in Liverpool on 9 May for repairs by Cammell Laird , and returned to Scapa Flow on 1 July 1942 to resume convoy escort duty . 
 = = = Mediterranean operations = = = 
 In May 1943 , King George V was moved to Gibraltar in preparation for Operation Husky . King George V and her sister ship HMS Howe were allocated to the reserve covering group when the operation got under way on 1 July . The two ships bombarded Trapani in Sicily on 12 July and also helped defend against an air raid whilst in Algiers prior to departing for Operation Avalanche , ( the Allied invasion of Italy ) . The two ships also bombarded the islands of Levanzo and Favignana , after which they were in the reserve group for the Salerno landings ( Operation Avalanche ) which began on 9 September . King George V escorted part of the Italian Fleet , including the battleships Andrea Doria and Caio Duilio , to Malta after the armistice and with Howe provided cover for the 1st Airborne Division who were transported to Taranto in support of Operation Slapstick from 9 to 11 September by the cruiser USS Boise and the fast minelayer HMS Abdiel . The battleship then escorted a naval force which occupied the Italian naval base at Taranto . She later escorted surrendered Italian ships from Malta to Alexandria . After bombarding German positions during the Salerno landings , King George V returned to the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Pacific operations = = = 
 King George V was in Liverpool for an overhaul from March to June , 1944 ; it included the installation of additional radar gear , more anti @-@ aircraft guns , improved accommodation and ventilation . On 28 October 1944 King George V sailed from Scapa Flow under the command of Admiral Sir Bruce Fraser to join other Royal Navy units assembling at Trincomalee in Ceylon . A stop at Alexandria en route enabled her to divert to Milos in the Aegean Sea to bombard German positions . On 1 December she resumed her eastward journey , arriving in Trincomalee on 15 December . King George V got under way again on 16 January 1945 . The flotilla , known as Task Force 63 , comprised King George V , the aircraft carriers HMS Illustrious , Indomitable , Indefatigable and Victorious , four cruisers and ten destroyers . The first stage of the voyage was covering the 11 @,@ 000 nautical miles to Sydney ; en route the force attacked oil refineries on Sumatra in Operation Meridian . They also practised replenishment @-@ at @-@ sea and beat off a Japanese air attack , with King George V 's anti @-@ aircraft crews shooting down one Mitsubishi Ki @-@ 21 . 
 Joined by Howe and re @-@ designated Task Force 57 , the British Pacific Fleet was again involved in operations in late March 1945 , when it launched attacks on the <unk> @-@ Gunto airfields , a task it repeated in early May . On 4 May 1945 King George V led battleships and cruisers in a forty @-@ five @-@ minute bombardment of Japanese air facilities in the Ryukyu Islands . As the Allies approached the Japanese homeland , King George V was dispatched in mid @-@ July to join the US battleships in a bombardment of industrial installations at Hitachi . King George V fired 267 rounds from her 14 @-@ inch guns during this operation . The task force then moved on to Hamamatsu in southern Honshu , where it carried out a further bombardment of aviation factories . During the Okinawa campaign , the battleship supported four fast carriers of the British Pacific Fleet . Her last offensive action was a night bombardment of Hamamatsu on 29 and 30 July 1945 . 
 With the dropping of the atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki and the surrender that followed , King George V moved with other units of the British Pacific Fleet into Tokyo Bay to be present at the surrender ceremonies . 
 = = = Post war = = = 
 In January 1946 she conveyed the Duke and Duchess of Gloucester on an official visit to Australia , returning to Portsmouth in March . She was flagship of the Home Fleet until December 1946 , after becoming a training vessel . 
 King George V 's active naval career was terminated by the Royal Navy in June 1950 , when she and her sister @-@ ships went into reserve and were mothballed . King George V was the first large warship to be preserved in this fashion . This involved sealing the armament , machinery and boilers against damp and installing dehumidifiers throughout . In December 1955 , she was downgraded to extended reserve and in 1957 the decision was taken to scrap the four ships . The following year King George V was moved from her berth in Gareloch to the ship breaking firm of Arnott Young and Co. in Dalmuir to undergo dismantling . 
 = = Refits = = 
 During her career , King George V was refitted on several occasions in order to update her equipment . The following are the dates and details of the refits undertaken : 
 = HAT @-@ P @-@ 33b = 
 HAT @-@ P @-@ 33b is a planet in the orbit of HAT @-@ P @-@ 33 , which lies 1 @,@ 367 light years away from Earth . Its discovery was reported in June 2011 , although it was suspected to be a planet as early as 2004 . The planet is about three @-@ fourths the mass of Jupiter , but is almost eighty percent larger than Jupiter is ; this inflation has , as with the discovery of similar planets WASP @-@ 17b and HAT @-@ P @-@ 32b , raised the question of what ( other than temperature ) causes these planets to become so large . 
 HAT @-@ P @-@ 33b was difficult to confirm because its star experiences high jitter , which disrupted the ability to obtain accurate measurements . As such , a greater number of radial velocity observations were collected to make the confirmation , although it was later determined that HAT @-@ P @-@ 33b could not be determined using the radial velocity method . The planet 's confirmation came about after the planet 's light curve was collected , and the Blendanal process ruled out most false positive scenarios . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 HAT @-@ P @-@ 33b 's existence was first suggested after observations by the six @-@ telescope <unk> collaboration , a project that searches the sky for planets in transit of , or crossing in front of , their host stars . The presence of a planet in HAT @-@ P @-@ 33 's orbit had been suspected as early as 2004 , although high levels of jitter were detected . This jitter , or a random and shaky appearance that clouds the accuracy of measurements , made it difficult to easily verify the radial velocity of the planetary candidate 's host star , which usually leads summarily to the planet 's confirmation . 
 As a start , the spectrum of HAT @-@ P @-@ 33 was composed using the digital speedometer at the 1 @.@ 5 @-@ meter Fred Lawrence Whipple Observatory in Arizona . The collected data found that the star was a single dwarf star exhibiting a slight rotation . Several of its parameters , including its effective temperature and surface gravity , were found . Additionally , the SOPHIE échelle spectrograph at a 1 @.@ 93 @-@ meter telescope at France 's Haute @-@ Provence Observatory was used to observe the star . The resulting data invited the possibility that radial velocity measurements , which can exhibit anomalies that often indicate the presence of a planet , may have been because of background distortion ( and not a planet ) . This possibility significantly complicated the ability of scientists to verify this planet . After the observations , follow @-@ ups were postponed for several years . 
 Between September 2008 and December 2010 , twenty @-@ two spectra were collected using the High Resolution Echelle Spectrometer ( HIRES ) instrument at Hawaii 's W.M. Keck Observatory . This data was used to derive HAT @-@ P @-@ 33 's radial velocity . A far greater number of spectra were gathered for HAT @-@ P @-@ 33 than the number usually gathered for planetary candidates to compensate for the data 's jitter effect . It was concluded that the jitter in the data was caused by stellar activity and not the presence of other planets . 
 It became apparent to the investigating science team that radial velocity data alone could not prove the existence of HAT @-@ P @-@ 33b . As such , photometric observations of HAT @-@ P @-@ 33 were conducted using the Fred Lawrence Whipple Observatory 's 1 @.@ 2 @-@ meter telescope , which hosted the <unk> CCD instrument . This data was used to create the light curve of HAT @-@ P @-@ 33 . In doing so , a slight dimming was observed where HAT @-@ P @-@ 33b was believed to have transited its star . 
 Using a program called Blendanal , similar to the Blender technique used to verify the planets discovered by Kepler , the astronomers observing HAT @-@ P @-@ 33 hoped to rule out false positive alternatives that could explain the planet @-@ like signal seen in HAT @-@ P @-@ 33 's light curve and radial velocity . The use of Blendanal ruled out the possibilities that the signal was caused by that of a hierarchical triple star or a mixture between a bright star and a binary star in the background . The possibility that HAT @-@ P @-@ 33 is actually a binary star whose secondary companion is too dim to be distinguishable from the brighter star could not be ruled out . However , the data indicated that the planet HAT @-@ P @-@ 33b did indeed exist . 
 The discoveries of the high @-@ radii planets HAT @-@ P @-@ 33b and HAT @-@ P @-@ 32b , along with that of WASP @-@ 17b , contributed to the question of what factors , besides temperature , contribute to the large radii of these inflated planets . The discrepancy lies in planet WASP @-@ 18b , which is far hotter than the newly discovered HAT planets and WASP @-@ 17b , but has a far smaller radius . 
 The discoveries of HAT @-@ P @-@ 33b and HAT @-@ P @-@ 32b were reported together in the Astrophysical Journal . The paper was submitted on June 6 , 2011 . The authors of the discovery paper of the planets suggested the usage of the Spitzer Space Telescope to observe the occultation of HAT @-@ P @-@ 33b behind its star to better define its characteristics . 
 = = Host star = = 
 HAT @-@ P @-@ 33 , or GSC <unk> @-@ <unk> , is an F @-@ type star that lies 419 parsecs ( 1 @,@ 367 light years ) away from Earth . The star has 1 @.@ 403 solar masses and 1 @.@ 777 solar radii ; the star is , in other words , 40 % more massive than and 77 % larger than the Sun . With an effective temperature of <unk> K , HAT @-@ P @-@ 33 is hotter than the Sun . It is also more metal @-@ rich , with a metallicity that is measured at [ Fe / H ] = 0 @.@ 05 . This means that HAT @-@ P @-@ 33 has 12 % more iron than the amount measured in the Sun . HAT @-@ P @-@ 33 is younger than the Sun , at an estimated age of 2 @.@ 4 billion years . The surface gravity of the star is determined to be 4 @.@ 09 . All the values above are determined with the assumption that planet HAT @-@ P @-@ 33b has an irregular , or eccentric , orbit . 
 HAT @-@ P @-@ 33 has an apparent magnitude of 11 @.@ 89 . It cannot be seen from Earth with the naked eye because it is so dim . 
 Because high levels of jitter have been detected in the spectrum of HAT @-@ P @-@ 33 , the ability to collect the most sensitive radial velocity measurements possible has been dulled . The loss of accuracy has prevented astronomers from disregarding the possibility that HAT @-@ P @-@ 33 is actually a binary star , where the secondary , dimmer companion is visually indistinguishable from the brighter primary companion . If this is the case , then the dimmer star in the HAT @-@ P @-@ 33 system would have to have a mass that is less than 0 @.@ 55 times that of the Sun . A search for a binary companion star using adaptive optics at the MMT Observatory was negative . 
 It is possible that other planets with shorter orbital periods than HAT @-@ P @-@ 33b exist in the system . However , at the time of HAT @-@ P @-@ 33b 's discovery , not enough radial velocity measurements had been collected to determine if this is so . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 HAT @-@ P @-@ 33b is a planet that has 0 @.@ 764 Jupiter masses and 1 @.@ 827 Jupiter radii . In other words , it is about three @-@ fourths as massive as Jupiter , but is slightly less than twice Jupiter 's size . HAT @-@ P @-@ 33b orbits its star at an average distance of 0 @.@ <unk> AU , which is about 5 % of the average distance between the Sun and Earth . This orbit is completed every 3 @.@ <unk> days ( 83 @.@ 39 hours ) . HAT @-@ P @-@ 33b has an equilibrium temperature of 1838 K , which is almost fifteen times hotter than the measured equilibrium temperature of Jupiter ( 124 K ) . 
 The best fit for the shape of HAT @-@ P @-@ 33b 's orbit suggests that the orbit is slightly elliptical , as the planet 's orbital eccentricity is fit to 0 @.@ 148 . However , because the star HAT @-@ P @-@ 33 has such a high level of jitter , it is difficult to constrain the planet 's eccentricity with accuracy . Most of the planet 's defined characteristics are based on the assumption that HAT @-@ P @-@ 33b has an elliptical orbit , although the planet 's discoverers have also derived HAT @-@ P @-@ 33b 's characteristics on the assumption that the planet has a circular orbit . The elliptical model has been chosen because it is considered to be the most likely scenario . 
 HAT @-@ P @-@ 33b has an orbital inclination of <unk> as seen from Earth . The planet is , thus , almost edge @-@ on when seen from Earth . The planet has been observed to transit its host star . 
 = Dallas Buyers Club = 
 Dallas Buyers Club is a 2013 American biographical drama film , co @-@ written by Craig Borten and Melisa Wallack , and directed by Jean @-@ Marc Vallée . The film tells the story of Ron Woodroof , an AIDS patient diagnosed in the mid 1980s when HIV / AIDS treatments were under @-@ researched , while the disease was not understood and highly stigmatized . As part of the experimental AIDS treatment movement , he smuggled unapproved pharmaceutical drugs into Texas for treating his symptoms , and distributed them to fellow people with AIDS by establishing the " Dallas Buyers Club " while facing opposition from the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) . Two fictional supporting characters , Dr. Eve Saks ( Jennifer Garner ) , and Rayon ( Jared Leto ) , were composite roles created from the writer 's interviews with transgender AIDS patients , activists , and doctors . 
 Screenwriter Borten interviewed Woodroof in 1992 and wrote the script , which he polished with writer Wallack in 2000 , and then sold to producer Robbie Brenner . Several other actors , directors , and producers who were attached at various times to the development of the film left the project . Universal Pictures also tried to make the film , but did not . A couple of screenwriters wrote drafts that were rejected . In 2009 , producer Brenner involved McConaughey , because of his Texas origins , the same as Woodroof 's . Brenner selected the first draft , written by Borten and Wallack , for the film , and then Vallée was set to direct the film . Principal photography began on November 11 , 2012 , in New Orleans , Louisiana , continuing for 25 days of filming , which also included shooting in Baton Rouge . Brenner and Rachel Winter co @-@ produced the film . The official soundtrack album was featured by various artists , and was released digitally on October 29 , 2013 , by the Relativity Music Group . 
 Dallas Buyers Club premiered at the 2013 Toronto International Film Festival and was released theatrically in the United States on November 1 , 2013 , by Focus Features , strategically entering wide release on November 22 for award season . The film grossed over $ 27 million domestically and $ 27 @.@ 9 million internationally , the box office revenue returned over $ 55 million against a budget of $ 5 million in 182 @-@ days of a theatrical run . It grossed over $ 4 @.@ 5 million from DVD , and over $ 3 million from Blu @-@ ray sales . The film received universal critical acclaim , resulting in numerous accolades . Most praised the performances of McConaughey and Leto , who received the Academy Award for Best Actor and for Best Supporting Actor , respectively , at the 86th Academy Awards , making this the first film since Mystic River ( 2003 ) , and only the fifth movie ever , to win both awards . The film also won the award for Best Makeup and Hairstyling , and garnered nominations for Best Picture , Best Original Screenplay , and Best Editing . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1985 , Dallas electrician and rodeo cowboy Ron Woodroof is diagnosed with AIDS and given 30 days to live . He initially refuses to accept the diagnosis , but remembers having unprotected sex with an intravenous drug @-@ using prostitute . He is soon ostracized by family and friends , gets fired from his job , and is eventually evicted from his home . At the hospital , he is tended to by Dr. Eve Saks , who tells him that they are testing a drug called zidovudine ( AZT ) , an antiretroviral drug which is thought to prolong the life of AIDS patients — and is the only drug approved by the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) for testing on humans . Saks informs him that in the clinical trials , half the patients receive the drug and the other half are given a placebo , as this is the only way they can determine if the drug is working . 
 Woodroof bribes a hospital worker to get him the AZT . As soon as he begins taking it , he finds his health deteriorating ( exacerbated by his cocaine use ) . When he returns to the hospital , he meets Rayon , a drug addicted , HIV @-@ positive trans woman , toward whom he is hostile . As his health worsens , he drives to a Mexican hospital to get more AZT . Dr. Vass , who has had his American medical license revoked , tells him that the AZT is " poisonous " and " kills every cell it comes into contact with " . He instead prescribes <unk> and the protein peptide T , which are not approved in the US . Three months later , Woodroof finds his health much improved . It occurs to him that he could make money by importing the drugs and selling them to other HIV @-@ positive patients . Since the drugs are not illegal , he is able to get them over the border by masquerading as a priest and swearing that they are for personal use . Meanwhile , Dr. Saks also begins to notice the negative effects of AZT , but is told by her supervisor Dr. Sevard that it cannot be discontinued . 
 Woodroof begins selling the drugs on the street . He comes back into contact with Rayon , with whom he reluctantly sets up business since she can bring many more clients . The pair establish the " Dallas Buyers Club " , charging $ 400 per month for membership , and it becomes extremely popular . He gradually begins to respect Rayon and think of her as a friend . When Woodroof has a heart attack caused by a recently acquired dose of interferon , Sevard learns of the club and the alternative medication . He is angry that it is interrupting his trial , while Richard Barkley of the FDA confiscates the interferon and threatens to have Woodroof arrested . Saks agrees that there are benefits to AIDS medicine buyers clubs ( of which there are several around the country ) but feels powerless to change anything . The processes that the FDA uses to research , test and approve drugs is seen as flawed and a part of the problem for AIDS patients . Saks and Woodroof strike up a friendship . 
 Barkley gets a police permit to raid the Buyers Club , but can do nothing but give Woodroof a fine . In 1987 , the FDA changes its regulations such that any unapproved drug is also illegal . As the Club runs out of funds , Rayon , who is addicted to cocaine , begs her father for money and tells Woodroof that she has sold her life insurance policy to raise money . Woodroof travels to Mexico and gets more of the peptide T. Upon return , Ron finds out that Rayon died after being taken to the hospital . Saks is also upset by her death , and is asked to resign when the hospital discovers she is linking patients with the Buyers Club . She refuses to comply and insists that she would have to be fired . 
 As time passes , Woodroof shows compassion towards gay , lesbian , and transgender members of the club and making money becomes less of a concern ; his priority is provision of the drugs . Peptide T gets increasingly difficult to acquire , and in 1987 he files a lawsuit against the FDA . He seeks the legal right to take the protein , which has been confirmed as non @-@ toxic but is still not approved . The judge is compassionate toward him and admonishes the FDA , but lacks the legal tools to do anything . As the film ends , on @-@ screen text reveals that the FDA later allowed Woodroof to take peptide T for personal use and that he died of AIDS in 1992 , seven years later than his doctors initially predicted . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Matthew McConaughey as Ron Woodroof , a real @-@ life AIDS patient who smuggled unapproved pharmaceutical drugs into Texas when he found them effective at improving his symptoms . In an interview with CBS News ' Lee Cowan in February 2014 , McConaughey said that he selected the role because he thought it was not just a normal story , but it was a story of a " wild man . " McConaughey was born and raised near Dallas , so he was very familiar with the culture . Additionally , he thought that the script was " incredibly human , with no sentimentality . " McConaughey lost nearly 50 pounds ( 22 kilograms ) to play Woodroof in the film . 
 Jennifer Garner as Dr. Eve Saks , who treats AIDS patients like Woodroof and Rayon . Upon Garner 's casting , after reading the script she expressed : " I had heard about it , and I had seen pictures of Matthew losing weight . And really couldn 't imagine how I was going to do it , and was so happy at home . " 
 Jared Leto as Rayon , a fictional trans woman with HIV who helps Woodroof . To accurately portray his role , Leto lost 30 pounds ( 13 kilograms ) , shaved his eyebrows and waxed his entire body . He stated the portrayal was grounded in his meeting transgender people while researching the role . He stated that , when he moved to Los Angeles in 1991 , he had a roommate who died of AIDS . He " [ worked ] on Rayon 's voice for weeks " and refused to break character during filming ; director Vallée stated : " I don 't know Leto . Jared never showed me Jared . " 
 Denis O 'Hare as Dr. Sevard 
 Steve Zahn as Tucker 
 Michael O 'Neill as Richard Barkley 
 Dallas Roberts as David Wayne 
 Griffin Dunne as Dr. Vass 
 Kevin Rankin as T. J. 
 Bradford Cox as " Sunflower " , Rayon 's lover , a cross @-@ dresser dying of AIDS 
 Scott Takeda as Mr. Yamata 
 Adam Dunn ( cameo ) as a bartender 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The film is based on the real life of Ron Woodroof , a patient of HIV and AIDS , who was the subject of a lengthy 1992 article in The Dallas Morning News written by journalist and author Bill <unk> . A month before Woodroof died in September 1992 , screenwriter Craig Borten was told about the story by his friend , so he went and interviewed him to create the screenplay ; Borten recorded many hours of interviews with Woodroof and had access to his personal journals . Borten wrote a script for what he believed would make a great movie and attempted to attract interest in making the film in mid 1996 , with Dennis Hopper attached to direct . Columbia Pictures was set to buy the script but the film was unable to secure financial backing . 
 In an interview , Borten revealed that he met Melisa Wallack in 2000 and asked her to help with the script , to which she said yes . In 2001 , after one year of working on the script , they sold it to producer Robbie Brenner , who then set Marc Forster to direct the film for Universal Pictures , but left due to some personal delays . In June 2008 , Craig Gillespie and Ryan Gosling were in talks to join the film , which was to be produced by David Bushell and Marc Abraham for Universal Pictures and Strike Entertainment . Chase Palmer was writing the script that time around , and screenwriters Guillermo Arriaga and Stephen <unk> had reportedly also written the subsequent drafts for the film . In 2009 , producer Robbie Brenner got involved again and rejected all the rewrites of the script , and the original version by Borten and Wallack was sent to actor Matthew McConaughey to see if the Dallas native would be interested in playing the role . On March 9 , 2011 , Jean @-@ Marc Vallée was confirmed to direct the film based on the script by Borten and Wallack . Rachel Winter also attached to produce the film . 
 On November 14 , 2012 , it was announced that <unk> Films had acquired the Canadian rights while Entertainment One would handle the United Kingdom rights for the film . On April 23 , 2013 , Focus Features acquired the United States and Latin American distribution rights for the theatrical release of the film . In May 2013 , Voltage Pictures and Truth Entertainment closed a deal to produce the film . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 In 1996 , Woody Harrelson was attached to the film to play Ron Woodroof , but left the film because of financing issues . In 2002 , Brad Pitt was attached to play the lead role . In June 2008 , Ryan Gosling was in talks to join the film for the lead role to play Woodroof , but couldn 't take the role . In 2009 , producer Brenner sent the script to actor Matthew McConaughey and got him involved to star in the film . Wondering whether the Texas native was interested in playing another Texas native ( he 's originally from Uvalde ) , Brenner says that he asked himself : " ' Who is Ron Woodroof ? ' And in my mind , it was Matthew . Like Ron , he 's from Dallas , he 's handsome , and he has a twinkle in the eye . Matthew also has intensity and intelligence like Ron did , mixed with that cowboy charisma and fighter 's spirit . He was beyond perfect for the role . " Writer Borten said : " Ron was a very charismatic , funny and persuasive , a real salesman . Even if he was making fun of you , you wanted him to continue because he was so charming . Matthew possesses a lot of those same qualities . " On March 9 , 2011 , Los Angeles Times confirmed that McConaughey would star in the film as Woodroof and quoted McConaughey as saying : " It 's a great script and a great story . And I think it can be a great movie . " Woodroof 's sister Sharon Woodroof Braden was reportedly pleased with the casting of McConaughey as Woodroof because he had a similar swagger and personality . She had shown concern earlier in the development process when Pitt and Gosling were attached , due to their personalities not matching Woodroof 's . 
 On May 11 , 2011 , Hilary Swank was reportedly in talks to join the film with McConaughey 's role confirmed . On October 3 , 2012 , it was announced that Swank had dropped out of the film and that Gael Garcia Bernal was in talks to play an HIV patient who meets Woodroof in the hospital and helps him in the club . On November 6 , The Hollywood Reporter confirmed that Jared Leto would be returning to acting to play the role which Bernal was previously in talks to play . In January 2014 , Jared Leto has admitted that he was sent a script 15 years ago but never read it . When Leto was asked about his role , he said : " This was a really special movie . I think it was the role of a lifetime . It 's one of the best things I 've ever done . " He also said that he tried to stay focused on the role because he knew it was an incredible opportunity . On November 14 , Dallas Roberts and Steve Zahn joined the film ; Roberts would play David Wayne , Ron 's defense attorney , while Zahn would play a Dallas police officer who is sympathetic to Ron . On November 26 , Griffin Dunne , Denis O 'Hare , and Bradford Cox joined the cast when the shooting was underway in New Orleans . 
 McConaughey lost 47 pounds ( 21 kg ) for the role , going from 183 pounds ( 83 kg ) to 136 pounds ( 62 kg ) . He reportedly stayed indoors in his Texas mansion for six months to become paler and ceased socializing and had to find new ways to entertain himself , which made him " smarter " . When he reached as low as 143 lbs , his eyesight began to fail . He began to feel extremely weak to the point that he would be sore from doing five push @-@ ups and his legs would lock up after running 30 feet . Leto lost over 30 pounds ( 14 kg ) for the role and said that he had stopped eating to lose weight quicker ; his lowest record weight was 114 pounds ( 52 kg ) . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began on November 11 , 2012 in New Orleans , Louisiana . Filming also took place in Baton Rouge . Jennifer Garner has stated that the film was shot very quickly over just 25 days and has remarked that McConaughey " gave an even wilder performance in takes that didn 't appear onscreen " . McConaughey stated that " I was riding a new way of making a film . There were no lights , one camera , 15 @-@ minute takes . " Half of the shots were lit with artificial light and the other half were not . Vallée said : " I now had a perfect opportunity to try to shoot an entire movie without artificial lights , using the Alexa digital camera . Like the RED , the Alexa offers a broad spectrum of colors and shadows in even the darkest natural lighting conditions . I felt that the approach was right for this project . The look and feel became that we were capturing reality ; even though Dallas Buyers Club is not a documentary in content or structure , it could have that subtle quality . We shot the movie 100 % handheld with two lenses , a 35 @-@ millimeter and a 50 @-@ millimeter . These get close to the actors and don 't skew the images . ( Director of Photography ) Yves Belanger adjusted for every shot at 400 or 1600 ASA ( light sensitivity ) , displaying different color balance . " 
 Jared Leto , who played Rayon , an AIDS patient and trans woman with a drug problem in the film , refused to break character for the whole 25 @-@ days shooting . During the interviews of people with the New York Times at TIFF premiere , who were involved in the film said about Leto that , in a sense , they never really met Mr. Leto until months after the shoot was over . Leto said about his character , " That phrase staying in character to me really means commitment , focus , and for a role like this that 's so intense and challenging and extreme in a lot of ways , it demanded my full attention . " 
 = = Music = = 
 The official soundtrack album was announced on October 16 , 2013 , and it was released digitally on October 29 , 2013 , by the Relativity Music Group . The soundtrack album featured various artists , include Leto 's band Thirty Seconds to Mars , Tegan and Sara , Awolnation , The Naked and Famous , T. Rex , My Morning Jacket , Fitz and The <unk> , <unk> , Neon Trees , Cold War Kids , Capital Cities , The Airborne Toxic Event , and more . It was announced that 40 cents of every sale of album at iTunes would go to the AIDS relief charity Project Red 's Global Fund . 
 New Noise Magazines Joseph Tucker said , " The score on this record is incredibly diverse and of equally incredible quality , unlike so many others . Pick this up before or after you go and see Dallas Buyers Club . " Matt of Homo Razzi said about the album , " Overall this soundtrack has a little bit of everything and it works perfectly , mirroring some of the themes , emotions and moments of the film . " Stephanie <unk> reviewed for Renowned for Sound and gave the soundtrack 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 ratings , she said , " Set in the 80s where drugs and other experimentation was all the rage , music plays a big factor in the entire atmosphere of the movie . The soundtrack includes a diverse group of artists , from country stars , indie icons and modern rockers . All the songs featured help bring out the kind of mood a movie like Dallas Buyers Club is . " <unk> also said that , " Without such an accurate soundtrack , the film wouldn 't have made such a big impact , and both the visual and aural aspects work together to create a beautiful story of a man fighting for the right to live his life . " 
 Music critic Green Baron reviewed the music for Sputnikmusic , and said : " Dallas Buyers Club itself was a breathtaking motion picture driven by the extraordinary performances from Matthew McConaughey and Jared Leto . Its accompanying soundtrack , however , is less than satisfying . Filled to the brim with lifeless , stale indie @-@ rock tracks , the supporting album to one of the year 's most gripping films is a complete waste of talent and potential . " Baron thought that Dallas Buyers Club was saved by a few excellent songs , which were " Ready to Be Called On " , " After the Scripture " , and " City of Angels " . He said that , " Overall , the Dallas Buyers Club soundtrack is one that really isn 't worth your time or money . Aside from three superb songs , the whole album is a collection of drab indie pop / rock that ultimately falls flat due to its lack of memorability . " 
 = = Release = = 
 The first trailer was launched on August 27 , 2013 . The film premiered at the 2013 Toronto International Film Festival on September 7 , on which Deadline 's Pete Hammond said , " It would seem an absolute no @-@ brainer that both ( McConaughey and Leto ) will be sitting front and center come March 2nd at the Dolby Theatre when Oscar winners are announced . If there are two better performances by anyone this year I have not seen them . " Focus Features released the film on November 1 , 2013 . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film 's release was previously set for December 5 , but hoping to gain a competitive edge amid a crowded playing field , Focus Features shifted the release date to November 1 , believing the new date was ideal to launch a platform release in the awards season , and expecting to do a wide release for 5 @-@ day Thanksgiving weekend ( November 27 – December 1 ) . Because the film was an awards contender , Focus set the date in November for an Oscars strategy like that for 2013 Oscar winner Argo , which was released in October 2012 . 
 Over its opening weekend from November 1 – 3 of limited release in Los Angeles , New York , Toronto and Montreal , the film grossed $ 260 @,@ 865 from 9 theaters with an average of $ 28 @,@ 985 per theater , In second weekend from November 8 – 10 , film grossed $ 638 @,@ 704 , making total of $ 993 @,@ 088 with an average amount of $ 18 @,@ 249 from 35 theaters . And it was expanded to 184 locations in its third week of release and it grossed $ 1 @,@ 751 @,@ 359 from Nov 15 – 17 , with an average of $ 9 @,@ 518 , making total of $ 3 @,@ 012 @,@ 295 . It opened wide on November 22 ( the weekend before Thanksgiving ) in 666 theaters and grossed $ 2 @,@ 687 @,@ 157 from November 22 – 24 , with a total of $ 6 @,@ 374 @,@ 058 and average of $ 4 @,@ 035 per location . The wide release coincided with the Screen Actors Guild Awards ballots deadline , and was before the Golden Globe Awards ballots . The Screen Actors Guild mailed Screen Actors Guild Award nomination ballots to its voters on November 20 , and the nomination ballots for the Golden Globe Awards were mailed to the Hollywood Foreign Press Association members on or before November 27 . 
 71st Golden Globe Awards were announced on January 12 , 2014 with Dallas Buyers Club winning both of its nominations , and the film earned six 86th Academy Awards nominations that were announced on January 16 . The twelfth weekend after limited release , the film 's theater run jumped from 125 screens to a total of 419 and the film grossed $ 17 @,@ 813 @,@ 220 with an average of $ 2 @,@ 246 per theater from January 17 – 19 . After the 20th Screen Actors Guild Awards were announced on January 18 with Dallas Buyers Club winning two of its three nominations , during the thirteenth weekend from January 24 – 26 , 2014 , the film expanded to 1 @,@ 110 locations ( highest playing of the film ) and grossed $ 2 @,@ 028 @,@ 570 more in that weekend with an average of $ 1 @,@ 828 . Until that weekend the top grossing markets were Los Angeles , New York , San Francisco , Chicago and Dallas . 
 After a total of 182 days , the film ended its American theatrical run on May 1 , 2014 with a gross of $ 27 @,@ 298 @,@ 285 in North America . It grossed $ 27 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 in foreign countries including $ 8 @,@ 755 @,@ 794 of the United Kingdom , $ 2 @,@ 761 @,@ 258 of Australia , making a worldwide total gross of $ 55 @,@ 198 @,@ 285 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Dallas Buyers Club was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on February 4 , 2014 . In the United States , the film has grossed $ 4 @,@ 532 @,@ 240 from DVD sales and $ 3 @,@ 097 @,@ 179 from Blu @-@ ray sales , making a total of $ 7 @,@ 629 @,@ 419 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Upon its premiere at the 2013 Toronto International Film Festival , Dallas Buyers Club received universal acclaim by critics and audiences , who greatly praised the film for its acting ( particularly for McConaughey and Leto ) , screenplay and direction . Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 94 % , based on 233 reviews , with an average score of 7 @.@ 8 / 10 . The site 's consensus reads , " Dallas Buyers Club rests squarely on Matthew McConaughey 's scrawny shoulders , and he carries the burden gracefully with what might be a career @-@ best performance . " Metacritic gives the film a score of 84 out of 100 , based on 47 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " . 
 Richard Corliss of Time magazine considered McConaughey 's portrayal to be a " bold , drastic and utterly persuasive inhabiting of a doomed fighter " , remarking that " if the camera occasionally suffers a fashionable case of the jitters , the movie transcends its agitated verismo to impart dramatic and behavioral truth " . Chris <unk> reviewed the film for JoBlo.com and gave it 9 out of 10 , and said , " Like Woodroof , the film never wants your pity , and while tears will no doubt be shed while watching it , they 're well @-@ earned . " The Philadelphia Inquirer 's Steven Rea talked about McConaughey 's role , " Just about everything is right with Dallas Buyers Club , beginning with Matthew McConaughey 's literally transformative portrayal . McConaughey 's performance isn 't just about the weight loss . It 's about gaining compassion , even wisdom , and it 's awesome . " Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle said , " Dallas Buyers Club " takes audiences back to the worst of the AIDS crisis , where the disease was a death sentence , and the public 's terror and hostility were at its height . " Film critic Richard Roeper reviewed the film for his own website , and talked about McConaughey : " Once we get past McConaughey 's stunning transformation , we 're transfixed by a performance that reminds us of why this guy became a movie star in the first place . " Ann Hornaday gave the film 4 out of 4 ratings , and then gave her remarks on McConaughey 's remarkable performance for The Washington Post , " McConaughey delivers the performance of his career , characterized not just by an astonishing physical transformation but by a wellspring of deep compassion and fearlessness . " 
 The Orange County Register 's film critic Michael Sragow gave the film grade " A " and commented on three lead characters , " A trio of terrific performers imbues a riveting AIDS drama with heart and mind as well as <unk> . " Film critic Ty Burr reviewed the film for The Boston Globe and criticized , " The movie 's often touching and very watchable , but what gets you past the script 's sincere calculation is the growing sense of rage toward a medical @-@ industrial complex that saw AIDS sufferers as guinea pigs and sources of profit . " The Chicago Tribune 's film critic Michael Phillips talked about " How Woodroof became his own brand of AIDS activist is the stuff of Dallas Buyers Club , which does a few things wrong but a lot right , starting right at the top with McConaughey . " Bob Mondello criticized the film 's character for the NPR in these words : " Dallas Buyers Club is just about a selfish boor who arguably gets a pass in terms of posterity , because while looking out for No. 1 , he paved the way for change for everyone else . " Dana Stevens of Slate <unk> McConaughey 's performance , highlighting that the movie " <unk> in deep hindbrain emotions : fear and rage and lust and , above all , the pure animal drive to go on living . " 
 Lou Lumenick of the New York Post expressed his compliments about the film 's crew , " It 's a remarkable story , vividly and urgently told by French @-@ Canadian director Vallée from a pointed , schmaltz @-@ free script by Craig Borten and Melissa Wallack . " A. O. Scott reviewed the film for The New York Times and said , " Matthew McConaughey brings a jolt of unpredictable energy to Dallas Buyers Club , an affecting if conventional real @-@ life story of medical activism . " The Wall Street Journal 's film critic thinks " Matthew McConaughey continues to amaze . " David Denby of The New Yorker talked about McConaughey 's physical transformation in his words , " It 's McConaughey 's spiritual transformation that is most remarkable . His gaze is at once desperate and challenging . " Rolling Stone 's Peter Travers said , " [ Matthew McConaughey 's ] explosive , unerring portrayal defines what makes an actor great , blazing commitment to a character and the range to make every nuance felt . " Film critic Rex Reed reviewed the film for The New York Observer and said , " Dallas Buyers Club represents the best of what independent film on a limited budget can achieve @-@ powerful , enlightening and not to be missed . " The Wrap 's Alonso Duralde said why he watched the film , " McConaughey is the only reason to see Dallas Buyers Club , but he 's enough of a reason to see Dallas Buyers Club . " 
 Film critic Betsy Sharkey reviewed for the Los Angeles Times , " [ McConaughey and Leto ] elevate the movie beyond ordinary biography or overplayed tragedy , and give Oscar @-@ worthy performances in the process . " Sharkey expressed her compliments about Leto 's performance , " Leto 's performance , though , is the revelation . ... It 's a hauntingly authentic performance ; the tailored suit he puts on to meet with his disapproving father is one of the film 's most moving scenes . " Peter Debruge of Variety said , " Matthew McConaughey and Jared Leto give terrific performances in this riveting and surprisingly relatable true story . " 
 Leto 's portrayal of Rayon , a drug @-@ addicted trans woman with AIDS who befriends McConaughey 's character Ron Woodroof , received critical acclaim . The writers created Rayon , to show " Woodroof 's gradual acceptance of a subculture he had dismissed . " Time 's Richard Corliss noted , " Leto captures the sweet intensity and almost saintly good humor of a glamorous , poignant and downright <unk> creature — a blithe Camille who may surrender her health but never her panache . " Leto was awarded an Academy Award , Golden Globe , a Screen Actors Guild Award and a variety of film critics ' circle awards . After the 86th Academy Awards ceremony , the casting of a non @-@ transgender actor was critiqued as a missed opportunity , with some LGBT activists criticizing the choice as misogynistic . A guest blogger published on the L.A. Times website compared the issue to white actors appropriating , and exploiting , the roles of East Asians and Africans in the past ; and guest contributors noted in The Guardian and The Independent that transgender actors are often relegated to roles such as prostitutes , corpses and " freaks . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Dallas Buyers Club received six nominations at the 86th Academy Awards : Best Picture , Best Actor for McConaughey , Best Supporting Actor for Leto , Best Original Screenplay , Best Film Editing for Martin <unk> and Vallée ( Vallée being credited under the pseudonym " John Mac <unk> " ) , and Best Makeup and Hairstyling for <unk> Lee and Robin Mathews . McConaughey and Leto won Academy Awards for Best Actor and Best Supporting Actor , respectively – the first film since Mystic River 10 years earlier to receive both awards and only the fifth overall to do so . Lee and Mathews won the Academy Award for Best Makeup , although Mathews had a budget of only $ 250 . 
 The film received two Screen Actors Guild Awards , for Best Actor ( McConaughey ) and Best Supporting Actor ( Leto ) ; it was also nominated for Best Cast . At the 71st Golden Globe Awards McConaughey and Leto again won Best Actor – Motion Picture – Drama and Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture respectively . The film was also nominated for Best Original Screenplay at the Writers Guild of America Awards , while Leto 's performance won a range of awards from critics groups , including the New York Film Critics Circle and the Los Angeles Film Critics Association . The National Board of Review named Dallas Buyers Club one of the top ten independent films of 2013 . 
 = = Historical accuracy = = 
 The characters of Rayon and Dr. Eve Saks were fictional ; the writers had interviewed transgender AIDS patients , activists , and doctors for the film and combined these stories to create the two composite supporting roles . However , Woodroof did lose all his friends after they found out he was HIV @-@ positive . In his interviews with Borten , Woodroof implied that this , along with interactions with gay people living with AIDS through the buyers club , led to a rethinking of his apparent anti @-@ gay sentiments and changed his views on gay people . Other people who knew him said that he did not harbor anti @-@ gay sentiments and was himself bisexual . Also , while a rodeo enthusiast , he never rode any bulls himself . Although the film shows Woodroof diagnosed in 1985 , he told Borten that a doctor had informed him he might have had the disease well before that ; Woodroof believed that he may have been infected in 1981 , something that was briefly alluded to in a flashback in the film . 
 While Woodroof was known for outlandish behavior , according to those who knew him , both the film and McConaughey made him rougher than he actually was ; The Dallas Morning News has reported that Woodroof was " outrageous , but not confrontational " and that people who knew him felt that his portrayal as " rampantly homophobic " early in the film was inaccurate . The real Woodroof also had a sister and a daughter who were not approached by the writers and were left out of the script to make the film more of a character study . 
 = = = Drug treatments = = = 
 The film implies that the drug and vitamin regime promoted by Woodroof was safer and more effective than the drugs being issued in hospitals and tested by the FDA at the time , but this has been criticized by numerous observers . Daniel D 'Addario , in an article in Salon , suggests that " the film 's take is perilously close to endorsing pseudoscience . " 
 Woodroof frequently declares that the drug AZT ( <unk> ) is ineffective and counter @-@ productive , yet years later it is still prescribed to patients with AIDS , albeit at a much lower dose ( hinted at in the film ) . Medical historian Jonathan Engel , who wrote " The Epidemic : A History of AIDS , " states that AZT was in fact a relatively effective for the period , consistently prolonging lives for a year at a time when AIDS had a 100 % mortality rate . Journalist David France , who directed the documentary “ How to Survive a Plague , ” suggested that AZT was actually " the first element of a cocktail of drugs that ended the era of AIDS @-@ as @-@ death sentence . " Initial attempts to use high doses of AZT proved to be no more effective than smaller doses , but HIV / AIDS activist Peter Staley ( who was consulted by the filmmakers ) believes this was not the result of any conspiracy - initially medical researchers had to guess what dose would be effective and they feared a low dose would be ineffective . Eventually , researchers realized that AZT was ineffective in the long term because the HIV virus mutated and became resistant to the treatment . By the mid @-@ 1990s , David Ho and other researchers found AZT was quite effective when used in conjunction with two other anti @-@ virals , which decreased the chances of virus developing resistance to any one drug . 
 The treatments that Woodroof did promote were less @-@ effective at best , or at worst , dangerous . According to Staley , Woodroof became a proponent of Peptide T , a treatment which " never panned out . It 's a useless therapy , and it never got approved , and nobody uses it today , but the film implies that it helped him . " DDC , also promoted by Woodroof , did prove to be an effective antiviral treatment , but it also proved to have worse side effects than AZT , with the potential to cause irreversible nerve damage in some cases . As a result , it was only used by doctors for a relatively short time . A third treatment promoted by Woodroof , called Compound Q ( <unk> ) , was specifically linked to two deaths during trials , and therefore , was not used by doctors thereafter . Most " buyers clubs " stopped providing it as well , but Woodroof continued to dispense it , part of the reason for Woodroof 's conflict with the FDA . 
 = = Copyright enforcement by the film 's makers = = 
 = = = Australia = = = 
 Makers of Dallas Buyers Club have attempted to aggressively enforce their copyrights by serving discovery orders on Australian internet service providers ( ISPs ) . iiNet , one of the ISPs served with a discovery application , stated it has " serious concerns " that the film 's makers will look to intimidate subscribers . Steve Dalby , iiNet 's chief regulatory officer , said : " We are concerned that our customers will be unfairly targeted to settle claims out of court using a practice called ' speculative <unk> ' " . Information of up to 4 @,@ 700 subscribers were being sought for allegedly downloading the film before its box office release . 
 In April 2015 , an Australian federal judge , Justice Nye Perram ruled that ISPs must hand over contact information related to the IP addresses associated with sharing the movie . 
 In August 2015 the Australian Federal Court refused the application for film makers of Dallas Buyers Club to force ISPs to hand over the details of their customers . The courts found that the contents of the letter , proposed by the film makers to contact downloaders with , were more demanding than deemed appropriate . The letter was found to ask for such details as salary and other films that were downloaded . 
 In December 2015 , Justice Perram dismissed the Dallas Buyers Club LLC case against iiNet entirely unless an appeal were filed by February 11 , 2016 . The judge remarked upon <unk> 's attempts to claim costs for a worldwide non @-@ exclusive distribution agreement , concluding that " <unk> ’ s contention was wholly unrealistic ; indeed , I went so far as to describe it as ‘ surreal ’ . Perram also required posting a $ 600 @,@ 000 bond to the court should the suit proceed . " 
 = = = Singapore = = = 
 Dallas Buyer Club LLC successfully obtained a court order against two major ISPs Starhub and M1 to reveal customers who have allegedly downloaded illegal copies of the movie . In April 2015 , Samuel Seow Law Corporation represented the owners in sending demand letters to more than 500 subscribers asking for a written offer of damages and costs . A few days later , <unk> was also issued a court order to reveal 150 of its subscribers for alleged illegal downloading . President Harish Pillay and Vice @-@ President Professor Ang Peng Hwa of the Singapore Internet Society ( <unk> ) Chapter stated , that " threatening subscribers won 't stop piracy " . This is the second reported instance of a major legal action taken by a media company against individuals in Singapore for alleged illegal downloading since Odex 's actions against file @-@ sharing in 2007 . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 Beginning in 2014 , Voltage Pictures filed nearly 150 multi @-@ defendant " John Doe " lawsuits against internet users identified only by their IP addresses , alleging illegal downloading of the film . Despite statutory damages claims of $ 150 @,@ 000 , users reported settling claims with the film maker for $ 5 @,@ 000 to $ 8 @,@ 000 . 
 = Perovskia atriplicifolia = 
 Perovskia atriplicifolia ( / <unk> <unk> / ) , commonly called Russian sage , is a flowering herbaceous perennial plant and subshrub . Although not a member of Salvia , the genus of other plants commonly called sage , it is closely related to them . It has an upright habit , typically reaching 0 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 2 m tall ( 1 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 9 ft ) , with square stems and grey @-@ green leaves that yield a distinctive odor when crushed . It is best known for its flowers . Its flowering season extends from mid @-@ summer to late October , with blue to violet blossoms arranged into showy , branched panicles . 
 Native to the steppes and hills of southwestern and central Asia . Successful over a wide range of climate and soil conditions , it has since become popular and widely planted . Several cultivars have been developed , differing primarily in leaf shape and overall height ; ' Blue Spire ' is the most common . This variation has been widely used in gardens and landscaping . P. atriplicifolia was the Perennial Plant Association 's 1995 Plant of the Year , and the ' Blue Spire ' cultivar received the Award of Garden Merit from the Royal Horticultural Society . 
 The species has a long history of use in traditional medicine in its native range , where it is employed as a treatment for a variety of ailments . This has led to the investigation of its phytochemistry . Its flowers can be eaten in salads or crushed for <unk> , and the plant has been considered for potential use in the phytoremediation of contaminated soil . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 Perovskia atriplicifolia was described by George Bentham in 1848 , based on a specimen collected by William Griffith in Afghanistan , now preserved at the Kew Gardens herbarium as the species 's holotype . The specific epithet atriplicifolia means " with leaves like Atriplex " , referring to its similarity to saltbush . Commonly known as Russian sage , P. atriplicifolia is neither native to Russia nor a member of Salvia , the genus generally referred to as sage . 
 A Chinese population was described as a separate species in 1987 and given the name Perovskia <unk> , but has since been considered synonymous with P. atriplicifolia . 
 = = = Phylogenetics = = = 
 Within the family Lamiaceae , the large genus Salvia had long been believed monophyletic , based on the structure of its stamina . Several smaller genera , including <unk> , Perovskia , and <unk> were also included in tribe Mentheae , but were thought more distantly related . In 2004 , a molecular phylogenetics study based on two cpDNA genes ( rbcL and <unk> @-@ F ) demonstrated that Salvia is not monophyletic , but comprises three identifiable clades . Clade I is more closely related to Perovskia than to other members of Salvia . 
 P. atriplicifolia has been the subject of subsequent studies seeking to clarify the relationships within Mentheae . Further research combined palynological analysis of pollen grains with rbcL sequencing to provide additional support for the relationship between Perovskia and Salvia clade I. It also distinguished between P. atriplicifolia and P. abrotanoides , while confirming their close relationship . A subsequent multigene study ( four cpDNA markers and two <unk> markers ) redrew parts of the Mentheae cladogram , making <unk> a sister group to Perovskia . 
 = = = Cultivars = = = 
 Several cultivars of P. atriplicifolia have been developed . They are primarily distinguished by the height of mature plants and the depth of the leaf @-@ margin incisions . Many of these cultivars , especially those with deeply incised leaves , may actually be hybrids of P. atriplicifolia and P. abrotanoides . In that context , some may be referred to by the hybrid name P. × hybrida . 
 The most common cultivar , ' Blue Spire ' , is among those suspected of being a hybrid . It was selected from German plantings by the British Notcutts Nurseries , and first exhibited in 1961 . ' Blue Spire ' grows to approximately 1 @.@ 2 m ( 3 ft 11 in ) , and has large , darker blue flowers . In 1993 , it received the Royal Horticultural Society 's Award of Garden Merit . 
 <unk> ' reaches a height of 1 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 3 m ( 3 ft 11 in to 4 ft 3 in ) ; this tall , sturdy cultivar 's name is German for filigree , in reference to its lacy , fern @-@ like foliage . ' Little Spire ' is shorter , with a mature height of only 0 @.@ 6 m ( 2 ft 0 in ) . ' <unk> ' is similar in height to ' Blue Spire ' but more upright . Allan Armitage established the late @-@ flowering cultivar ' Mystery of Knightshayes ' from a plant at Knightshayes Court . Other cultivars include ' Blue Haze ' , ' Blue Mist ' , ' Hybrida ' ( also called ' <unk> ' ) , ' Lace ' , ' <unk> ' , ' <unk> ' , and ' <unk> ' . 
 = = Description = = 
 Perovskia atriplicifolia is a deciduous perennial subshrub with an erect to spreading habit . Superficially , it resembles a much larger version of lavender . Multiple branches arise from a shared <unk> , growing to a height of 0 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 2 m ( 1 ft 8 in – 3 ft 11 in ) , with occasional specimens reaching 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 ft 11 in ) . The mature plant may be 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 2 m across ( 2 ft 0 in – 3 ft 11 in ) . The rigid stems are square in cross @-@ section , and are covered by an indumentum formed by stellate , or star @-@ shaped , trichomes and oil droplets . Especially during autumn , these hairs give the stems a silvery appearance . 
 The grayish @-@ green leaves are arranged in opposite pairs , and attached to the stems by a short petiole . They are generally 3 – 5 cm long ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 0 @-@ inch ) and 0 @.@ 8 – 2 cm wide ( 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 8 @-@ inch ) , although narrower in some populations . The overall leaf shape is oblate , a rounded shape longer than it is wide , to lanceolate , shaped like the head of a lance . They are <unk> , with a deeply incised leaf margin that may be either wavy or sharp @-@ toothed ; even within a single community of P. atriplicifolia , there can be considerable variation in the details of leaf shape . Leaves near the top of branches may merge into bracts . The foliage is aromatic , especially when crushed , with a fragrance described as sage @-@ like , a blend of sage and lavender , or like turpentine . 
 The flowering season of P. atriplicifolia can be as long as June through October , although populations in some parts of its range , such as China , may bloom in a much more restricted period . The inflorescence is a showy panicle , 30 – 38 cm long ( 12 – 15 in ) , with many branches . Each of these branches is a raceme , with the individual flowers arranged in pairs called <unk> . Each flower 's calyx is purple , densely covered in white or purple hairs , and about 4 mm long ( 0 @.@ 16 @-@ inch ) . The corolla is tube @-@ shaped , formed from a four @-@ lobed upper lip and a slightly shorter lower lip ; the blue or violet blue petals are about 1 cm long . The style has been reported in both an exserted — extending beyond the flower 's tube — form and one contained within the flower ; all known examples of P. atriplicifolia in cultivation have exserted styles . Gardening author Neil Soderstrom describes the appearance of the flowers from a distance as " like a fine haze or fog " . 
 Fruits develop about a month after flowering , and consist of dark brown oval <unk> , about 2 mm × 1 mm ( 2 ⁄ 25 by 1 ⁄ 25 inch ) . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Nine species of Perovskia are recognized . P. abrotanoides shares much of the range of P. atriplicifolia , but is distinguished by its bipinnate leaves . Hybrids between these two species may occur naturally . Restricted to Turkestan in its native range , P. <unk> is less upright ; some forms have white flowers . The flowers of P. <unk> are yellow . 
 = = Distribution , habitat , and ecology = = 
 Widely distributed across Asia in its native range , Perovskia atriplicifolia grows in western China , Pakistan , Afghanistan , Iran , Turkey , and parts of eastern Europe . It is found in steppes and on hillsides , and grows at higher elevations in mountainous regions , including the Himalayas . It has been recorded at 10 @,@ 000 ft ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) of altitude in the Karakoram . In Pakistan 's Quetta district , it is often found in association with the grass Chrysopogon <unk> , and may serve as an indicator species for soils with low calcium carbonate and chloride availability . The harsh habitats preferred by P. atriplicifolia are comparable to the sagebrush steppe of North America . 
 In parts of its range , such as the <unk> , these steppe ecosystems are employed as rangeland for grazing animals such as sheep and goats , although this forage is generally of poor nutritional quality . P. atriplicifolia can serve as an important source of phosphorus and zinc , despite being high in poorly @-@ digested material such as neutral detergent fiber and lignin . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Following its introduction to the United Kingdom in 1904 , the Irish gardener and author William Robinson was immediately taken with the plant , which he described as being " worth a place in the choicest garden for its graceful habit and long season of beauty . " The Royal Horticultural Society records the establishment of cultivars beginning with P. ' Hybrida ' , selected at a Hampshire nursery in the 1930s . By the late 1980s and early 1990s , P. atriplicifolia had gained widespread popularity , and in 1995 , it was selected as the Perennial Plant Association 's Plant of the Year . 
 = = = Planting and care = = = 
 P. atriplicifolia is a perennial plant suitable for a wide range of conditions . The species prefers full sun . Specimens planted in partially shaded locations tend to spread or flop , although this behavior can be controlled somewhat by pinching young shoots or by providing a strong @-@ standing accompaniment that the plant can drape itself around for support . Flowers bloom only on new growth . Plants trimmed to 15 – 61 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 – 24 @.@ 0 in ) in early spring provide the best subsequent growth and flowering . 
 Tolerant of both heat and cold , it is grown in North America in United States Department of Agriculture hardiness zones three through nine , although some cultivars may be better suited than others to extremes of temperature . It is successfully grown from the southwestern United States , north and east across much of the country , and across the Canadian border into Ontario and Quebec . In the coldest of these areas , it may require considerable protection to survive the winter . In the United Kingdom , the Royal Horticultural Society has assigned it hardiness rating H4 , indicating that it tolerates temperatures as low as − 10 to − 5 ° C ( 14 to 23 ° F ) , hardy in most of the country through typical winters . 
 It also tolerates a variety of soil conditions . Although young specimens perform best when planted in a mixture of peat and either sand or perlite , P. atriplicifolia can thrive in sandy , chalky , or loamy soil , or heavy clay soil with sufficient drainage . It can endure a wide range of soil pH , as well as exposure to salty conditions near oceans . Its deep @-@ feeding taproot makes it especially drought tolerant ; for this reason it has seen wide use for xeriscaping in the Intermountain West . Overwatering and over @-@ fertilization can damage its roots and lead to a rapid decline in health . P. atriplicifolia is otherwise generally free from plant pathogens . In cultivation , it is also rarely selected as forage by grazing animals , and so is considered both a deer @-@ resistant and rabbit @-@ resistant plant . 
 = = = Landscaping = = = 
 Popular landscaping authors , including Gertrude Jekyll and Russell Page , have praised P. atriplicifolia for its usefulness in gardens and landscaping features . It is most commonly planted as an accent feature , such as an " island " in an expanse of lawn , but it can also be used as filler within a larger landscaping feature , or to enhance areas where the existing natural appearance is retained . Gardening author Troy Marden describes P. atriplicifolia as having a " see @-@ through " quality that is ideal for borders . Some experts suggest groups of three plants provide the best landscape appearance . It is also suitable for container gardening . 
 It attracts bees , birds , and butterflies , and contributes color to gardens — both the blue of its late @-@ season flowers , and the silvery colors of its winter stalks . 
 = = = Propagation = = = 
 P. atriplicifolia is frequently propagated by cuttings . Because its woody crown is resistant to division , softwood cuttings are taken from shoots near the base , generally in late spring . Hardwood cuttings selected in mid @-@ to @-@ late summer also provide a viable propagation technique . The plant is also grown from seed in cultivation . Such seeds require exposure to cold for 30 – 160 days to germinate , and seed @-@ raised specimens may not preserve the characteristics of named cultivars . In the commercial greenhouse or nursery setting , P. atriplicifolia 's relatively large size and rapid growth can adversely affect quality or make plants more difficult and expensive to transport ; the use of plant growth regulators such as <unk> chloride and <unk> may be more cost @-@ effective than large @-@ scale pruning . 
 Some members of the Lamiaceae can spread unchecked and become invasive plants . Planting of P. atriplicifolia near wild lands has been discouraged by some gardening guides out of concern for its potential to spread , but it is not considered invasive , and has been suggested as a substitute for purple loosestrife for this reason . 
 = = Uses = = 
 Perovskia atriplicifolia has a long history of use in traditional medicine , especially as an antipyretic . It has also been employed as an antiparasitic and analgesic in Tibet , and smoked elsewhere as a euphoriant . In Balochistan , Pakistan , a decoction of the plant 's leaves and flowers has been considered an anti @-@ diabetic medication and a treatment for dysentery . 
 In addition to its use in folk medicine , P. atriplicifolia is sometimes used in Russia to flavor a vodka @-@ based cocktail . Its flowers are eaten in parts of Afghanistan and Pakistan , including Kashmir , adding a sweet flavor to salads ; they can also be crushed to yield a blue colorant that can be employed in cosmetics or as a textile dye . This species is considered a candidate for use in phytoremediation because of its rapid growth , tolerance for harsh conditions , and ability to accumulate toxic heavy metals from polluted soil . 
 = = = Phytochemistry = = = 
 Because of its extensive <unk> tradition , the phytochemistry of P. atriplicifolia has been the topic of several studies . Analysis of the plant 's essential oil has identified over two dozen compounds , although the compounds detected and their relative prevalence have not been consistent . Most analyses have identified various monoterpenes and <unk> as the dominant components , such as carene , <unk> , limonene , γ @-@ <unk> , and ( + ) -β @-@ <unk> , although the essential oil of a sample from the Orto Botanico dell 'Università di Torino had camphor as its most prevalent component . Other monoterpenes , camphene , α @-@ pinene , and β @-@ pinene are also present , as are sesquiterpenes such as γ @-@ cadinene , δ @-@ cadinene , trans @-@ caryophyllene , and α @-@ humulene . Several terpenoid alcohols — <unk> , <unk> , and menthol — have been extracted from P. atriplicifolia , as have caffeic acid and ferulic acid . More complex compounds have been isolated , some of which were first identified in this manner , including <unk> ; the glycosides <unk> A and B ; and <unk> A and B , a pair of triterpenes that are similar to oleanane . 
 The essential oil has displayed antimicrobial properties in vitro , and can function as a biopesticide , especially regarding <unk> castaneum beetles and Camponotus maculatus carpenter ants . Several terpenoids isolated from P. atriplicifolia have been investigated for potential inhibitory effects on the hepatitis B virus . Its traditional use as an anti @-@ inflammatory has been attributed to the ability of the <unk> ( + ) <unk> and five other compounds to act as leukotriene antagonists . The <unk> acid derivative <unk> may also contribute to an anti @-@ inflammatory effect as an <unk> 5 @-@ lipoxygenase inhibitor . Interaction with opioid and cannabinoid receptors has been proposed as the mechanism of traditionally reported analgesic effects . 
 = Lisa 's Pony = 
 " Lisa 's Pony " is the eighth episode of the third season of The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 7 , 1991 . In this episode , Homer goes drinking at Moe 's Tavern instead of buying a new reed for Lisa 's saxophone , resulting in her flopping at the school talent show . Desperate to win back his daughter 's love , Homer gives Lisa the one thing she has always wanted : a pony . Homer struggles with two jobs to cover the cost of sheltering and feeding the pony . Lisa , upon seeing what Homer must go through to pay for the pony , decides to give it away . 
 The episode was written by Al Jean and Mike Reiss , and directed by Carlos Baeza . Lunchlady Doris , a recurring character on The Simpsons , made her first appearance on the show in this episode . " Lisa 's Pony " features cultural references to films such as The Godfather and 2001 : A Space Odyssey and the comic strip Little Nemo in Slumberland . Since airing , the episode has received positive reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 13 @.@ 8 and was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Lisa is participating in a school talent show and is in need of a new saxophone reed as the one she owns is broken . She calls Homer , who agrees to buy one before heading to the show . However , he decides to visit Moe 's Tavern first , and when he arrives at the music shop , it has closed down for the night . Dejected , Homer goes back to Moe 's where the music shop owner is enjoying a drink . Moe helps him convince the man to re @-@ open his store . Homer is happy that he remembered exactly which reed he needs to get ; however , he then forgets which instrument Lisa plays . After going through many of the instruments in the store , Homer finally remembers that Lisa plays the saxophone and rushes to the school . However , he is too late , arriving in time to hear Lisa humiliate herself by butchering the song she chose to play . After that , she wants nothing to do with Homer , refusing to forgive him . Going through family videos , Homer realizes the extent of how much she hates him for every time he has ignored her in the past because he was either too busy watching TV or dealing with Bart 's shenanigans . 
 Marge encourages Homer to mend his relationship with Lisa by spending time with her . This is unsuccessful , and Homer worries he 'll go fruity doing activities suited to little girls ( evident when Bart and Milhouse made him a laughingstock ) . He gets the idea to buy her the pony she 's always wanted . Marge is aghast and warns Homer against using the easy way out in purchasing a pony because they cannot afford it . He decides to purchase a pony regardless of Marge 's feelings . To afford the pony , he applies for a loan through the Power Plant Credit Union . Mr. Burns personally reviews the loan , and approves it only after determining that Homer does not intend to eat the pony and has no knowledge of the " state 's stringent usury laws . " Homer buys the pony ( named Princess ) for Lisa , who , after waking up to find it lying next to her ( in a parody of The Godfather ) , gallops into her parents ' bedroom happily telling Homer she loves him . While he is happy that Lisa is no longer angry with him , Homer faces an enraged Marge and she berates him for making such an extravagant purchase even after she warned him against it . Bart is also disappointed with Homer and demands a moped . He is quickly silenced by Homer for it . 
 In order to pay the rent for Princess 's shelter , Homer takes a second job working for Apu at the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart . Homer becomes extremely exhausted after trying to work both jobs . Finally , Marge admits to the children that their father has been working two jobs to pay for the pony . Lisa is expecting Marge to say she must give up the pony , especially when Bart aggressively says he can make her do so . But Marge firmly rebukes Bart , explaining that it 's something Lisa needs to decide for herself . After watching a meek , sleep @-@ deprived Homer being bullied by his own son at the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart , Lisa agrees to give up the pony , and she shares a heart @-@ breaking goodbye with Princess . Lisa tells Homer that there is a " big dumb animal " she loves even more than her horse : that being Homer himself . Homer happily quits his job , much to Apu 's dismay and yet admits he was one of his better workers despite his crude nature . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Lisa 's Pony " was written by Al Jean and Mike Reiss , who were show runners of The Simpsons when the episode was produced . According to Reiss , being a show runner is a stressful job as he has to supervise all the processes the episodes go through . Jean and Reiss were working approximately 80 – 100 hours a week when they were assigned to write an episode on top of their regular job . " Lisa 's Pony " was written between 10 @.@ 00 p.m. and 1 @.@ 00 a.m. every night after they had finished their 12- to 14 @-@ hour workday . They came up with idea for it while going through a list of Lisa 's interests , and Jean told Reiss , " Lisa likes ponies ; we [ should ] give her a pony . " While writing down ideas for the story , they decided to explore the consequences of having a pony in a suburban house . 
 Carlos Baeza served as animation director for the episode . The Simpsons creator Matt Groening said animating horses is " the most difficult thing to do . " The animators used Eadweard Muybridge 's famous animation of a horse galloping and other photo references as models for Princess . In the talent show scene , Lisa is lit up by a spotlight when she performs with her saxophone . After the episode came back from the animation studio in Korea , the staff noticed that the light was colored blue , making Lisa look like " a Smurf . " The scene had to be re @-@ animated in the United States , and the spotlight effect was reduced . 
 The woman who sells the pony to Homer is based on actress Katharine Hepburn . Cast member Tress MacNeille provided the voice for the character . Lunchlady Doris , a recurring character on The Simpsons , made her first appearance on the show in this episode as one of the judges in the talent show . She was voiced by the show 's script supervisor Doris Grau , who had a " beautiful , tobacco @-@ cured voice " the staff thought was perfect for the role . Following Grau 's death in 1995 , the characters she voiced were retired out of respect , with the exception of Lunchlady Doris who stayed on the show without speaking roles . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
