 = = = Record results and performances = = = 
 = = = Victories = = = 
 League : 
 Premier League : 
 Home : 6 – 0 v Barnsley 10 January 1998 
 Away : 5 – 0 v Derby County 10 November 2007 
 Division One : 
 Home : 8 – 0 v Sunderland 19 October 1968 
 Away : 6 – 1 v Manchester City 8 September 1962 
 Division Two : 
 Home : 8 – 0 v Rotherham United 8 March 1958 
 Away : 6 – 0 v Leicester City 15 February 1923 
 FA Cup : 
 Home : 8 – 1 v Chesterfield ( Rd 1 ) 10 January 1914 
 Away : 5 – 0 v Chatham Town ( 5th qualifying rd ) 28 November 1903 
 League Cup : 
 Home : 10 – 0 v Bury ( Rd 2 leg 2 ) ( 12 – 1 aggregate scoreline ) 25 October 1983 
 Away : 5 – 1 v Cardiff City ( SF leg 2 ) ( 10 – 3 aggregate scoreline ) 2 February 1966 
 Away : 5 – 1 v Walsall ( Rd 2 ) 13 September 1967 
 European Cup Winners Cup : 
 Home : 5 – 1 v Castilla CF ( Rd 1 leg 2 ) ( 6 – 4 aggregate scoreline ) 1 October 1980 
 Away : 2 – 1 v Lausanne ( QF leg 2 ) ( 6 – 4 aggregate scoreline ) 16 March 1965 
 UEFA Cup : 
 Home : 3 – 0 v Osijek ( Rd 1 leg 1 ) 16 September 1999 
 Home : 3 – 0 v Lusitanos ( Qual Rd 1 leg 1 ) 2 July 2015 
 Away : 3 – 1 v Osijek ( Rd 1 leg 2 ) 30 September 1999 
 = = = Defeats = = = 
 League : 
 Premier League : 
 Away : 0 – 6 v Everton 8 May 1999 
 Division One : 
 Home : 2 – 8 v Blackburn Rovers 26 December 1963 
 Away : 0 – 7 v Sheffield Wednesday 28 November 1959 
 Division Two : 
 Away : 0 – 7 v Barnsley 1 September 1919 
 FA Cup : 
 Away : 0 – 6 v Manchester United ( Rd 4 ) 26 January 2003 
 League Cup : 
 Away : 0 – 6 v Oldham Athletic ( SF leg 1 ) 14 February 1990 
 Away : 0 – 6 v Manchester City ( SF leg 1 ) 8 January 2014 
 European Cup Winners Cup : 
 Home : 1 – 4 v Dinamo Tbilisi ( QF leg 1 ) ( 2 – 4 aggregate scoreline ) 4 March 1981 
 Away : 2 – 4 v FC Den Haag ( QF leg 1 ) ( 5 – 5 aggregate scoreline , West Ham won on away rule ) 3 March 1976 
 Neutral : 2 – 4 v Anderlecht ( Final ) 5 May 1976 
 UEFA Cup : 
 Home : 0 – 1 v Palermo ( Rd 1 leg 1 ) 14 September 2006 
 Away : 0 – 3 v Palermo ( Rd 1 leg 2 ) 28 September 2006 
 = = = Club league highs and lows = = = 
 See also West Ham United F.C. by season 
 = SM UB @-@ 50 = 
 SM UB @-@ 50 was a German Type UB III submarine or U @-@ boat in the German Imperial Navy ( German : Kaiserliche Marine ) during World War I. The U @-@ boat was ordered on 20 May 1916 . She was commissioned into the Pola Flotilla of the German Imperial Navy on 12 July 1917 as SM UB @-@ 50 . 
 The submarine conducted seven patrols and sank 38 ships during the war for a total loss of 97 @,@ 284 gross register tons ( GRT ) . She operated as part of the Pola Flotilla based in Cattaro . UB @-@ 50 surrendered on 16 January 1919 with the remainder of the Pola Flotilla following an order by Admiral Reinhard Scheer to return to port . During her passage through the Straits of Gibraltar , she managed to sink the battleship HMS Britannia . UB @-@ 50 was later broken up at Swansea . 
 = = Construction = = 
 UB @-@ 50 was ordered by the German Imperial Navy on 20 May 1916 . She was built by Blohm & Voss , Hamburg and following just under a year of construction , launched at Hamburg on 6 January 1917 . UB @-@ 50 was commissioned later that same year under the command of Kapitänleutnant ( Kptlt . ) Franz Becker . Like all Type UB III submarines , UB @-@ 50 carried 10 torpedoes and was armed with an 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) deck gun . UB @-@ 50 could carry a crew of up to 34 men and had a cruising range of 9 @,@ 040 nautical miles ( 16 @,@ 740 km ; 10 @,@ 400 mi ) . UB @-@ 50 had a displacement of 516 t ( 508 long tons ) while surfaced and 651 t ( 641 long tons ) when submerged . Her engines enabled her to travel at 13 @.@ 6 knots ( 25 @.@ 2 km / h ; 15 @.@ 7 mph ) when surfaced and 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) when submerged . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = First patrol = = = 
 Soon after she left Pola , UB @-@ 50 encountered the William H. Crawford , a 1 @,@ 593 GRT American sailing ship . It sank after an attack from the U @-@ boat stopped her . Four days later , UB @-@ 50 sighted the 800 GRT British barge <unk> UB 50 launched a torpedo which instead hit the British tug towing the ship , the 121 GRT <unk> The tug sank , but the barge was not sunk . The following day , UB @-@ 50 found two Portuguese sailboats <unk> De <unk> and <unk> Da <unk> at 30 GRT and 32 GRT respectively . They were sunk 6 nautical miles ( 11 km ; 6 @.@ 9 mi ) north of Cape <unk> . A day later , she found the Portuguese 233 GRT ship Sado , which she sank about 16 nautical miles ( 30 km ; 18 mi ) south of her prey the day before . Four days later , UB @-@ 50 finally encountered and sank a merchant , this being the 3 @,@ 611 GRT British Polar Prince , carrying coal for Malta . Two days later , she sank the Fabian , a 2 @,@ 246 GRT British steamer going to Liverpool , killing three . Later that day , she sank the <unk> <unk> , a 4 @,@ 124 GRT ton Italian steamer carrying ore . The 2 @,@ 464 GRT coal carrying Greek steamer <unk> was attacked two days later by UB @-@ 50 , sinking close off Oran . The UB 50 followed up with the sinking of the 1 @,@ 670 GRT Norwegian steamer John Knudsen , killing one . Four days later , the 296 GRT Italian sailboat Ciro was scuttled after being hit by UB @-@ 50 , the last ship she would sink before returning to base . 
 = = = Second patrol = = = 
 SM UB @-@ 50 began her second patrol with the sinking of the Marc <unk> , a 3 @,@ 060 GRT French steamer carrying wood , munitions , and hay to Bizerte . It sank 15 nautical miles ( 28 km ; 17 mi ) north of <unk> after being torpedoed by UB @-@ 50 . Later that day UB 50 encountered the Senegal , an 845 GRT Italian steamer , sinking her off the coast of Algeria with no casualties . Three days after that , the <unk> Abbey , a 4 @,@ 367 GRT British steamer carrying coal , was found and torpedoed by UB @-@ 50 . It was beached off of the coast of Algeria , but the torpedo damage , which killed two , had wrecked the ship . UB 50 attacked the Antaeus , a 3 @,@ 061 GRT British steamer , three days later off of Cape Bon . There were no casualties , but the captain was taken prisoner . On the following day , UB 50 torpedoed the Amberton , a 4 @,@ 556 GRT British steamer , but she was only damaged . Four days later , the submarine found her last target of her second patrol , the 2 @,@ 774 GRT American steamer Rizal , which sank 9 nautical miles ( 17 km ; 10 mi ) from Cape Cavallo . 
 = = = Third patrol = = = 
 UB @-@ 50 started out her third patrol by finding and sinking the 9 GRT Italian sailboat S. Giuseppe B. off the coast of Africa . She sank the 8 @,@ 293 GRT British steamer City of Lucknow two days later 50 nautical miles ( 93 km ; 58 mi ) northeast of the <unk> Rocks . On Christmas Day , 1917 , UB @-@ 50 sank the Sant ’ Antonio , an 843 GRT Italian sailing vessel , by gunfire near Bizerte . On New Year 's Day , 1918 , the Egyptian Transport , a 4 @,@ 648 GRT British steamer , was damaged during an attack by UB @-@ 50 , which killed five men . It was later beached but refloated . Two days later , the <unk> , a 4 @,@ 253 GRT British steamer carrying coal , was sunk by UB @-@ 50 , which also sunk the <unk> , a 3 @,@ 649 GRT British steamer also carrying coal later that day . Four days later , UB @-@ 50 torpedoed the Arab , a 4 @,@ 191 GRT British steamer coal off the coast of Cape Serrat , killing 21 . 
 = = = Fourth patrol = = = 
 UB @-@ 50 's fourth patrol was very successful . In less than a month , she sank six vessels . The first victim was the 2 @,@ 457 GRT French steamer Saint Jean Ii , which went down 22 March 1918 off of Cap Bon . That same day , UB @-@ 50 managed to damage the British steamer Shadwell off of Bizerta . Four days later UB @-@ 50 sank the 11 @,@ 495 GRT Italian steamer Volturno off of Bone ( Annaba ) , Algeria . On 6 April , UB @-@ 50 sank the French vessel Madeleine <unk> and on 11 April , she sank the Italian sailing ship Carmela G and the British vessel Highland Prince . 
 = = = Fifth patrol = = = 
 UB @-@ 50 began her fifth war patrol by damaging the 3 @,@ 296 GRT British steamer Elswick Grange carrying coal off of the coast of Oran , killing one . Two days later , she ran across the 3 @,@ 152 GRT British steamer <unk> carrying coal . She was torpedoed south east of Cabo de Gata , killing 18 . On that same day , she came upon the 168 GRT Danish three @-@ masted iron @-@ hulled schooner <unk> <unk> , sinking after being fired upon from UB @-@ 50 's deck gun with no deaths . Two days later , the New Sweden , a 5 @,@ 319 GRT Swedish steamer , was hit by UB @-@ 50 and sank . Two days later , UB @-@ 50 found the 180 GRT Spanish steamer Maria Pia , which sank with no casualties . Three days after that , the 117 GRT French sailboat Animal Lafont and 257 GRT Italian sailboat Santa Teresa were torpedoed by the U @-@ boat with no casualties . 
 = = = Sixth patrol = = = 
 Shortly before her sixth patrol , Oberleutnant zur See Heinrich <unk> took over command from Kptlt . Becker . On her sixth patrol , UB @-@ 50 encountered the <unk> , a 2 @,@ 514 GRT British steamer and torpedoed her south of Cape St. Maria di Leuca , though she survived . Three days later , UB @-@ 50 sank the War Swallow , a 5 @,@ 216 GRT British merchant ship carrying coal from the River Tyne to Port Said . Another three days passed before UB @-@ 50 found her next target , the Italian steamer Adria 1 , a ship carrying cotton from Palermo to Tunis . It sank , but no lives were lost . Two days later , the 5 @,@ 257 GRT British steamer <unk> was torpedoed by UB @-@ 50 killing three , but was only damaged . UB @-@ 50 sank the <unk> , a 3 @,@ 883 GRT British coal steamer two days later , sinking the ship and killing one . The following day , she torpedoed the Rutherglen , a 4 @,@ 214 GRT British steam merchant carrying coal . That was followed by an attack on the Magellan , a 3 @,@ 642 GRT British steamer on the following day . She sank with one man . The last ship sunk on the patrol was the Antonio S. , a 153 GRT Italian sailboat sunk off of the coast of Tunisia . 
 = = = Seventh patrol = = = 
 On 9 November 1918 , two days before the Armistice with Germany , UB @-@ 50 sank the British battleship HMS Britannia . The Britannia was on a voyage to Gibraltar when she was torpedoed off Cape Trafalgar . After the initial explosion , the ship began listing ten degrees to port . A few minutes later , another explosion started a fire in a 9 @.@ 2 in ( 230 mm ) magazine , which resulted in a cordite explosion in the magazine . The Britannia stayed at 10 @-@ degrees for 2 ½ hours before sinking . Its 16 @,@ 350 gross register tons made it the largest ship the U @-@ boat ever sank , and the only one UB @-@ 50 would sink during her last patrol . 
 = = Summary of raiding history = = 
 = Alexios Strategopoulos = 
 Alexios Komnenos Strategopoulos ( Greek : Ἀλέξιος Κομνηνός <unk> ) was a Byzantine general during the reign of Michael VIII Palaiologos , rising to the rank of megas domestikos and Caesar . Of noble descent , he appears in the sources already at an advanced age in the early 1250s , leading armies for the Empire of Nicaea against Epirus . After falling out of favour and being imprisoned by Theodore II Laskaris , Strategopoulos sided with the aristocrats around Michael Palaiologos , and supported him in his rise to the throne after Theodore II 's death in 1258 . He participated in the Pelagonia campaign in 1259 , going on to capture Epirus , but his successes were undone in the next year and he was captured by the Epirotes . Released after a few months , he led the unexpected reconquest of Constantinople from the Latin Empire in July 1261 , restoring the Byzantine Empire . He was captured again by the Epirotes in the next year and spent several years in captivity in Italy , before being released . He retired from public affairs and died in the early 1270s . 
 = = Origin and family = = 
 Nothing is known of the early years of Alexios Strategopoulos ' life , nor of his exact descent , except that he belonged to the nobility : other <unk> are mentioned in the 11th and 12th centuries , and a John Strategopoulos became megas logothetes ( chief minister ) of the Empire of Nicaea ca . 1216 , although his relation with Alexios is unknown . Strategopoulos was apparently related to the illustrious Komnenos line , as a seal dated to ca . 1255 has been found bearing the inscription " Alexios Strategopoulos from the Komnenos family " . 
 The date of his birth is likewise unknown , but as he is called an " old man " in 1258 , it must have been around the turn of the 13th century . Of his own family , it is known that he had one son , Constantine , who according to George Pachymeres was married to a daughter of the sebastokrator Isaac Doukas Vatatzes , brother of the Nicaean emperor John III Doukas Vatatzes . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Alexios Strategopoulos first appears in the chronicles in 1252 – 53 , during the reign of John III Doukas Vatatzes , when he led a detachment of the army sent to plunder the areas of the Despotate of Epirus around Lake Ostrovo . In 1254 , he was based at Serres , and in the next year , he participated , along with megas <unk> Constantine Tornikes , in a campaign against the fortress of <unk> in the western Rhodope Mountains . The campaign failed with heavy losses , due , according to George Akropolites , to bad generalship on behalf of both Strategopoulos and Tornikes . They failed to reconnoitre properly the Bulgarian forces opposing them , and instead their army broke and fled leaving behind their equipment and horses " to the Bulgarian shepherds and <unk> " . This failure enraged the Emperor Theodore II Laskaris , who removed both from their offices . In addition , probably because of his close connection to the aristocratic faction around Michael Palaiologos , his son Constantine was blinded for lèse @-@ majesté , and Alexios himself was imprisoned some time later . 
 Strategopoulos was probably released from prison immediately after the death of Theodore II Laskaris in August 1258 . Along with the other heads of the aristocratic families , he was a prominent supporter of Michael Palaiologos ' successful coup against George Mouzalon in a bid to assume the regency of the under @-@ age John IV Laskaris . In the same year he accompanied the army that was sent , under Michael 's brother , the megas domestikos John Palaiologos , to confront the Epirote designs on Macedonia . When Michael Palaiologos was proclaimed emperor in early 1259 , John Palaiologos was promoted to sebastokrator , and Strategopoulos succeeded him as megas domestikos . In 1259 he participated in the campaign that led to the decisive victory over an Epirote – Sicilian – Achaean alliance at the Battle of Pelagonia , where , along with Nikephoros <unk> , he took captive the 400 @-@ strong detachment of German knights sent by Manfred , King of Sicily , to aid the Epirotes . 
 After the Nicaean victory , John Palaiologos invaded Thessaly , while Alexios Strategopoulos and John Raoul Petraliphas were tasked with reducing Epirus proper . Strategopoulos and Petraliphas crossed the Pindus , bypassed Ioannina , which they left under siege , and captured the Epirote capital , Arta , forcing the Despot Michael II to flee to the island of Cephalonia . At Arta they found and released many Nicaean prisoners , including the historian George Akropolites . For this success , he was raised to the rank of Caesar . In the next year , however , the Nicaean successes were largely undone : Despot Michael with his sons and an Italian mercenary army landed at Arta , and the Epirote population rallied to his cause . The Epirote army clashed with Alexios ' forces at the <unk> pass near <unk> ; the Nicaean army was routed , and Alexios himself captured . 
 = = Recapture of Constantinople = = 
 Despite these reverses , in early 1261 , Emperor Michael VIII set his sights on capturing the great prize : Constantinople , the capital of the Byzantine Empire , which had been the seat of the Latin Empire since its capture by the Fourth Crusade in 1204 . To this end , Michael concluded an alliance with Genoa in March , and in July 1261 , as the one @-@ year truce concluded after the previous failed Nicaean attack was nearing its end , Strategopoulos , recently released from Epirote custody , was sent with a small advance force of 800 soldiers ( most of them Cumans ) to keep a watch on the Bulgarians and spy out the defences of the Latins . 
 When the Nicaean force reached the village of Selymbria , some 30 miles ( 48 km ) west of Constantinople , however , they learned from some independent local farmers ( <unk> ) that the entire Latin garrison , and the Venetian fleet , were absent conducting a raid against the Nicaean island of <unk> . Strategopoulos was initially hesitant to take advantage of the situation , since his small force might be destroyed if the Latin army returned too soon , and because he would exceed the emperor 's orders , but eventually decided not to lose such a golden opportunity to retake the city . 
 On the night of July 24 / 25 , 1261 , Strategopoulos and his men approached the city walls and hid at a monastery near the Gate of the Spring . Strategopoulos sent a detachment of his men , who , led by some of the <unk> , made their way to the city through a secret passage . They attacked the walls from the inside , surprised the guards and opened the gate , allowing the Nicaean force entry into the city . The Latins were taken completely unaware , and after a short struggle , the Nicaeans gained control of the land walls . As news of this spread across the city , the Latin inhabitants , from Emperor Baldwin II downwards , hurriedly rushed to the harbours of the Golden Horn , hoping to escape by ship . At the same time , Strategopoulos ' men set fire to the Venetian buildings and warehouses along the coast to prevent them from landing there . Thanks to the timely arrival of the returning Venetian fleet , many of the Latins managed to evacuate to the Latin @-@ held parts of Greece , but the city was lost for good . The recapture of Constantinople signalled the restoration of the Byzantine Empire , and on August 15 , the day of the Dormition of the Theotokos , Emperor Michael entered the city in triumph and was crowned at the Hagia Sophia . The rights of John IV Laskaris were brushed aside , and the young man was blinded and imprisoned . 
 Alexios was honoured by Michael with a triumphal procession through the city , and by allowing his name to be commemorated in the church services for a year alongside the Emperor and the Patriarch . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 After this feat that earned him fame and glory , in 1262 Alexios was appointed again to lead an army against Epirus . Here , however , he was defeated and captured by Nikephoros Doukas , who sent him to Manfred in Italy . He was ransomed in 1265 in exchange for Constance II of Hohenstaufen , widow of John Vatatzes . He is last mentioned in a document from December 1270 in which he made a donation to the <unk> Monastery near Volos , and died sometime between 1271 and 1275 , probably at Constantinople . 
 = Xgrid = 
 Xgrid is a proprietary program and distributed computing protocol developed by the Advanced Computation Group subdivision of Apple Inc that allows networked computers to contribute to a single task . 
 It provides network administrators a method of creating a computing cluster , which allows them to exploit previously unused computational power for calculations that can be divided easily into smaller operations , such as Mandelbrot maps . The setup of an Xgrid cluster can be achieved at next to no cost , as Xgrid client is pre @-@ installed on all computers running Mac OS X 10 @.@ 4 to Mac OS X 10 @.@ 7 . The Xgrid client was not included in Mac OS X 10 @.@ 8 . The Xgrid controller , the job scheduler of the Xgrid operation , is also included within Mac OS X Server and as a free download from Apple . Apple has kept the command @-@ line job control mechanism minimalist while providing an API to develop more sophisticated tools built around it . 
 The program employs its own communication protocol layered on top of a schema to communicate to other nodes . This communication protocol interfaces with the BEEP infrastructure , a network application protocol framework . Computers discovered by the Xgrid system , that is computers with Mac OS X 's Xgrid service enabled , are automatically added to the list of available computers to use for processing tasks . 
 When the initiating computer sends the complete instructions , or job , for processing to the controller , the controller splits the task up into these small instruction packets , known as tasks . The design of the Xgrid system consists of these small packets being transferred to all the Xgrid @-@ enabled computers on the network . These computers , or nodes , execute the instructions provided by the controller and then return the results . The controller assembles the individual task results into the whole job results and returns them to the initiating computer . 
 Apple modeled the design of Xgrid on the Zilla program , distributed with NeXT 's OPENSTEP operating system application programming interface ( API ) , which Apple owned the rights to . The company also opted to provide the client version of Mac OS X with only command @-@ line functions and little flexibility , while giving the Mac OS X Server version of Xgrid a GUI control panel and a full set of features . 
 = = History = = 
 Xgrid 's original concept can be traced back to <unk> , found in the OPENSTEP operating system , created by NeXT in the late 1980s . Zilla was the first distributed computing program released on an end @-@ user operating system and which used the idle screen @-@ saver motif , a design feature since found in widely used projects such as Seti @ Home and <unk> Zilla won the national <unk> Smithsonian Award ( Science Category ) in 1991 for ease of use and good design . Apple acquired Zilla , along with the rest of NeXT , in 1997 and later used Zilla as inspiration for Xgrid . The first beta version of Xgrid was released in January 2004 . 
 Several organizations have adopted Xgrid in large international computing networks . One example of an Xgrid cluster is <unk> 's <unk> , where scientists can request access to large amounts of processing power to run tasks related to their research . Another was the now defunct Xgrid @ Stanford project , which used a range of computers on the Stanford University campus and around the world to perform biochemical research . 
 In a pre @-@ release promotional piece , MacWorld cited Xgrid among the Unix features in " 10 Things to Know about TIGER " , calling it " handy if you work with huge amounts of experimental data or render complex animations " . After Xgrid 's introduction in 2004 , InfoWorld noted that it was a " ' preview ' grade technology " which would directly benefit from the <unk> G5 's launch later that year . InfoWorld commentator Ephraim Schwartz also predicted that Xgrid was an opening move in Apple 's entry into the enterprise computing market . 
 Apple discontinued Xgrid with OS X <unk> ( Mountain Lion ) , along with dependent services such as Podcast Producer . 
 = = Protocol = = 
 The Xgrid protocol uses the BEEP network framework to communicate with nodes on the network . The system 's infrastructure includes three types of computers which communicate over the protocol . One is the client , which communicates the calculation . Next is the controller , which starts and segregates the calculation . Finally , the agents process their own allocated part of the calculation . 
 A computer can act as one or all three of these components at the same time . The Xgrid protocol provides the basic infrastructure for computers to communicate , but is not involved in the processing of the specified calculation . Xgrid is targeted towards time consuming computations that can be easily segregated into smaller tasks , sometimes called embarrassingly parallel tasks . This includes Monte Carlo calculations , 3D rendering and Mandelbrot maps . 
 Within the Xgrid protocol , three types of messages can be passed to other computers on the same cluster : requests , notifications and replies . Requests must be responded to by the recipient with a reply , notifications do not require a reply , and replies are responses to sent messages . They are identified by their name , type ( request / notification / reply ) and contents . Each message is encapsulated in a BEEP message ( BEEP MSG ) and is acknowledged on receipt by an empty reply ( <unk> ) . Xgrid does not leverage <unk> message / reply infrastructure . Any received message which requires a response merely generates an independent BEEP message containing the reply . The Xgrid messages are encoded as dictionaries of key / value pairs which are converted to XML before being sent across the BEEP network . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The architecture of the Xgrid system is designed around a job based system ; the controller sends agents jobs , and the agents return the responses . The actual computation that the controller executes in an Xgrid system is known as a job . The job contains all the files required to complete the task successfully , such as the input parameters , data files , directories , <unk> and / or shell scripts , the files included in an Xgrid job must be able to be executed either simultaneously or asynchronously , or any benefits of running such a job on an Xgrid is lost . Once the job completes , the controller can be set to notify the client of the task 's completion or failure , for example by email . The client can leave the network while the tasks are running . It can also monitor the job status on demand by querying the controller , although it cannot track the ongoing progress of individual tasks . 
 The controller is central to the correct function of an Xgrid , as this node is responsible for the distribution , supervision and coordination of tasks on agents . The program running on the controller can assign and reassign tasks to handle individual agent failures on demand . The number of tasks assigned to an agent depend on two factors : the number of agents on an Xgrid and the number of processors in each node . The number of agents on an Xgrid determines how the controller will assign tasks . The tasks may be assigned simultaneously for a large number of agents , or queued for a small number of agents . When a node with more than one processor is detected on an Xgrid , the controller may assign one task per processor ; this only occurs if the number of agents on the network is lower than the number of tasks the controller has to complete . 
 Xgrid is layered upon the Blocks Extensible Exchange Protocol ( BEEP ) , an <unk> standard comparable to HTTP , but with a focus on two @-@ way multiplexed communication , such as that found in peer @-@ to @-@ peer networks . BEEP , in turn , uses XML to define profiles for communicating between multiple agents over a single network or internet connection . 
 = = Interface = = 
 While it is possible to access Xgrid from the command line , the Xgrid graphical user interface , a program bundled with Mac OS X Server and , as of March 2009 , available online , is a much more efficient way of administering an Xgrid system . Originally , the Xgrid agent was included in all Mac OS X version 10 @.@ 4 installations but the GUI was reserved for users of Mac OS X Server . This decision limited the efforts of the computer community to embrace the platform . Eventually , Apple released the Mac OS X Server Administration Tools to the public , which included the Xgrid administration application bundled with Mac OS X Server . 
 Despite the lack of a graphical controller interface in the standard ( non @-@ server ) Mac OS X distribution , it is possible to set up an Xgrid controller via the command line tools <unk> and <unk> . Once the Xgrid controller daemon is running , administration of the grid with Apple 's Xgrid Admin tool is possible . Some applications , such as <unk> , provided Xgrid controller capability through their user interfaces . 
 = History of the Roman Constitution = 
 The History of the Roman Constitution is a study of Ancient Rome that traces the progression of Roman political development from the founding of the city of Rome in 753 BC to the collapse of the Western Roman Empire in 476 AD . The constitution of the Roman Kingdom vested the sovereign power in the King of Rome . The king did have two rudimentary checks on his authority , which took the form of a board of elders ( the Roman Senate ) and a popular assembly ( the Curiate Assembly ) . The arrangement was similar to the constitutional arrangements found in contemporary Greek city @-@ states ( such as Athens or Sparta ) . These Greek constitutional principles probably came to Rome through the Greek colonies of Magna Graecia in southern Italy . The Roman Kingdom was overthrown in 510 BC , according to legend , and in its place the Roman Republic was founded . 
 The constitutional history of the Roman Republic can be divided into five phases . The first phase began with the revolution which overthrew the Roman Kingdom in 510 BC , and the final phase ended with the revolution which overthrew the Roman Republic , and thus created the Roman Empire , in 27 BC . Throughout the history of the republic , the constitutional evolution was driven by the struggle between the aristocracy ( the " Patricians " ) and the ordinary citizens ( the " Plebeians " ) . Approximately two centuries after the founding of the republic , the Plebeians attained , in theory at least , equality with the Patricians . In practice , however , the plight of the average Plebeian remained unchanged . This set the stage for the civil wars of the 1st century BC , and Rome 's transformation into a formal empire . 
 The general who won the last civil war of the Roman Republic , Gaius Octavian , became the master of the state . In the years after 30 BC , Octavian set out to reform the Roman constitution , and to found the Principate . The ultimate consequence of these reforms was the abolition of the republic , and the founding of the Roman Empire . Octavian was given the honorific Augustus ( " venerable " ) by the Roman Senate , and became known to history by this name , and as the first Roman Emperor . Octavian 's reforms did not , at the time , seem drastic , since they did nothing more than reorganize the constitution . The reorganization was revolutionary , however , because the ultimate result was that Octavian ended up with control over the entire constitution , which itself set the stage for outright monarchy . When Diocletian became Roman Emperor in 284 , the Principate was abolished , and a new system , the Dominate , was established . This system survived until the ultimate fall of the Eastern Roman ( Byzantine ) Empire in 1453 . 
 = = Under the Kingdom = = 
 The period of the kingdom can be divided into two epochs based on the legends , handed down to us principally in the first book of Livy 's Ab <unk> condita ( " From the City Having Been Founded " , or simply " History of Rome " ) . While the specific legends were probably not true , they were likely based on historical fact . It is likely that , before the founding of the republic , Rome actually had been ruled by a succession of kings . The first legendary epoch saw the reigns of the first four legendary kings . During this time , the political foundations of the city were laid , the city grew increasingly organized , the religious institutions were established , and the senate and the assemblies evolved into formal institutions . The early Romans were divided into three ethnic groups . The families that belonged to one of these ethnic groups were the original Patrician families . In an attempt to add a level of organization to the city , these Patrician families were divided into units called curia . The vehicle through which the early Romans expressed their democratic impulses was known as a " committee " ( comitia or " assembly " ) . The two principle assemblies that formed were known as the Curiate Assembly and the Calculate Assembly . The two assemblies were designed to mirror the ethnic divisions of the city , and as such , the assemblies were organized by curia . The vehicle through which the early Romans expressed their aristocratic impulses was a council of town elders , which became the Roman senate . The elders of this council were known as patres ( " fathers " ) , and thus are known to history as the first Roman senators . The demos ( " people " ) and the elders eventually recognized the need for a single political leader , and thus elected such a leader , the rex ( Roman King ) . The demos elected the rex , and the elders advised the rex . 
 The second epoch saw the reigns of the last three legendary kings . The second epoch was more consequential than was the first , which was in part due to the significant degree of territorial expansion which occurred during this period . Regardless of how true these legends were , it is likely that , as the legends suggest , a series of conquests did occur during the late monarchy . As a result of these conquests , it became necessary to determine what was to be done with the conquered people . Often , individuals whose towns had been conquered remained in those towns , while other such individuals came to Rome . To acquire legal and economic standing , these newcomers adopted a condition of dependency toward either a Patrician family , or toward the king . Eventually , the individuals who were dependents of the king were released from their state of dependency , and became the first Plebeians . As Rome grew , it needed more soldiers to continue its conquests . When the Plebeians were released from their dependency , they were released from their Curia . When this occurred , while they were no longer required to serve in the army , they also lost their political and economic standing . To bring these new Plebeians back into the army , the Patricians were forced to make concessions . While it is not known exactly what concessions were made , the fact that they were not granted any political power set the stage for what history knows as the Conflict of the Orders . 
 The reign of the first four kings was distinct from that of the last three kings . The first kings were elected . Between the reigns of the final three kings , however , the monarchy became hereditary , and as such , the senate became subordinated to the king . This breach in the senate 's sovereignty , rather than an intolerable tyranny , was probably what led the Patricians in the senate to overthrow the last king . The king may have sought the support of the Plebeians ; however , the Plebeians were no doubt exhausted from their continued military service , and from their forced labor in the construction of public works . They were probably also embittered by their lack of political power , and therefore did not come to the aide of either the king or the senate . 
 = = Under the Republic = = 
 After the monarchy had been overthrown , and the Roman Republic had been founded , the people of Rome began electing two Consuls each year . In the year 494 BC , the Plebeians ( commoners ) seceded to the Aventine Hill , and demanded of the Patricians ( the aristocrats ) the right to elect their own officials . The Patricians duly capitulated , and the Plebeians ended their secession . The Plebeians called these new officials Plebeian Tribunes , and gave these Tribunes two assistants , called Plebeian Aediles . 
 In 449 BC , the Senate promulgated the Twelve Tables as the centerpiece of the Roman Constitution . In 443 BC , the office of Censor was created , and in 367 BC , Plebeians were allowed to stand for the Consulship . The opening of the Consulship to the Plebeian class implicitly opened both the Censorship as well as the Dictatorship to Plebeians . In 366 BC , in an effort by the Patricians to reassert their influence over the magisterial offices , two new offices were created . While these two offices , the <unk> and the Curule Aedileship , were at first open only to Patricians , within a generation , they were open to Plebeians as well . 
 Beginning around the year 350 BC , the senators and the Plebeian Tribunes began to grow closer . The Senate began giving Tribunes more power , and , unsurprisingly , the Tribunes began to feel indebted to the senate . As the Tribunes and the senators grew closer , Plebeian senators began to routinely secure the office of Tribune for members of their own families . Also around the year 350 BC , the Plebeian Council ( popular assembly ) enacted a significant law ( the " Ovinian Law " ) which transferred , from the Consuls to the Censors , the power to appoint new senators . This law also required the Censors to appoint any newly elected magistrate to the Senate , which probably resulted in a significant increase in the number of Plebeian senators . This , along with the closeness between the Plebeian Tribunes and the Senate , helped to facilitate the creation of a new Plebeian aristocracy . This new Plebeian aristocracy soon merged with the old Patrician aristocracy , creating a combined " Patricio @-@ Plebeian " aristocracy . The old aristocracy existed through the force of law , because only Patricians had been allowed to stand for high office . Now , however , the new aristocracy existed due to the organization of society , and as such , this order could only be overthrown through a revolution . 
 In 287 BC , the Plebeians seceded to the Janiculum hill . To end the secession , a law ( the " Hortensian Law " ) was passed , which ended the requirement that the Patrician senators consent before a bill could be brought before the Plebeian Council for a vote . The ultimate significance of this law was in the fact that it robbed the Patricians of their final weapon over the Plebeians . The result was that the ultimate control over the state fell , not onto the shoulders of democracy , but onto the shoulders of the new Patricio @-@ Plebeian aristocracy . By the middle of the second century BC , the economic situation for the average Plebeian had declined significantly . Farmers became bankrupted , and soon masses of unemployed Plebeians began flooding into Rome , and thus into the ranks of the legislative assemblies , where their economic status usually led them to vote for the candidate who offered them the most . A new culture of dependency was emerging , which would look to any populist leader for relief . 
 In 88 BC , an aristocratic senator named Lucius Cornelius Sulla was elected Consul , and soon left for a war in the east . When a Tribune revoked Sulla 's command of the war , Sulla brought his army back to Italy , marched on Rome , secured the city , and left for the east again . In 83 BC he returned to Rome , and captured the city a second time . In 82 BC , he made himself Dictator , and then used his status as Dictator to pass a series of constitutional reforms that were intended to strengthen the senate . In 80 BC he resigned his Dictatorship , and by 78 BC he was dead . While he thought that he had firmly established aristocratic rule , his own career had illustrated the fatal weakness in the constitution : that it was the army , and not the senate , which dictated the fortunes of the state . In 70 BC , the generals Pompey Magnus and Marcus Licinius Crassus were both elected Consul , and quickly dismantled Sulla 's constitution . In 62 BC Pompey returned to Rome from battle in the east , and soon entered into an agreement with Julius Caesar . Caesar and Pompey , along with Crassus , established a private agreement , known as the First Triumvirate . Under the agreement , Pompey 's arrangements were to be ratified , Crassus was to be promised a future Consulship , and Caesar was to be promised the Consulship in 59 BC , and then the governorship of Gaul ( modern France ) immediately afterwards . In 54 BC , violence began sweeping the city , and in 53 BC Crassus was killed . In January 49 BC , the senate passed a resolution which declared that if Caesar did not lay down his arms by July of that year , he would be considered an enemy of the republic . In response , Caesar quickly crossed the Rubicon with his veteran army , and marched towards Rome . Caesar 's rapid advance forced Pompey , the Consuls and the senate to abandon Rome for Greece , and allowed Caesar to enter the city unopposed . 
 By 48 BC , after having defeated the last of his major enemies , Julius Caesar wanted to ensure that his control over the government was undisputed . He assumed these powers by increasing his own authority , and by decreasing the authority of Rome 's other political institutions . Caesar held the office of Roman Dictator , and alternated between the Consulship ( the chief @-@ magistracy ) and the <unk> ( in effect , a military governorship ) . In 48 BC , Caesar was given the powers of a Plebeian Tribune , which made his person sacrosanct , gave him the power to veto the Senate , and allowed him to dominate the legislative process . After Caesar was assassinated in 44 BC , Mark Antony formed an alliance with Caesar 's adopted son and great @-@ nephew , Gaius Octavian . Along with Marcus Aemilius Lepidus , they formed an alliance known as the Second Triumvirate , and held powers that were nearly identical to the powers that Caesar had held under his constitution . While the conspirators who had assassinated Caesar were defeated at the Battle of Philippi in 42 BC , the peace that resulted was only temporary . Antony and Octavian fought against each other in one last battle in 31 BC . Antony was defeated , and in 30 BC he committed suicide . In 29 BC , Octavian returned to Rome as the unchallenged master of the state . The reign of Octavian , whom history remembers as Augustus , the first Roman Emperor , marked the dividing line between the Roman Republic and the Roman Empire . By the time this process was complete , Rome had completed its transition from a city @-@ state with a network of dependencies , to the capital of an empire . 
 = = Under the Empire = = 
 When Octavian returned to Rome two years after defeating Mark Antony , no one remained to oppose him . Decades of war had taken a terrible toll on the People of Rome . The political situation was unstable , and there was a constant threat of renewed warfare . Octavian 's arrival alone caused a wave of optimism to ripple throughout Italy . As soon as he arrived , he began addressing the problems that were plaguing Rome . Octavian 's popularity soon reached new heights , which ultimately gave him the support he needed to implement his reforms . When Octavian deposed Mark Antony in 32 BC , he resigned his position as triumvir , but was probably vested with powers similar to those that he had given up . 
 Octavian wanted to solidify his status as master of the state , but avoid the fate of his adopted father . On January 13 of 27 BC , Octavian transferred control of the state back to the Senate and the People of Rome , but neither the Senate nor the People of Rome were willing to accept what was , in effect , Octavian 's resignation . Octavian was allowed to remain Roman Consul ( the chief @-@ executive under the old Republic ) , and was also allowed to retain his tribunician powers ( similar to those of the Plebeian Tribunes , or chief representatives of the people ) . This arrangement , in effect , functioned as a popular ratification of his position within the state . The Senate then granted Octavian a unique grade of Proconsular command power ( imperium ) which gave him the authority over all of Rome 's military governors , and thus , over the entire Roman army . Octavian was also granted the title of " Augustus " ( " venerable " ) and of Princeps ( " first citizen " ) . In 23 BC , Augustus ( as Octavian now called himself ) gave up his Consulship , and expanded both his Proconsular imperium and his tribunician powers . After these final reforms had been instituted , Augustus never again altered his constitution . Augustus ' final goal was to ensure an orderly succession . In 6 BC Augustus granted tribunician powers to his stepson Tiberius , and quickly recognized Tiberius as his heir . In 13 AD a law was passed which made Tiberius ' legal powers equivalent to , and independent from , those of Augustus . Within a year , Augustus was dead . 
 When Augustus died in 14 AD , the Principate legally ended . Tiberius knew that if he secured the support of the army , the rest of the government would soon follow . Therefore , Tiberius assumed command of the Praetorian Guard , and used his Proconsular imperium to force the armies to swear allegiance to him . As soon as this occurred , the Senate and the magistrates acquiesced . Under Tiberius , the power to elect magistrates was transferred from the assemblies to the Senate . When Tiberius died , Caligula was proclaimed Emperor by the Senate . In 41 Caligula was assassinated , and for two days following his assassination , the Senate debated the merits of restoring the Republic . Due to the demands of the army , however , Claudius was declared emperor , but he was ultimately killed , and Nero was declared Emperor . 
 In the decades after the death of Augustus , the Roman Empire was , in a sense , a union of inchoate principalities , which could have disintegrated at any time . In 68 AD , Ser . Sulpicius Galba , the governor of Hispania Tarraconensis , was proclaimed Emperor by his troops . In Rome , the emperor Nero quickly lost his supporters and committed suicide . The governor of Lower Germany , A. Vitellius , was soon proclaimed Emperor by his troops , and in Rome , the Praetorian Guard proclaimed M. Salvius Otho Emperor . In 69 , Galba was assassinated and Otho took an army to Germany to defeat Vitellius , but instead was himself defeated . He committed suicide , and Vitellius was proclaimed Emperor , but was quickly defeated and the executed by Vespasian , who was then declared Emperor . Under the Emperor Vespasian , the Roman constitution began a slide toward outright monarchy . Vespasian died in 79 , and was succeeded by his son , Titus , who presided over a further weakening of the senate . He was succeeded by his brother , Domitian , in 81 . Domitian 's reign marked a significant turning point on the road to monarchy , as he made himself Censor for life , and unlike his father , used these powers to further subjugate the Senate . Domitian , ultimately , was a tyrant with the character which always makes tyranny repulsive , and this derived in part from his own paranoia , which itself was a consequence of the fact that he had no son , and thus no obvious heir . In September 96 , Domitian was assassinated . 
 During the period that began with the accession of the Emperor Nerva and ended with the death of the Emperor Commodus , the Empire continued to weaken . It was becoming difficult to recruit enough soldiers for the army , inflation was becoming an issue , and on at least one occasion , the Empire almost went bankrupt . The most significant constitutional development during this era was the steady drift towards monarchy . M. Cocceius Nerva succeeded Domitian , and although his reign was too short for any major constitutional reforms , he did reverse some of his predecessor 's abuses . He was succeeded by Trajan in 98 , who then went further than even Nerva had in restoring the image of a free republic , by , for example , allowing the senate to regain some independent legislative abilities . Hadrian succeeded Trajan as Emperor . By far , his most important constitutional alteration was his creation of a bureaucratic apparatus , which included a fixed gradation of clearly defined offices , and a corresponding order of promotion . Hadrian was succeed by Antonius Pius , who made no real changes to the constitution . Antonius Pius was succeeded by Marcus Aurelius in 161 . The most significant constitutional development that occurred during the reign of Marcus Aurelius was the revival of the republican principle of collegiality , as he made his brother , L. Aelius , his co @-@ emperor . In 169 , Aelius died , and in 176 , Marcus Aurelius made his son , L. Aurelius Commodus , his new co @-@ emperor . In 180 , Marcus Aurelius died , and Commodus became Emperor . Commodus ' tyranny revived the worst memories of the later Julian emperors , as he was more explicit than any of his predecessors in taking powers that he did not legally have , and in disregarding the constitution . He was killed in 192 . 
 No further constitutional reforms were enacted during the Principate . The only development of any significance was the continuing slide towards monarchy , as the constitutional distinctions that had been set up by Augustus lost whatever meaning that they still had . Starting in 235 , with the reign of the barbarian Emperor Maximinus Thrax , the Empire was put through a period of severe military , civil , and economic stress . The crisis arguably reached it height during the reign of Gallienus , from 260 to 268 . The crisis ended with the accession of Diocletian in 284 , and the abolishment of the Principate . 
 = = Decline and fall = = 
 When Diocletian became Roman Emperor in 284 , the military situation had recently stabilized , which allowed him to enact badly needed constitutional reforms . Diocletian resurrected the " collegial " system that Marcus Aurelius had first used , and divided the empire into east and west . Each half was to be ruled by one of two co @-@ emperors , called the Augusti . He then resurrected the precedent set by Hadrian , and ensured that each emperor named his successor early in his reign . Diocletian called that successor a Caesar . Diocletian then created a bureaucratic apparatus that was similar to the system that Hadrian had created , wherein each office had a defined set of responsibilities , a set rank , and a set path of promotion . In this administrative system , Diocletian followed the example that had been set by Domitian , and divided the Empire into small administrative units . He also assigned to the four tetrarchs ( the two Augusti and the two Caesares ) honorary titles and insignia that had been used by Domitian . One important consequence of these reforms was the fact that the image of a free republic had finally given way , and the centuries @-@ old reality of monarchy now became obvious . 
 When Diocletian resigned , chaos ensued , but after the chaos had subsided , most of his reforms remained in effect . While the Emperor Constantine the Great did enact some revisions to this constitution , the most significant change over the centuries was in the abolition of the Caesares . Ultimately this constitution survived , in one form or another , until the Western Roman Empire fell in 476 . Diocletian 's division of the Empire into west and east set the stage for ages to come , and was a significant factor behind the ultimate division of the Christian church into western Roman Catholic and eastern Greek Orthodox , while his division of the Empire into prefectures and dioceses is used by the Catholic Church to this day . 
 = Viking metal = 
 Viking metal is a style of heavy metal music with origins in black metal and Nordic folk music , characterized by a lyrical and thematic focus on Norse mythology , Norse paganism , and the Viking Age . Viking metal is quite diverse as a musical style , to the point where some scholars consider it more of a term than a genre , but it is typically manifested as black metal with influences from Nordic folk music . Some common traits include a slow @-@ paced and heavy riffing style , anthemic choruses , use of both clean and harsh vocals , a frequent reliance on folk instrumentation , and often the use of keyboards for atmospheric effect . Viking metal developed in the 1980s through the mid @-@ 1990s as a rejection of Satanism and the occult , instead embracing the Vikings and paganism as the leaders of opposition to Christianity . It is similar , in lyrics , sound , and thematic imagery , to pagan metal , but pagan metal has a broader mythological focus and utilizes folk instrumentation more extensively . Most Viking metal bands originate from the Nordic countries , and nearly all bands claim that their members descend , directly or indirectly , from Vikings . Many scholars view Viking metal and the related black , pagan , and folk metal genres as part of broader <unk> and neo @-@ völkisch movements as well as part of a global movement of renewed interest in , and celebration of , local and regional ethnicities . 
 Though artists such as Led Zeppelin , Yngwie Malmsteen , Heavy Load , and Manowar have previously dealt with Viking themes , Bathory , from Sweden , is generally credited with pioneering the style with its albums Blood Fire Death ( 1988 ) and Hammerheart ( 1990 ) , which launched a renewed interest in the Viking Age among heavy metal musicians . Enslaved , from Norway , followed up on this burgeoning Viking trend with <unk> Land ( 1993 ) and <unk> <unk> ( 1994 ) . Burzum , Emperor , Einherjer , and Helheim , among others , helped further develop the genre in the early through mid @-@ 1990s . Through the work of artists such as the German project Falkenbach , Viking metal soon spread from the Nordic countries to other nations with Viking history or an even broader Germanic heritage , and has since influenced musicians across the globe . The death metal bands Unleashed and Amon Amarth , which emerged during the early 1990s , also adopted Viking themes , broadening the style from its primarily black metal origin . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Sonic traits = = = 
 AllMusic identifies Viking metal as a nickname for the 1990s Norwegian black metal scene , which the site describes as " noisy , chaotic , and often augmented by sorrowful keyboard melodies . " Journalist Johannes Jonsson described the style as " slow black metal with influences from Nordic folk music . " Lecturer Ross Hagen identifies Viking metal as a subgenre of black metal , albeit one that abandoned black metal 's Satanic imagery . Cosmo Lee of Stylus , described Viking metal as running the gamut from " folk to black to death metal " . Deena Weinstein mentions that Viking metal bands typically rely extensively on keyboards , which are often played at a " swift , galloping pace . " Also according to Weinstein , Viking metal bands often add " local cultural flourishes " such as traditional instruments and ethnic melodies . Aaron Patrick Mulvany considers it a category of folk metal , but with considerably less usage of " non @-@ standard instruments " . Steven P. Ashby and John Schofield also note the similarity to folk metal , but likewise also note that Viking metal uses folk instruments less commonly than folk metal . For vocals , Viking metal incorporates both singing and the typical black metal death growls . 
 Scholar <unk> von Helden acknowledges that " There are difficulties in defining [ Viking metal ] , because the definition — apart from certain elements like anthem @-@ like choruses — is not based entirely on musical features and overlaps with other metal genres . The music derives from the also Scandinavian @-@ coined genres of black and death metal . " Some bands , such as Unleashed and Amon Amarth , play death metal , but incorporate Viking themes and thus are labeled under the genre . Scholar Heather O 'Donoghue also notes how Viking metal is defined more by its thematic material than musical qualities . She writes that " Viking metal draws on Norse themes not in a strictly musical sense — the work of groups such as Bathory is not by any means a mock @-@ up of medieval music . Rather , it is in the band names , album titles , artwork of album covers and , especially , in the song lyrics that Viking themes are so evident . " Irina @-@ Maria Manea in " Primal Roots : Ancestry and Race in Extreme Music Discourses " considers Viking metal , and the closely related style pagan metal , more of a term or " etiquette " than a musical style . She elaborates that " Viking and Pagan Metal are more likely lyrical subgenres distinguished primarily by their content and less by sound characteristics , which is why categorizations may come out as controversial . " Ashby and Schofield also consider Viking metal more of a cross @-@ genre term than a descriptor of a certain sound . They write that " The term ' Viking metal ' is one of many that falls within a complex web of genres and subgenres , the precise form of which is constantly shifting , as trends and fads emerge and fade . " They note further on that from its origins in black metal , Viking metal " has diversified ( at least in aural terms ) , and now covers a range of styles that run the gamut between black metal and what one might justifiably term classic rock . " 
 In the essay " Scandinavian Heavy Metal as an <unk> Play with Norse Mythology " , scholar Anna G. <unk> analyzed the music of the Viking metal bands Bathory and Týr . Starting with the album Blood Fire Death , one of the first definitive Viking metal releases , the band Bathory incorporated a diverse range of sonic elements . While still retaining the noise and chaos of previous recordings , the band took a more sorrowful and melodic approach , working in ballads based on Germanic and Norse <unk> shanty @-@ like melodies and folk music elements such as <unk> sounds , Jew 's harps , and fifes were introduced . Bathory also added in natural found sounds , such as ocean waves , thunder , and wild animal sounds , in a style similar to that of musique concrète . Instruments were sometimes used to create onomatopoeic effects such as drum sounds imitating thunder or a sledgehammer . Bathory 's song structure typically of this era featured multi @-@ sectional formal structures , and usually followed a pattern of three instrumental sections - introduction , bridge , and finale - and two vocal sections - stanza and refrain . 
 The Faroese band Týr , though consisting of a typical rock band lineup with electric instruments , makes extensive use of traditional Faroese music in its song composition . Faroese ballads typically involve unusual time signatures , most commonly 74 or the alternative rhythms 128 or 98 . In an attempt to replicate these uneven signatures , Týr often places the accent on the weak beat of the bar . In songs based on old Faroese ballads , Týr will usually play in harmonic or melodic minor scale or else in mixolydian mode . 
 = = = Thematic and lyrical focus = = = 
 Thematically , Viking metal draws extensively on elements of black metal , but uses pagan and Norse lyrics and imagery instead of those of an anti @-@ Christian or Satanic nature . Viking metal combines the symbolism common in black and death metal , especially the exultation of violence and virility through weapons and battlefields , with a common interest in ancestral roots , especially a pre @-@ Christian heritage , expressed through Viking mythology and imagery of northern landscapes . However , some bands such as <unk> keep the Satanic elements of black metal but sonically are influenced from more recent folk tunes . Visual media such as album art , band photos , website design , and merchandise all highlight the dark and violent outlook of Viking metal lyrics and themes . Authors Simon Trafford and Aleks Pluskowski note that the album sleeves on works by Viking metal artists are frequently decorated with Viking Age archeological finds : Thor 's hammers are especially common , but other artifacts such as Oseberg posts and even the Sutton Hoo helmet have appeared . Some bands incorporate far more ancient , pre @-@ medieval imagery , such as the Finnish band Moonsorrow 's use of prehistoric rock carvings and megaliths . Other Finnish bands , such as Ensiferum , Turisas , and Korpiklaani , focus on Sami traditions and shamanism , further stretching the definition of Viking metal . 
 While many bands rely on Viking @-@ related visuals or other ancestral images to aid their musical character , others do not . For instance , the members of Týr , from the Faroe Islands , do not wear Viking costumes on stage , and thus , apart from its lyrical content and heavily folk @-@ influenced music , the band is otherwise virtually indistinguishable from other heavy metal bands . 
 In his thesis paper " ' <unk> Pride Once Lost ' : <unk> and European Folk Metal " , Aaron Patrick Mulvany says that while much of the thematic history of heavy metal uses parodies of the occult in an incongruous fashion , Viking metal bands use " a very specific mythology which controls not only textual choices , but also the imagery used on albums and frequently the kind of music composed . " Deena Weinstein comments that despite a whole pantheon of Norse gods to choose from , Viking metal bands typically focus on Odin , the god of war , and Thor , " whose hammer , ' the hammer of the gods ' , defended the Pagans against the Christians . " Alcohol , particularly mead , is also a common lyrical <unk> von Helden identifies two main trajectories that Viking metal bands take toward their subject matter . The first trajectory is one of romanticism and escapist ideas , where bands cultivate an image of strength and barbarism and quote passages from various poems and sagas . The second trajectory emphasizes historical accuracy , typically relying on Norse mythology as the sole focus of lyricism and identity . Trafford and Pluskowski find that many Viking metal bands identify first with local roots — for instance , Moonsorrow with Finland or Einherjer with Norway — and perhaps a northern European identity second . 
 While many songs are composed in English , Viking metal bands often write lyrics in various other languages , usually of the North Germanic family : Norwegian , Old Norse , Swedish , Danish and , less commonly , Icelandic , Faroese , and the non @-@ Germanic Finnish language . Other European languages , such as German , Old High German , Latin , Dutch , or Sami languages are sometimes used . In 2013 , The Wall Street Journal published an article which examined how heavy metal fans around the world learn languages such as Norwegian or Finnish in order to understand the lyrics of their favorite bands . It reported that " A band of young metal heads — spanning Romania to Singapore — have taken up a Northern European language in order to better appreciate or even mimic their favorite metal bands . " 
 = = = = Paganism and opposition to Christianity = = = = 
 According to Trafford and Pluskowski , the imagery in Viking metal draws not only from material culture left from Viking Age , but also " encompasses the broad semiotic system favored by many black and death metal bands , not least of all the exultation of violence and hyper @-@ masculinity expressed through weapons and battlefields . " However , in Viking metal this semiotic system is melded with an interest in ancestral roots , specifically a pre @-@ Christian heritage , " expressed visually through Viking mythology and the aesthetics of northern landscapes . " Trafford and Pluskowski further explain that extreme and obsessive loathing of Christianity had long remained the norm of black and death metal bands , but in the 1990s Bathory and many other bands began turning away from Satanism as the primary opposition to Christianity , instead placing their faith in the Vikings and Odin . Many artists claim affiliation to Ásatrú , treating Christianity as a foreign influence that was forcibly imposed , and therefore as a wrong to be righted . Trafford and Pluskowski state that some members of the scene were motivated to act , citing the church burnings by black metal musician Varg Vikernes as an example . They admit that while most bands or individuals did not go that far , an undercurrent of racism , nationalism , and anti @-@ Semitism continues to permeate parts of the black metal scene . On the other hand , Trafford and Pluskowski note that many Viking metal artists , including bands such as Enslaved and Einherjer , simply express interest in Vikings and Norse mythology and entirely reject the Satanic inclination of black metal , writing almost exclusively on Norse themes , without any racist or anti @-@ Semitic undertones . Hoad considers Viking metal both pre @-@ Christian and post @-@ apocalyptic — it looks to a pre @-@ Christian past and imagines a post @-@ Christian future . While opposition to Christianity drove the formation of Viking metal , some bands that play , or have played , Viking metal , such as Slechtvalk , <unk> , and Holy Blood , subscribe to Christian beliefs . 
 Writing for Thrash <unk> , David Keevill argues that the explicitly anti @-@ Christian attitude of most Viking metal artists is an anachronistic view of the Viking Age . Keevill explains that " while bands have used [ Viking mythology ] as the basis for their musical existence ... the historical reality of the Viking Age ( late 8th century to the 11th century ) is a chequered backdrop of a multitude of belief systems and disparate political mechanisms . " As an historical example , he cites the raid on Lindisfarne in 793 , an event considered the beginning of the Viking Age and celebrated by the band Enslaved in its song " 793 ( <unk> Om Lindisfarne ) " . He contends that this attack was merely an opportunistic raid , not a concerted attack on the growing power of Christianity . Likewise , he clarifies that the terms " heathen " and " pagan " historically did not necessarily mean " anti @-@ Christian , " but that the persons in question did not fit under a denominational label . Furthermore , Norse religion and Christianity intermingled and influenced each other throughout the era , and Christianity was often imposed through monarchical regimes such as Harald <unk> and Harald Bluetooth or conversion movements such as those initiated by Ansgar . Keevill concludes his article by stating , " It 's not that bands like Amon Amarth shouldn 't flout their Norse heritage , the bellicose nature of the ancestors or the kind of practices that would have taken place in far flung tribal societies , it 's just that ruling out the presence of an overbearing Christian influence on the Viking Age is incredibly close @-@ minded . " 
 = = = = Relationship to pagan metal = = = = 
 Weinstein considers Viking metal the progenitor of the pagan metal genre , citing Bathory 's Hammerheart as the first pagan metal recording . She writes how " it is fitting that pagan metal began with Viking metal , given that the Vikings were Europe 's last Pagans , converted slowly and with reluctance to Christianity . " von Helden also notes similarities between Viking metal and pagan metal , but also highlights some key differences . " [ Pagan metal ] deals mainly with Pagan religions and lies in a broader context where not only Old Norse mythology is dealt with , but also Celtic myths and history , fairy tales and other elements of folklore . Traditional instruments like the violin or flute are used more often in pagan than in Viking metal music . " Irina @-@ Maria Manea explains that " the idea of incorporating and then revering exclusively national or regional myths , stories , and tales first gained ground in the work of artists such as <unk> Brood , Falkenbach , Black Messiah , Enslaved or Einherjer , but the musical phenomenon is far from being merely European , but a global trend artistically expressing its affinity for an ethnically colored spectrum . " Ashby and Schofield likewise consider Viking , pagan , and folk metal part of an " interesting trend within cultural heritage towards not only a wider acceptance as heritage of the ordinary and the everyday alongside the nationally significant and the iconic , but a willingness and impetus to explore heritage 's outer reaches , the marginal areas in which definitions of cultural heritage and heritage communities start to fragment and become increasingly contested . " 
 = = = = Masculinity = = = = 
 Catherine Hoad in " ' Hold the Heathen Hammer High ' : Viking Metal from the Local to the Global " points out that the Viking image in popular understanding is that of hyper @-@ masculinity , and thus Viking metal is inherently patriarchal . Hoad does acknowledge that some bands include female members , such as <unk> <unk> , Storm , and <unk> , and that female fans comprise a substantial part of Viking metal 's audience . However , she stresses that women " do remain largely subordinate within the Viking metal scene , " and are rarely present in the production of Viking metal music . She considers Viking metal a form of " nation @-@ building , " and while women may participate in the nation building process , it is still controlled by men . Irina @-@ Manea likewise notes that within Viking metal , " themes in the spectrum of war and masculinity are almost a rule . " 
 <unk> Mørk explains that in songs such as Burzum 's " <unk> " link manliness with Norse tradition and gender ideals , and that the Viking male thus represents traditional masculinity . Most of the Norse references in black metal are heroic , masculine , and militaristic in theme - <unk> , Odin , the iron cross , and berserkers and einherjar . Conversely , Jesus , though a male figure , is seen in songs such as " Jesu død " by Burzum as cold , dark , and life @-@ extinguishing . Christianity is viewed as stigmatizing and suppressing the natural " dark " sides of men , and so , from the perspective of black metal , true masculinity is achieved through exploring the dark sides of man 's nature - warfare and killing . Mørk highlights the thesis of cultural historian Nina <unk> that within Norway , images of nature are often symbolic with cultural affiliation to Norway . <unk> traces the roots of this ideal to Tacitus 's German @-@ heathen identity narrative which romanticized the Germanic people as superior through their connection with nature , and whose brutality and belligerence opposed the apathetic and decadent Roman elite . Mørk concludes that Norse imagery therefore is used within black metal to build a view of natural and authentic masculinity to counter the oppressive force of the Judeo @-@ Christian tradition . 
 = = = Influence from sea shanties and popular media = = = 
 Aaron Patrick Mulvany stated that " Viking metal ... is much less concerned with traditional aural materials like instruments and melodies . Instead , Viking bands limit themselves mainly to the use of Norse mythology as a textual source , which they often augment with stylized shanty @-@ like melodies that are meant to evoke apropos images " . Mulvany elaborated to say that 
 Although the majority of Viking metal bands ... limit themselves primarily to textual borrowings , many others can be additionally classified as musically evocative of the Vikings . Unlike folk metal bands drawing from other mythologies , bands using Norse mythology as text have no musical @-@ historical examples to augment their illusion . This has led to the creation of an ahistorical ' Viking music ' that is used in tandem with the metal style to conjure up appropriate images . 
 According to Mulvany , Viking metal draws heavily on sea shanties and media images of pirates and Vikings , an influence evident in two basic forms of the genre . The first type " is largely stepwise in motion with many repeated note figures " , is frequently in minor key , and is primarily sung in unison . The second type uses an " arching ascent @-@ descent structure " and is less dependent on lyrics , making it " more evocative of rolling waves on the open sea " . Mulvany explains that the heavy sea shanty influence results from media stereotyping in which certain aural associations are equated with " images of sailors , sea @-@ borne marauders , and Vikings " , and that " though rooted in traditional sea shanties , these aural images have been perpetuated through the media of pirate movies and television shows , and they have been extended — by association — to Vikings " . Ashby and Schofield agree with Mulvany that musically , Viking metal bands generally are unconnected with a real Viking past , but instead connote a broader sense of the maritime . They stipulate that " Presumably this conflation of maritime contexts is a knowing one , but one nonetheless felt to be somehow evocative . " 
 Keith Fay of the folk metal band Cruachan has also noted the influence of sea shanties on Viking metal , though rather disparagingly . In an interview with Terrorizer , he stated that " There is no real defined ' Viking music ' , so all these Nordic bands use ' sea shanty ' type tunes to match their music . A lot of these bands , especially the bigger ones , are called folk metal but they don 't really understand what real folk music is ; though I know this is not true for all of them . " 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Precursors : 1970s to mid @-@ 1980s = = = 
 The use of Viking themes and imagery in hard rock and heavy metal music predates the advent of Viking metal . For instance , the lyrics to Led Zeppelin 's " Immigrant Song " ( 1970 ) and " No Quarter " ( 1973 ) feature allusions to Viking voyages , violence , and exploration . The Swedish band Heavy Load often wrote Viking @-@ themed songs , such as the 1978 song " Son of the Northern Light " , and Eduardo Rivadavia of AllMusic writes that the 1983 song " Stronger than Evil " establishes a case for Heavy Load as the first Viking metal group . Swedish neoclassical metal guitarist Yngwie Malmsteen sometimes featured themes of hyper @-@ masculinity , heroic warriors , and Vikings ; for example , on his 1985 album Marching Out . The German band Grave Digger and American band Manowar , both of which formed in 1980 , drew upon Norse myth as envisioned in Richard Wagner 's Der Ring des Nibelungen . Manowar in particular adopted Viking imagery much more heavily than other bands . Trafford and Pluskowski write that Manowar , " champions of the furry loincloth " , " were widely ridiculed even within heavy metal , but won a sizeable — and fanatical — following . " However , Trafford and Pluskowski stipulate that while Manowar adopted Viking imagery , it did not embrace it . They explain that " in any case , the Manowar version of the Vikings owes as much to Conan the Barbarian as it does to history , saga , or Edda : What matters to Manowar is untamed masculinity , and the Vikings are for them merely the archetypal barbarian males . " Unlike the later Viking metal bands , Manowar did not bother with the historicity of popular Viking image , and did not in any way identify with the Vikings , religiously or racially . 
 = = = Viking metal : Late @-@ 1980s to present = = = 
 = = = = Bathory = = = = 
 The roots of Viking metal proper are generally cited to be later in the Scandinavian metal scene , particularly the death and black metal scenes of the late 1980s . Inspired by the Viking themes used by Manowar , some bands identified with the Vikings with far more totality than Manowar . At the forefront of this movement stood the Swedish band Bathory . Its first album Bathory was released in 1984 and is " regarded by many as the first black metal record " . The band 's fourth album Blood Fire Death , released in 1988 , includes two early examples of Viking metal – the songs " A Fine Day to Die " and " Blood Fire Death " . Eduardo Rivadavia of AllMusic describes this as " possibly the first true example " of Viking metal . The cover to Blood Fire Death even features <unk> , a painting by Norwegian artist Peter Nicolai <unk> which depicts Norse god Odin on a Wild Hunt . Bathory followed up on this Viking theme in 1990 with the release of Hammerheart , a concept album fully devoted to Vikings . Like its predecessor , this album also features a Viking @-@ themed painting , this time The Funeral of a Viking by Sir Frank <unk> . Following up this release were 1991 's Twilight of the Gods , titled after Wagner 's opera of the same name , and Blood on Ice , recorded in 1988 – 1989 but released in 1996 . Rivadavia cites Hammerheart as a landmark album that " formally introduced " to the metal world the " archetypical Viking metal album " . Through this album , writes <unk> , Quorthon , the band 's founder , " became a standard @-@ bearer for an entire generation of disenfranchised Norse @-@ descended teens " , and the album 's " well @-@ thought @-@ out words and overall scope and vision engendered a deep @-@ seated anti @-@ Christian sentiment within the region 's extreme metal scene " that culminated in the violence and hate crimes committed by members of the Norwegian black metal community in the early 1990s . Quorthon later explained , in the liner notes to Blood on Ice , that his shift to Viking themes was an intentional move away from Satanism : 
 I came to the personal conclusion that this whole Satanic bit was a fake : a hoax created by another hoax — the Christian church , the very institution they were attempting to attack using Satanic lyrics in the first place . Since I am an avid fan of history , the natural step would be to find something in history that could replace a thing like the dark side of life . And what could be more simple and natural than to pick up on the Viking era ? Being Swedish and all , having a personal relation to , and linked by blood to , that era at the same time as it was an internationally infamous moment in history , I sensed that here I might just have something . Especially well suited was it since it was an era that reached its peak just before the Christian circus came around northern Europe and Sweden in the tenth century , establishing itself as the dictatorial way of life and death . And so that Satan and hell type of soup was changed for proud and strong <unk> , shiny blades of broadswords , dragon ships and <unk> ' til @-@ you @-@ puke type of living up there in the great halls 
 The characteristics of Bathory 's Viking metal music featured Wagnerian " lengthy epics , ostentatious arrangements , chorused vocals , and ambient keyboards " . Mulvany notes that the 90s releases by Bathory marked the beginnings of a Viking @-@ themed trend initially slow , even confusing , in formation . For example , in 1994 , the Austrian black metal band <unk> , on its album <unk> , incorporated themes of Vikings and Germanic paganism , but stated about the first track on the album that " this vision should not be seen as a part of the upcoming Viking trend . " According to Mulvany , " The Viking trend presaged by <unk> was actually taking place around them , and it remains more ' true ' to how black metal is often defined than the folk influenced metal that followed . Its folk elements are predominantly textual or musically evocative rather than musically @-@ historically accurate . " 
 = = = = Enslaved = = = = 
 Enslaved , from Norway , formed in 1991 , which Mulvany cites as " probably the first truly ' Viking ' metal band " . In the German edition of Metal Hammer , Robert Müller cites the 1993 EP by the band , <unk> Land , as the first true Viking metal release . Its debut album , <unk> <unk> , arrived in 1994 , with " many melodies being borrowed from ethnic Scandinavian folk music to lend additional authenticity to the vicious , fast @-@ paced black metal " . Inspired by Bathory , Enslaved set out to " create Viking metal devoted to retelling Norway 's legends and traditions of old — not attacking Christianity by means of its own creation : Satan . " Its second album Frost , also released in 1994 , served as " an important release for the extreme music subgenre of Viking metal " . Eld , released in 1997 , was described in an AllMusic review as featuring all the hallmarks of Enslaved : " Viking themes , razor sharp guitars , blastbeat drums , and an ear for orchestration resulting in complex structures , bountiful harmonies and time changes . " The reviewer also noted that " Among the countless bands who were inspired by Bathory 's seminal Viking metal , arguably none were as true to its gospel as Norway 's Enslaved , whose utmost commitment even extended to donning vintage Norse armor and outfits on @-@ stage " . 
 = = = = Burzum = = = = 
 Ideologically , the one @-@ man project Burzum by Varg Vikernes helped inspire the Viking metal scene through Vikernes ' strong racist , nationalistic , and anti @-@ Judeo @-@ Christian beliefs and longing to return to paganism . Trafford and Pluskowski opine that <unk> 's beliefs , which had culminated in the burning of several churches , including the twelfth @-@ century Fantoft Stave Church in Bergen , revealed the confused nature of ideas about Vikings in the Norwegian black metal scene . They note that " His tastes seem originally not for the unmediated medieval itself as for J. R. R. Tolkien : he adopted the name ' Count <unk> , ' based upon an orc in The Lord of the Rings , and named his band Burzum after a <unk> word for ' darkness . ' " They postulate that only in retrospect did Vikernes " cloak his actions in an <unk> garb and claim the motivation of an attempt to restore Norse paganism for his church burning . " While in prison , Vikernes released the book <unk> , which Trafford and Pluskowski call an echoing of the Hávamál , though with " an eye on Mein Kampf . " They further opine that " proving both that it is not just the early medieval past to which he looks for inspiration , and that he will use any historical weapon at his disposal to offend Norwegian liberal opinion , it is notable that he has recently added the name Quisling to his own , and is even attempting to claim some sort of kinship to the wartime collaborator . " Vikernes himself has connected the church burnings to an idea of resurgent Viking paganism . He stated that the first burning , that of Fantoft Church on June 6 , 1992 , was thought by many to be related to Satanism , since the burning occurred on the sixth day of the week , on day six of the sixth month and was thus a reference to the number of the beast . But Vikernes contends that the date June 6 was really picked because the first recorded Viking raid , that upon Lindesfarne , occurred , according to Vikernes , on June 6 , 793 . 
 = = = = Other pioneers = = = = 
 Besides Bathory , Enslaved , and Burzum , several other artists are credited as pioneers of the style . The original bassist for Emperor , Håvard Ellefsen , also known as Mortiis , was according to AllMusic , " an indispensable force in the genesis of Norway 's epic Viking metal sound . " Despite Ellefsen 's short tenure in the band , it was his musical interests that catalyzed the band to mix chaotic black metal with synthesizer melodies based on Norwegian folk music . 
 Helheim was another major pioneer in the early scene . The webzine <unk> states that Helheim emerged on the scene before other bands such as Einherjer and Thyrfing , when even Enslaved was in its infancy . According to the site , not only was Helheim one of the first bands to meld black metal with Viking themed @-@ music , but one of the first to include stylistically unconventional instruments such as horns and violins . Robert Müller considers the song " Galder " , the final track from Helheim 's 1995 debut album <unk> , the death blow to Viking metal emerging as a concrete genre , since the ambitious track even went beyond compatibility with heavy metal . 
 Other highly influential Viking metal bands are <unk> , <unk> My Betrothed , Einherjer , Ensiferum , Moonsorrow , Thyrfing , and Windir . Trafford and Pluskowski call Einherjer , Moonsorrow , Thyrfing , and Windir , the " most influential " Viking metal bands and write that , apart from Enslaved , the album covers of Einherjer give that band the most " Viking " feel of all , due to the prevalence of Viking artifacts . They elaborate that Einherjer 's artwork spans the full chronology of Viking art : 8th and 9th century Oseberg to 11th and 12th century Urnes . Writing for AllMusic , Craig Harris stated that <unk> My Betrothed " combine songs about ancestors and Norse gods with electrifying , to power @-@ driven , arrangements , creating a new style of music , that they call , ' Viking metal . ' " 
 = = = = Amon Amarth and Unleashed = = = = 
 Amon Amarth and Unleashed sonically play death metal but incorporate Viking lyrical themes and thus are considered to have broadened the scope of Viking metal . Florian Heesch in " Metal for Nordic Men : Amon Amarth 's Representations of Vikings " writes that " While receptions of Norse myths where mostly important in black metal , especially the Norwegian black metal of the early 1990s , and the younger pagan metal , bands as the Swedish Unleashed made the topic fit into death metal before Amon Amarth appeared . " Michael Moynihan and <unk> Søderlind in Lords of Chaos consider Unleashed as setting a precedent for many of the coming black metal bands , as , similar to Bathory 's rejection of common black metal imagery , the band rejected the common death metal themes of gore and , like Bathory , instead focused on pre @-@ Christian Swedish heathenism , particularly the Viking Age and old Norse religion . Both Amon Amarth and Unleashed , however , resist the Viking metal label . Johan Hegg of Amon Amarth stated that " It 's weird to label a band after the lyrical content because , in that case , Iron Maiden is a Viking metal band , Black Sabbath is a Viking metal band , Led Zeppelin is a Viking metal band . " Johnny Hedlund of Unleashed maintains that the band has always played and always will play death metal , commenting that " The Viking lyrics you will find on about three to five songs on every Unleashed album from 1991 and on . I don 't think that fact alone re @-@ defines our style in some way . " 
 = = = Spread outside the Nordic countries = = = 
 According to Trafford and Pluskowski , practically all Viking metal bands claim Viking ancestry , and after its inception in Scandinavia , Viking metal spread to areas historically settled by Vikings , including England , Russia , and Normandy . Viking metal bands have even formed in the United States and Canada , with their members claiming Viking descent either directly from Scandinavia or through England . Some members of the Viking metal scene believe that it is impossible for someone to be a Viking unless they themselves are of northern European descent . However , the scene also spread to other parts of Northern Europe in areas united by a common Germanic heritage , such as Austria , Germany , and the Netherlands . Trafford and Pluskowski cite the Austrian band Valhalla , which makes extensive use of Viking iconography , including horned helmets . Another Austrian example is <unk> , which on the cover of its promotional album Remembering Ancient Origins depicts a wood carved scene of Sigurd killing Regin , a panel held in <unk> stave church . 
 One of the first non @-@ Nordic Viking metal bands was the German project Falkenbach . Formed in 1989 and primarily the work of front @-@ man <unk> <unk> , Falkenbach performs a mixture of black metal and folk music , with lyrics drawing from Western and Northern European mythologies , religions , and folk traditions . The Dutch bands Heidevolk , Slechtvalk , and Fenris have also been labeled as Viking metal , though Heidevolk 's former vocalist Joris <unk> claims that Heidevolk has never tried to " play the Viking card or the Pan @-@ Germanic card , " instead choosing to write about local Dutch history . 
 Hoad finds the issue of national and racial identity central to Viking metal . For instance , she writes that when Trafford and Pluskowski claim that Manowar could not claim religious or racial identity with the Vikings when the band had a lead singer with the " ' less than wholly Scandinavian name of Joey di Maio ' , [ Trafford and Pluskowski ] are approaching a more complex and racially @-@ charged issue than their <unk> would suggest . " Hoad states that Viking imagery may be readily appropriated , the definition of a " true " Viking is quite rigid , a rigidity with which non @-@ Nordic , and especially non @-@ White , musicians must contend with . As an example , she cites the Brazilian band Viking Throne , which claims legitimacy through European ancestry and historical references to explorations of South America by Nordic countries . The front @-@ man , Count Nidhogg , extols that " Some people understand perfectly that it doesn 't matter where you live , what 's really important is your heritage and ancestry . Even living in a South American country as Brazil we all have European blood . " Hoad argues that Viking Throne illustrates the cultural importance of claiming Viking ancestry , a culture that operates on largely geographic lines . In contrast to Viking Throne , she cites the band Slechtvalk , which is well known for its brand of Christian Viking metal , but yet goes largely without comment from the scene regarding its authenticity . Hoad speculates that the European ethnicity of the band is enough to compensate for its otherwise counter @-@ intuitive music . 
 = = = = Influence on pagan metal = = = = 
 Weinstein comments that " Viking metal has travelled further than any Viking ship . Self @-@ defined pagan metal bands who describe their music as Viking metal can be found in the United States , Brazil and Uruguay , among other places . " She cites the sensationalism of the early Norwegian black metal scene for some of this popularity , but considers the genre 's greatest influence to be " the inspiration it has given to others to explore their own roots . " This impact was particularly strong in the Baltic states , where Viking metal influenced the development of a distinct pagan metal scene known as " Baltic war metal . " Weinstein considers the Lithuanian band <unk> the prime example of this style . Formed as a black metal band in 1993 with Lithuanian lyrics , the band 's 1997 album <unk> birthed the war metal scene . Weinstein highlights a comment by scholar Michael F. Strmiska that despite the claim that Scandinavia was home to the last pagans in Europe , " A point of particular pride is the knowledge that Lithuania was the last country in all of Europe to officially abandon its native Pagan traditions and convert to Christianity in 1387 . " Another Baltic band influenced by Viking metal is the Latvian project Skyforger , which composes its lyrics in the Latvian language . A final example by Weinstein of the influence of Viking metal on pagan metal is the National Socialist black metal band <unk> from Poland , which on its second album , Thousand Swords , released in 1995 , featured a variety of folk styles mixed in with the band 's black metal sound , and introduced lyrics about Polish history and Slavic gods . Trafford and Pluskowski note as a contrast to Viking metal the emergence of Celtic metal in Ireland , France , and even Germany , a style which they state sounds essentially like Viking metal , apart from the addition of harps , but with lyrics celebrating Celtic gods and myths . 
 = Ruby Buckton = 
 Ruby Buckton is a fictional character from the Australian Channel Seven soap opera Home and Away , played by Rebecca Breeds . She debuted on @-@ screen during the episode airing on 20 June 2008 . Ruby was created by executive producer Cameron Welsh . When she was first introduced she appeared to hide her problems and pretends to be strong . She was characterised as a free spirited and independent girl . Her storylines have consistently followed themes such as romance , unrequited love and rejection . In what has been described as a " shock storyline " Ruby discovered her sister Charlie Buckton was in fact her mother . This had subsequent effects in her character development . She became out of place and confused about her life . It destroyed her trust in Charlie and their relationship never recovered . Ruby went on a journey of self @-@ discovery and used men to redefine herself . Her relationship with Xavier Austin was characterised through their mutual friendship , which ended through lack of passion . She controversially fell in love with her music teacher Liam Murphy , the pair shared an emotional and creative connection through music . Yet , her advances were unrequited and it created problems with her state of mind and began binge drinking . Breeds felt the storyline differed to her romance with Xavier , as it showed Ruby " headstrong and unconfined " . Breeds felt they were ill @-@ suited to one another . 
 Ruby later develops feelings for Romeo Smith and attempts to ruin his relationship with Indigo Walker . Off @-@ screen Breeds is dating Luke Mitchell who plays Romeo , they had both previously stated they did not want their characters to get together in case it created problems for them in real life . Ruby and Romeo sleep together and after she is rejected , Ruby becomes wayward , self @-@ harms and sleeps with Casey Braxton on the rebound . The storyline also created more tension with Charlie who found it difficult to offer Ruby any parental advice . In other minor storylines , Ruby has come to terms with having diabetes and discovered a talent for singing . Breeds is a classically trained singer and she had to change her voice to suit Ruby 's amateur vocals . Ruby has received critical analysis through her storylines . Some have branded her a " boyfriend @-@ stealer " , " self @-@ absorbed " and a " randy school girl " . Her storylines with Liam were partially favoured to others . Breeds has been nominated for the " Most Popular New Female Talent " and " Most Popular Actress " Logie Awards for her portrayal of Ruby . 
 = = Character development = = 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 The serial 's official website describes Ruby as being carefree , though she puts on a front to hide her emotions . Ruby arrives grieving for the loss of her mother ; unlike her sister , Ruby takes an " internal approach and bottled it up inside " , creating a facade and appearing to be strong . They also brand her as independent and she does not care what others think about her and is inclined to keep to herself . Speaking of her aspirations in life , they add : " Her goal in life is simply to be happy and to be content in enjoying life ’ s simpler things and the people in it . " 
 Describing her character , portraying actress Rebecca Breeds stated : " Ruby has gone through a lot and had to gain a level of independence I really admire . She is free @-@ spirited and sure of whom she is . I love playing Ruby ; she is cheeky and easy @-@ going , but very passionate about her family . " Breeds also described Ruby 's hatred to being underestimated : " When people think something is beyond her , or she 's too young , she gets twice as determined . " 
 Ruby is often " prepared to be confrontational and abrasive " . She is often not careful in situations and is unaware of the consequences and what is coming up in the future . Breeds said she is " idealistic and has high expectations " of herself and is a " very passionate " person , but is flawed by her " outspoken and brash " nature . Breeds said that she can sympathise that she is irrational and silly because she is young . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Ruby has a relationship with Xavier Austin ( David Jones @-@ Roberts ) , who initially messes her around . Ruby decides to try and win Xavier back even after her initial heartbreak , of this Breeds states : " She pushes boundaries where I wouldn 't and she has a lot of fun . She thinks she is so mature , but she 's really young and innocent . " Breeds explains her attraction to Xavier as " a challenge - she had to work for him and there is something mysterious and naughty about him but deep down she knows he is loyal and decent . " Their relationship ultimately ends after they grow apart . Breeds said that Ruby and Xavier 's relationship was a more " beautiful friendship and really good support " dynamic , rather than a romantic scenario . She also said it was " lacking passion , which everyone deserves . It 's there but it 's not there enough . " 
 Ruby later starts to have feelings for Romeo Smith ( Luke Mitchell ) . Of the storyline Breeds states : " It 's going to be the easiest thing I 've ever had to do . There 's no acting involved at all . But he 's got a girlfriend so Ruby has to find a way to justify going after someone who has a girlfriend . So that 's kind of hard . But he 's the hero . She believes he 's the love of her life . I guess with that in mind you wouldn 't let anything get in the way of that . Who knows , he might be . " However Breeds previously revealed she did not want the pair to romance each other , due to her real life relationship with Mitchell . Mitchell himself had also revealed he did not want the pair to start a romance . In comparison to her willingness to take him from Indigo , Breeds said Ruby would not have done the same whilst Romeo was with her best friend Annie Campbell ( Charlotte Best ) . 
 Mitchell revealed that Romeo 's relationship with Indigo Walker ( Samara Weaving ) would drift apart in the event of the " love triangle " storyline . Executive producer Cameron Welsh promised viewers that the storyline would play a big part of the serial in 2011 . He also stated : " Fans will definitely take sides on this one . Luke Mitchell , Rebecca Breeds and Samara Weaving are having a great time with this storyline , and we 'll see a new side to all of them as they face the consequences of their actions . " Breeds later explained Ruby 's reasoning and the hidden issue which makes her believe she loves him so quickly stating : " Ruby has a lot of insecurity because Ruby never really had a father figure . There 's a lot of looking to belong and looking for love because she 's had a displaced family life , and she feels like Romeo is her family . Romeo has some issues of his own . He is struggling with his relationship with Indi . The pair find themselves in a similar place of understanding . " After Romeo sleeps with Ruby , Mitchell said Romeo immediately regrets it . Ruby then decides to reveals the truth to Indigo . This ruins their friendship and Weaving said : " I think that friendship is pretty much over now ! " . 
 Ruby has a brief fling with Casey Braxton ( Lincoln Younes ) after her romance with Romeo ends . When Ruby realises that Romeo is back with his girlfriend , she sleeps with Casey . He then takes " great pleasure " in revealing the details about Ruby 's relationship with Romeo . 
 = = = Maternal issues = = = 
 In another storyline her sister Charlie Buckton ( Esther Anderson ) reveals she is in fact her mother . The reveal episode centered around Ruby interrogating Charlie about the identity of her secret child , with Charlie breaking down whilst she admits the truth . Whilst filming the episodic block , both Breeds and Anderson found the storyline challenging ; furthermore they felt a responsibility to get the narrative flow and emotions perfect . Breeds said she had to let it affect her own emotions in order to affect the viewing public . Although she was nervous , Breeds was pleased with the end result . 
 The revelation ruins their relationship . The actresses shared insight : " Ruby just wants to get some security back , everything she thought her life was is totally up in the air " ; whilst Charlie was " trying desperately to bridge this gap " The events impact Ruby 's self @-@ identity , leaving her feeling confused and her backstory succumb the distortion Charlie causes . Ruby starts to ask herself questions such as " Where do I stand now with everything ? " and " How do I reconcile this ? " . Breeds said it was a " big exploration " and " a journey " for Ruby , with Anderson agreeing . Anderson felt there was a beautiful element to the storyline and opined " Although it is tragic , you feel sorry for Charlie and you can sort of understand where it has all come from . " She said that ultimately everyone feels sorry for Ruby , meaning neither are wrong . Furthermore , she said " You are just rooting for them , you just want them to get back to how they were and it is a bit of a journey . " 
 Charlie later struggles to deal with Ruby 's relationship with Casey . Discussing Charlie 's motives , Anderson stated : " Ruby 's at that age where she is quite impressionable , and Charlie doesn 't want to see her getting hurt . She 's only very recently been in a relationship with Romeo , and Charlie is concerned about her moving from one guy to the next too quickly . " Casey 's brother Darryl Braxton ( Steve Peacocke ) tries to advise Ruby through her troubles . Although she was not prepared to listen , Darryl gave her a new understanding , a development that is said to " surprise " Ruby . Questioned about Ruby 's situation Anderson opined : " He offers the first bit of good advice that she 's heard in relation to parenting so , as much as she doesn 't want to admit it , he does get through . " 
 = = = School girl crushes = = = 
 Ruby has fallen in love with two of her teachers during her tenure . The first being Miles Copeland ( Josh Quong Tart ) . Breeds said it was a " genuine teenage infatuation " and Ruby was " drawn to his maturity " rather than his physical appearance . Quong Tart said Miles was " taken back " by the kiss him and the subsequent investigation he faces from the school board . 
 Ruby later becomes good friends with her music teacher Liam Murphy ( Axle Whitehead ) . They work closely together and Ruby develops feelings for him . The storyline creates many hurdles for the characters and highlights " controversial negotiation " in its themes . This sees Ruby experience a " different kind of love " than she felt for Xavier . At this point Breeds said : " She 's matured a bit and is exploring different parts of herself and love . " Through Liam she was " realising something she 's passionate about , and being encouraged in her creativity with her music . " It is the intoxication of the situation that has been misappropriated to Liam . Breeds opined they shared " really strong chemistry emotionally and creatively . " She said Ruby is ignorant to the fact he is her teacher by virtue of the fact she is feeling " headstrong and doesn 't confine herself to boxes . " Ruby was initially in denial of her feelings , she realised it was " controversial " – Yet , ultimately she decided to be true to her feelings . 
 Breeds acknowledged that from a musical stand point someone who inspires you creatively and acts as your muse , is a special bond . She attributed it to Liam 's feelings for Ruby . Ruby and Liam continue to act a support unit for one another . As the scholarship develops they talk to each other about " mature things that surpass a student @-@ teacher relationship . " Liam later develops feelings for Bianca Scott ( Lisa Gormley ) and Ruby is seeing Liam slip from her grasp . Breeds said " She sees them flirting and she has a moment where she realises that she 's so in love with this guy and it 's kind of now or never . She needs to take action . " True to Ruby 's persona she does not <unk> her actions and Ruby feels she has to " set the record straight and to give it a really good crack . " For Ruby it is a spontaneous , impromptu moment ; " She 's just totally spilling out with feelings for him . " 
 However Liam is forced to maintain his responsibility . Breeds attributes this to the fact he has a " professional career to think about it . He 's not a teenager , so he 's in a different place . I think it 's very confusing for him . Liam issued a firm warning that he would terminate their professional relationship if her feelings became uncontrollable . Breeds subsequently stated she did not think Liam was right for Ruby . She said the ideal scenario for the pair would be " in a different lifetime and if they were closer in age . It would have been beautiful if there weren 't logistics standing in the way . " Ruby then cannot handle rejection and turns to alcohol for comfort and to " numb her feelings " . 
 Aside from the romantic theme in her storyline Ruby has been shown as an aspiring singer . Breeds is classically trained in real life and said she doesn 't mind singing on camera . Discussing this she stated : " When you 're playing a character you can hide behind them . I know it 's still my voice , [ ... ] I was more confident singing from Ruby 's point of view . Even though there was a storyline where she was terrified about singing in a school play , I wasn 't nervous at all . I had to try really hard to make myself feel nervous . " She revealed she had to play down her voice and make it " a bit cleaner " and a " bit more inexperienced " . This was due to the fact it was meant to be that she had never sung before – " I have to pull her back a bit . " She added the storyline was realistic because there are no set guidelines for discovering vocal talent . 
 = = = Departure = = = 
 In June 2012 , TV Week 's Miller reported that Breeds had filmed her final scenes and left Home and Away . Breeds told Miller that she could not discuss her departure because of her contract with the series . She added that " Ruby is still very much alive , I 'm not free of Ruby just yet " . Two months later , the Daily Star 's Susan Hill announced that Ruby decides to leave Summer Bay after she makes " an emotional visit " to her mother 's grave . She then realises that she needs to move on from recent events and the only way she can do that is to leave the Bay . A spokesperson told Hill " Ruby knows that to save her life she must leave for a fresh start . It 's going to be emotional as she has so many good memories but the bad ones are all she can think of . " However , Ruby leaves Summer Bay after she confesses to tampering with the brakes of a car , which resulted in Dexter Walker ( Charles Cottier ) being seriously injured . Ruby regrets what she has done and hands herself in to the police after saying goodbye to Darryl Braxton ( Steve Peacocke ) . Breeds thanked her fans on Twitter , saying " Thank you . Such beautiful feedback . So sad that it 's all over , but kind of relieved to let poor Ruby go and heal ... And my Eyes .. Love you . " 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Ruby arrives in Summer Bay following the death of her mother Elsie Buckton . She and her boyfriend Pat Jenkins ( Lachlan Jeffrey ) spend a few weeks together until she realises it is not going to work out , he leaves her . Her friends Jai Fernandez ( Jordan Rodrigues ) and Annie , who are in a relationship , make her feel lonely so she convinces herself she loves Miles . When her father Ross Buckton is diagnosed with Alzheimer 's , she finds it hard to cope . She contacts - via the internet - classmate Matthew Lyons ( Ross Pirelli ) , a wayward teenager , and reveals he is experiencing the same with his grandmother . When she finds out it is Matthew , she thinks he has lied and photographs him undressed and displays them . She then realises he was telling the truth , he would not forgive her and decides to exact revenge . 
 She later takes a romantic interest in Xavier and they have a brief fling until he has to leave because of drug couriering . He later returns and she opts to resume their relationship , but his ex @-@ girlfriend Freya Duric ( Sophie <unk> ) ruins things . She makes him sell illegal drugs again and Xavier is torn between her and Ruby . He later decides to settle down with Ruby much to her delight after Ruby exposes Freya and pays her to leave . When Xavier 's brother Brendan ( Kain O 'Keeffe ) arrives , he pushes Ruby away because he has learning difficulties , he feels they will act strangely . Ruby later bonds with Brendan ; Xavier is pleased and they resume their relationship . 
 Ruby initially finds it hard to cope with her sister Charlie 's relationship with Joey Collins ( Kate Bell ) , but grows to accept it . Ruby decides to sleep with Xavier , they are caught by Ross who sends Ruby away for a while . Ruby learns Charlie had a secret child when she was young , she tries to track her down and is shocked when her Aunt Michelle tells her that Charlie knows who it is . Charlie reveals the truth , that Ruby is actually her daughter and that she became pregnant when Grant <unk> raped her . Charlie 's parents agreed to bring Ruby up as their own . Ruby tracks Grant down and accuses him of ruining everyone 's lives . Grant tells Ruby she has convinced herself it was not consented , Charlie then kidnaps Grant to get the truth . Grant later turns up dead on the beach and Charlie and Ruby are in the frame for his murder , until Ross later admits he did it . 
 Ruby starts to have feelings for Geoff Campbell ( Lincoln Lewis ) , Xavier is jealous and they drift apart . She tries to dump him but he is knocked unconscious and forgets what she told him . After a while he remembers and their relationship ends . While seeing Geoff , Ruby starts to feel unwell and is diagnosed with diabetes . She later organises a rally to stop a number of refugees being deported , but the event is fire bombed by racists . After this event Geoff blames Ruby and leaves her and Summer Bay . She briefly reunites with Xavier but Mink Carpenter ( <unk> <unk> ) ruins it . Ruby later enlists Liam to become her music tutor . They form a strong friendship but Ruby starts to have feeling for him . Nicole Franklin ( Tessa James ) tells Liam , he agrees to keep tutoring her and tells her where they stand . Although Liam tells her they will not be together , she lets her feelings develop into love for Liam and tries to kiss him . He tells her again that it is wrong and decides to put some space between them . Ruby kisses Casey , but she later reveals she really wants to be with Romeo . She has sex with Romeo , but is devastated when he rejects her . She tells Charlie that she wants to hurt Romeo like he hurt her and tells Indigo about their one @-@ night stand . Ruby then begins a relationship with Casey . She is devastated when Charlie dies , after being shot . Ruby blames Darryl Braxton ( Steve Peacocke ) for her mother 's death and she pushes Casey away and their relationship ends . 
 Ruby begins entering surf competitions with Romeo and when his marriage breaks down , he tells her that he has feelings for her . They begin dating later move in together . Ruby suspects Romeo is going to break up with her and she tells him she is pregnant . Leah Patterson @-@ Baker ( Ada Nicodemou ) learns Ruby is lying and urges her to tell Romeo the truth . Ruby does and Romeo leaves her . Ruby later notices Romeo trying to get back with Indi and she decides to tamper with the brakes on Indi 's car in order to get rid of her . However , Indi 's brother , Dexter ( Charles Cottier ) , drives the car and crashes , leaving him with serious injuries . Ruby feels guilty for what she has done and decides to hand herself into the police . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Breeds received a Logie Award nomination for " Most Popular New Female Talent " at the 51st Logie Awards for her portrayal of Ruby . She was later nominated for the " Most Popular Actress " Logie in 2010 , with Breeds stating : " To know that people like Ruby makes me think I 'm doing a good job . " At the 2012 Inside Soap Awards , Breeds was nominated for " Best Daytime Star " . Holy Soap recall Ruby 's most memorable moment as being : " Trying to cope with her Dad 's illness , Ruby started talking to someone on Skype , only to find out it was Matthew playing a trick . She got revenge by convincing him to go skinny @-@ dipping and nicking his clothes . " Carolyn Stewart writing for TV Week felt it was unrealistic for Ruby and Nicole to be best friends after she has " actively pursued two of Nicole 's ex @-@ boyfriends . " She criticised Bianca 's role in Ruby and Liam 's storyline , quipping " Bianca @-@ The @-@ Butt @-@ In @-@ Ski " offered " her two cents worth " – subsequently calling her efforts unhelpful to Ruby . She also discussed Ruby 's sudden descent into drink and wearing make up ; " Obviously heavy make @-@ up is a clue that a character is about to go off the rails … and , boy did she ! " She said the moral of the storyline was to never fall in love with a teacher and that the situation had resulted in her as the " drowned @-@ rat Ruby with eye @-@ liner pouring down her face " . Stewart later said " The way Ruby stares at Liam ... oh , I 'm just so embarrassed for the poor little petal ! Hilarious ! " She also criticised Nicole 's bad advice . She later praised the storyline stating it was getting " juicy " . Catrin Griffiths writing for the Daily Express said the serial came back in style after its summer break in the UK , owing to storylines such as Ruby 's binge drinking . 
 The Daily Record also said ever since the Buckton family arrived they " created drama " , noting it was Ruby and Charlie especially . All About Soap questioned whether " poor Ruby " would ever find a " good bloke " to pair up with . They also said it should not have been to hard for Ruby with all the " surfer types " . Holy Soap later said " If there 's one thing that Ruby seems to have inherited from Charlie , it 's her sometimes questionable taste in men . " When Ruby impressed everyone with her singing voice , the Daily Record said " there is actually a rather pleasant storyline involving Ruby " . They described the week Ruby slept with Romeo as an eventful one for her and opined she was on " cloud nine " . Debbie Schipp writing for Adelaide 's Sunday Mail brands Ruby " a low @-@ down boyfriend @-@ stealer " for her affair with Romeo . Caroline Fitton writing for Daily Mail observed Ruby as being " self @-@ absorbed " . TV Week said the " impulsive teen " waited until Romeo dropped his guard and " moved in for the kill " , but had her " head in the clouds " . They correctly predicted it would end " messy " . They also showed Ruby little sympathy when she told Indigo about her affair and lost her friends . They said : " The salient lesson here is : don 't cop off with your best mate 's boyfriend , so you 're just gonna have to ride this one out , <unk> . " Peter Dyke writing for the Daily Star said Ruby is a " randy schoolgirl " and said that her romance with Casey was merely a " passionate rebound romp " . Whilst Erin Miller of TV Week said : " Phew , it 's hard to keep up with Ruby 's romantic escapades lately ! " In April 2011 , TV Week said Ruby had become " increasingly trouble @-@ prone " and concluded that " belle in blue Charlie is at her wits ' end about what to do with her wayward daughter " . 
 = Battle of Pakchon = 
 The Battle of Pakchon ( 5 November 1950 ) , also known as the Battle of <unk> ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Bó <unk> Zhàn Dòu ) , took place ten days after the start of the Chinese First Phase Offensive , following the entry of the People 's Volunteer Army into the Korean War . The offensive reversed the United Nations ( UN ) advance towards the Yalu River which had occurred after their intervention in the wake of the North Korean invasion of South Korea at the start of the war . The battle was fought between British and Australian forces from the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade with American armour and artillery in support , and the Chinese 117th Division , around the village of Pakchon on the Taeryong River . After capturing Chongju on 30 October the British and Australians had been ordered to pull back to Pakchon in an attempt to consolidate the western flank of the US Eighth Army . Meanwhile , immediately following their success at Unsan against the Americans , the Chinese 117th Division of the 39th Army had attacked southward , intending to cut off the UN forces as they withdrew in the face of the unexpected Chinese assault . To halt the Chinese advance , the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade was ordered to defend the lower crossings of the Taeryong and Chongchon rivers as part of a rearguard , in conjunction with the US 24th Infantry Division further upstream on the right . 
 During the night of 4 / 5 November , the Chinese and North Koreans mounted a full @-@ scale assault on the US 24th Infantry Division , pushing back an American infantry regiment nearly 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) . The Chinese force subsequently turned west , advancing between the Taeryong and Chongchon rivers and threatening the rear of the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade by cutting the Pakchon – Sinanju road . The following day they attacked an American artillery battery which was guarding a vital concrete bridge near Kujin . The British and Australians then successfully counter @-@ attacked the Chinese forces occupying a number of nearby ridgelines during the day but were in turn counter @-@ attacked before being pushed off the high ground during the night . In their first battle with the Chinese , the 3rd Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 3 RAR ) captured a well defended hill with only limited offensive support , and held it in the face of heavy counter @-@ attacks before confused command decisions resulted in a disorganised night withdrawal while still in contact . The withdrawal threatened to open the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade 's left flank and the Australians were ordered to immediately reposition on the ridge , yet ultimately it was too late to regain the feature in darkness . However , following heavy fighting the pressure on the Australians unexpectedly ceased after midnight , and parties of Chinese were observed beginning to withdraw . By early morning the Chinese attack had been checked and 3 RAR had redeployed to new positions in the paddy fields around the railway crossing north of Maenjung @-@ dong . 
 The fighting was costly for both sides . Although the Australians halted the advancing Chinese 117th Division and inflicted numerous casualties on them , they also suffered heavy losses . In the aftermath the inexperienced Australian battalion commander — Lieutenant Colonel Floyd Walsh — was relieved of his position by the British brigade commander , having taken over just six days earlier following the death of the previous commanding officer at Chongju . Nonetheless , the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade succeeded in preventing a Chinese break @-@ through at Pakchon , keeping open vital withdrawal routes across the river and securing the UN left flank . Suffering significant casualties , the Chinese offensive was halted the next day due to logistic difficulties . The Chinese and North Koreans were temporarily forced to withdraw north , while the UN successfully reinforced its positions , holding on the Chongchon Line . Yet by late November the US Eighth Army was again forced to withdraw after the Chinese began their Second Phase Offensive , starting a long retreat south . The UN forces were expelled from North Korea , and withdrew to the 38th Parallel where they sought to re @-@ establish defensive positions . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Military situation = = = 
 The Korean War began early in the morning of 25 June 1950 , following the surprise invasion of the Republic of Korea ( ROK ) by its northern neighbour , the communist Democratic People 's Republic of Korea ( DPRK ) . Numerically superior and better @-@ equipped , the Korean People 's Army ( KPA ) crossed the 38th Parallel and rapidly advanced south , easily overcoming the South Koreans . In response , the United Nations ( UN ) decided to intervene on behalf of South Korea , inviting member states to send forces to restore the situation . As a consequence , American ground forces were hastily deployed in an attempt to prevent the South Koreans from collapsing ; however , they too were under @-@ strength and poorly equipped , and by early August had been forced back by the North Koreans to an enclave around Pusan , known as the Pusan Perimeter . Key US allies — Britain , Canada and Australia — also committed forces , although these were initially limited to naval contingents and were largely viewed as token efforts in the US . Under diplomatic pressure the British agreed to deploy an infantry brigade in July , and would later dispatch a second brigade as the crisis worsened . The Canadians also agreed to provide an infantry brigade , although the first battalion would not arrive until December 1950 . A total of 21 UN member states eventually contributed forces . 
 Australia was one of the first nations to commit units to the fighting , playing a small but sometimes significant part in the United Nations Command , which was initially led by General Douglas MacArthur . Forces deployed in Japan as part of the British Commonwealth Occupation Force ( BCOF ) formed the basis of the Australian response , with P @-@ 51 Mustang fighter @-@ bombers from No. 77 Squadron RAAF flying their first missions on 2 July , while the frigate HMAS Shoalhaven and the destroyer HMAS Bataan were also committed to naval operations . During this time the 3rd Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 3 RAR ) , which had been preparing to return to Australia prior to the outbreak of the war , remained in Japan , however on 26 July the Australian government announced that it would also commit the under @-@ strength and poorly equipped infantry battalion to the fighting , following a period of preparation . Training and re @-@ equipment began immediately , while hundreds of reinforcements were hastily recruited in Australia as part of K Force ; they soon began arriving to fill out the battalion . The battalion 's commanding officer , Lieutenant Colonel Floyd Walsh , was replaced by Lieutenant Colonel Charles Green . An officer with extensive operational experience fighting the Japanese in New Guinea during the Second World War , Green took over from Walsh due to the latter 's perceived inexperience . 
 On 23 September 1950 , 3 RAR embarked for Korea , concentrating at Pusan on 28 September . There it joined the British 27th Infantry Brigade , a garrison formation hurriedly committed from Hong Kong by the British government as the situation deteriorated around the Pusan Perimeter in late August to bolster the US Eighth Army under Lieutenant General Walton Walker . Commanded by Brigadier Basil Coad , the brigade was renamed the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade and consisted of the 1st Battalion , Argyll and Sutherland Highland Regiment ( 1 ASHR ) , the 1st Battalion , Middlesex Regiment ( 1 MR ) and 3 RAR . Under @-@ strength , the two British battalions had each mustered just 600 men of all ranks , while the brigade was also short on transport and heavy equipment , and had no integral artillery support , for which it would rely entirely on the Americans until the 16th Field Regiment , Royal New Zealand Artillery arrived in January 1951 . As such , with a strength of nearly 1 @,@ 000 men , the addition of 3 RAR gave the brigade increased tactical weight as well as expediently allowing the Australians to work within a familiar organisational environment , rather than being attached to a US formation . 
 By the time 3 RAR arrived in the theatre , the North Koreans had been broken and were in rapid retreat , with MacArthur 's forces conducting a successful amphibious assault at Inchon and breaking out along the Naktong perimeter on the southern tip of the Korean peninsula . A steady advance began , driving the North Koreans northwards towards the 38th Parallel . The 27th British Commonwealth Brigade was attached to the US 1st Cavalry Division , under the command of Major General Hobart R. Gay . On 16 October the brigade took over as the vanguard of the UN advance up the west coast . Although the North Koreans had suffered heavily in the preceding weeks , they continued to resist strongly . The 27th British Commonwealth Brigade moved 70 kilometres ( 43 mi ) from Kumchon , with the Argylls capturing Sariwon on 17 October , killing 215 North Koreans and taking many prisoners for the loss of one man killed and three wounded . The British and Australians then passed to the command of the US 24th Infantry Division on 21 October , under the overall command of Major General John H. Church , while the US 1st Cavalry Division remained in Pyongyang to complete its capture . The brigade was ordered to seize Chongju . 
 The advance continued north with little respite , and on 22 October the Australians fought their first major action at Yongju , killing 150 North Koreans and capturing 239 of the brigade 's 800 prisoners , for the loss of seven men wounded . Intending to defeat the North Koreans and bring the war to a close , the UN forces pushed towards the Yalu River , on the Chinese border . The brigade crossed the Chongchon River , moving towards Pakchon . On 24 October , MacArthur had removed all restrictions on the movement of his forces south of the Yalu River and prepared for the final phase of the advance , defying a directive of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff and risking Chinese intervention in support of North Korea . On 25 October 3 RAR crossed the Taeryong River . The North Koreans attacked the forward Australian companies at Kujin early the following morning , resulting in Australian losses of eight killed and 22 wounded . However , the North Koreans suffered heavy casualties including over 100 killed and 350 captured , and the Australians succeeded in defending the bridgehead after the North Koreans withdrew . Intelligence indicated that the British and Australians were facing the North Korean 17th Tank Brigade , which was preparing a last line of defence at Chongju , 70 kilometres ( 43 mi ) away . With the war considered all but over the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade continued to pursue the North Koreans towards Chongju ; however , the advance increasingly encountered strong resistance as they approached the Manchurian border . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Opposing forces = = = 
 3 RAR took over as lead battalion of the brigade on 29 October , 6 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) from Chongju . That morning a spotter aircraft reported a large North Korean formation consisting of a battalion @-@ sized force of 500 – 600 infantry supported by several tanks and at least two self @-@ propelled guns , positioned on a thickly wooded ridgeline around Chongju . The Battle of Chongju ensued as the Australians dislodged the strong North Korean armoured force and then defended their positions against North Korean counter @-@ attacks during the evening . The following day the Australians advanced to the high ground overlooking Chongju , killing and capturing a number of North Koreans in skirmishes . That afternoon the town itself was cleared by the remaining elements of the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade without opposition . The fighting around Chongju was the heaviest undertaken by the Australians since entering the war . North Korean casualties included 162 killed and 10 captured , while Australian losses were nine killed and 30 wounded , including Green , who was wounded in the stomach by artillery fire after the battle , succumbing to his wounds and dying two days later on 1 November . 
 Following the capture of Chongju the US 21st Infantry Regiment had set off rapidly along the road to Sonchon to the west . Encountering only one strong North Korean position which they quickly turned , by noon on 1 November the lead battalion had reached Chonggodong , just 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) from the Yalu River where the Americans clashed with another North Korean armoured force . To the north meanwhile , the US 5th and 9th Infantry Regiments of the US 24th Infantry Division secured Taechon and Kusong , before advancing to within 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) of the Manchurian border . However , during the last weeks of October the Chinese had moved 18 divisions of the People 's Volunteer Army across the Yalu River under the overall command of Marshal Peng Dehuai in order to reinforce the remnants of the KPA . Undetected by US and South Korean intelligence , the 13th Army Group crossed the border on 16 October and penetrated up to 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) into North Korea , and were reinforced in early November by 12 divisions from the 9th Army Group ; in total 30 divisions composed of 380 @,@ 000 men . The Chinese ambushed MacArthur 's forces which were now widely dispersed , decimating ROK II Corps at Onjong and encircling and overrunning the US 8th Cavalry Regiment at Unsan . With the US 24th Infantry Division ordered back to the Chongchon River as a result , the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade also began moving south as part of the UN general withdrawal in the face of the Chinese First Phase Offensive . 
 Ultimately Chongju was the furthest north that the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade was to penetrate , and on 1 November , while still in divisional reserve , the brigade was ordered to pull back to Pakchon in an attempt to consolidate the western flank . Immediately following their success at Unsan , the Chinese 117th Division of the 39th Army — under the overall command of Zhang <unk> — attacked southward , intending to cut off the retreating UN forces and in so doing eliminate the remnants of the ROK 1st Infantry Division and US 1st Cavalry Division by cutting the road junction at Pakchon . Meanwhile , the Chinese 38th and 40th Armies approached along the Chongchon River from the east . 3 RAR remained at Chongju , however , due to a lack of transport , while the remainder of the brigade moved south ; now the most forward element on the US Eighth Army 's left flank , the battalion soon became isolated without communications or armour and artillery support . Finally , on 2 November , US Army trucks became available , and the battalion completed its move south without incident , harbouring in the bed of the Taeryong River that evening . Meanwhile , it was announced that Green would be temporarily replaced by Walsh , who he had himself replaced in Japan several months before . Walsh , by then an observer at US Eighth Army headquarters , was urgently posted back to 3 RAR to resume command , despite his lack of operational experience as an infantry commander . Taking over amid difficult circumstances following Green 's death , and with little time to become acquainted with the battalion , Walsh 's inexperience soon told as the local situation deteriorated . 
 Walker elected to stand north of the Chongchon and Taeryong rivers in response to the Chinese offensive , and the following day Coad received new orders to hold the left forward section of the bridgehead over the Chongchon . To halt the Chinese advance , the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade was ordered to defend the lower crossings of the Taeryong and Chongchon rivers as part of a rearguard , in conjunction with the US 24th Infantry Division further upstream on the right . The brigade concentrated in the Pakchon area . The Middlesex occupied the town and the high ground to the north and east , while 3 RAR and the Argylls held positions covering the western approaches to the Taeryong , with the latter designated as the brigade reserve . Yet the information available to the British and Australians suggested that the Chinese would likely attack from an easterly direction , and the dispositions adopted by Coad were later criticised for failing to take this into account . 3 RAR took up a defensive position 1 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 93 mi ) west of the village , where it remained for the next two days . Meanwhile , B and C Companies of the Argylls formed a bridgehead over the Taeryong around the far @-@ side of the partially destroyed bridge near Kujin , while A Company occupied positions astride the road to the south . To the right , the US 24th Infantry Division covered the crossing over the Chongchon at Anju , while the South Korean II ROK Corps held positions further east . Forced to defend on a wide frontage , the UN positions were weakened by a 9 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometre ( 5 @.@ 9 mi ) gap between the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade and the nearest American formation — 2nd Battalion , US 19th Regimental Combat Team ( 2 / 19 RCT ) — on the brigade 's eastern flank . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Opening moves , 4 / 5 November 1950 = = = 
 During the night of 4 / 5 November 1950 , the Chinese and North Koreans mounted a full @-@ scale assault on US 24th Infantry Division . Before dawn , US 19 RCT had become heavily engaged , and was pushed back nearly 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) . The Chinese force turned west to advance between the Taeryong and Chongchon rivers , threatening the rear of the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade by cutting the Pakchon – Sinanju road . The previous afternoon a patrol from the Middlesex had clashed with a large Chinese patrol 9 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 0 mi ) to the north @-@ east and suffered a number of casualties , yet the main Chinese attack did not come until early the next morning . Meanwhile , large numbers of refugees continued to move south , causing the British and Australians further concern given the possibility that they might be used by the Chinese to cover the infiltration of their positions . At 08 : 00 on 5 November a group of around 200 Chinese attacked C Battery , US 61st Field Artillery Battalion , which was attached to the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade . The American guns had been supporting the brigade from a position beside the road about 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) south of Pakchon , and were protecting the vital concrete bridge 1 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 1 mi ) south of the Argyll 's battalion headquarters at Kujin . 
 The Chinese established a number of road blocks in the area before proceeding to assault the American gun line and the nearby bridge . The attack cut the road to Anju which was the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade 's single means of resupply or withdrawal , and exposed the only available crossing over the Chongchon River . Coad considered that unless the Chinese could be cleared from the gun position and the hills secured , the brigade was in danger of being surrounded and cut off and the crossing at Anju lost , while US 19 RCT would also be threatened . Under the command of Lieutenant Colonel George Neilson , the Argylls were despatched to restore the situation . B and C Companies would be drawn back from the west bank of the <unk> to reinforce A Company , and then attack south one after the other supported by American tanks . At the same time A Company — under Major Alexander Wilson — was ordered to immediately attack north to clear the road . Hasty control measures were put in place to avoid the possibility of the two forces accidentally engaging one another , while air support was requested at 08 : 40 . After commandeering two American trucks , Wilson 's men stepped off with four US M4 Sherman tanks in support . 
 Meanwhile , to the north , under the command of Captain Howard M. Moore , C Battery , US 61st Field Artillery formed its six 105 mm M2A1 howitzers into a semi @-@ circle and created a perimeter around them , strongly defending their positions with automatic weapons from behind their gun shields . Assaulting from the east , the Chinese attempted to infiltrate the gun @-@ line using a number of creek beds and paddy bunds for concealment . One of the American howitzers was depressed and brought into action , firing over open sights at point @-@ blank range , bouncing shells off the frozen paddy fields which then exploded among the assaulting troops . A second howitzer was turned around 45 minutes later , augmenting the fire of the first . The Americans expended 1 @,@ 400 rounds at a range of between 45 to 270 metres ( 49 to 295 yd ) ; however , the weight of fire was insufficient to halt the assaulting force . Supporting fire from a nearby battery was directed by a spotter aircraft overhead , and this temporarily stemmed the Chinese onslaught . Running low on small arms ammunition and having lost one howitzer destroyed as well as two men killed and seventeen wounded , the Americans faced the prospect of being overrun . The gunners killed a member of a Chinese demolition team just 18 metres ( 20 yd ) from the bridge . Finally , after crossing the Taeryong in single file under fire , B and C Companies of the Argylls began to systematically clear the road supported by machine @-@ gun fire from the Middlesex , while A Company also continued to advance . At 09 : 00 the lead tanks and infantry of the relief force arrived , closely followed by the remainder of A Company . The Argylls rapidly cleared the gun position and the Chinese withdrew north along the railway to a nearby hill while the American tanks continued to engage them . Over 70 Chinese dead were found in the vicinity of the gun @-@ line , however , from their new position the Chinese continued to dominate the road . 
 In order to open the road the Argylls moved to clear the Chinese off the high ground located 500 to 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 550 to 1 @,@ 090 yd ) east of the road . The hill , about 45 metres ( 49 yd ) high , offered clear fields of fire to the west over the paddy fields to the Taeryong River and dominated the Pakchon – Sinanju road running beside the river . Supported by four Sherman tanks , machine @-@ guns and mortars , A Company captured the hill at 10 : 00 . Wilson occupied the summit with a reinforced platoon , before withdrawing the remainder of the company to the road , where the 3 @-@ inch mortar and Vickers medium machine @-@ gun sections were established . Meanwhile , B Company — under the command of Major Alastair Gordon @-@ Ingram — attacked the second Chinese road block , again supported by a number of American tanks . Back in action , the guns from C Battery also fired in support of the British infantry , and after a vigorous engagement in which Gordon @-@ Ingram was wounded the Chinese were compelled to withdraw , leaving many of their dead on the road . A number were later found to have been carrying demolition charges , presumably for use against the bridge at Anju . With the survivors of the battle seen moving into the hills , Neilson then ordered B and C Companies to establish positions on the eastern flank in order to protect the road . Although the Chinese had been cleared from the gun @-@ line and the hills around Pakchon , further attacks to the south continued to threaten the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade 's position , which remained perilous . The fighting continued , and at 11 : 00 the Chinese mounted a heavy counter @-@ attack on the A Company outpost , wounding six men . The Argylls were then forced to withdraw from the high ground under the cover of sustained fire from two Vickers medium machine @-@ guns sited on the road , and became pinned down on the reverse slope . 
 Throughout the morning a US LT @-@ 6G Mosquito light observation aircraft had continued to monitor growing concentrations of Chinese in hills to the rear of the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade , with reports indicating their strength at approximately one division . Determining that the Chinese would move to cut the road during the night and believing it dangerous to remain any further forward than required , Coad requested approval for a limited withdrawal . He decided to pull his forward units back across the Taeryong River , before moving south towards the Chongchon River , near Anju . The brigade counter @-@ attacked the Chinese forces occupying the nearby ridgelines in order to clear the route south . The plan envisioned the Argylls holding the road open , while 3 RAR recaptured the high ground previously held by A Company , 1 ASHR . The Middlesex would then pass through to clear and occupy the hills east of <unk> @-@ dong , while the Argylls — as the brigade rearguard — would follow to occupy the right of the new defensive position . The brigade would then adopt a tight defensive perimeter on the hills overlooking the north bank , so as to maintain the bridgehead over the river . Meanwhile , still in position west of Pakchon , the Australians prepared to cross the Taeryong River to regain the lost position , 7 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 7 mi ) to their south . 3 RAR faced a difficult approach after moving beyond the river , with the battalion 's route paralleling the disputed ridge which overlooked it 800 metres ( 870 yd ) to the east . 
 = = = 3 RAR assaults the ridgeline , 5 November 1950 = = = 
 The Australians crossed the Taeryong at 11 : 30 and began preparations to assault Chinese positions on the ridgeline 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) east of the road to Pakchon and 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) north of Maenjung @-@ dong . In support were four P @-@ 51 Mustang fighter @-@ bombers from No. 77 Squadron RAAF which attacked the Chinese with rockets and machine @-@ gun fire , one of only a few occasions during the war when Australian aircraft operated in support of 3 RAR . There were three main crests on the ridge running south @-@ east , the first being nearest the road , the second just to its rear , and the third further back still , with the Chinese occupying the first two . Although the Argylls had occupied the ridgeline briefly during the morning , they had been pushed off by the Chinese . Mortar fire fell on 3 RAR while it was forming up ; however , using the road as a start line the battalion attack began at 14 : 00 , with A Company on the left flank and B Company on the right , each with two platoons forward and one back in reserve , each in extended line with bayonets fixed . A Company was commanded by Captain Bill Chitts , while B Company was led by Captain D 'arcy Laughlin , after Major George Thirlwell had broken his leg in a vehicle accident two days before . The Mortar Platoon was sited with Battalion Headquarters alongside the road , with two sections of Vickers medium machine @-@ guns and two 17 pounder anti @-@ tank guns from the Anti @-@ Tank Platoon . The Assault Pioneer Platoon provided local defence , while the mortars laid down a continuous barrage in an attempt to counter the Chinese mortar fire in conjunction with the machine @-@ guns and tanks which began to engage the hilltop . 
 Beginning their advance , the Australians began to suffer casualties ; yet they were initially unable to confirm the location of the Chinese . However , as they commenced their ascent they were met by heavy small arms fire from the higher ground to the south and east . After a long approach across 500 metres ( 550 yd ) of open paddy field , A Company relieved the beleaguered Argylls . The Chinese then forced the two Australian companies to fight hard in order to gain the 50 @-@ metre ( 55 yd ) crest . Lacking artillery support , the Australians instead relied on the battalion 's integral support weapons , with 3 @-@ inch mortars and medium machine @-@ guns in support , as well as four Sherman tanks which provided fire support from a stand @-@ off position near the road . With A and B Companies heavily engaged , Walsh moved D Company — under the command of Major Walter Brown — to attack the hill to the south to reinforce the right flank . A Company succeeded in establishing itself on the first crest , forcing the Chinese from the position , while supporting fire from their Bren light machine @-@ guns and Vickers medium machine @-@ guns allowed B Company to move up on their right and capture the second crest . Finally at 16 : 00 , after two hours of heavy fighting , the Australians had achieved their objectives against a determined defence . A and B Company prepared for a counter @-@ attack by the Chinese . Meanwhile , C Company — under Captain Archer Denness — had remained in reserve on the road with Battalion Headquarters and Support Company . 
 Although orders for the attack had been hurried and lacking in detail , and the strength of the defenders unknown , the assaulting force had prevailed , securing the ridge with only limited offensive support . During the fighting one of the B Company platoon commanders , Lieutenant Eric Larsen , who had only the week before led the crossing at Kujin , was killed . One of the section commanders , Corporal Jeff Jones , immediately took command of the 5 Platoon assault , moving from section to section across the steep slope to direct their fire , even while under heavy Chinese mortar and machine @-@ gun fire . He was awarded the US Silver Star for his actions . The successful assault opened the road south , enabling the Middlesex battalion , brigade headquarters and a number of supporting units to withdraw down the road through the Australians , followed by the Argylls . 3 RAR remained behind as a rearguard while the British battalions took up new positions , covering the Chongchon River crossing at Anju . Chinese mortars and machine @-@ gun fire continued to fall on 3 RAR , and at 17 : 00 a round destroyed the A Company headquarters , killing two men and wounding four others , including Chitts who was evacuated by stretcher . 
 Coad ordered 3 RAR to consolidate its positions and to secure the railway bridge ; however , with all his companies committed there were no troops available for the latter task and Walsh chose to ignore the order . Meanwhile , the Middlesex occupied a hill north @-@ east of Maenjung @-@ dong , which was found to be clear except for one minor feature occupied by the Chinese , while the Argylls moved south with a platoon of tanks and positioned themselves on a small group of hills , 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) east of Maenjung @-@ dong . From here the brigade was able to dominate the Pakchon – Maenjung @-@ dong – Anju road . Meanwhile , as the light began to fade the administrative elements of the formation and the US 61st Field Artillery Battalion were moved south of the Chongchon River amid a bitter wind . The British and Australians stood @-@ to from dusk until nightfall , and after posting sentries the remainder of the brigade began their night routine . 
 = = = Walsh withdraws from the high ground , 5 / 6 November 1950 = = = 
 An hour after last light on 5 November the Chinese attacked C Company 3 RAR — the forward Australian company occupying positions astride the Pakchon road 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) north of Maenjung @-@ dong — with mortars and machine @-@ guns . Meanwhile , machine @-@ gun fire also fell on Support Company and Battalion Headquarters , 400 metres ( 440 yd ) to the south . Walsh decided to relocate his headquarters 900 metres ( 980 yd ) further to the rear . The Chinese infantry launched a strong attack against C Company assaulting them across the paddy fields in darkness , while simultaneously also falling upon A and B Companies holding the hills they had captured during the afternoon . In the face of the heavy Chinese counter @-@ attack Walsh feared the loss of his entire force , and at 20 : 00 he ordered a general withdrawal , pulling them back off the ridgeline in order to concentrate the battalion on the road , without informing Coad . Ordered in the dark and with one company still under attack , a disorganised night withdrawal occurred . The decision proved to be a serious tactical error , for as was to be demonstrated often in the months that followed , the Chinese were skilled at moving across the hills to outflank road @-@ bound UN forces who often failed to hold the ridges on either side of the roads only to be confronted by strong concentrations in front and behind them as a result . The withdrawal threatened to open the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade 's left flank ; recognising the danger this posed , Coad ordered Walsh to immediately reposition his companies on the ridge . Ultimately this proved unachievable . 
 A Company — now under Lieutenant Lawrence Clark following Chitts ' wounding that afternoon — had only just succeeded in breaking contact from the Chinese , suffering a number killed and wounded during a confused withdrawal . Meanwhile , B Company had also been forced to fight its way down the hill . Both companies were now well clear of their former positions and would have had a hard time fighting their way back . Ultimately it was too late for the Australians to regain the feature in darkness , and the weight of the Chinese attack continued to mount . Only D Company on the southern right flank — which had been left unmolested — was able to regain its previous position on Hill 63 . Meanwhile , the positions previously occupied by A and B Companies were occupied by the Chinese in superior numbers , and the remainder of 3 RAR concentrated at the railway crossing instead . At 22 : 00 Coad arranged to shell and mortar the relinquished ridge , while a standing patrol from the Middlesex was posted on the south @-@ western side of the Maenjung @-@ dong pass in anticipation of a renewed Chinese attack . However , following heavy fighting the pressure on the Australians unexpectedly ceased after midnight , and parties of Chinese were observed beginning to withdraw . 
 By 02 : 00 the Chinese attack had been checked and 3 RAR had redeployed to new positions in the paddy fields around the railway crossing north of Maenjung @-@ dong . However , amid the confusion the exact dispositions of the companies remained unclear for the remainder of the night . Australian losses were 12 killed and 64 wounded , the same number as those suffered during their entire advance into North Korea . A number of officers of the battalion were later critical of the decision to withdraw while still engaged , believing that it had been both dangerous and unnecessary , while the lack of detailed planning , reconnaissance and orders were also seen as a factor in the disorganisation that ensued . While A Company had immediately withdrawn as ordered and had suffered a number of casualties in doing so , both B and D Companies , which were commanded by experienced veterans of the 2nd Australian Imperial Force , had delayed doing so until more favourable circumstances prevailed and fared better as a consequence . Yet the following morning a patrol from D Company cleared the abandoned A and B Company positions unopposed . The area was found littered with Chinese dead and equipment . Among the casualties were both Chinese and North Koreans , and it became clear that the Australians had been attacked by a mixed force , estimated at around 1 @,@ 500 men . Many of those killed were also found to have been carrying demolition charges . 
 Despite the events of the previous night the Australians still held the road , while D Company continued to occupy the former Chinese strongpoint on Hill 63 , even if it was isolated from the rest of the battalion . Yet B and C Companies were now precariously positioned in the paddy field to the east and west of the road respectively , and come daylight were exposed to the Chinese positions on the high ground . The same day Coad visited 3 RAR ; dissatisfied with the battalion 's dispositions and having now lost confidence in its commander , he relieved Walsh of his position , appointing the second @-@ in @-@ command , Major Bruce Ferguson , in his place . Walsh returned to his posting at US Eighth Army headquarters . Ferguson came forward to take command of the battalion . Ordering 3 RAR to dig @-@ in , he despatched a number of clearing patrols , while C Company advanced unopposed to a hill overlooking the road 2 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 4 mi ) north @-@ east of D Company . Reaching the top the Australians observed the Chinese withdrawing northwards up the valley . Further east , the Chinese attacked US 19 RCT ; however , by the afternoon of 6 November it became apparent that the Chinese withdrawal around Pakchon was part of a general disengagement . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 After the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade 's initial success , they had in turn been counter @-@ attacked by the Chinese before being pushed off the high ground during the night . During the action the brigade lost 12 killed and 70 wounded , the majority of them among the Australians . Chinese losses were not known with many of their dead removed from the battlefield , but according to Commander Wu <unk> of the Chinese 39th Army , an infantry company from the Chinese 350th Regiment of the 117th Division was badly mauled by the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade during the engagement . Australian forces later estimated that the Chinese had suffered 200 killed and another 200 wounded . In their first battle with the Chinese , 3 RAR had successfully captured a well defended hill with only limited offensive support , and had held it the face of heavy counter @-@ attacks before confused command decisions resulted in the battalion conducting a disorganised night withdrawal while still in contact . The fighting was costly for both sides and although the Australians had halted the advancing Chinese 117th Division and inflicted numerous casualties on them , they had also lost heavily . Nonetheless , the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade had succeeding in preventing a Chinese break @-@ through at Pakchon , keeping open vital withdrawal routes across the river and securing the UN left flank . Suffering significant casualties , the Chinese offensive was finally halted the next day due to logistic difficulties . The Royal Australian Regiment and Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders were later granted the battle honour " Pakchon " . The Chinese and North Koreans were temporarily forced to withdraw north , while Walker successfully reinforced the UN positions , holding on the Chongchon Line . The Chinese had failed to exploit their initial success , and instead now seemed to adopt a deliberately cautious strategy . 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 On 7 November , the 24th US Infantry Division and 27th British Commonwealth Brigade followed up the Chinese withdrawal with a limited probing advance . That morning Australian clearing patrols killed seven Chinese soldiers , before 3 RAR prepared to advance with the remainder of the brigade . C Company occupied Hill 74 2 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) to the north @-@ east without opposition , only to discover a North Korean company on the reverse slope . The Australians engaged the North Koreans with machine @-@ gun fire , inflicting heavy losses on the defenders and capturing five before forcing them to withdraw towards Tang @-@ dong harried by artillery and airstrikes . The remainder of the battalion deployed on the right , while the Argylls occupied two hills further north . The brigade 's advance had forestalled a planned North Korean attack on the night of 7 / 8 November , while large numbers of Chinese dead from the previous fighting were also discovered . On 9 November the advance wheeled to the north @-@ west around Pakchon , with 3 RAR moving forward another 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) to the east , encountering little resistance and taking a number of prisoners in the process . From 11 November the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade advanced slowly north . On 16 November 3 RAR occupied Hill 117 , on a bend in the Taeryong River 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) north of Pakchon . Over the following weeks they remained in the Pakchon area , conducting extensive patrolling up to company @-@ size , and clashing with small groups of Chinese and North Koreans . As winter approached the weather became bitterly cold amid snow and strong winds . Unprepared for the extreme conditions the Australians increasingly suffered health problems , particularly among the older members of the battalion . Lacking the training and equipment for operations in ice and snow , maintenance also proved burdensome before additional US cold weather clothing and equipment was issued . 
 Ferguson ultimately proved to be an able commander . Thirty @-@ seven years old and a New Zealander by birth , he had been commissioned into the Australian 2 / 2nd Battalion with Green during the Second World War . Serving as an intelligence officer on the headquarters of the 16th Brigade during the Libyan campaign in 1941 , Ferguson had been awarded the Military Cross for his actions during fighting on the Kokoda Track in New Guinea in 1942 . Later , he had served as a liaison officer with the 6th Division , before finishing the war as a staff officer posted to the 7th Division headquarters on Morotai island , taking part in the amphibious landing at Balikpapan in 1945 . Ferguson volunteered to serve in the BCOF in Japan after the war and was posted to the 67th Battalion as a company commander , arriving in Kure in February 1946 . After leaving the battalion in 1948 to serve on the headquarters of BCOF for six months , he returned as battalion second @-@ in @-@ command . In 1949 the battalion had been renamed the 3rd Battalion , Australian Regiment , and was later granted the ' Royal ' prefix . He remained with the battalion after that time . The change of command was confirmed by the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief BCOF , Lieutenant General Sir Horace Robertson , and Ferguson was promoted to lieutenant colonel on 10 November . He developed a good working relationship with Coad , who held him in high regard , and went on to command 3 RAR during its most demanding period in Korea . 
 The United Nations resumed the offensive on 24 November , shortly before the Chinese began their own Second Phase Offensive . The Chinese 13th Army Group launched a series of surprise attacks on the night of 25 November , pushing the US Eighth Army back to the Chongchon River . The Chinese inflicted heavy losses on the South Koreans and decimated the US 2nd Infantry Division on the right flank , as the US Eighth Army began a long retreat south . At the same time , the Chinese 9th Army Group ambushed the US X Corps near the Chosin Reservoir as the freezing winter weather set in . Although the US Eighth Army succeeded in avoiding encirclement , the US X Corps had to be evacuated by sea from Hungnam during December 1950 , despite inflicting heavy casualties on the Chinese . MacArthur 's forces were expelled from North Korea and withdrew to the 38th Parallel , where they sought to once again establish defensive positions . In reserve at the start of the renewed Chinese offensive , the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade was spared the initial brunt . Yet the offensive soon forced the UN forces into a disorganised withdrawal . 3 RAR withdrew 320 kilometres ( 200 mi ) in nine days , arriving at Uijeongbu , 24 kilometres ( 15 mi ) north @-@ east of Seoul , on 11 December 1950 . There the British and Australians occupied defensive positions in an attempt to secure the northern approaches to the South Korean capital during the Battle of Uijeongbu . 
 = Rex Ryan = 
 Rex Ashley Ryan ( born December 13 , 1962 ) is an American football coach who is the head coach of the Buffalo Bills of the National Football League ( NFL ) . After serving as an assistant coach for 22 years , Ryan attained his first head coaching job in the NFL with the New York Jets in 2009 . He is the son of former head coach Buddy Ryan and is the fraternal twin brother of Rob Ryan . 
 From a young age , Ryan aspired to follow in his father 's footsteps and become a professional football coach . After spending the majority of his youth in Canada , Ryan returned to the United States as a teenager where he attended college at Southwestern Oklahoma State University . Upon graduating Ryan spent the next 22 years serving as an assistant coach on different teams at both the college and professional level . At the behest of their head coach Brian Billick , Ryan joined the Baltimore Ravens in 1999 and spent nine years there . In 2005 he became the defensive coordinator , and in 2008 the assistant head coach . 
 Hours after the Ravens lost to the Steelers in the 2008 playoffs , Ryan accepted a contract offer from the Jets for their vacant head coaching position . During his tenure , Ryan became well known throughout the league for his outspoken manner , boisterous attitude and success with the Jets , which included back @-@ to @-@ back AFC Championship Game appearances in the 2009 and 2010 seasons . Ryan was fired by the Jets at the conclusion of the 2014 season , and he accepted a contract offer to coach the Bills two weeks later . 
 Ryan 's teams are highly regarded for their defensive capabilities , which often feature " relentlessness [ and ] unpredictable mayhem founded on [ Ryan 's ] premise that ' whatever you do best , we 're going to take away from you ' " , according to New York Times writer Nicholas <unk> . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Rex Ryan and his fraternal twin , Rob , were born in Ardmore , Oklahoma , on December 13 , 1962 , to Doris and Buddy Ryan . When the boys were aged two , their parents amicably divorced . Following the divorce , their mother attended the University of Chicago to earn her doctorate . Rex , Rob and their older brother Jim moved with her to Toronto , Ontario , Canada , where she secured an administrative position at the University of Toronto . During the course of his upbringing , Rex wanted to follow in the footsteps of his father , a defensive pioneer in the NFL known for developing the 46 defense , and by age six Rex and Rob knew they wanted to pursue coaching careers . 
 In Canada , there was little emphasis on football , much to the disappointment of Rex . By the time Rex was a teenager , Doris realized he and his brothers were too much to handle for a single mother trying to advance her career . She decided it was in the best interest of the brothers to send them to live with their father , who was the defensive line coach for the Minnesota Vikings at the time . The reasons behind this were to keep them out of trouble and to help them expand their knowledge of the game of football where it was more prevalent . 
 In 1978 , when Buddy was hired by the Chicago Bears as their defensive coordinator , Rex , Rob and Jim followed their father to Illinois where the family settled in Prairie View . The brothers attended Stevenson High School in Lincolnshire . 
 Rex went on to attend Southwestern Oklahoma State University in Weatherford , Oklahoma , alongside Rob , and played for the football team as a defensive end . He graduated from Southwestern Oklahoma in 1986 , and in 2011 was inducted into the university 's Hall of Fame . 
 = = Collegiate coaching = = 
 Upon graduating from Southwestern in 1986 , with the help of his father , Ryan secured a job as a graduate assistant on the Division I @-@ AA ( now Division I FCS ) Eastern Kentucky Colonels football team . At Eastern Kentucky , he had a multitude of responsibilities which ranged from making copies of game plans to picking players up at the airport . The Colonels won the Ohio Valley Conference title in the two years Ryan served as an assistant . At the age of 26 , Ryan became the assistant head coach and defensive coordinator at Division II New Mexico Highlands for a year , during which the team led the league in defensive turnovers . After his stint with New Mexico Highlands , Ryan joined Division I Morehead State as the defensive coordinator , where he remained for four years . During his tenure , the defense was ranked among the highest in the nation . 
 After working for his father for two years with the NFL 's Arizona Cardinals , Ryan returned to college coaching as the defensive coordinator for the Cincinnati Bearcats . The Bearcats won the first Humanitarian Bowl over Utah State in Ryan 's final year , marking the team 's first bowl appearance in fifty years . Ryan was the Oklahoma Sooners ' defensive coordinator for a year in which the defense was ranked sixth in the nation . However , head coach John Blake failed to achieve a winning record for a third straight year and subsequently , the entire staff was fired . Ryan served as defensive coordinator at Kansas State for a month in 1999 under head coach Bill Snyder . 
 = = National Football League = = 
 = = = Assistant coach = = = 
 When his father was hired as the head coach of the Arizona Cardinals in 1994 , he offered Rex his first job in the NFL as a defensive assistant , working with the team 's linebackers and defensive linemen . After nine straight losing seasons prior to Buddy 's arrival , the Cardinals produced an 8 – 8 record in Buddy 's first year as head coach . However , in his second season , the team went 4 – 12 and subsequently , the entire staff was fired despite the positive performance of the defense . 
 Ryan went on to coach at three different colleges following his tenure with the Cardinals , though by the time he joined Kansas State in 1999 , he was hopeful of a return to the NFL . Ryan received a call from newly named head coach Brian Billick of the Baltimore Ravens , who wanted to interview him for the defensive line coaching position . Having visited a class Ryan was teaching earlier in his career , Billick had been so impressed by Ryan 's passion for the game of football that he decided to hire Ryan if he ever attained a head coaching position . When offered the position , Ryan accepted . 
 In his first year , the defense was ranked second overall in the NFL and second in rushing yards allowed . By his second year , in 2000 , the Ravens ' defense set NFL records for fewest points allowed and fewest rushing yards allowed . The defense allowed a combined 23 points in four playoff games en route to a Super Bowl XXXV victory , Ryan 's only Super Bowl ring . The defense consistently performed well in the following years . As a result , Ryan was promoted to defensive coordinator in 2005 following the departure of Mike Nolan , who became the head coach of the San Francisco 49ers . In 2006 , Ryan received Assistant Coach of the Year awards from Pro Football Weekly and the Pro Football Writers Association . 
 Upon the conclusion of the Ravens ' 5 – 11 performance in 2007 , the entire staff was dismissed on New Year 's Eve . Ryan was one of the candidates interviewed by the Ravens for their head coaching vacancy ; however , the Ravens chose to name John Harbaugh as the team 's new head coach . Ryan also interviewed with Miami and Atlanta about filling their head coaching vacancies , but the offers went to Tony <unk> and Mike Smith respectively . 
 Ryan was disappointed by his failure to obtain a head coaching job , but he agreed to return to Baltimore under the direction of Harbaugh , who retained Ryan as defensive coordinator and promoted him to assistant head coach . In 2008 , Ryan 's final year with the team , the defense was ranked second overall in the NFL . The Ravens lost by nine points in the AFC Championship Game against the Pittsburgh Steelers . Ryan 's nine @-@ year tenure with the team , during which the defense never ranked lower than sixth overall in the NFL , concluded an hour later when he accepted the head coaching position with the New York Jets . 
 = = = New York Jets = = = 
 Following a late season collapse in which the Jets missed the playoffs after losing four of their final five games , the team fired head coach Eric Mangini on December 29 , 2008 . The team interviewed a host of candidates , including Ryan , Jeff Jagodzinski , Russ Grimm , Bill Callahan , and Brian Schottenheimer ; however , the contract , which was valued at approximately $ 11 @.@ 5 million over the course of four years , was ultimately offered to Ryan . 
 Accepting the offer on January 19 , 2009 , Ryan immediately began to carry out a plan of action he outlined for the franchise 's future . He planned to remove the players from distractions on and off the field and allow them get to know one another to build team chemistry . Thus , training camp was moved to the campus of SUNY Cortland , where the team would be relatively secluded from the media and any other distractions . Ryan and general manager Mike Tannenbaum were also determined to draft a quarterback who could lead and be the face of the franchise . As a result , the team traded up to select Mark Sanchez with the fifth overall pick in the 2009 NFL Draft . 
 = = = = 2009 season = = = = 
 The Jets opened their season against the Houston Texans . Ryan began his head coaching career with a 24 – 7 victory over the Texans in which the Jets ' defense shut out their opponents ' offense . Houston 's lone score came on a fumble return for a touchdown . The following week , the defense did not allow a touchdown against the New England Patriots in a 16 – 9 victory at home , marking the Jets ' first home victory over New England since 2000 . Ryan and the Jets went on to defeat the Tennessee Titans in week three , marking the first time the Jets opened the season at 3 – 0 since 2004 . The victory also allowed Ryan to become the Jets ' first rookie head coach to win his first three games since Al Groh did so in 2000 . New York went on to lose six of their next seven games save for a shutout victory over the Oakland Raiders , 38 – 0 . 
 The team eventually recovered and won five of their final six games despite Ryan mistakenly stating the Jets had been eliminated from playoff contention following a loss to the Atlanta Falcons . The Jets defeated a previously unbeaten Indianapolis Colts — a game not without controversy following Jim Caldwell 's decision to pull Indianapolis ' starters with the Colts leading . The Colts , who had already clinched a playoff berth , had little to play for aside from a perfect record . In the final game of the season , the Jets defeated the Cincinnati Bengals 37 – 0 at Giants Stadium , the final sporting event to be held at the venue , as the defense held Cincinnati to 72 total rushing yards , and 0 total yards passing . The victory secured New York 's playoff berth as a wild card team . Under Ryan , the Jets finished the regular season ranked first overall in the NFL in rushing yards and total defense . New York defeated Cincinnati again the following week , this time at Paul Brown Stadium , in the AFC Wild Card playoff round . On January 17 , 2010 , Ryan coached the Jets in an upset over the San Diego Chargers , 17 – 14 , on their way to the AFC Championship Game . The Jets subsequently lost to the Colts 30 – 17 after leading in the first half of the game . Ryan became embroiled in controversy a few days later when he made an obscene gesture towards heckling Dolphins fans who spat on him during a Strikeforce mixed martial arts event at BankAtlantic Center in Sunrise , Florida . Ryan apologized for his action , stating that it was " stupid and inappropriate . " Ryan was fined $ 50 @,@ 000 by the Jets . 
 = = = = 2010 season = = = = 
 As Ryan headed into his second year as the team 's head coach , the club announced he had been given a two @-@ year contract extension . Ryan continued to exude confidence in the team , writing on ESPN 's training camp tour bus " Soon To Be Champs " in August , referencing that the Jets would make it to the Super Bowl and become the eventual champions . Ryan had been asked to sign the Jets ' logo on the back of the bus but included the message with his signature . The prediction was met with some criticism while others praised his brashness , something that was felt to be lacking in the NFL at the time . When the team appeared on the television series Hard Knocks that same month , Ryan was criticized , particularly by former head coach Tony Dungy , for his use of foul language . Dungy and Ryan later met in person to reconcile their differences . Ryan 's championship claims were nearly proven correct as the Jets opened the season with the best record in the NFL at 9 – 2 . This set the stage for a Monday night matchup with their division rival , the Patriots , who were also 9 – 2 . The Patriots , behind the strong performance of quarterback Tom Brady , defeated the Jets 45 – 3 . However , the Jets finished the season with an 11 – 5 record and qualified as a wild card team in the playoffs . The Jets were one win short of tying the franchise record in wins set by the 1998 team led by Bill Parcells . 
 In the wild card round , the sixth @-@ seeded Jets beat the AFC South champion and third @-@ seeded Colts 17 – 16 on January 8 , 2011 , at the Colts ' home field to qualify for the Divisional Playoffs . The following week , on January 16 , they defeated the AFC East champion and first @-@ seeded Patriots 28 – 21 , ending New England 's eight @-@ game winning streak . The victory made the Jets the first team to win back @-@ to @-@ back road playoff games in consecutive seasons , and qualified them to advance to the AFC Championship Game for the second consecutive season , where they lost on the road to the AFC North champion Pittsburgh Steelers 24 – 19 . 
 = = = = 2011 season = = = = 
 The Jets opened their 2011 campaign with a 2 – 3 record , leading to discontent within their clubhouse . The team had begun to stray from its philosophy of consistently running the ball and began to pass more often , but the offense struggled with this adjustment . Receivers Plaxico Burress , Santonio Holmes and Derrick Mason reportedly approached coach Ryan to question offensive coordinator Brian Schottenheimer 's system . Ryan , meanwhile , had begun to isolate himself from the rest of the team as he became less " hands @-@ on " and opted to have his assistants coach the players at their respective positions . Ryan attracted further attention to the team during a Thursday Night Football game against the New England Patriots when he responded to a heckling fan with an obscene remark and was fined $ 75 @,@ 000 by the league . Despite struggling to an 8 – 7 record , the Jets still had the ability to attain a playoff berth if they won their regular season finale against the Miami Dolphins in combination with the outcome of three other games played that day . 
 However , the discontent within the locker room and the team 's overall struggles culminated with Holmes criticizing and arguing with teammates in the huddle against Miami . Holmes was benched in the fourth quarter while the Jets subsequently lost 19 – 17 , ending their postseason pursuit . After the Jets finished the season with a disappointing 8 – 8 record , Ryan admitted to having lost the pulse of the team . Then free agent running back LaDainian Tomlinson remarked that Ryan 's Super Bowl predictions had an adverse effect on the locker room by placing undue pressure on the players . Ryan conceded this point and announced that he would refrain from making such statements publicly in the future . 
 = = = = 2012 season = = = = 
 Through 11 weeks in 2012 , the Jets struggled to a 4 – 7 record . The presence of Tim Tebow created a controversy as the media and fans called for Ryan to bench the inconsistent Mark Sanchez in favor of Tebow . Ryan was criticized for his decision to keep Tebow activated during the Jets ' Thanksgiving Day contest against the New England Patriots despite Tebow playing with two broken ribs , leading to questions about his job security . With Tebow inactive for the Jets ' following contest against the Arizona Cardinals , Ryan made the decision to bench Sanchez , who threw three interceptions , in favor of Greg McElroy . McElroy threw a touchdown pass to Jeff Cumberland to score the team 's only points in a 7 – 6 victory over Arizona . 
 Ryan renamed Sanchez the starting quarterback the following Wednesday after seeking out multiple opinions within the organization . In a must win game against the Tennessee Titans to remain in playoff contention , Sanchez struggled ; he completed 13 of his 28 passes for 131 yards while throwing four interceptions and fumbling the ball in Titans territory in the closing minutes of the Jets ' 14 – 10 defeat . A day later , Ryan announced McElroy would start . Sanchez started the final game of the season after McElroy suffered a concussion in his lone start . Sanchez 's struggles continued as the Jets fell to the Buffalo Bills and ended their year with a 6 – 10 record , their first losing season under Rex Ryan . On December 31 , 2012 , the Jets fired general manager Mike Tannenbaum , but announced that Ryan would return for the 2013 season . 
 = = = = 2013 season = = = = 
 For the 2013 campaign , Ryan overhauled his coaching staff , promoting Dennis Thurman to defensive coordinator while adding several new coaches including offensive coordinator Marty <unk> . Newly hired general manager John Idzik emphasized there would be competition at all positions including quarterback . The Jets drafted Geno Smith in the second round of the 2013 NFL Draft to compete with Sanchez . Ryan was widely criticized for his decision to insert Sanchez late in a preseason game against the New York Giants after Sanchez suffered a season @-@ ending shoulder injury which led to Smith being named the starter . 
 Through their first nine games of the year , the Jets went 5 – 4 and earned Ryan some early Coach of the Year consideration . The team proceeded to lose their next three contests as the rookie Smith committed eight turnovers while failing to score during that stretch . This prompted speculation by analysts as to whether or not Ryan would be fired . The Jets broke their losing streak with a 37 – 27 win over the Raiders that kept them in playoff contention . The following week , the Jets played the Carolina Panthers and trailed by three points heading into the fourth quarter . In the span of five minutes , the Panthers scored twice and the Jets were unable to complete a comeback attempt , losing 20 – 30 . The loss eliminated the Jets from playoff contention . 
 New York played the Cleveland Browns a week later . In a meeting before the game , Ryan told his players that he expected to be fired at the end of the year . The Jets defeated Cleveland 24 – 13 and despite the uncertainty , the players and coaches were in high spirits . Several players including Antonio Cromartie , Calvin Pace and Willie Colon went on to publicly express their support for Ryan to return as coach . In the season finale , the Jets defeated the Miami Dolphins 20 – 7 , eliminating them from playoff contention . In the locker room after the game , owner Woody Johnson and Idzik announced Ryan would return for the 2014 season much to the delight of the players . Ryan was praised for keeping his team competitive after being eliminated from playoff contention and keeping their spirits high throughout the year despite their inconsistency . 
 = = = = 2014 season = = = = 
 The Jets opened the 2014 season with a 19 – 14 win over the Oakland Raiders but proceeded to lose their next eight games . Geno Smith , who started the year at quarterback , was replaced by veteran Michael Vick midway through the season . Vick helped to snap the losing streak in a week nine win over the Pittsburgh Steelers . Despite the victory , Ryan was seen cursing at an unidentified person and was subsequently fined $ 100 @,@ 000 by the league . The team continued to struggle with Smith eventually being reinserted into the lineup . The Jets went on to win two of their last three games to finish with a 4 – 12 record , their worst finish under Ryan . Despite players again expressing their desire for Ryan to remain the coach , he was dismissed on December 29 , 2014 . 
 = = = Buffalo Bills = = = 
 Ryan was hired as head coach of the Buffalo Bills on January 12 , 2015 , agreeing to a five @-@ year , $ 27 @.@ 5 million contract . 
 = = = = 2015 season = = = = 
 The Bills opened the 2015 season with a 27 @-@ 14 win over the Indianapolis Colts . Frustrated by the Bills leading the NFL in penalties heading into their Week 5 game against the Tennessee Titans , Ryan gave the entire team wristbands with the message " Yes sir " . These were the only words he wanted his players to use with officials if they were flagged . After being flagged 17 times in Week 4 loss against the New York Giants , the Bills were penalized only seven times in their 14 @-@ 13 victory over the Titans . The Bills entered their bye week with a 3 @-@ 4 record after losing in London to the Jacksonville Jaguars . 
 Ryan gave the whole team the week off during the bye , and he himself found a secluded beach to " get away and focus " . The Bills came out of their bye week and defeated the Miami Dolphins 33 @-@ 17 , improving their season record to 4 @-@ 4 . Ryan is now 2 @-@ 5 all time following a bye week . Ryan returned to MetLife Stadium week 10 during a much anticipated Thursday Night Football game against the Jets . The Bills won the game 22 @-@ 17 , and improved to 5 @-@ 4 on the season . Ryan faced questions before and after the game about his decision to name IK <unk> , who had been released by the Jets in preseason after breaking quarterback Geno Smith 's jaw in an altercation , as Buffalo 's captain for the game . 
 The Bills were unable to make the playoffs in their first season with Ryan as coach , as they were eliminated in Week 15 with a 35 @-@ 25 loss to the Washington Redskins on December 20 , extending their drought to 16 seasons , the NFL 's longest active drought . They finished the season with an 8 @-@ 8 record . 
 = = = = 2016 season = = = = 
 On January 10 , 2016 it was announced that Ryan had hired his twin brother Rob to the Bills coaching staff . Rob will serve as an assistant head coach and will also work with the defense . Three days later Ryan hired former NFL standout Ed Reed to be an assistant defensive backs coach . 
 = = Coaching philosophy = = 
 Ryan stresses that coaches are essentially supposed to be open and communicative with the players and management , who in turn will reciprocate the same attitude . By connecting with his associates , Ryan states , it 's " valuable when it comes to figuring out how to motivate somebody ( ... ) because I want that guy to fight for me , just like I want to fight for him . " Fullback Tony Richardson , in an interview , stated Ryan " loves his football team , loves his players " and does as much as he possibly can to ensure their success . Despite his boisterous and brash comments that have caused increased media coverage of the team , Ryan has taken the attention and has managed to " [ put ] it on himself " so the players can focus on their tasks . Ryan has also stressed that the teaching process is an important one , particularly when it comes to providing a player information and building chemistry . However , there has to be flexibility as the process must also be insightful and positive . Coaches , Ryan states , are responsible for providing players with information that is vitally important otherwise " if you emphasize everything , you 've emphasized nothing . " 
 = = = Coaching strategy = = = 
 With extensive knowledge regarding the intricacies of the defense , Ryan has been criticized for not devoting similar time and effort into coaching the offense . Ryan refuted this , stating his goal is to implement a proficient running game , citing a desire to " get after " the opponent through running the ball . Ryan has also stated that passing the ball is important but should not be used incessantly as there should be a balance between both aspects of the offense . In 2009 and 2010 , the Jets were ranked first and fourth overall in the league in rushing which coincided with their two playoff appearances . In 2011 , the Jets attempted to convert to a more pass @-@ oriented offense , which have become more widely used in the NFL , however , the team struggled with this adjustment and reverted to their former run @-@ oriented offense by the middle of the season . His defensive strategy , in contrast , tends to be more elaborate taking into consideration his experience in the field . There are six different defensive formations utilized in football , but the two commonly used formations are the 3 – 4 formation , with three defensive lineman and four linebackers , and the 4 – 3 formation , with four defensive lineman and three linebackers . The Jets utilized the former of the two popular formations ; however , Ryan tended to employ all six formations in varying forms . Furthermore , he often calls audibles that have the defense line up in one formation and switch to another so as to cloak their intentions and confuse and pressure the opponent . 
 As a testament to this philosophy , Ryan is often willing to defer the coin toss to the opponent so his team can begin the game playing on defense in order to " set the tone " and generate turnovers . This concept has been criticized by ESPN 's John Clayton , who has found the method to be ineffective league @-@ wide . Mark Kriegel , an analyst for the NFL Network , found that between 2005 and 2012 , during his tenure with both the Ravens and Jets , Ryan 's defenses have never been ranked lower than sixth overall in the NFL and have allowed an average of 281 yards per game from scrimmage , second to Dick LeBeau 's 277 @.@ 4 yards per game . LeBeau is generally regarded as one of the best defensive coordinators in the history of the NFL . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Ryan and his wife , Michelle , met at Southwestern Oklahoma State . When Rex accepted his position as a graduate assistant at Eastern Kentucky , he proposed to Michelle by phone ; she accepted and they were married in 1987 . Together , they have two sons , Payton and Seth , who is a walk @-@ on freshman wide receiver for Clemson . Ryan earned a Bachelor of Science and a Master 's degree in physical education from Eastern Kentucky University . He resided in Summit , New Jersey , during his tenure with the Jets . 
 = = = Health = = = 
 Ryan publicly announced in 2009 that he had been battling dyslexia for his entire life . During his early years , Ryan struggled to read and write in school ; however , he was not formally diagnosed until testing confirmed he had the disorder in 2007 . Ryan utilizes color @-@ coded playbooks and game plans when coaching on the sidelines to aid his comprehension . 
 Ryan underwent lap @-@ band surgery at NYU Medical Center in March 2010 in an effort to battle his obesity . Ryan also had a hernia repaired during the procedure . He was able to return to his home that same day to recover . Following a three @-@ week period he had lost 40 pounds and as of July 2012 , Ryan had lost 106 pounds . 
 = = = Car crash = = = 
 Ryan was involved in a three @-@ car crash in eastern Pennsylvania on January 14 , 2013 . A witness said Ryan ran his Ford Mustang through a red light and collided with another driver which caused the unidentified driver to hit a third car . Ryan was issued a warning , but no citation . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 Ryan released Play Like You Mean It , an autobiography and a conversational about football strategy . The book , which was published by Doubleday in the spring of 2011 , was co @-@ written by Don Yaeger , a former Sports Illustrated editor who has co @-@ authored the autobiographies of former NFL players Walter Payton and Warren Moon . 
 Ryan made a cameo appearance in the Adam Sandler film That 's My Boy , which was released on June 15 , 2012 . Ironically , his character was a fan of the Jets ' rival , the Patriots . 
 = = = Internet video = = = 
 In 2010 , a video purportedly of Michelle Ryan 's feet surfaced on the internet . The video shows a man rubbing and smelling what is presumed to be the feet of Ryan 's wife . A spokesperson for the Jets commented by saying " Coach Ryan considers this a personal matter and will have no comment . " Multiple reports linked Ryan to a user profile named " <unk> " on a site for alternative sexual lifestyles . In September 2015 , a photo of Ryan surfaced of him sitting at his desk with a framed photo of a person 's feet behind him . 
 = = = Sports allegiances = = = 
 Ryan is an avid hockey fan , and has developed a notoriety of being a bandwagon jumper in recent years . Ryan has admitted he was a fan of the Toronto Maple Leafs , as a result of growing up in the city , but upon taking the Jets head coaching job , he was often seen cheering for all three of the New York metropolitan area franchises . During the New Jersey Devils run to the 2012 Stanley Cup Finals , Ryan was seen sporting the team 's attire , and two years later was seen donning the attire of the New York Rangers , during their run to the Stanley Cup Final . Outside of the playoff runs , Ryan performed a ceremonial puck drop at Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum on October 9 , 2010 , wearing a vintage New York Islanders jersey . 
 Ryan was known for a notorious incident at a Carolina Hurricanes game , as he attended the matchup with the Florida Panthers sporting a throwback Philadelphia Flyers jersey on . Upon being recognized by the fans at the arena , the team 's cheerleaders approached him with a Hurricanes alternate jersey sported by the team . The incident was noted as he was seen taking off the jersey and baring his chest for the crowd to see . 
 Upon taking the Buffalo Bills head coaching job , Ryan changed his allegiance to the Buffalo Sabres , and is often seen at the team 's home games and sporting the team 's attire . 
 = = = Political views = = = 
 On April 18 , 2016 Ryan introduced Republican presidential candidate front @-@ runner Donald Trump at one of his rallies held at the First Niagara Center in Buffalo , NY . Ryan told The Associated Press he was supporting Chris Christie for the nomination , but he dropped out of the race and has since endorsed Trump . 
 = = Head coaching record = = 
 Source : 
 = = = Coaching tree = = = 
 NFL head coaches under whom Rex Ryan has served : 
 Assistant coaches under Rex Ryan who have become NFL head coaches : 
 = CMLL World Trios Championship = 
 The CMLL World Trios Championship ( Spanish : " Campeonato Mundial de Trios " ) is a professional wrestling championship promoted by Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre ( CMLL ) in Mexico . The title has existed since 1993 and is contested for by teams of three wrestlers . As it is a professional wrestling championship , it is not won or lost competitively but instead by the decision of the bookers of a wrestling promotion . The title is awarded to the chosen team after they " win " a match to maintain the illusion that professional wrestling is a competitive sport . 
 The first champions were Los Infernales ( " The Infernal Ones " ; MS @-@ 1 , Pirata Morgan and El Satánico ) who won a tournament on November 22 , 1991 . Since then a total of 25 different trios have held the championship . The current champions are Sky Team ( Místico , Valiente and Volador Jr . ) who have been champions since February 13 , 2015 . The championship has been vacated on four different occasions , each time leading to CMLL holding a tournament to determine new champions . Only two teams have held the title on more than one occasion , Los Infernales and the trio of Héctor Garza , Hijo del Fantasma and La Máscara . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1985 , the Mexican lucha libre , or professional wrestling , promotion Empresa Mexicana de Lucha Libre ( " Mexican Wrestling Enterprise " ; EMLL ) was given control of the newly created Mexican National Trios Championship . Over the next six years , that title became the focal point of the very popular trios division , serving as the highest honor EMLL could bestow on a trio . In 1991 , EMLL changed their name to Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre ( " World Wrestling Council " ) and began to establish a series of CMLL branded world championships , relegating the Mexican National championships to a secondary rank . In 1991 , CMLL decided to create a CMLL @-@ branded world championship for the trios division . They held a 16 @-@ team tournament to crown the first champions , a tournament that saw " Los Infernales " ( " The Infernal Ones " ; MS @-@ 1 , Pirata Morgan and El Satánico ) defeat " Los Brazos " ( " The Arms " ; El Brazo , Brazo de Oro and Brazo de Plata ) to become the first Trios Champions . Over the next couple of years , the championship would be held by such teams as " Los <unk> " ( Jaque Mate , <unk> and Pierroth Jr . ) and " La Ola Blanca " ( " The White Wave " ; Gran Markus Jr . , El Hijo del Gladiador and Dr. Wagner Jr . ) . In 1993 , the then @-@ reigning Mexican National Trios Champions left CMLL and the Mexico City Boxing and wrestling commission allowed the champions to take the Mexican National Trios Championship with them . From 1993 through 2001 , when the Mexican National Trios Championship returned to CMLL , the CMLL World Trios Championship was the only championship for the division . 
 In 1997 then @-@ reigning champion Héctor Garza , who held the title along with Dos Caras and La Fiera , left CMLL , forcing the title to be vacated . Subsequently , the team of Rey Bucanero , Emilio Charles Jr. and El Satánico won the titles in a tournament final over Apolo Dantés , Black Warrior , and Dr. Wagner Jr . In October 1998 , the championship was vacated again when Mr. Niebla was injured , forcing his teammates Atlantis and Lizmark to give up the championship . The <unk> team of Black Warrior , Blue Panther and Dr. Wagner Jr. defeated " Los <unk> " ( " The <unk> Ones " ; Bestia Salvaje , Scorpio Jr. and Zumbido ) in the tournament finals , but vacated the titles when the team split up in February 2002 . Blue Panther and Dr. Wagner Jr. replaced Black Warrior with Fuerza Guerrera and defeated <unk> Warrior 's new team of Mr. Niebla , <unk> del Norte and Black Warrior himself . In 2006 , the titles were vacated once again after not being defended for almost 20 months as the champions had not worked together for several months . Los Guerreros de Atlantida ( " The Warriors from Atlantis " ; Atlantis , Tarzan Boy and Último Guerrero ) won the titles on September 29 , 2006 , and defended them regularly . In February 2007 Los Perros del Mal ( " The Bad Dogs " ; Perro Aguayo Jr . , Mr. Águila and Héctor Garza ) won the titles and held them for 15 months before splitting up and vacating the titles . The team of El Hijo del Fantasma , Héctor Garza and La Máscara won the tournament , defeating Blue Panther , Dos Caras Jr. and Místico in the finals . In 2015 CMLL 's Guadalajara branch brought back the Occidente ( " Western " ) Trios Championship , specifically for their shows held in Jalisco , Guadalajara . This title is considered tertiary to both the world and national titles . 
 = = Reigns = = 
 Sky Team ( Místico , Valiente and Volador Jr . ) are the current champions , having defeated Los Guerreros <unk> ( Euforia , Niebla Roja and Último Guerrero ) to win the title on February 13 , 2015 . They are the 27th overall championship team and this is their first reign as a team . Místico and Valiente have previously held the championship with Máscara Dorada . 25 different teams have held the title , combining for 27 individual title reigns . Only two teams have held the title more than once , the first champions Los Infernales and the team of Héctor Garza , Hijo del Fantasma and La Máscara . The team of Héctor Garza , Tarzan Boy and El Terrible have the longest run of any team with 666 days , while Héctor Garza holds the record for the longest combined reigns , with 1 @,@ 256 days for five reigns in total . Héctor Garza 's five individual reigns is the most reigns for any wrestler . All title matches take place under two out of three falls rules . 
 = = Tournaments = = 
 = = = 1991 = = = 
 CMLL held a 16 @-@ trios team tournament from October 25 , 1991 to November 22 , 1991 to determine the first ever CMLL World Trios Championship . This was the third CMLL branded world championship that CMLL created following the CMLL World Heavyweight Championship in May and the CMLL World Light Heavyweight Championship in September . In the finals , Los Infernales ( El Satánico , MS @-@ 1 and Pirata Morgan ) defeated Los Brazos ( El Brazo , Brazo de Oro and Brazo de Plata ) to win the championship . 
 Tournament brackets 
 = = = 1997 = = = 
 In early 1997 Héctor Garza , who was one @-@ third of the CMLL World Trios Championship team with Dos Caras and La Fiera , left CMLL to join rival promotion Asistencia Asesoría y Administración ( AAA ) CMLL vacated the championship and decided a one @-@ night eight @-@ team tournament to crown the next trios champions . The tournament took place on Friday March 21 , 1997 on the undercard of the 1997 Homenaje a Salvador <unk> ( " Homage to Salvador <unk> " ) show . In the finals , Emilio Charles Jr . , Rey Bucanero and El Satánico defeated Apolo Dantés , Black Warrior , and Dr. Wagner Jr . 
 Tournament brackets 
 = = = 1998 = = = 
 In October 1998 , Mr. Niebla suffered an injury , which forced CMLL to vacate the CMLL World Trios Championship as it was not clear when Mr. Niebla would be able to return to the ring . They held a three @-@ show , eight @-@ team tournament from December 4 to December 12 . Former champions Atlantis and Lizmark teamed up with Emilio Charles Jr. for the tournament , while Mr. Niebla actually returned to action in time to be in the tournament as well , teaming up with Rayo de Jalisco Jr. and Shocker . In the finals the trio of Dr. Wagner Jr . , Blue Panther and Black Warrior defeated Los <unk> ( Scorpio Jr . , Bestia Salvaje and Zumbido ) to lay claim to the championship . 
 Tournament brackets 
 = = = 2008 = = = 
 In the summer of 2008 then @-@ CMLL World Trios Champions Los Perros del Mal kicked Héctor Garza out of the group ; at the time Garza held the championship alongside Perros members Perro Aguayo Jr. and Mr. Águila , forcing the championship to be vacated . CMLL held an eight @-@ team tournament for the vacant championship , starting on May 30 , with the finals on June 13 , 2008 , during CMLL 's 2008 Infierno en el Ring event . 
 Tournament brackets 
 = = = 2013 = = = 
 In May 2013 long @-@ time CMLL World Trios Champions El <unk> del Amor ( Marco Corleone , Máximo and Rush ) were forced to vacate the championship due to Corleone suffering a serious knee injury . CMLL held an eight @-@ team , two @-@ night tournament to determine the next champions . The tournament started on June 9 , 2013 and the finals took place on June 16 . 
 Tournament brackets 
 = First Motion Picture Unit = 
 The First Motion Picture Unit ( FMPU ) , later 18th Army Air Forces Base Unit , was the primary film production unit of the US Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) during World War II and was the first military unit made up entirely of professionals from the film industry . It produced more than 400 propaganda and training films , which were notable for being informative as well as entertaining . Films for which the unit is known include Resisting Enemy Interrogation , Memphis Belle : A Story of a Flying Fortress and The Last Bomb — all of which were released in theatres . Veteran actors such as Clark Gable , William Holden , Clayton Moore , and future President Ronald Reagan and directors such as John Sturges served with the FMPU . The unit also produced training films and trained combat cameramen . FMPU personnel served with distinction during World War II . 
 First Motion Picture Unit is also the eponymous title of a 1943 self @-@ produced documentary about the unit narrated by radio and television announcer Ken Carpenter . 
 = = Background = = 
 When the United States entered World War II in December 1941 , the USAAF was a part of the army , and motion picture production was the responsibility of the Army Signal Corps . USAAF Commanding General " Hap " Arnold believed that the formation of an independent film entity would help lead to the air service gaining its independence . At a meeting in March 1942 , General Arnold commissioned Warner Bros. head Jack L. Warner , producer Hal Wallis and scriptwriter Owen Crump to create the unit . Warner was made lieutenant colonel and Crump a captain but Wallis , who was then in production with Casablanca , did not accept the offer . Of immediate concern was a critical shortage of pilots and recruits . Arnold told Warner he needed 100 @,@ 000 pilots , and contracted with Warner Bros. to produce and release a recruitment film , which would come to be known as Winning Your Wings . 
 Winning Your Wings was directed by Owen Crump , and featured James Stewart as a dashing pilot . Stewart 's virile , masculine portrayal changed the public perception of military aviators . The film , which was completed in only two weeks , was a great success and according to General Arnold was pivotal in recruiting 100 @,@ 000 pilots . Warner Bros. would produce several films prior to the activation of the FMPU , most notably Men of the Sky , Beyond the Line of Duty and The Rear Gunner . 
 = = Formation = = 
 The success of Winning Your Wings created a demand for training and recruitment films which proved difficult for Warner Bros. to fulfill . Jack Warner began the process of developing the organizational structure for an independent motion picture unit . The dual mission of the unit was to produce training and morale films , and to train combat cameramen . The ranks were to be filled with film industry professionals , the first time in history such a unit would be raised . 
 On 1 July 1942 , the FMPU became an active unit of the USAAF . Key personnel that formed the initial roster included Lt. Col. Warner as commanding officer , Capt. Crump , Capt. Knox Manning , 2nd Lt. Edwin Gilbert , 2nd Lt. Ronald Reagan and Cpl. Oren W. Haglund . At first the unit operated out of offices at Warner Bros. in Burbank , California , and then moved to Vitagraph Studios in Hollywood . Vitagraph , however , had not been maintained and proved to be inadequate for movie production on a scale required by the FMPU . By sheer happenstance Crump came upon the Hal Roach Studios in Culver City . According to writer Mark Betancourt , the facility was perfect : 
 The studio had everything the motion picture unit needed : six warehouse @-@ size sound stages , prop rooms , editing bays , costume and makeup departments , even an outdoor set made to look like a city street ... The lot comprised 14 acres and dozens of buildings ... 
 In October the unit moved into Hal Roach Studios , which the men nicknamed " Fort Roach . " Warner returned to running his company , and Lt. Col. Paul Mantz took over as commanding officer . 
 = = Life at Fort Roach = = 
 Personnel assigned to the FMPU included some of the most well known film professionals of the day , as well as filmmakers who would have great success after the war . Actors such as Clark Gable , William Holden and Alan Ladd , and directors including Richard Bare and John Sturges served with the unit . Future president Ronald Reagan , who transferred from the cavalry reserve , was a captain in the unit . He was the personnel officer and was responsible for maintaining personnel files and orienting new recruits to the operational aspects of Fort Roach . Later he was appointed adjutant . Like the other notable actors Reagan appeared in the films produced by the unit , but to avoid distracting the audience they were eventually relegated to narrating the films . 
 The FMPU was unique in comparison to other military units in the methods employed to obtain recruits . Many members were well into middle age and unsuitable for combat duty . Few of the men in the FMPU were ever sent to a war zone . Due to its special mission , the unit was able to bypass the normal recruiting channels and was empowered to draft directly . Basic Training was not as rigorous as that experienced by most servicemen . According to former unit member Howard <unk> , Basic Training was mandatory , " but it wasn ’ t the basic @-@ basic . " 
 Military decorum at Fort Roach was less formal than in most units . Saluting was optional , and unit members called each other by their first names . Hal Roach Studios did not have barracks , so commuting from home was commonplace . Men from out of the area were billeted at nearby Page Military Academy . 
 = = Film production = = 
 The first film project undertaken was a flight training aid titled , Learn and Live . Set in " Pilot 's Heaven " , the feature @-@ length film stars Guy Kibbee as Saint Peter . In order to demonstrate correct aviation techniques , twelve common flying mistakes are addressed . The film was highly regarded and led to a series of films including Learn and Live in the Desert , Ditch and Live and Learn and Live in the Jungle . 
 Resisting Enemy Interrogation was lauded by the military and according to documentarian Gregory Orr is considered to be the " best educational film " produced during the war . It tells the story of two captured flyers in dramatic and suspenseful fashion . They are interrogated at a German chateau . The layout of the chateau , the interrogation strategy and the overall experience of the film was extremely realistic . Airmen captured after viewing the film reported that they were able to successfully resist German efforts to extract information . The feature @-@ length film was of the highest quality and in recognition the documentary was nominated for an Academy Award in 1944 . 
 Animation was an essential and integral component of films produced at Fort Roach . Animation provided FMPU filmmakers with scenarios not possible with live action photography due to technical or secrecy constraints . In an introductory training film , pilots learn how to fly airplanes with the help of colorful cartoon characters named Thrust , Gravity and Drag , representative of the forces which act on airframes . Another character , Mr. Chameleon was created to teach the fine points of military camouflage . " Trigger Joe " ' s appearance in Position Firing was an immediate hit amongst gunners . Animators used humor to illustrate common pitfalls when loading and firing and techniques to maximize their efficiency and accuracy . Gunnery personnel clamored for more : " We want more films like Position Firing that make the theory simple and clear and yet keep us interested . And Trigger Joe ! He 's great ! " Joe became the central character in an entire series of films developed to further gunnery training . The animation department was staffed with a stellar assortment of animators , including department head Rudolf Ising , one of the creators of Looney Tunes and Merrie Melodies , and one of Disney 's Nine Old Men , Frank Thomas . 
 = = = Bombing of Japan = = = 
 One of the most important assignments of the unit was to develop navigational and topographic materials to support the bombing campaign against Japan . This top secret series of films , code @-@ named " Special Film Project 152 " was , according to Gregory Orr , " perhaps the most important and challenging effort to come from the First Motion Picture Unit . " The unit was given forty days to produce the films which would be used by B @-@ 29 Superfortress crews . 
 In 1944 the United States readied its forces in the Pacific Theatre for the final assault on the Japanese mainland . The 20th Air Force , tasked with carrying out the bombing campaign , lacked necessary information regarding flight routes and targeting data . Orr explains what the unit was expected to deliver : 
 every landmark , check point , initial point and bomb release point ... every radar center , every Japanese naval vessel in a harbor , every railroad , building and forest and rice paddies ... The objects had to appear not only as seen on a clear day by the naked eye , but also as viewed by a radar screen through an overcast . 
 After conducting extensive research on the topography of Japan , an 80 @-@ by @-@ 60 @-@ foot ( 24 m × 18 m ) scale model ( 1 foot : 1 mile ) of target areas was fabricated complete with mountains , buildings , railroads and the rice paddies . It also depicted clouds and fog . The films were produced using a specially mounted overhead camera . The camera was motorized and could be moved to simulate an airplane 's flight over the model . According to the New York Sun , " the camera recorded what the crew of a B @-@ 29 would see from 30 @,@ 000 feet . " Using the films , pilots of the 20th Air Force easily found their targets and were amazed at the level of detail and the accuracy that the unit was able to produce . General Arnold said the following of the units accomplishment : " there never has been anything quite so good as this for briefing men on dangerous missions . " 
 = = = Bomb damage in Europe = = = 
 After Nazi Germany surrendered in May 1945 , General Arnold ordered Crump to document the extent of the damage caused by aerial bombardment . This project was code @-@ named " Special Film Project 186 . " Crump and his crew , using color film , surveyed bomb damage inflicted on the major European cities . In addition , Crump recorded the <unk> of Nazi civilian and military personnel in Allied custody such as Herman Goering , as well as the capture of the Ohrdruf and Buchenwald concentration camps by American soldiers . Upon viewing the film of the camps for the first time , <unk> Wald recollected , " Even though it was a summer day , Reagan came out shivering — we all did . We ’ d never seen anything like that . " 
 Crump and his crew shot hundreds of hours of film — most of which has never been seen . The Army Air Forces declined to fund the production and editing of the footage at an estimated cost of $ 1 million . The documentary The Story of Special Film Project 186 points out that the effort was " the biggest color film project of World War II — and the biggest unseen film of all time . " 
 = = Combat cameraman training = = 
 A primary function of the FMPU was the training of combat cameramen . The units were based at nearby Page Military Academy . There were approximately 16 combat units , each made up of seven officers and between 20 and 30 enlisted men . They were trained to use a variety of photographic equipment and cameras and also received combat and weapons training . The cameramen were sent to every army air force base to document all aspects of the base 's operations as well as aerial battle tactics and enemy airplane performance . Every cameraman was trained to load film into their camera under adverse conditions , and if need be , to develop it on location . Most of the aerial motion picture photography shot during World War II was filmed by Fort Roach alumni . 
 Unlike regular personnel at the FMPU , combat cameramen suffered a number of casualties . Alumni of the program were " highly praised and much decorated . " Lt. James Bray , a cameraman trained at Fort Roach was assigned to the Ninth Air Force in Cairo , Egypt . While photographing a combat mission he shot down two Luftwaffe Messerschmitts when the gunner was wounded . For his heroism he was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross . He then returned to Fort Roach as an instructor . 
 = = Effect = = 
 Although most FMPU personnel were never assigned to combat duty , they made a significant contribution to the war effort . Air & Space / Smithsonian reported that the air superiority enjoyed by the USAAF in Europe was partly due to the training films delivered by the FMPU . Field Marshal Wilhelm Keitel , commander in chief of Germany 's armed forces , noted the decisive role played by film production units : 
 We had everything calculated perfectly except the speed with which the Allies were able to train their people for war . Our major miscalculation was in underestimating their quick and complete mastery of film education . 
 The unit 's efforts did not go unnoticed by the American military . The Inspector General 's office of the Department of Intelligence in an investigative report wrote : 
 This investigating officer cannot conclude his discussion without saying something for those sincere and patriotic officers and men who have contributed so much to the excellent work of the First Motion Picture Unit . The vast majority of its personnel have succeeded in producing training and orientation films , most of which are superior by every standard of motion picture art , training and effectiveness . Men of the First Motion Picture Unit probably represent a higher civilian income bracket than would be found in any other military organization . They are proud of their work and have a right to be so . This can also be said of the Combat Camera Units . 
 Noting the sheer volume of footage shot under the auspices of the unit , historian John <unk> said : 
 Every time you flip on the History Channel or the Discovery Channel , and you see World War II from an American perspective , you 're watching the work of one of these gentlemen . That 's their legacy . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 This is a list of selected USAAF films produced by Warner Bros. prior to the formation of the FMPU : 
 The growing demand for training films overwhelmed Warner Bros. and the USAAF established an inhouse film production unit . The FMPU released over 400 films between 1942 and 1945 , many of which have been lost or destroyed . This list is representative of that output : 
 Notes 
 * director * * narrator 
 = Sunsets ( song ) = 
 " Sunsets " is a song released as the third single from Australian rock band Powderfinger 's fifth studio album , Vulture Street . The single was released on 4 January 2004 in Australia and New Zealand . 
 " Sunsets " earned a mixed response from reviewers . Some reviewers praised its appeal and aggression , whilst others appreciated the power ballad elements within it . Others , however , described the song negatively as " lumbering " . " Sunsets " charted moderately , reaching No. 11 on the Australian singles chart . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Vulture Street was recorded and developed over a seven @-@ week period in Sydney , Australia . It was during this time that " Sunsets " was written and produced . Nick DiDia produced the album , as he had done on previous Powderfinger albums including Odyssey Number Five . " Sunsets " was mixed in Atlanta , Georgia , by Brendan <unk> , who had previously worked with DiDia . Fanning described the album during production stages as " a much more dry , direct rock " , but also noted that " just because I rock , doesn 't mean I 'm made of stone " . In that sense , " Sunsets " ( and numerous other songs on Vulture Street ) were seen as emotive , combined with the rock elements Fanning described . 
 In an interview with Undercover magazine , Powderfinger guitarist Darren Middleton described " Sunsets " as one of ( songwriter and lead vocalist ) Bernard Fanning 's older songs . He said it was similar to the acoustic songs on Odyssey Number Five , the band 's previous album . Middleton also said the band worked hard to make " Sunsets " heavy , so that it shared the feel of other songs on the album . In an interview with Rove host Rove McManus , Fanning described Vulture Street as the band wanting to " make a change " and " go back to why [ they ] started playing " . He cited rock and roll from the 1970s as a major influence on the album , especially the work of Led Zeppelin and AC / DC . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Sunsets " was created by the animation studio Liquid Animation . It begins with the following dialogue in yellow : 
 The visual theme for the video is the Chinese legend of <unk> . The video goes on to introduce King Di @-@ Jun , his ten sons ( who are also the Celestial Suns ) , Queen Xi and Warrior Yi . The video shows one of the King 's ten sons being strapped to the back of the jade dragon , but breaks free and the sons made life on Earth unbearable , so the King send the warrior who was introduced earlier to kill them . He succeeds in finding them , and kills all but one . 
 An acoustic video for " Sunsets " is also featured on bonus DVDs for Vulture Street , and Dream Days at the Hotel Existence , as well as the Sunsets DVD single and These Days : Live in Concert " low key " DVD . The video features Bernard Fanning and Darren Middleton playing the song in a rehearsal room . 
 = = Response = = 
 " Sunsets " was received with varying levels of enthusiasm from reviewers . MusicOMH reviewer Simon Evans described " Sunsets " and " Stumblin ' " as some of the more " lumbering " moments on Vulture Street , but still said they contained " a certain earthy appeal " . In his review of Vulture Street , Sputnikmusic contributor James Bishop agreed , calling " Sunsets " the " most successful single from the album " , and praising its emotional impact . 
 Meanwhile , Allmusic 's Vulture Street reviewer , Jason MacNeil , described " Sunsets " as " adorable " , and drew comparisons to The Verve 's " Lucky Man " . Sydney Morning Herald 's Bernard Zuel agreed , praising " Sunsets " as " the new definition of power ballad " , and saying the song contained " open @-@ hearted feeling and well @-@ constructed progression " . 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " Sunsets " 
 " Sunsets " ( acoustic ) 
 " Rita " ( Audio Airlock Demos ) 
 " Not the Only One " ( Studio outtake ) 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = Iván Rodríguez = 
 Iván Rodríguez Torres ( born November 27 , 1971 ) , nicknamed " Pudge " or " I @-@ Rod " is a retired Major League Baseball catcher . In his career , he played for the Texas Rangers ( on two different tours , comprising the majority of his career ) , Florida Marlins , Detroit Tigers , New York Yankees , Houston Astros and Washington Nationals . 
 Rodríguez was awarded the AL MVP award in 1999 . He is widely regarded as one of the best defensive catchers of all time . 
 Rodríguez won the World Series with the Marlins in 2003 , and also played in the 2006 World Series while with the Tigers . On June 17 , 2009 , Rodríguez set an MLB record by catching his <unk> game , passing Carlton Fisk . During his career , he had the best caught stealing percentage of any major league catcher , at 45 @.@ 68 % . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Rodríguez was born and raised in Vega Baja . His father , Juan , worked for a U.S.-based construction company , and his mother , Eva Torres , was an elementary school teacher . Iván 's first job involved delivering flyers in the shopping malls in Puerto Rico . 
 He learned baseball at an early age , his biggest rival being Juan González , who he often played against in his youth . As a Little League player , he moved from pitcher to catcher because his father , who was also his coach , thought he was throwing too hard and scaring opposing players with his pitches . Rodríguez attended Lino Padron Rivera High School , where he was discovered by scout Luis Rosa . Rosa reported that " He showed leadership at 16 that I 'd seen in few kids . He knew where he was going . " Rodríguez signed a contract with the Texas Rangers in July 1988 , at the age of 16 , and began his professional baseball career . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Minor leagues = = = 
 Rodríguez made his professional debut in 1989 at the age of 17 as catcher for the Gastonia Rangers of the South Atlantic League . In his first game , he had three hits in three at @-@ bats ( 3 @-@ for @-@ 3 ) against Spartanburg . Playing in the Florida State League in 1990 , Rodríguez was selected the best catcher in the league and named to the All @-@ Star team . He placed 15th in the league in batting at .287 , and led his team in runs batted in , with 55 . He also played in the Puerto Rican Professional Baseball League ( LBPPR ) over the offseason . 
 At the beginning of the 1991 season , Rodriguez played 50 games with the Tulsa Drillers , a AA team , where he batted .274 in 175 at @-@ bats . He was considered the number one prospect of the Texas League . Before the middle of the season , he was called up to the Texas Rangers , thus bypassing AAA . 
 = = = Texas Rangers = = = 
 Making his debut with the Texas Rangers on June 20 , 1991 , he became the youngest player to catch in a major league game that season at 19 years of age . He immediately established himself as an excellent hitter who was also proficient in throwing out would @-@ be base @-@ stealers . No other catcher in the past 35 years has been as successful at this aspect of the game , with Rodríguez throwing out 48 % of attempted basestealers through May 2006 . He started many of the Rangers games at the end of the season , including 81 of the last 102 . Rodríguez became the youngest player in the history of the Texas Rangers to hit a home run , on August 30 , 1991 , facing the Kansas City Royals and right @-@ hander Storm Davis . He was named to the Major League Baseball ( MLB ) Rookie All @-@ Star team by both Topps and Baseball America and finished in fourth place in the AL Rookie of the Year voting . He also placed first in throwing out runners , catching 48 @.@ 6 percent of runners attempting to steal . 
 In 1992 , Rodríguez started 112 games behind the plate and was the youngest player in the major leagues for the second year in a row . Playing in the Puerto Rico Winter League , he had a .262 batting average playing in 17 games for Mayagüez . In the 1993 season , Rodríguez batted .273 , had 66 runs batted in and hit 10 home runs , ranking fourth , fifth , and fifth on his team respectively . He had a stretch of eight straight hits over two games facing the Kansas City Royals on July 26 and July 28 . He played the final month of the regular season in the Puerto Rican Winter league , where he had a .425 batting average and 14 runs batted in for Mayagüez . Rodríguez was named to the Puerto Rican Winter League all @-@ star team and was also the league Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) . 
 In 1994 , Rodríguez led the American League in batting average among catchers , at .298 . He placed high on his team in many statistics , placing second in batting average ( .298 ) , tied for third in doubles ( 19 ) , and fourth in hits , total bases , runs , home runs , walks , games , and at bats . He also caught Kenny Rogers ' perfect game on 1994 @-@ 07 @-@ 28 . Rodríguez played in the Puerto Rican Winter League over the winter , but he suffered a severe knee injury which kept him from playing for the rest of the season . 
 Playing for the Rangers during the 1995 season , Rodríguez led his team in batting , total bases , and doubles , at .303 , 221 , and 32 respectively . He was named the Texas Rangers ' player of the year . Rodríguez also had his first multi @-@ home run game while playing the Boston Red Sox on July 13 , hitting both off All @-@ Star pitcher Roger Clemens . He also played for Caguas in the Puerto Rican Winter League during the offseason . 
 In 1996 , Rodríguez set an MLB record for most doubles by a catcher , amassing 44 over the course of the season . This broke the previous mark of 42 , set by Mickey Cochrane in 1930 . He also set the major league record for at @-@ bats by a catcher in a single season , with 639 , which surpassed Johnny Bench 's record of 621 in 1970 . He led the Texas Rangers in doubles , at bats , hits , and runs scored . He was selected to the Major League Baseball All @-@ Star team that played a series in Japan against the Japanese all @-@ stars after the season was over . He again played in the Puerto Rican Winter League this season . In the 1997 season , Rodríguez also placed first among catchers in many categories in Major League Baseball . These categories were hits , runs , runs batted in , and doubles . He placed second in home runs among catchers , below only Sandy Alomar , Jr. of the Cleveland Indians , who had 20 home runs . He appeared on the cover of Sports Illustrated on the week of August 4 . This marked the fourth time a player from the Texas Rangers had been on the cover of Sports Illustrated . Rodríguez played in the Puerto Rican Winter League yet again , where he had a .285 batting average , 4 home runs , and <unk> batted in over the course of 32 games playing for Caguas . 
 In the 1998 season , Rodríguez led the Texas Rangers in batting average at .325 , which placed eighth in the American League . He also had 75 multi @-@ hit games and 186 hits , finishing seventh and ninth in MLB respectively . He finished second on the Rangers in hits , total bases , triples , and slugging percentage . Rodríguez was third on the team in doubles , home runs , and stolen bases , and fourth in runs batted in . He had his 1000th hit in a game facing the Cleveland Indians on May 10 of that season . Rodríguez also became the first catcher in the history of Major League Baseball to have two or more seasons with 40 or more doubles . He was selected to the American League All @-@ Star Team again , and he was also named to all @-@ star teams by the Associated Press , The Sporting News , and Baseball America . 
 In 1999 , Rodríguez was selected as the American League MVP . He set a new American League record for home runs in a single season among catchers with 35 . Rodríguez was also the first catcher to have more than 30 home runs , 100 runs batted in , and 100 runs scored in the history of Major League Baseball . In addition , he holds the distinction of being the first catcher in the history of the league to amass more than 20 home runs and 20 stolen bases . From May 8 , 1999 to June 1 , 1999 , Rodríguez had a career high 20 game hitting streak . He had 25 stolen bases , which was fifth most among catchers in the history of the league . He led the league in times grounded into a double play , with 31 . Rodríguez was only the ninth catcher in the history of Major League Baseball to win the Most Valuable Player award , and he was the first to win it since Thurman Munson in 1976 . He was named on all of the ballots , getting seven first place votes and six second place votes . Rodríguez was the sixth Puerto Rican to win the award , and the fourth player from the Texas Rangers to win it . He also won the Silver Slugger Award for the sixth time in a row and was selected Most Valuable Player by Baseball Digest . He was again named to all @-@ star teams by the Associated Press , The Sporting News , and Baseball America . While he was hitting home runs , he wasn 't taking many walks . He is one of only six players active in 2009 who have had at least 30 home runs in a season in which they had more homers than walks ( 34 HR , 24 BB in 1999 ) . The others are Alfonso Soriano ( 39 – 23 in 2002 , 36 – 33 in 2005 , 33 – 31 in 2007 ) , Garret Anderson ( 35 – 24 in 2000 ) , Ryan Braun ( 34 – 29 in 2007 ) , Joe Crede ( 30 – 28 in 2006 ) , and José Guillén ( 31 – 24 in 2003 ) . 
 In 2000 , Rodríguez suffered a season @-@ ending injury in a game against the Anaheim Angels . While trying to make a throw to second base , his thumb made contact with the swing of Mo Vaughn 's bat . He fractured his right thumb and underwent surgery the next day . This injury caused him to miss the rest of the season . Rodríguez appeared in just 91 games , which was the fewest that he appeared in since his first season in the league , 1991 . His nine home runs in April matched a team record that was shared ( through 2008 ) with Alex Rodriguez ( 2002 ) , Carl Everett ( 2003 ) , and Ian Kinsler ( 2007 ) . Even though he was injured , he was still named to the second @-@ team of Baseball America 's Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Team . 
 Rodríguez returned to full action in 2001 and had another all @-@ star season . He was selected to his ninth straight MLB All @-@ Star Game , which tied the all @-@ time record set by Johnny Bench . He also tied Bench 's record of ten straight Rawlings Gold Glove Awards in a row . He batted .308 , making 2001 his seventh straight season with a batting average of over .300 . He had 25 home runs , 136 hits , and 65 runs batted in . 
 Rodríguez 's final year with the Texas Rangers came in 2002 . His .314 batting average was seventh best among American League players . This was his eighth season in a row with batting average of .300 or above . He also had 32 doubles , 2 triples , and 60 runs batted in while playing in 108 games for the Rangers . Rodríguez was placed on the disabled list on April 23 after suffering a herniated disk on April 15 . The injury did not require surgery , and he rehabilitated while playing for Class @-@ A Charlotte . He later returned to the Rangers and played there for the remainder of the season . After the 2002 season his contract with Texas ran out and he became a free agent . 
 = = = Florida Marlins = = = 
 Before the 2003 season Rodríguez signed with the Florida Marlins . By then a major @-@ league veteran of over a decade , he helped lead the young team to victory in the World Series . During the 2003 regular season , he set many Marlins single season records for a catcher , such as batting average , at .297 , and runs batted in , at 85 . On March 31 , Rodríguez became the tenth Marlins player ever to hit a home run in the team 's first game of the season . On April 8 , he set a Marlins single game record by drawing five walks in a game against the New York Mets . He had a nine @-@ game hitting streak from June 24 to July 2 , during which he batted .500 with seven doubles , two triples , and four home runs . From June 24 to July 1 , he drove in a run in eight consecutive games , another single season record for the Florida Marlins . In the post @-@ season , he was named National League Championship Series Most Valuable Player for the first time in his career . He also closed out the National League Division Series by holding onto the ball during a dramatic game @-@ ending collision at the plate with J. T. Snow in Game Four . He chose not to return to the Marlins following the 2003 season . 
 = = = Detroit Tigers = = = 
 Before the 2004 season Rodríguez signed a 4 @-@ year , $ 40 million contract with the Detroit Tigers . In 2004 , he was selected to the MLB All @-@ Star Game for the 11th time in his career and for his 10th time as a starting player , joining Johnny Bench and Mike Piazza as the only Major League Baseball catchers to start an All @-@ Star game 10 times or more in their career . During the month of June , he batted .500 and was named the American League Player of the Month . He also won his 11th consecutive Rawlings Gold Glove Award , making him the first player on the Detroit Tigers to win the award since Gary Pettis won it in 1989 . He won his seventh career Silver Slugger Award , tied with Víctor Martínez of the Cleveland Indians . He was fourth in the American League in batting average and fourth among all Major League Baseball catchers . On October 1 , he recorded his 1,000th career RBI in a game against the Tampa Bay Devil Rays . 
 Prior to the 2005 season , Jose Canseco , in his controversial book Juiced , claimed to have personally injected Rodríguez with anabolic steroids during their time as teammates on the Texas Rangers . Rodríguez denied the allegations and said he was " in shock " over Canseco claims . Asked by a reporter four years later whether his name is on the list of 104 players who tested positive for steroids during baseball 's 2003 survey testing , Rodríguez responded , " Only God knows . " 
 Despite the off @-@ season controversy , the 2005 season turned out to be another All @-@ Star year for Rodríguez . He was selected to the Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Game for the twelfth time in his career , and he participated in the Century 21 Home Run Derby on the day before the All @-@ Star game , finishing second to Bobby Abreu of the Philadelphia Phillies in his home stadium of Comerica Park . By the end of the season , he batted .276 with 14 home runs and 50 runs batted in . On October 26 , 2005 , Major League Baseball named him the catcher on their Latino Legends Team . 
 In 2006 , Rodríguez returned to throwing out runners attempting to steal a base at a very high percentage , as he did in his earlier career ; he was first in the league in this category , throwing out 45 @.@ 7 percent of all runners attempting to steal a base . On May 9 , 2006 , Rodríguez played first base for the Tigers . That game , a 7 – 6 loss to the Baltimore Orioles , was the first time that he played a position other than catcher in his 1 @,@ 914 Major League games . On August 15 , 2006 , he also made his first Major League appearance at second base after regular second baseman Plácido Polanco was injured in a game in Boston . Rodríguez was honored with a Fielding Bible Award as the best fielding catcher in MLB in 2006 . Rodríguez would help the Tigers upset the Yankees in the 2006 ALDS and the A 's in the 2006 ALCS to help Detroit win the pennant . 
 On April 16 , 2007 , he batted in 6 runs on the way to a 12 – 5 victory over the Kansas City Royals . On June 12 he caught Justin Verlander 's first no @-@ hitter , the second no @-@ hitter he caught in his career . In 2007 , Rodríguez walked in only 1 @.@ 8 percent of his plate appearances , the lowest percentage in the major leagues . On October 9 , the Tigers announced that they were picking up the fifth @-@ year , 13 @-@ million @-@ dollar option on Rodríguez 's contract , keeping him on the Tigers team through at least the 2008 season . The team could have bought out the option for three million dollars and allowed him to become a free agent . 
 In spring training in 2008 he led the major leagues with eight home runs . On April 10 against Boston , he got his 2,500th hit . 
 = = = New York Yankees = = = 
 On July 30 , 2008 , Rodríguez was traded to the New York Yankees for relief pitcher Kyle Farnsworth after starting Yankee catcher Jorge Posada had season @-@ ending surgery . While Rodríguez wanted to leave Detroit due to Tigers manager Jim Leyland 's decision to use rotating catchers , he wound up sharing catching duties with back @-@ up Yankee catcher José Molina , starting only 26 of the remaining 55 games of the 2008 season . With his customary number 7 having been retired by the Yankees for Mickey Mantle , Rodríguez changed his jersey number to 12 . He finished the year with a .278 batting average with his time on the Yankees being his worst part of the season . 
 = = = Return to Puerto Rican League = = = 
 In preparation for the 2009 World Baseball Classic , Rodríguez returned to the Puerto Rico Baseball League ( formerly LBPPR ) during the offseason , following ten years of absence . Playing for the Criollos de Caguas , he gathered a batting average of .370 with three runs batted in and one home run in six games during the regular season . Upon leaving the team on vacation , Rodríguez noted that his intention was to return to action if the Criollos advanced to the playoffs . He returned to action in a " sudden death " game for the final postseason space , but the team lost and was eliminated . On January 8 , 2008 , the Leones de Ponce reclaimed Rodríguez in the last turn of a special post @-@ season draft , where players from eliminated teams were selected to reinforce those that qualified . In the first week of December 2009 , Rodríguez re @-@ joined the Criollos de Caguas in the <unk> . 
 = = = Houston Astros = = = 
 On March 20 , 2009 , Rodríguez signed a one @-@ year deal worth $ 1 @.@ 5 million with the Houston Astros . Rodríguez was given the opportunity to make an additional $ 1 @.@ 5 million in performance bonuses . In a situation similar to his tenure with the Yankees , his customary number 7 had been retired by the Astros in honor of Craig Biggio , so Rodríguez initially wore jersey number 12 , then later changed to number 77 mid @-@ season . 
 On May 17 , 2009 , Rodríguez hit his 300th career home run off of Chicago Cubs pitcher Rich Harden at Wrigley Field . On June 17 , 2009 , Rodríguez passed Carlton Fisk for the most games caught in a career ; the game was against his former team ( the Rangers ) at Rangers Ballpark in Arlington . 
 = = = Second stint with Rangers = = = 
 On August 18 , 2009 , Rodríguez was traded to the Texas Rangers for minor league reliever Matt Nevarez and two PTBNL . Teammate David Murphy switched his uniform number to # 14 so Rodríguez could wear the # 7 he previously wore with the Rangers . In his first game with the Rangers , Rodríguez went 3 @-@ for @-@ 4 with an RBI double and two singles . He hit his first home run with the Rangers since 2002 on August 29 , a solo shot against Minnesota Twins reliever José Mijares . 
 He finished the 2009 season ranked first in major league history with 13 @,@ 910 putouts as a catcher , ahead of Brad Ausmus ( 12 @,@ 671 ) . 
 = = = Washington Nationals = = = 
 Following the 2009 season , Rodríguez filed for free agency , declining the Rangers ' offer of salary arbitration . On December 11 , 2009 , Rodríguez signed a 2 @-@ year , $ 6 million contract with the Washington Nationals . 
 Rodríguez hit his first home run as a member of the Nationals on May 6 against Tim Hudson of the Atlanta Braves . Facing the New York Mets at Citi Field four days later , he went 4 @-@ for @-@ 4 and drove in the eventual game @-@ winning RBI . On May 24 , Rodríguez was hitting .325 , but was placed on the 15 @-@ day disabled list due to a back sprain . 
 On June 8 , 2010 , Rodríguez returned from the DL in time to catch for Stephen Strasburg 's Major League debut . In this debut , Strasburg struck out 14 batters and walked none over seven complete innings . This game has already been dubbed as one of the greatest major league pitching debuts of all time . In a postgame interview , Pudge reacted that " [ e ] verybody [ was ] impressed with what this kid did . " 
 Rodríguez platooned at the catching duties for the Nationals with Wilson Ramos . 
 = = World Baseball Classic = = 
 Rodríguez represented Puerto Rico in the 2006 World Baseball Classic . Rodríguez was one of several Major League Baseball players that committed to represent their birthplaces before the organization of the tournament . He also played for Puerto Rico in the 2009 World Baseball Classic and was named to the classic 's All @-@ Tournament Team . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Rodríguez announced his retirement on April 18 , 2012 . He signed a one @-@ day contract with the Rangers on April 23 , retiring as a member of the team . Rodriguez also threw out the ceremonial first pitch during the Rangers home game against the New York Yankees . Instead of throwing out the ceremonial first pitch from the mound , he went to his usual position behind the plate and threw from behind home plate to second base to Michael Young . Rodriguez was inducted into the Texas Sports Hall of Fame on February 27 , 2014 . He also joined FOX Sports Southwest in 2014 as an analyst for pre and postgame television coverage . 
 In 2017 Rodríguez will become eligible for induction into the Baseball Hall of Fame . Richard Justice of MLB.com has argued that he is " unquestionably " a Hall of Fame @-@ caliber player , writing on <unk> in 2012 that he batted better than .290 with more than 2 @,@ 500 hits , 550 doubles , 300 home runs and 1 @,@ 300 RBI , an accomplishment equaled only by four all @-@ time greats : Hank Aaron , George Brett , Babe Ruth and Barry Bonds . ( This statement was incorrect , as Stan Musial also met and far surpassed all of those numbers . Incidentally , in 2013 , the year following Justice 's publication of this article , Todd Helton had met all five of these criteria as well , and among active players , Albert Pujols joined this club in 2015 upon hitting his 550th double . ) However , Justice acknowledges that like Bonds , Rodríguez may have difficulty winning election to the Hall of Fame due to suspicion that he used steroids during his career . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Rodríguez has three children : Iván Derrek ( b . 06 @-@ 05 @-@ 1992 ) , who was picked in the 6th round of the 2011 MLB draft by the Minnesota Twins , Amanda Christine ( b . 06 @-@ 21 @-@ 1995 ) and <unk> Sofia ( b . 01 @-@ 12 @-@ 2000 ) . The family divided their time between <unk> , Texas , Miami , Florida and Puerto Rico . In 1993 , Rodríguez and his wife founded the Ivan " Pudge " Rodríguez Foundation , whose purpose is to help families in Puerto Rico , Dallas and Fort Worth , Texas . Rodríguez has also stated that the Make @-@ a @-@ Wish Foundation is one of his charities of choice . Their fifteen @-@ year marriage ended in 2006 . Rodríguez remarried in 2007 . Rodríguez 's appreciation of recording artist Yanni was pointed out during the 2003 World Series and the 2004 All @-@ Star Game by Fox Sports . 
 = Fulvous whistling duck = 
 The fulvous whistling duck or fulvous tree duck ( Dendrocygna bicolor ) is a whistling duck that breeds across the world 's tropical regions in much of Mexico and South America , the West Indies , the southern US , sub @-@ Saharan Africa and the Indian subcontinent . It has mainly reddish brown plumage , long legs and a long grey bill , and shows a distinctive white band across its black tail in flight . Like other members of its ancient lineage , it has a whistling call which is given in flight or on the ground . The preferred habitat is shallow lakes , paddy fields or other wetlands with plentiful vegetation . 
 The nest , built from plant material and unlined , is placed among dense vegetation or in a tree hole . The typical clutch is around ten whitish eggs . The breeding adults , which pair for life , take turns to incubate , and the eggs hatch in 24 – 29 days . The downy grey ducklings leave the nest within a day or so of hatching , but the parents continue to protect them until they fledge around nine weeks later . 
 The fulvous whistling duck feeds in wetlands by day or night on seeds and other parts of plants . It is sometimes regarded as a pest of rice cultivation , and is also shot for food in parts of its range . Despite hunting , poisoning by pesticides and natural predation by mammals , birds and reptiles , the large numbers and huge range of this duck mean that it is classified as Least Concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The whistling ducks , Dendrocygna , are a distinctive group of eight bird species within the duck , goose and swan family Anatidae , which are characterised by a hump @-@ backed , long @-@ necked appearance and the whistled flight calls that give them their English name . They were an early split from the main duck lineage , and were predominant in the Late Miocene before the subsequent extensive radiation of more modern forms in the Pliocene and later . The fulvous whistling duck forms a superspecies with the wandering whistling duck . It has no recognised subspecies , although the birds in northern Mexico and the southern US have in the past been assigned to D. b. <unk> , described as having paler and brighter underparts and a lighter crown than D. b. bicolor . 
 The duck was first described by Johann Friedrich Gmelin in 1789 and given the name Anas fulva but the name was " preoccupied , " or already used , by Friedrich Christian <unk> in 1787 for another species . This led to the next available name proposed by French ornithologist Louis Jean Pierre Vieillot in 1816 from a Paraguayan specimen as Anas bicolor The whistling ducks were moved to their current genus , Dendrocygna , by British ornithologist William John Swainson in recognition of their differences from other ducks . The genus name is derived from the Ancient Greek dendron , " tree " , and Latin <unk> , " swan " , and bicolor is Latin for " two @-@ coloured " . " Fulvous " means reddish @-@ yellow , and is derived from the Latin equivalent fulvus . Old and regional names include large whistling teal , brown tree duck , Mexican duck , <unk> and Spanish cavalier . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fulvous whistling duck is 45 – 53 cm ( 18 – 21 in ) long ; the male weighs 748 – 1 @,@ 050 g ( 26 @.@ 4 – 37 @.@ 0 oz ) , and the female averages marginally lighter at 712 – 1 @,@ 000 g ( 25 @.@ 1 – 35 @.@ 3 oz ) . It is a long @-@ legged duck , mainly golden @-@ brown with a darker back and an obvious blackish line down the back of its neck . It has whitish stripes on its flanks , a long grey bill and grey legs . In flight , the wings are brown above and black below , with no white markings , and a white crescent on the rump contrasts with the black tail . All plumages are fairly similar , but the female is slightly smaller and duller @-@ plumaged than the male . The juvenile has paler underparts , and appears generally duller , especially on the flanks . There is a complete wing moult after breeding , and birds then seek the cover of dense wetland vegetation while they are flightless . Body feathers may be moulted throughout the year , although each feather is replaced only once annually . 
 These are noisy birds with a clear whistling kee @-@ wee @-@ ooo call given on the ground or in flight . <unk> birds also have a harsh repeated kee . In flight , the beating wings produce a dull sound . The calls of males and females show differences in structure and an acoustic analysis on 59 captive birds demonstrated 100 % accuracy in sexing when compared with molecular methods . 
 Adult birds in Asia can be confused with the similar lesser whistling duck , although that species is smaller , has a blackish crown and lacks an obvious dark stripe down the back of the neck . Juvenile fulvous whistling ducks are very like young lesser whistling ducks , but the crown colour is still a distinction . Juvenile comb ducks are bulkier than whistling ducks and have a dark cap to the head . In South America and Africa , juvenile white @-@ faced whistling ducks are separable from fulvous by their dark crowns , barred flanks and chestnut breasts . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The fulvous whistling duck has a very large range extending across four continents . It breeds in lowland South America from northern Argentina to Colombia and then up to the southern US and the West Indies . It is found in a broad belt across sub @-@ Saharan Africa and down the east of the continent to South Africa and Madagascar . The Indian subcontinent is the Asian stronghold . 
 It undertakes seasonal movements in response to the availability of water and food . African birds move southwards in the southern summer to breed and return north in the winter , and Asian populations are highly nomadic due to the variability of rainfall . This species has strong colonising tendencies , having expanded its range in Mexico , the US and the West Indies in recent decades . Wandering birds can turn up far beyond the normal range , sometimes staying to nest , as in Morocco , Peru and Hawaii . 
 The fulvous whistling duck is found in lowland marshes and swamps in open , flat country , and it avoids wooded areas . It is particularly attracted to wetlands with plenty of emergent vegetation , including rice fields . It is not normally a mountain species , breeding in Venezuela , for example , only up 300 m ( 980 ft ) , but the single Peruvian breeding record was at 4 @,@ 080 m ( 13 @,@ 390 ft ) . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 This species is usually found in small groups , although substantial flocks can form at favoured sites . It walks well , without waddling , and although it normally feeds by upending , it can dive if necessary . It does not often perch in trees , unlike other whistling ducks . It flies at low altitude with slow wingbeats and trailing feet , in loose flocks rather than tight formation . It feeds during the day and at night in fairly large flocks , often with other whistling duck species , but rests or sleeps in smaller groups in the middle of the day . They are noisy and display their aggression towards other individuals by throwing back their heads . Before taking off in alarm , they often shake their head sideways . 
 A number of arthropod parasites have been recorded on this duck , including chewing mites of the families <unk> and <unk> , feather mites and skin mites . Internal helminth parasites include roundworms , tapeworms and flukes . In a survey in Florida , all 30 ducks tested carried at least two helminth species , although none had blood parasites . Only one duck had no mites or lice . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Breeding coincides with the availability of water . In South America and South Africa , the main nesting period is December – February , in Nigeria it is July – December , and in North America mid @-@ May – August . In India , the breeding season is from June to October but peaking in July and August . Fulvous whistling ducks show lifelong monogamy , although the courtship display is limited to some mutual head @-@ dipping before mating and a short dance after copulation in which the birds raise their bodies side @-@ by @-@ side while treading water . 
 Pairs may breed alone or in loose groups . In South Africa , nests may be within 50 m ( 160 ft ) of each other , and breeding densities of up to 13 @.@ 7 nests per square kilometre ( 35 @.@ 5 per square mile ) have been found in Louisiana . The nest , 19 – 26 cm ( 7 @.@ 5 – 10 @.@ 2 in ) across , is made from plant leaves and stems and has little or no soft lining . It is usually built in dense vegetation and close to water , but sometimes in tree holes . In India , the use of tree holes , and even the old nests of raptors or crows , is much more common than elsewhere . Eggs are laid at roughly 24- to 36 @-@ hour intervals , starting before the nest is complete , resulting in some losses from the clutch . They are whitish and on average measure 53 @.@ 4 mm × 40 @.@ 7 mm ( 2 @.@ 10 in × 1 @.@ 60 in ) and weigh 50 @.@ 4 g ( 1 @.@ 78 oz ) . The clutch is usually around ten eggs , but other females sometimes lay into the nest , so 20 or more may be found on occasion . Eggs may also be added to the nests of other species , like ruddy duck . 
 Both sexes incubate , changing over once a day , with the male often taking the greater share of this duty . The eggs hatch in about 24 – 29 days , The downy ducklings are grey , with paler upperparts , and a white band on the neck , and weigh 22 – 38 g ( 0 @.@ 78 – 1 @.@ 34 oz ) within a day of hatching . Like all ducklings , they are precocial and leave the nest after a day or so , but the parents protect them until they fledge around nine weeks later . Eggs and duckling may be preyed on by mammals , birds and reptiles , although one parent may try to distract a potential predator with a broken @-@ wing display while the other adult leads the ducklings away . Birds are sexually mature after one year , and the maximum known age is 6 @.@ 5 years . 
 In South Africa , a few records of hybridization with the white @-@ faced whistling duck have been noted in the wild , although in most parts of southern Africa , the two species breed at different times , bicolor during the dry season ( April to September ) and <unk> during the rains ( October to March ) . Hybridization in captivity is more frequent but limited to other species in the genus Dendrocygna . 
 = = Feeding = = 
 The fulvous whistling duck feeds in wetlands by day or night , often in mixed flocks with relatives such as white @-@ faced or black @-@ bellied whistling ducks . Its food is generally plant material , including seeds , bulbs , grasses and stems , but females may include animal items such as aquatic worms , molluscs and insects as they prepare for egg @-@ laying , which may then comprise up to 4 % of their diet . Ducklings may also eat a few insects . Foraging is by picking plant items while walking or swimming , by upending , or occasionally by diving to a depth of up to 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) . Favoured plants include water snowflake , aquatic <unk> , <unk> millet , <unk> grass , Cape blue water lily , waxy @-@ leaf nightshade , <unk> , flatsedge and <unk> . Rice is normally a small part of the diet , and a survey in Cuban rice fields found that the plants taken were mainly weeds growing with the crop . However , in a study in Louisiana , 25 % of the diet of incubating females consisted of the cereal . 
 = = Status = = 
 The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) estimates the population of the fulvous whistling duck to be from 1 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 5 million individuals . This may be an underestimate since regional assessments suggest 1 million birds in the Americas , 1 @.@ 1 million in Africa and at least 20 @,@ 000 in South Asia . Although the population appear to be declining , the decrease is not rapid enough to trigger the vulnerability criteria . The large numbers and huge breeding range mean that this duck is classified by the IUCN as being of Least Concern . It is one of the species to which the Agreement on the Conservation of African @-@ Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds ( AEWA ) applies . 
 The fulvous whistling duck has expanded its range in the West Indies , and into the southern US . A series of invasions from South America and reaching the eastern US commenced around 1948 , fueled by rice cultivation , and breeding was recorded in Cuba in 1964 , and Florida in 1965 . Some Florida birds still winter in Cuba . In Africa , it bred on the Cape Peninsula between 1940 and the 1960s . A survey of eighteen species which had colonised the area in recent decades found that most were wetland species that had used irrigated farmland as " stepping stones " across the arid country separating the peninsula from the breeding main range . However , the status of the two whistling duck species featured in the research is dubious since they are popular ornamental species , so their origin is unclear . 
 Outside North America it is subject to hunting for food or because of its liking for rice , and persecution means that it is now rare in Madagascar . Pesticides used on rice fields may also have an adverse impact , causing liver and breast muscle damage even at sub @-@ lethal levels . 
 = By Your Side ( The Black Crowes album ) = 
 By Your Side is the fifth studio album by American rock band The Black Crowes . It was released in early 1999 on Columbia Records , following the band 's move from American Recordings , after second guitarist Marc Ford and bassist Johnny Colt had left the band in 1997 . Audley Freed and Sven Pipien were hired as the new guitarist and bassist , respectively , although Rich Robinson played all the guitar parts on the album . By Your Side was recorded in New York City during the second quarter of 1998 and produced by Kevin Shirley . It comprised songs written in the studio , revised songs from pre @-@ production and re @-@ recorded songs from the abandoned 1997 album Band . 
 The Black Crowes promoted By Your Side by performing on numerous television programs in North America and Europe . The album debuted at its peak position of number 26 on the Billboard 200 and generally received positive reviews . While some critics depreciated By Your Side for its similarity to albums by Rod Stewart and The Rolling Stones , most reviewers lauded The Black Crowes ' return to the straightforward approach of their debut album , Shake Your Money Maker ( 1990 ) . Chris Robinson 's singing and Rich 's guitar playing also won praise from critics , though reviews of the lyrics were mixed . 
 Beginning in February 1999 , the band toured North American theaters for two months in support of the album . <unk> from the tour , known as the " Souled Out Tour " , typically included more than half the album 's songs . The concerts were followed by a short co @-@ headlining tour of US amphitheaters with Lenny Kravitz . The band spent the remainder of the summer opening for Aerosmith 's European tour . 
 = = Background = = 
 Personnel changes and label interference frustrated The Black Crowes ' attempts to follow up their 1996 album Three Snakes and One Charm . During May and June 1997 , they recorded an album called Band , but it was rejected by their label , American Recordings . Lead singer Chris Robinson said American " couldn 't go with the vibe " and wanted something more " safe " . In August , guitarist Marc Ford was fired due to a heroin habit that impaired his performances . Guitarist Rich Robinson said , " We would be onstage playing ' Remedy ' , and he would be playing a completely different song .... We told him to clean up or get out . We assumed , since he loved music and the band , that he would clean up . " Bassist Johnny Colt had been losing interest in the band since the recording of Three Snakes and One Charm ; his contributions to that album were minimal , as Rich played bass in his stead on all but one track . Colt quit in October to become a yoga instructor . 
 Sven Pipien was hired in December to replace Colt . Pipien had previously played with Mary My Hope and had been a housemate of Chris . Audley Freed was hired as the second guitarist before a 1998 tour in support of the band 's Sho ' Nuff box set . Recording sessions for By Your Side were well underway at this point , and continued after the tour , but Freed did not contribute to the album . Chris said of the new members , " It 's great . These guys want to be here — and we feed off of that . And that will become obvious when you see us on the road . " 
 American Recordings was partially absorbed by Columbia Records in early 1998 . Though the arrangement preserved the American label , The Black Crowes transferred to Columbia after privately expressing their desire to disassociate themselves from American Recordings founder Rick Rubin . Despite working under a larger label , the band felt they had more freedom and support under Columbia ; Chris remarked , " At American , I never knew what a record company did . We never had an A & R guy . Now we have a product manager .... It 's like ... I didn 't know what the music business was . " 
 = = Writing and production = = 
 Pre @-@ production for By Your Side began in December 1997 with songs that later underwent substantial revision or were dropped altogether . Early versions of " HorseHead " and " It Must Be Over " were recorded at this point , and a reworked riff from " Every Little Bit " and some lyrics from " Tickle Tickle " were later incorporated into " Heavy " . Some of the songs ultimately dropped , such as " Baby " and " Bled to Death " , were later rewritten by Rich for his debut solo album , Paper ( 2004 ) . More songs were introduced in January 1998 , including " Red Wine Stains " , which eventually became " Go Faster " , and an early version of " Virtue and Vice " . Some unused sections from this batch were borrowed for Paper , as well , including the main riffs of what became " Tomorrow Is Here " and " Thrown It All Away " . 
 Producer Kevin Shirley was brought in on the advice of Aerosmith guitarist Joe Perry . As Rich explained , " We really wanted to work with someone who can come in and say , ' That 's not good . ' ... If Kevin says something I disagree with , he 'll be the first one to say , ' Hey , it 's your song , ' but it 's healthy for me and Chris to have him come in and be as excited about our songs as we are and say , ' Okay , that 's cool , but what if we tried this ? ' " At his first meeting with the band , Shirley described the songs played for him as having " the same old jammy , shuffle feel of the last two records . I stopped them then and I said to them ... ' You 've got to feel like you 're teenagers again . You need a song like that . ' " Shirley 's prompting led the band to write " Kickin ' My Heart Around " on the spot , before he had signed on to produce . Rich agreed that Shirley shifted the focus to making " a rock record " that was " focused and concise " . 
 The band hired Shirley and agreed to his recording conditions , which meant recording in New York City at Avatar Studios , taking weekends off and recording from 1 : 00 – 8 : 00 pm . Chris said of the rigid schedule , " We loved it .... We had lives other than just being in the studio 24 hours a day , seven days a week . Got a different vantage point on the whole thing . " Shirley 's laid @-@ back style also won praise from the band . " Kevin is the first guy that I 've worked with that just went with it — especially my singing . A lot of this album is just my scratch vocals . It 's very loose , and Kevin let it go .... He 'd say , if we didn 't get it in two or three takes , ' We 'll come back tomorrow ' " , said Chris . Of the album 's lyrical bent , Chris said , " ... there is a lot of love on it , and I 've never written love songs . I do think having a muse in my life like the woman I 'm with now helped .... I think there 's also a lot of humor on this album , which is something we haven 't touched on before , except maybe on Shake Your Money Maker , which was a lighter time and a lighter mood . " There was also a conscious effort to " simplify the language " , which was inspired by Chris 's listening to music by Otis Redding , George Jones and Muddy Waters . " I realized how direct and honest those records were – and I wanted that here " , said Chris . 
 For the first time on a Black Crowes album , Rich was the only guitarist involved in the recording . He said recording that way was not a challenge because he recorded most of the guitar parts on Three Snakes and One Charm , as well . Rich also noted that having only one guitarist gives the band " a different dynamic " because it affords Pipien and keyboardist Eddie Harsch " a lot of space " . Chris praised his brother 's performance , saying , " It sounds like there 's two guitarists , two distinct personalities . " 
 Fifteen songs were recorded in the second quarter of 1998 during the main recording session with Kevin Shirley . Some were updated versions of songs from pre @-@ production ; a few were totally new ; others combined newly written music with parts from older , shelved songs . The main riff of a Three Snakes and One Charm leftover called " Pastoral " , for example , was used for the B @-@ side " You Don 't Have to Go " , while its chorus riff was borrowed for " Then She Said My Name " . Four of the songs were holdovers from the Band sessions : " Only a Fool " and " If It Ever Stops Raining " were included on the album ( the latter with new chorus lyrics as " By Your Side " ) , while " Peace Anyway " and " Smile " were released as B @-@ sides . One cover song , Bob Dylan 's " When the Night Comes Falling from the Sky " , was recorded during the session and later released as a B @-@ side . 
 While touring in support of Sho ' Nuff , Chris and Rich finished writing " Diamond Ring " and " Go Tell the Congregation " . The two songs were recorded after the tour during a planned session for putting finishing touches on By Your Side , though the decision delayed the album 's release from November 17 to January 12 . Rich said , " It 's cool that Columbia Records is backing us on an artistic level and they 're being open to all the hassles that come with moving an album into the new year . I know we 're driving them insane with these last @-@ minute changes , but we know it 's all for the right reasons . " After finishing the album , Chris noted that it " has the same sort of energy " as Shake Your Money Maker , " ... but there is much more to it . There are a lot of subtleties in these songs . These are rock ' n ' roll songs with subversive pop hooks . " 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 The Black Crowes began promoting By Your Side in September 1998 when they performed at the Hard Rock Cafe in New York City for an episode of the VH1 show Hard Rock Live ; the episode aired on December 12 . The first noticeable instance of promotion was Columbia 's release of " Kickin ' My Heart Around " as the album 's first single on November 2 , 1998 . The track spent ten weeks at its peak position of number 3 on the Billboard Mainstream Rock Tracks chart starting on November 28 ; it also charted in Canada and the UK . The band 's next promotional event was a performance and interview for a live album premiere radio broadcast on January 6 . On January 11 , the Crowes performed " Kickin ' My Heart Around " on the Late Show with David Letterman . 
 By Your Side was released on January 12 , 1999 . The album 's cover art is a blue @-@ tinted nighttime photograph of the band , all dressed in white and standing in front of a lake . The band name is rendered in tiny white lights above their heads , and other small white lights are scattered at their feet . In keeping with the tiny lights theme , the back of the booklet shows a satellite image of the United States at night , in which densely populated areas can be discerned by light pollution , and the booklet contains drawings of constellations . The album 's disc artwork is designed after a centaur with a crow 's head in place of the man 's head . 
 On the day the album was released , the band appeared at a Tower Records store in Manhattan to sign autographs and give away 1 @,@ 000 tickets to that night 's private show at Irving Plaza . By Your Side debuted at its peak position of number 26 on the Billboard 200 on January 30 . The album has sold 271 @,@ 000 copies in the US as of January 2002 . The next two weeks were filled with radio and television appearances in Canada , Belgium , France , Sweden , and Italy . The Black Crowes returned to the US to perform during pre @-@ game festivities at Joe Robbie Stadium before Super Bowl XXXIII on January 31 . While on tour in support of the album in February , the band performed the second single , " Only a Fool " , on Late Night with Conan O 'Brien . The single was released in mid @-@ February and peaked at number 7 on the Billboard Mainstream Rock Tracks chart . The accompanying promotional video was directed by " Weird Al " Yankovic . After an early April stop at an Atlanta radio station where the band played a half @-@ hour acoustic set , The Black Crowes made a third late night television appearance at the end of that month , playing the album 's third single , " Go Faster " , on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno . " Go Faster " peaked at number 24 on the Mainstream Rock Tracks chart in July . Also in late April , Chris Robinson promoted By Your Side in an interview on The Daily Show with Jon Stewart . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 By Your Side was generally well received by critics . Regarding the songwriting , most reviewers praised The Black Crowes for returning to the straightforwardness of Shake Your Money Maker ( 1990 ) following the more adventuresome <unk> ( 1994 ) and Three Snakes and One Charm . Gemma <unk> of The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel welcomed the album " because it represents a great band 's return to what it does best " , calling it " 45 minutes of good , dirty fun " . Wall of Sound 's Russell Hall found that the band 's emergence from " the jam @-@ band haze that 's infected " their recent work resulted in a " laser @-@ sharp focus " . Mark Falkner of The Florida Times @-@ Union said that beyond the band 's mastery of their influences ' musical styles , what prevents them " from being just another tribute act is that they have ( also ) mastered the power , the passion and the fun that made the mix work " . Some critics , also noting the change in approach , derided the band for returning to mine the same influences perceived in their debut album . Jim Farber of the Daily News thus described By Your Side as " a copy @-@ of @-@ a @-@ copy @-@ of @-@ a @-@ copy " and marked " Go Faster " a sped @-@ up version of Humble Pie 's " Hot ' n ' Nasty " . The Times ' Nigel Williamson called " HorseHead " " <unk> " and labeled " By Your Side " " a kicking boogie half way between [ the Faces ' ] ' Cindy Incidentally ' and [ The Rolling Stones ' ] ' Tumbling Dice ' " . Steve Dougherty of People summed up by commenting , " Purists will wonder why to buy this album when [ The Rolling Stones ' ] 1972 Exile on Main Street or [ Rod ] Stewart 's 1970 Gasoline Alley exist on CD . " 
 On some tracks , the influence of soul music was perceived . Richard Harrington of The Washington Post wrote that " Only a Fool " " conjures ' 60s @-@ era Stax @-@ Volt passions while Robinson 's jubilant vocals evoke Redding 's rough @-@ edged insistence " and compared " Diamond Ring " to Al Green 's work . The Dirty Dozen Brass Band 's playing on " Welcome to the Goodtimes " was called " infectious " by Wayne Bledsoe of The Knoxville News @-@ Sentinel . 
 The musical performances and sound of the album were frequently hailed by critics . Lorraine Ali of Rolling Stone identified Rich Robinson 's guitar playing as " brilliant in spots , letting it rip with Southern @-@ rock abandon or lazy , drawling slide guitar " . Allmusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine praised the band 's retention of the sonic detail from <unk> , and Jane Stevenson of the Toronto Sun appreciated the " soulful " backing vocals throughout . Echoing those sentiments was CMJ , which noted the " lazy slide @-@ guitar textures , harmonica moans and choirs of soulful singers " , but also stated " Chris Robinson 's gritty , cocksure vocals blaze the trail . " Stephen Thompson of The A.V. Club called Robinson 's vocal performance on " HorseHead " " an inflection @-@ for @-@ inflection imitation of ... Billy Squier " ; elsewhere on the album Robinson 's voice was compared to that of Rod Stewart . Stewart himself called the album " brilliant " and said it " absolutely knocked [ him ] out " . Robinson 's lyrics were alternately praised and panned . The Guardian 's Caroline Sullivan called " Go Faster " an amalgam of the band 's interests , " including drugs ... nubile <unk> ... scrapes ... and touring " . The Washington Post 's Harrington , however , called Robinson " convincing when he sings [ in ' Virtue and Vice ' ] , ' I feel so alive today and that 's all I want to say / I hope it stays this way , ' adding , ' If not , I 'll be okay ' " . 
 = = Concert tours = = 
 The Black Crowes played a few shows in the eastern US in early January before the release of By Your Side , then spent the rest of the month promoting the album via television appearances in the US , Canada and Europe . A brief warm @-@ up show in Milwaukee , Wisconsin , on February 10 preceded a two @-@ month tour of North American theaters , called the Souled Out Tour , with <unk> as the opening band . Every song from By Your Side was played at some point on this tour – " Go Faster " , " Kickin ' My Heart Around " , " By Your Side " and " Virtue and Vice " were performed at most shows , but " Diamond Ring " was played only twice . A 1963 Fender Esquire guitar belonging to Rich was stolen from the backstage area at DeVos Performance Hall in Grand Rapids , Michigan , on February 16 . The band 's management waited six weeks before issuing a press release asking for its return , hoping the guitar would turn up in a local pawnshop . No update on the guitar was ever provided . After taking two weeks off , the band spent six weeks playing outdoor amphitheaters in the US on a co @-@ headlining tour with Lenny Kravitz ; opening acts were Everlast and Cree Summer . 
 Beginning in June , The Black Crowes toured Europe for six weeks , opening for Aerosmith in concert halls and at festivals . " Go Faster " and " Kickin ' My Heart Around " remained staples of the band 's 60- to 75 @-@ minute sets . Harsch required emergency surgery for a twisted intestine on June 24 and missed the band 's next eight shows . ( The crew continued to set up Harsch 's keyboards and placed a human @-@ sized inflatable green alien in his spot . ) One of the shows Harsch missed was a charity concert in London at which The Black Crowes played a 45 @-@ minute set of Led Zeppelin songs and blues covers with Jimmy Page . The band 's last show in support of By Your Side was a one @-@ off festival date in Niigata , Japan , on July 30 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Chris Robinson and Rich Robinson . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = Død Kalm = 
 " Død Kalm " is the nineteenth episode of the second season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on March 10 , 1995 . The story was written by Howard Gordon , the teleplay was written by Gordon and Alex Gansa , and the episode was directed by Rob Bowman . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Død Kalm " earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 7 , being watched by 10 @.@ 2 million households in its initial broadcast . The episode received mostly mixed @-@ to @-@ positive reviews . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In the episode , Mulder and Scully are called in when a boatload of survivors from a U.S. Navy destroyer escort are found . What particularly catches Agent Mulder 's attention is that all of these sailors appear to have aged many decades in the course of a few days . Mulder and Scully travel to Norway where they find a civilian fisherman who is willing to take them to the ship 's last known position . 
 " Død Kalm " was written to make use of the show 's access to a navy destroyer that had previously featured in " Colony " and " End Game . " The episode was originally intended as a way to give the production crew a rest after several demanding episodes had been shot , but the episode became one of the more difficult to film during the second season . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the Norwegian Sea , chaos erupts on board the USS Ardent , an American destroyer escort . Due to mysterious yet unspecified events , half of the Ardent 's crew board lifeboats and abandon ship against the captain 's orders . Eighteen hours later , they are spotted by a Canadian fishing vessel ; however , in that short span of time , the young crew members have undergone rapid aging . 
 Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) visit the ship 's sole surviving crew member , Lt. Harper , who has been quarantined at the Bethesda Naval Hospital . Scully finds that Harper , despite being in his twenties , has aged to the point of being unrecognizable . Mulder explains that the Ardent vanished at the 65th parallel , a location with a history of ship disappearances . Mulder believes that a " wrinkle in time " exists there , and that the Ardent was the subject of government experimentation related to the Philadelphia Experiment from World War II . 
 In Norway , Mulder and Scully get Henry Trondheim ( John Savage ) , a naval trawler captain , to take them to the Ardent 's last known location . After crashing into the bow of the Ardent , Mulder , Scully , and Trondheim find signs of advanced corrosion , even though the Ardent is only a few years old . Below decks , the party finds the mummified remains of several crew members . They also find the wizened commanding officer of the Ardent , Captain Barclay , who claims that " time got lost " after his ship encountered a " glowing light " in the ocean . Trondheim 's boat is stolen and his first mate is murdered . 
 Trondheim is later attacked by a Norwegian pirate whaler named Olafsson , who has not aged despite being on the ship for the past two days . Mulder , Scully , and Trondheim eventually begin to age unnaturally . Scully develops a theory that the Ardent is sailing near a metallic object beneath the ocean , and that it has caused free radicals to rapidly oxidize their bodies and age them . When Mulder notices that the ship 's sewage pipe is the only one not corroded through , the agents realize that something from the ocean contaminated the Ardent 's potable water and led to the aging ; Olafsson 's men remained unaffected due to their consumption of recycled water from the sewage system . Desperate to survive , Trondheim kills Olafsson after he reveals the secret , and sets out to keep the water for himself . 
 Scully learns from blood tests that the contaminated water causes rapid cellular damage and dramatically increases sodium chloride in the body . She tries to ration the drinkable water amongst the three , but discovers Trondheim attempting to hoard what little that remains . Trondheim locks Scully out of the sewage hold , forcing her to use minuscule supplies to keep Mulder alive . The corrosion eventually eats through the ship 's hull , flooding the hold and drowning Trondheim , who cannot unseal the hatch . The agents both lose consciousness shortly before Navy rescuers arrive at their former ship . Scully comes to at the hospital , where she is told that her written observations on the case helped naval doctors reverse their aging and save Mulder from near @-@ certain death . Scully says that she wants to return to the Ardent for more research , but the doctor tells her that the ship sank shortly after their rescue due to the flooding . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Series creator Chris Carter asked Howard Gordon to write " Død Kalm " because the X @-@ Files had been given access to a Canadian navy destroyer for the previous episodes " Colony " and " End Game . " The episode was originally intended as a way to give the production crew a rest after several " demanding " episodes had been shot . Before the script had been finished , Carter mentioned that he believed the episode would be a " great rest for everyone . " 
 In the book The Unofficial X @-@ Files Companion , N.E. Genge notes that aspects of the episode bear striking resemblances to the Philadelphia Experiment , the alleged naval military experiment . Indeed , the episode contains several mentions and allusions to the experiment . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 HMCS Mackenzie , a decommissioned Canadian Forces destroyer , was used for interior and exterior shots as USS Ardent . The ship had previously been used to shoot interior scenes for the climax of the episode " End Game " . The ship was repainted in order to more closely resemble an abandoned ship , a technique Graeme Murray referred to as " paint @-@ aged . " Originally docked at New Westminster Quay , the ship was relocated to the more remote location of Barry Point to avoid night lights when filming exterior shots of the ship . The move cost the show approximately $ 10 @,@ 000 . Mackenzie , once the lead ship of its class , was stripped and scuttled shortly after filming ended and now serves as an artificial reef off the Georgia Strait . 
 In order to ease filming , the producers sought out a set that could portray both a bar and a hospital , a task initially dubbed " impossible . " However , Jericho Sailing Club in Vancouver later stood in for both the Norwegian bar and the hospital to which Mulder and Scully are taken . The cast and crew of " Død Kalm " reportedly found the dual @-@ set " amazing . " The location of the set was only a short distance away from where David Duchovny was living . The producers subsequently decided to try to find possible locations closer to where the main stars were living in order to ease future filming . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Død Kalm " premiered on the Fox network on March 10 , 1995 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on January 16 , 1996 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 7 , with an 18 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 7 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 18 percent of households watching television , were tuned into the episode . It was viewed by 10 @.@ 2 million households . 
 " Død Kalm " received mostly mixed to moderately positive reviews . Entertainment Weekly gave " Død Kalm " a B , noting that , " Despite clumsy makeup , isolation pays off again , and Mulder and Scully get to try a little tenderness . " Todd VanDerWerff from The A.V. Club , despite noting his original dislike for the episode , awarded it a B rating and wrote , " This episode works , almost in spite of itself . There are so many nice little moments here [ ... ] it 's a script that pauses from the constant horror the show had been serving up for several episodes in a row to just tell an unsettling , ultimately moving tale of two friends who look into the abyss and somehow don 't fall . " 
 Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five . The two noted that , while the episode 's premise " brims over with atmosphere " , the ending of " Død Kalm " was extremely lacking . Shearman and Pearson argued " that if the writers can only devise a plot which paints them into a corner so awkward there 's no realistic way they can get out , then they shouldn 't write the story at all . " The two also criticized the episode 's make up . They noted that " Scully looks like a credible old lady , Mulder rather more like a man wearing several layers of latex . " 
 = Reginald Tate = 
 Reginald Tate ( 13 December 1896 – 23 August 1955 ) was an English actor , veteran of many roles on stage , in films and on television . He is remembered best as the first actor to play the television science @-@ fiction character Professor Bernard Quatermass , in the 1953 BBC Television serial The Quatermass Experiment . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Reginald Tate was born in Garforth , near Leeds in the West Riding of Yorkshire , and went to school in York . During World War I he served with the Northamptonshire Regiment and later with the Royal Flying Corps . He left the armed forces after the end of the war and studied acting at Leeds College of Music and Drama . He made his first professional acting appearance at Leeds Art Theatre in 1922 , and for the next four years was a resident performer both there and at the city 's Little Theatre . 
 In 1926 , he moved to London , with his first major role being in a production of Romeo and Juliet at the Strand Theatre . He had particular success with the lead role of Stanhope in R. C. Sherriff 's play Journey 's End , playing the part in a 1929 tour of Australia and New Zealand and again for a 1934 revival production at the Criterion Theatre in London . 
 = = Film and television career = = 
 He made his film debut in 1934 in Whispering Tongues , and later in the decade also began to appear in the newer medium of television . On 11 November 1937 , Tate appeared as Stanhope again in a production of Journey 's End made by the BBC 's fledgling television service , one of its earliest major drama productions . His performance was praised by the television critic of The Times newspaper , who wrote that : " his performance [ was ] brilliantly full of fiery disillusionment . It successfully dominated the stage — no easy matter when Osborne is played as well as Mr. Basil Gill played him . " 
 At the beginning of the Second World War he joined the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve . He was given the rank of pilot officer , and by the time his service came to an end in 1944 he had been promoted to squadron leader . He also continued to act during the war , and performed small roles in the well @-@ known films The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp ( 1943 ) and The Way Ahead ( 1944 ) . He also had a top supporting role as the intelligence officer , Major Richards , in another classic British war movie , The Next of Kin ( 1942 ) . 
 After the end of the war he continued to perform for theatre and increasingly for television . He met the Austrian television director Rudolph Cartier when Cartier cast him in his BBC production of It Is Midnight , Dr Schweitzer in February 1953 . Cartier was impressed with Tate 's performance , and later that year offered him the lead role in The Quatermass Experiment , a science @-@ fiction serial he was directing , written by BBC staff scriptwriter Nigel Kneale . Tate was the second choice for the part of Professor Bernard Quatermass ; Cartier had previously offered it to his co @-@ star It Is Midnight , Dr Schweitzer , André Morell , who declined the role . Morell would later play Quatermass for the third instalment of the series , Quatermass and the Pit . Tate however was a success in the part , and in a 1986 interview Nigel Kneale named him as his favourite of all the actors to have played the character . The serial itself was also a success , with the British Film Institute later describing it as " one of the most influential series of the 1950s . " Tate took an increased interest in television , and later in 1953 enrolled on the BBC 's staff training course to become a television producer . He also began to spend much of his spare time teaching acting classes at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art ( RADA ) , feeling that he had experience which might be useful to younger actors . 
 = = Death = = 
 When the BBC commissioned a second Quatermass serial in 1955 , Tate was eager to participate and play the Professor again . Production was due to begin in September , and on 7 August 1955 he produced his first television play , Night Was Our Friend . Only sixteen days after this , late at night on 23 August , he collapsed outside his home in London . He had suffered a heart attack , and despite being rushed to hospital in Putney he died soon afterwards . 
 = = Selected filmography = = 
 Whispering Tongues ( 1935 ) 
 The Riverside Murder ( 1935 ) 
 The Phantom Light ( 1935 ) 
 The Man Behind the Mask ( 1936 ) 
 For Valour ( 1937 ) 
 Poison Pen ( 1939 ) 
 Too Dangerous to Live ( 1939 ) 
 The Next of Kin ( 1942 ) 
 Madonna of the Seven Moons ( 1945 ) 
 The Man from Morocco ( 1945 ) 
 Uncle Silas ( 1947 ) 
 Escape Route ( 1952 ) 
 Secret People ( 1952 ) 
 Malta Story ( 1953 ) 
 King 's Rhapsody ( 1955 ) 
 = HMS Good Hope ( 1901 ) = 
 HMS Good Hope was one of four Drake @-@ class armoured cruisers built for the Royal Navy around 1900 ; she was originally named Africa , but was renamed before she was launched . She became flagship of the 1st Cruiser Squadron of the Atlantic Fleet in 1906 , and was the flagship of the 2nd Cruiser Squadron in 1908 . She was reduced to reserve in 1913 , but was recommissioned in mid @-@ 1914 . 
 When war was declared in August 1914 , Good Hope was ordered to reinforce the 4th Cruiser Squadron and became the flagship of Rear Admiral Christopher Cradock . Cradock moved the available ships of his squadron later that month to the coast of South America to search for German commerce raiders . He was then ordered further south to the Strait of Magellan to block any attempt of the German East Asia Squadron to penetrate into the South Atlantic . He found the German squadron on 1 November off the coast of Chile . The German squadron outnumbered Cradock 's force and were individually more powerful ; they sank Cradock 's two armoured cruisers in the Battle of Coronel . Good Hope was lost with all hands . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Good Hope was designed to displace 14 @,@ 150 long tons ( 14 @,@ 380 t ) . The ship had an overall length of 553 feet 6 inches ( 168 @.@ 7 m ) , a beam of 71 feet 4 inches ( 21 @.@ 7 m ) and a deep draught of 26 feet 9 inches ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) . She was powered by two 4 @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one shaft , which produced a total of 30 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 22 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 23 knots ( 43 km / h ; 26 mph ) . The engines were powered by 43 Belleville boilers . She carried a maximum of 2 @,@ 500 long tons ( 2 @,@ 500 t ) of coal and her complement consisted of 900 officers and enlisted men . 
 Her main armament consisted of two breech @-@ loading ( BL ) 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch ( 234 mm ) Mk X guns in single gun turrets , one each fore and aft of the superstructure . They fired 380 @-@ pound ( 170 kg ) shells to a range of 15 @,@ 500 yards ( 14 @,@ 200 m ) . Her secondary armament of sixteen BL 6 @-@ inch Mk VII guns was arranged in casemates amidships . Eight of these were mounted on the main deck and were only usable in calm weather . They had a maximum range of approximately 12 @,@ 200 yards ( 11 @,@ 200 m ) with their 100 @-@ pound ( 45 @.@ 4 kg ) shells . A dozen quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 12 @-@ pounder 12 cwt guns were fitted for defence against torpedo boats . Two additional 12 @-@ pounder 8 cwt guns could be dismounted for service ashore . Good Hope also carried three 3 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns and two submerged 17 @.@ 72 @-@ inch ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes . 
 The ship 's waterline armour belt had a maximum thickness of 6 inches ( 152 mm ) and was closed off by 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) transverse bulkheads . The armour of the gun turrets and their barbettes was 6 inches thick while the casemate armour was 5 inches thick . The protective deck armour ranged in thickness from 1 – 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 25 – 64 mm ) and the conning tower was protected by 12 inches ( 305 mm ) of armour . 
 = = Service = = 
 Good Hope , named after the British colony on the Cape of Good Hope , was laid down on 11 September 1899 with the name of Africa by Fairfield Shipbuilding & Engineering at their Govan shipyard . She was renamed Good Hope on 2 October and launched on 21 February 1901 . She arrived in Portsmouth to be completed and armed in late December 1901 . In 1906 she became the flagship of the 1st Cruiser Squadron , Atlantic Fleet and was the flagship of the 2nd Cruiser Squadron when she visited South Africa two years later . Good Hope was placed in reserve in 1913 . 
 Upon recommissioning in mid @-@ 1914 , she was briefly assigned to the 6th Cruiser Squadron in August before being assigned to the 4th Cruiser Squadron to reinforce Cradock 's forces . He transferred his flag to her because she was faster than his previous flagship . Cradock 's command was transferred to the coast of South America later that month at his own suggestion to better hunt for the German ships preying upon British merchant ships . His ships were generally unsuccessful in this and he moved his squadron further south in late September to search for the East Asia Squadron , under the command of Vice Admiral Graf Maximilian von Spee , in the vicinity of Cape Horn and the Strait of Magellan in accordance to his orders from the Admiralty . 
 At the end of September , Cradock made his first fruitless search of the Tierra del Fuego area and later detached three of his ships to search up the Chilean coast , reaching Valparaiso on 15 October , while Good Hope returned to Port Stanley , in the Falkland Islands , to recoal and to reestablish communications with the Admiralty . He received word on 7 October that Spee 's ships were definitely bound for the Cape Horn region and waited for the elderly predreadnought battleship Canopus to reinforce his squadron . She was in poor mechanical condition when she arrived at Port Stanley and required time to make repairs . Good Hope sailed on 22 October without her , going around Cape Horn , while Canopus and three colliers departed the following day , taking the shorter route through the Strait of Magellan . 
 = = = Battle of Coronel = = = 
 Good Hope rendezvoused with the rest of the squadron at Vallenar Roads in the remote <unk> Archipelago of Chile on 27 October to recoal . They departed two days later , just as Canopus arrived , Cradock ordering the battleship to follow as soon as possible . He sent the light cruiser Glasgow to scout ahead and to enter Coronel , Chile to pick up any messages from the Admiralty and acquire intelligence regarding German activities . The cruiser began to pick up German radio signals from the light cruiser SMS Leipzig on the afternoon of 29 October , and delayed entering Coronel for two days with Cradock 's permission to avoid being trapped by the fast German ships . A German supply ship was already there and radioed Spee that Glasgow had entered the harbour around twilight . The cruiser departed on the morning of 1 November , but Spee had already made plans to catch her when informed of her presence the previous evening . 
 Glasgow departed Coronel at 09 : 15 after having picked up the squadron 's mail and rendezvoused with the rest of the squadron four hours later . Cradock ordered his ships to form line abreast with an interval of 15 nautical miles ( 28 km ; 17 mi ) between ships to maximise visibility at 13 : 50 , and steered north at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . At 16 : 17 Leipzig spotted Glasgow , the easternmost British ship , to its west and she spotted Leipzig 's funnel smoke three minutes later . At 17 : 10 Cradock ordered his ships to head for Glasgow , the closest ship to the Germans . Once gathered together , he formed them into line astern , with Good Hope in the lead , steering southeasterly at 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) at 18 : 18 . As the sixteen 21 @-@ centimetre ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) guns aboard the armoured cruisers Scharnhorst and Gneisenau were only matched by the two 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch guns on his flagship , he needed to close the range to bring his more numerous 6 @-@ inch guns to bear . The Force 7 winds and high seas , however , prevented the use of half of those guns as they were too close to the water . He also wanted to use the setting sun to his advantage so that its light would blind the German gunners . Spee was well aware of the British advantages and refused to allow Cradock to close the range . His ships were faster than the British , slowed by the 16 @-@ knot maximum speed of the armed merchant cruiser Otranto , and he opened up the range to 18 @,@ 000 yards ( 16 @,@ 000 m ) until conditions changed to suit him . The sun set at 18 : 50 , which silhouetted the British ships against the light sky while the German ships became indistinguishable from the shoreline behind them . 
 Spee immediately turned to close and signalled his ships to open fire at 19 : 04 when the range closed to 12 @,@ 300 yards ( 11 @,@ 200 m ) . Spee 's flagship , Scharnhorst , engaged Good Hope while Gneisenau fired at Monmouth . Cradock 's flagship was hit on the Scharnhorst 's third salvo , when shells knocked out her forward 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch turret and set her forecastle on fire . Cradock , knowing his only chance was to close the range , continued to do so despite the battering that Spee 's ships inflicted . By 19 : 23 the range was almost half of that when the battle began and the British ships bore onwards . Spee tried to open the range , fearing a torpedo attack , but the British were only 5 @,@ 500 yards ( 5 @,@ 000 m ) away at 19 : 35 . Seven minutes later , Good Hope charged directly at the German ships , although they dodged out of her way . Spee ordered his armoured cruisers to concentrate their fire on the British flagship and she soon drifted to a halt with her topsides all aflame . At 19 : 50 her forward magazine exploded , severing the bow from the rest of the ship , and she later sank in the darkness . Spee estimated that his flagship had made 35 hits on Good Hope , suffering only two hits in return that did no significant damage and failed even to wound one crewman . Good Hope was sunk with all hands , a total of 919 officers and enlisted men . Four of the midshipmen aboard the ship were the first casualties of the newly formed Royal Canadian Navy . 
 = Belitung shipwreck = 
 The Belitung shipwreck ( also called the Tang shipwreck or Batu Hitam shipwreck ) is the wreck of an Arabian dhow which sailed a route from Africa to China around 830 AD . The ship completed the outward journey , but sank on the return journey , approximately 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) off the coast of Belitung Island , Indonesia . It is unclear why the ship was so far from its expected route back from China . Belitung is to the south @-@ east of the Singapore Strait by 380 miles ( 610 km ) , and this secondary route is more normal for ships travelling from the Java Sea , which is south of Belitung Island . 
 The wreck has given archaeologists two major discoveries : the biggest single collection of Tang dynasty artefacts found in one location , the so @-@ called " Tang Treasure " ; and the Arabian dhow , which gives a new insight into the trade routes between China and the Middle East during that period . The treasure has been kept as one collection and , during the excavation , the efforts to preserve the integrity of the site and its cargo have resulted in detailed archaeological evidence . This evidence has given new insight into the construction methods used in shipbuilding , and the items and style of artefacts has revealed previously unknown facts about the trade between the two areas . 
 = = Discovery and route = = 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 The wreck was discovered by fishermen in 1998 in the <unk> Strait in 51 feet ( 16 m ) of water . The site location was purchased from local fishermen and a license to engage in excavation was awarded to a local Indonesian company . The dig was subsequently financed and excavated by Tilman Walterfang and his team at Seabed Explorations , under a license of co @-@ operation with the original salvage company , and after a request from the Indonesian Government ; security was provided by the Indonesian Navy . The excavations spanned two expeditions , one which commenced in August 1998 and the second in 1999 . Seabed Explorations provided vessels and financed government naval operations to safeguard the wreck site before and during the monsoon season . 
 = = = Route = = = 
 It is unclear why the ship was so far from its expected route ( shown in red on the map to the right ) , as most ships leaving China for Arabia would have sailed through the South China Sea . They would then turn north @-@ west after passing southern Vietnam , continuing through the Singapore Strait into the Straits of Malacca between Peninsular Malaysia and Sumatra . Belitung is some distance from this route , and it is unclear how the vessel came to be in this area . Belitung is to the south @-@ east of the Singapore Strait by 380 miles ( 610 km ) , and this secondary route is more normal for ships travelling from the Java Sea , which is south of Belitung Island , to the Strait of Malacca 380 miles ( 610 km ) north of the Island . 
 = = Ship and construction = = 
 The shipwrecked dhow was approximately 21 feet ( 6 @.@ 4 m ) wide and 58 feet ( 18 m ) long and is remarkable for two reasons ; it is the first ancient Arabian ship to be found and excavated , and its planks were sewn together using a thin rope made of coconut fibres rather than using the more traditional methods of pegs or nails used in Arabia in later centuries . 
 The wreck timbers were found under a sediment that preserved the remains of the wooden vessel , without which the wreck would have been lost due to marine worms . Wrecks of this age are rare finds and this particular one was in such a good condition that much of the hull was preserved . This has given us an insight into how ships of this period were constructed — something which has not been seen before as no Arabian ship of this type had previously been found , nor any with their cargo intact . 
 Pieces of the original timbers were preserved enough to allow scientists to analyse them and determine some of the types of wood used . It is possible that the ship was constructed in western Asia and bought by Arabian merchants to be used for the Oman to China route ; the cargo contains many Arabian @-@ inspired artefacts . 
 = = = Construction techniques = = = 
 The ship was constructed around a 50 @.@ 2 feet ( 15 @.@ 3 m ) long keel of 14 – 15 @-@ centimetre ( 5 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 9 in ) thickness , which is believed to have survived intact . The front of the ship had a 61 ° angle of rake at the bow where the stem post was joined to the keel with mortise and tenon joints and secured with 16 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 63 in ) diameter rope . The hull planks were stitched onto the frames and keel through holes spaced at 5 – 6 @-@ centimetre ( 2 @.@ 0 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) intervals . The boat had a keelson for added strength , which rested on the half @-@ frames . 
 Michael Flecker , the chief excavating archaeologist at the site , compared the wrecked ship to three types of the same period and concluded that the wreck most resembled " lashed @-@ lug " ships of south @-@ east Asia — first used in the 5th century . He said that fully stitched boats were found from the African coast , Oman , in the Red Sea , on the Indian coast , and as far as the Maldives . He notes that Roman references by Procopius in the 6th century tell of boats with planks stitched together in a similar fashion used in " Indian Seas " . Though Arabian ships of this type have not been found before , they are mentioned in text including the late @-@ Tang Ling <unk> lu yi ( " Strange Things Noted in the South " ) . According to John Guy , curator of the Metropolitan Museum of Art , the book " describes the ships of foreign merchants as being stitched together with the fiber of coir @-@ palms and having their seams caulked rather than using iron nails to secure their planks " . 
 = = = Wood types = = = 
 Samples of wood from the shipwreck were sent for analysis at the Forest and Forest Products division of the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation ( CSIRO ) in Australia . The analysis was conducted by Jugo <unk> of CSIRO , a wood identification specialist . Many of the samples were too badly deteriorated to be positively identified , as the lack of cellulose remaining in the wood cells prevented successful analysis . 
 There are many types of wood that have been positively identified : teak ( <unk> grandis ) was used for the through @-@ beams and is resilient to the <unk> worm ( the <unk> family ) , the ceiling was made from a Cupressus genus which was possibly Cupressus torulosa , the stem @-@ post is made of rosewood from the Leguminosae family ( now called the Fabaceae ) and either the Dalbergia or <unk> genus . The wooden box found in the stern area of the shipwreck was made from an Artocarpus genus of the family Moraceae , more commonly known as the Mulberry family . 
 The species used for the hull planks was not positively identified but is thought to be Amoora of the <unk> family . The timber for the frames was similarly not definitively determined , although one frame was probably of Amoora or of the Afzelia genus of the Fabaceae family . Afzelia is interesting in that the three main species A. africana , A. <unk> and A. <unk> are mostly found in a small part of Africa , stretching from the mid @-@ western coast in a thin band towards the east coast and stopping short of it by a couple of hundred miles . 
 The ship could originally have been said to be of Arabian or Indian origin , as there is little to differentiate between ships of the area during that period , in regard to construction techniques — though its frame uses a species of tree that is only found in a small part of Africa . After analysing the hull form , timber species , and construction methods , <unk> concluded that the wreck was of Indian or Arabian origin . India was considered the more probable place of construction but Arabian construction was not ruled out , as the timber used was commonly imported to the Middle East for use in shipbuilding . Flecker concluded that the wreck was an Arabian ship in his 2010 chapter from the Sackler exhibition catalogue , arguing that " from an analysis of construction methods and materials and hull form , the author has determined that the Belitung wreck is an Arab vessel . " 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Present @-@ day knowledge of the original materials and methods used in construction of this particular Arab dhow stems largely from the shipwreck itself . The Jewel of Muscat reconstruction , a replica made as an exact copy of the wreck , has shown that the ship resembles a <unk> <unk> , a type of ship still found in Oman today . Amongst the hull of the shipwreck were large lumps of concretion containing artefacts from the ship 's cargo dated to the Tang dynasty of China around 800 AD , and from where the wreck gets its other names , the " Tang shipwreck " or " Tang treasure ship " . 
 The ship 's timbers and artefacts were shown to the public for the first time in 2011 . The world debut exhibition of the collection of artefacts , as well as timbers from the ship , took place in the <unk> Museum , adjacent to Singapore 's Marina Bay Sands . The significance of the discovery of the shipwreck led to the decision to construct the Jewel of Muscat as an exact reconstruction of the shipwrecked dhow . 
