 = = Cargo and " Tang treasure " = = 
 The wreck held three main types of " wares " in the form of bowls : Changsha ware , the majority of the 60 @,@ 000 items , were originally packed in either straw cylinders or " Dusun " storage jars ; White @-@ ware , manufactured in the Ding kilns and including the earliest known intact <unk> blue and white dishes ; and Yue ware from Zhejiang Province . One Changsha bowl was inscribed with a date : " 16th day of the seventh month of the second year of the <unk> reign " , or 826 AD . This was later confirmed by radiocarbon dating of star anise found amongst the wreck . The cargo had a surprising variety of influences and markets , including Buddhist lotus symbols , motifs from Central Asia and Persia , Koranic inscriptions , and green @-@ splashed bowls popular in Iran . 
 Included in the cargo were items of varying purposes , from spice jars and <unk> to <unk> , funeral urns and gilt @-@ silver boxes . The cargo was described by John Guy of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York as " the richest and largest consignment of early ninth @-@ century southern Chinese gold and ceramics ever discovered in a single hoard . " The cargo also included spices and resin , and metal ingots used as ballast . There were also special items found which include a gold cup — the largest Tang dynasty gold cup ever found — and a large silver flask decorated with a pair of ducks . The gold cup has pictures of people in various actions on its sides , such as musicians and a Persian dancer . It also has images of two men on its thumb plate with features that appear to be non @-@ Chinese , as they are depicted with curly hair . 
 = = = Current disposition = = = 
 Tilman Walterfang 's company formed a contract of cooperation with the original Indonesian salvage company and as a result the cargo was not sold off piece by piece to collectors . Although there were instances of some looting from the site , particularly between the two excavation periods , Walterfang kept the cargo intact as one complete collection so that it could be studied in its original context ; something which has given an " unparalleled insight into China 's industrial capacity and global trade " according to Julian Raby , director of the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery . It was housed in a private conservation facility for six years , where the artefacts were painstakingly conserved ( including desalination ) , studied , and carefully restored by Walterfang 's company , Seabed Explorations Ltd. of New Zealand . The work was carried out with the assistance of German conservator Andreas <unk> , who trained at the <unk> @-@ Germanisches <unk> in Mainz . The artefacts were authenticated by Professor Geng <unk> , a senior research fellow at the Palace Museum in Beijing . <unk> is the deputy director of Beijing 's Forbidden City and one of China 's foremost experts on antique ceramics . 
 The cargo was purchased for around 32 million USD by a private company , the Sentosa Leisure Group ( now the Sentosa Development Corporation ) , and the Singaporean government in 2005 , and loaned to the Singapore Tourism Board . 
 The debut exhibit of the treasure ran from 19 February 2011 to 31 July 2011 at the <unk> Museum in Singapore . The display was put on with the collaboration of the Smithsonian Institution , The Freer Gallery of Art , the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery , the Singapore Tourism Board , and the National Heritage Board of Singapore . The exhibition was then scheduled to travel the world for approximately five years , to venues which include museums of major importance throughout Asia , Australia , Europe , the Middle East , and the United States . But later on September 2011 , it was announced by the Singapore Tourism Board that the artifacts will go on permanent display at the Maritime Experiential Museum & Aquarium . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 The Sackler Gallery , part of the Smithsonian Institution , was due to host the US premiere exhibition of the Belitung cargo in early 2012 — a date set to coincide with the Smithsonian museum 's 25th anniversary celebration . On 28 June 2011 it was reported that the museum was postponing the show . The Sackler Gallery has received condemnation of the exhibition due to the time @-@ frame and nature of the original excavation of the artefacts ; with arguments put forwards about whether the display should be allowed . According to The New York Times , " a group of archaeologists and anthropologists from the National Academy of Sciences — including Robert McCormick Adams , a former leader of the Smithsonian " wrote to the head of the Smithsonian Institution , G. Wayne Clough , on 5 April 2011 claiming that " proceeding with the exhibition would ' severely damage the stature and reputation ' of the institution . " Proponents of the arguments against display say that the excavation was for commercial gain and conducted so quickly as to have caused a loss of information pertaining to the crew and cargo . The New York Times article goes on to say that further comments were made by " the Society for American Archaeology , the Council of American Maritime Museums and the International Committee for Underwater Cultural Heritage , as well as groups within the Smithsonian , including the members of the anthropology department and the Senate of Scientists at its National Museum of Natural History " all asking that the Smithsonian reconsider the exhibition . There are also claims that exhibiting the artefacts would be against international agreements on underwater excavations . Kimberly L. Faulk , a marine archaeologist and vice chairwoman of the non @-@ governmental Advisory Council on Underwater Archaeology said that , " by proceeding with the exhibition the Smithsonian — which is a research institution as well as a network of museums — would be violating its own set of professional ethics and promoting the looting of archaeological sites . " 
 Proponents of the arguments to display the works claim that the excavation was indeed legal as the work was carried out in accordance with Indonesian law , at the request of the Indonesian government , and in accordance with international laws at the time . James P. Delgado , director of maritime heritage at the United States Department of Commerce National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , said that " allowing any of the finds from an excavation to be sold betrays the most basic aspects of research " with the New York Times going on to report that , " he [ Delgado ] wished the Belitung shipwreck had been academically excavated . But unlike some of his colleagues , he said that instead of canceling the exhibition , the Smithsonian could use it to educate the public about the consequences of the commercialization of underwater heritage . " 
 Walterfang has stated that " the overall situation would without doubt be described as ' less than ideal ' " and that " the Indonesian government , fearful of looting , ordered Seabed Explorations to begin an immediate round @-@ the @-@ clock recovery operation . " 
 Some academics have expressed more definitive support for Tilman Walterfang ’ s excavation and treatment of the Belitung vessel and cargo . 
 Lu Caixa , a researcher at the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies in Singapore , states in the newsletter of the International Institute for Asian Studies , Leiden , Netherland , that “ the excavation of the Belitung has been acknowledged as an admirable example of what can be achieved under difficult conditions in Southeast Asia . ” She points out that unlike some other commercial operators , Walterfang ’ s company ensured that “ the ship structure itself was properly recorded , the cargo was kept together rather than dispersed , and the finds were well conserved , studied , catalogued , and published . " Caixa ends by highlighting the efficacy of the public @-@ private arrangement : “ It is difficult to imagine how this particular project could have been financed or organized without commercial involvement . ” 
 Prof. Victor H. Mair , Professor of Chinese Language and Literature in the Department of East Asian Languages and Civilizations at the University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , United States defends the Smithsonian exhibition , claiming that the “ educational and historical value of the collection is simply enormous , and those who have called for the cancellation of the exhibition are , in effect and in fact , denying access to the wealth of information embodied in the Belitung shipwreck , both to the lay public and to qualified researchers . " 
 Dr. Sean Kingsley , Director of Wreck Watch International reminds that " Wrecks like these should be ‘ feel good ’ factors at times when the world has very serious and painful natural , economic and civil disasters to contend with " and " it hardly needs stating that no European and American museum collection is whiter than white . " 
 In an interview with the Science Journal G. Wayne Clough , the 12th secretary of the Smithsonian Institution assuaged the animosities between critics and proponents of the exhibition : “ So I don 't think there 's anything negative here . I think the Smithsonian tried to do it right . When we heard the concerns , we asked the community to come together and talk about it , and we listened , and some people in that audience had their minds changed , as a matter of fact , but not everybody . So , I think it 's time in a situation like this to pause , and for the profession itself to say , " Okay , there 's a problem , what are you going to do about it ? And , you remember , the United States never signed the UNESCO treaty . ” 
 = = = Conventions by international organisations = = = 
 The Underwater Archaeology Resolutions that were adopted on 10 September 1993 by the International Congress of Maritime Museums ( ICMM ) state that : 
 ICMM member museums should follow the Council of American Maritime Museums ( <unk> ) policy and ' ... not knowingly acquire or exhibit artifacts which have been stolen , illegally exported from their country of origin , illegally salvaged , or removed from commercially exploited archaeological or historic sites ' in recent times ( <unk> since the 1990 full Congress of ICMM ) . " 
 They also say that , " ICMM members should recognize that artefacts from underwater sites are integral parts of archaeological assemblages , which should remain intact for research and display " and that , " a commercially exploited heritage site is one in which the primary motive for investigation is private financial gain . " The United Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organization ( UNESCO ) ratified a set of rules for preserving and excavating underwater sites at the Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage during 15 October — 5 November 2001 . Though the rules set out at the meeting do include preserving artefacts in situ as the preferable option they go on to say : 
 The commercial exploitation of underwater cultural heritage for trade or speculation or its irretrievable dispersal is fundamentally incompatible with the protection and proper management of underwater cultural heritage . Underwater cultural heritage shall not be traded , sold , bought or bartered as commercial goods . This Rule cannot be interpreted as preventing : ( a ) the provision of professional archaeological services or necessary services incidental thereto whose nature and purpose are in full conformity with this Convention and are subject to the authorization of the competent authorities ; 
 = Lucas Bros. Moving Co . = 
 Lucas Bros. Moving Co. is an American animated television series created by Kenny and Keith Lucas . It originally premiered on Fox on November 23 , 2013 , as part of Animation Domination High @-@ Def , but was renewed for two additional seasons on FXX . 
 The series features the twins as work @-@ shy animated counterparts of themselves , running a moving company out of their van . The series is roughly based on the creators ' experiences as cable television installers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The series revolves around identical twins Kenny and Keith Lucas ( voiced by Kenny and Keith Lucas , respectively ) , who run a moving company called " Lucas Bros Moving Co " in Greenpoint , Brooklyn , out of their van after receiving it from their dead uncle . The two are shown to frequently consume marijuana , emitting a calm demeanor throughout the various escapades caused at their job . <unk> and indolent , their customers are often apprehensive towards their weaknesses , but the brothers like to remind themselves " that 's why God made two of them . " 
 = = Production = = 
 Lucas Bros. Moving Co. is an animated television series created by twins Kenny and Keith Lucas of " The Lucas Brothers " , a Brooklyn @-@ based comedy duo . The series , featuring the voices of the twins as their animated counterparts , originally had them working as installers for a cable company , a job which the Lucas brothers occupied in real life . This idea was scrapped according to Keith , who felt the premise too close to that of the The Cleveland Show , another animated series aired by Fox . Kenny insisted that " moving was just more Brooklyn " , a sentiment which Keith echoed , thinking that " it would be funny if we were movers because we 've never moved a thing in our lives and we 're so fucking weak and we hate physical labor " . Keith complemented the nature of the premise , finding it to be flexible with any character or setting . 
 Commenting on the writing process , Keith called it " awesome " , citing crew members Nick Weidenfeld , Dave <unk> , and Matt Silverstein as giving them guidance . Kenny urged to " trust the process and not get ahead of yourself " , while Keith recommended being patient with breaking scenes down part by part ; he also called it similar to their stand @-@ up routines , although the structure of the show made for more comfort . 
 Commenting on their inspirations , the brothers recognized themselves as animation fans , with Keith mentioning Clone High as one of their favorite series , along with King of the Hill and The Life & Times of Tim . Summing Lucas Bros. as an equation , the two called it " Bill & Ted plus <unk> plus The Wire ( minus the bleakness ) . " In the United States , the series is rated TV @-@ 14 . Some jokes have been rejected by the network for content , with the brothers naming a parody of Clay Davis 's character from The Wire 's elongated pronunciation of the word " shit " as an example of this . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 The series premiered on November 23 , 2013 , on Fox , preceding the premiere of Golan the Insatiable ; both series were broadcast as part of the network 's late @-@ night animation block , Animation Domination High @-@ Def . The duo stated around the time of the premiere that the series was picked up for six additional episodes . Fox announced in April 2014 that the Animation Domination High @-@ Def block would cease broadcast on June 28 , 2014 , though its programs will continue on digital platforms . In June 2014 , the brothers announced a second and third season , following their film debut in 22 Jump Street . These seasons , bringing the total amount of episodes to 18 , will air on FXX , starting on October 26 , 2014 with a sneak peek of the second season premiere . 
 Rotten Tomatoes identified the first season as having one " fresh " review by Mike Hale of The New York Times . In his review , Hale found the differences between the protagonists and the creators more significant than their similarities . He acknowledged the duo as having " an industriousness completely alien to their fictional counterparts , " while calling the protagonists ' disinclined nature as perhaps either a " sly " joke about " the travails of young black men trying to earn an honest buck " or the characters ' consumption of marijuana . Emily Ashby of Common Sense Media cited the latter point as a probable source of concern among parents having their children watch the series . While she regarded the emptiness of the protagonists ' adventures as " surprisingly amusing " in a similar vein to Seinfeld , Ashby ultimately called it " mindless entertainment " , stating " there are no subtle themes nor any clever satire to be had here . " 
 Writing for Media Life Magazine , Tom Conroy felt the stoner comedy played to the series ' strengths — a rarity , he felt , among comedians relying on such humor while under the influence themselves . While he dubbed the twins ' humor " as lazy and aimless " as their animated counterparts at times , he concluded that " its genial vibe makes it a pleasant way to burn off a quarter hour . " Reviewing both the series and Golan the Insatiable , Erik Adams of The A.V. Club felt the " horizons " of Lucas Bros. were broader than that of Golan , given that its " slacker vibe so readily goes with the surreal flow . " Adams stated the show resembled Adventure Time if the aforementioned series ' creative staff were allowed to joke about marijuana , but concluded that the series ' humor invoked no more than " a <unk> grin " . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Sesame Street research = 
 In 1969 , the children 's television show Sesame Street premiered on the Public Broadcasting Service ( PBS ) in the United States . Unlike earlier children 's programming , the show 's producers used research and over 1 @,@ 000 studies and experiments to create the show and test its impact on its young viewers ' learning . By the end of the program 's first season , the organization founded to oversee Sesame Street production , Children 's Television Workshop ( CTW ) , had developed what came to be called " the CTW model " : a system of planning , production , and evaluation that combined the expertise of researchers and early childhood educators with that of the program 's writers , producers , and directors . 
 CTW conducted research in two ways : in @-@ house formative research that informed and improved production , and independent summative evaluations conducted by the Educational Testing Service ( ETS ) during the show 's first two seasons to measure the program 's educational effectiveness . CTW researchers invented tools to measure young viewers ' attention to the program . Based on these findings , the researchers compiled a body of data and the producers changed the show accordingly . The formative research on Sesame Street was the first time children 's television viewing was studied scientifically . 
 <unk> research conducted over the years , including two landmark evaluations in 1970 and 1971 , demonstrated that viewing the program had positive effects on young viewers ' learning , school readiness , and social skills . Subsequent studies have replicated these findings , such as the effect of the show in countries outside of the US , several longitudinal studies , the effects of war and natural disasters on young children , and studies about how the show affected viewers ' cognition . As CTW researcher Gerald S. Lesser stated in 1974 , early tests conducted on the show ( both formative and summative ) " suggested that Sesame Street was making strides towards teaching what it had set out to teach " . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 According to author Louise A. Gikow , Sesame Street 's use of research to create individual episodes and to test its effect on its young viewers set it apart from other children 's programming . Co @-@ creator Joan Ganz Cooney called the idea of combining research with television production " positively heretical " because it had never been done before . Before Sesame Street , most children 's television shows were locally produced , with hosts who , according to researchers Edward L. Palmer and Shalom M. Fisch , " represented the scope and vision of a single individual " and were often condescending to their audience . Scriptwriters of these shows had no training in education or child development . 
 The Carnegie Corporation , one of Sesame Street 's first financial backers , hired Cooney , a producer of educational talk shows and documentaries with little experience in education , during the summer of 1967 to visit experts in childhood development , education , and media across the US and Canada . She researched their ideas about the viewing habits of young children , and wrote a report on her findings entitled " Television for Preschool Education " , which described out how television could be used as an aid in the education of preschoolers , especially those living in inner cities . Cooney 's study became the basis for Sesame Street ; full funding was procured for its development and production and the creation of the Children 's Television Workshop ( CTW ) , the organization responsible for producing the new show . According to Gikow , the show 's financial backers , which consisted of the US federal government , the Corporation for Public Broadcasting and the Ford Foundation , insisted on " testing at critical stages to evaluate its ultimate success " . 
 During the summer of 1968 , Gerald S. Lesser , CTW 's first advisory @-@ board chairman , conducted five three @-@ day curriculum @-@ planning seminars in Boston and New York City to select a curriculum for the new program . Seminar participants were television producers and child development experts . It was the first time a children 's television show used a curriculum , which Palmer , who was responsible for conducting the show 's formative research , and Fisch described as " detailed or stated in terms of measurable outcomes " . The program 's creative staff was concerned that this goal would limit creativity , but one of the seminar results was to encourage the show 's producers to use child @-@ development concepts in the creative process . Some Muppet characters were created during the seminars to fill specific curriculum needs . For example , Oscar the Grouch was designed to teach children about their positive and negative emotions , and Big Bird was created to provide children with opportunities to correct his " bumbling " mistakes . Lesser reported that Jim Henson had a " particular gift for creating scenes that might teach " . 
 The show 's research staff and producers conducted regularly @-@ scheduled internal reviews and seminars to ensure that their curriculum goals were being met and to guide future production . As of 2001 , ten seminars had been conducted specifically to address the literacy needs of preschool children . Curriculum seminars prior to Sesame Street 's 33rd season in 2002 resulted in a change from the show 's magazine @-@ like format to a more narrative format . There have been over 1 @,@ 000 studies as of 2001 which examine the show 's impact on children 's learning and attention . Most of these studies were conducted by the CTW and remain unpublished . The most important studies that found negative effects of Sesame Street were conducted by educator Herbert A. Sprigle and psychologist Thomas D. Cook during its first two seasons . Both studies found that the show increased the educational gap between poor and middle @-@ class children . Morrow reported that these studies had little impact on the public discussion about Sesame Street . Another criticism was made by journalist Kay Hymowitz in 1995 , who reported that most of the positive research conducted on the show has been done by the CTW , and then sent to a sympathetic press . She charged that the studies conducted by the CTW " hint at advocacy masquerading as social science " . 
 = = The " CTW model " = = 
 Shortly after beginning Sesame Street , its creators developed the " CTW model " : a system of planning , production , and evaluation which only emerged after the show 's first season . The CTW model involved the interaction between television producers and educators , the development of a curriculum for three- to five @-@ year @-@ old children , formative research to shape the program , and independent summative research into what viewers learned . According to Cooney , " Without research , there would be no Sesame Street . " 
 Cooney credited Palmer and his colleague at Harvard , Gerald S. Lesser , whom CTW hired to write the program 's educational objectives , for bridging the gap between producers and researchers . Cooney observed of the CTW model : " From the beginning , we — the planners of the project — designed the show as an experimental research project with educational advisers , researchers , and television producers collaborating as equal partners " . She described the collaboration as an " arranged marriage " . 
 The show 's staff worked to create a non @-@ adversarial relationship between producers and researchers ; each side contributed , as Fisch stated , " its own unique perspective and expertise " . Early in the planning process , production staff recognized that it was valuable to have access to researchers who could analyze children 's reactions and help them improve production , and the show 's writers and producers brought their instincts for and experience in children 's television . Though initially skeptical about both the collaboration and the curriculum , the writers eventually came to see both as integral parts of the creative process . 
 When educational experts and producers in other countries approached CTW for assistance in producing their own versions of Sesame Street , which became known as " co @-@ productions " , a variant of the CTW model was used . The need for preschool education in each country was assessed through research and interviews with television producers , researchers , and educational experts , similar to the process followed in the US . The producers then convened a series of meetings with the experts , held in the individual countries , to create and develop a curriculum , the program 's educational goals , its set , and its characters . They held meetings , at the CTW offices in New York City and in the respective country , to train the co @-@ production team in the CTW model . Each co @-@ production conducted formative studies before production and if possible , summative studies to test the efficacy of its curriculum . 
 = = Formative research = = 
 = = = Methods = = = 
 Palmer and his team used concepts from the field of formative research , which consisted of in @-@ house , laboratory @-@ oriented research , to guide production and to determine whether the show held children 's attention . Palmer , described by Cooney as " a founder of CTW and founder of its research function " , was one of the few late @-@ 1960s academics studying children 's television and its effects on learning . He was responsible for designing and executing CTW 's formative research , and for working with ETS , which handled the Workshop 's summative research . Palmer 's work was so crucial to Sesame Street that author Malcolm Gladwell asserted , " Without Ed Palmer , the show would have never lasted through the first season " . 
 CTW 's researchers were strongly influenced by behaviorism , a popular movement in psychology during the late 1960s ; therefore , many methods and tools used were primarily behavioral . Palmer developed " the distractor " , which he used to test if the material shown on Sesame Street captured young viewers ' attention . Two children at a time were brought into the laboratory and shown an episode on a television monitor and a slide show next to it . The slides would change every seven seconds ; researchers recorded when the children 's attention was diverted from the episode . They were able to assess almost every second of Sesame Street this way ; if an episode captured children 's interest 80 – 90 percent of the time , producers would air it . However , if it only worked 50 percent of the time they would change ( or remove ) content . 
 In research during later seasons of Sesame Street , verbal measurements , in the form of letter @-@ recognition tests , were introduced . These reinforced earlier results , providing more insight into children 's knowledge , reactions , and responses than behavioral measures alone . The distractor method was modified by Workshop researchers Lewis Bernstein and Valeria Lovelace into an " eyes @-@ on @-@ screen " method , which collected simultaneous data from larger groups of children . Their method also tested for more " natural " distractions , such as those provided by other children in group @-@ viewing situations ; up to 15 children were tested at a time . Lovelace developed additional testing methods , described by Fisch as " state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art research design " . One innovation included the " engagement measure " , which recorded children 's active responses to an episode , such as laughing or dancing to music . 
 = = = Results = = = 
 Palmer reported that by the fourth season of the show , the episodes rarely tested below 85 percent . At least one segment , " The Man from Alphabet " , despite its expense , was eliminated because it tested poorly with children . The distractor provided new insight into the way children watch television , and was part of CTW 's research on its programs ' effectiveness for decades . It created a body of objective data , and marked the first time that children 's television viewing was studied scientifically . 
 CTW 's early studies with the distractor found that children learned more when they watched the program carefully , or when they participated by singing or talking along . In re @-@ tests four weeks later , it found that children retained most of what they learned . After the first three weeks , or 15 episodes , viewers and non @-@ viewers were compared ; few differences in learning were found . When both groups were tested after six weeks more differences began to appear , with viewers scoring higher than non @-@ viewers . A two @-@ season CTW study published in 1995 found a " significant increase " in difficulty in remembering the letter and number of the day . Based on the multiple @-@ intelligence theory , producers began to cluster Sesame Street 's short films , animations , and inserts around a single topic rather than sprinkling several topics throughout a single episode . 
 = = <unk> research = = 
 = = = ETS studies = = = 
 CTW solicited the Educational Testing Service ( ETS ) to conduct its summative research . CTW and ETS hired and trained coordinators , testers , and observers from local communities to conduct these studies . The most relevant tests of the show 's effectiveness were comparisons between children who watched it regularly and those who did not . After the first season , however , Sesame Street was so widely watched that it was difficult to make this distinction ; ETS began to have problems finding subjects for their non @-@ viewing groups , which weakened the experimental design . It solved this problem by selecting control @-@ group households from areas that did not broadcast the show . Instead of using groups of viewers and non @-@ viewers , later large @-@ scale studies used statistical designs and methods for estimating cause @-@ effect relationships . 
 ETS , whose prestige enhanced the credibility of its findings , conducted two landmark summative evaluations in 1970 and 1971 , demonstrating that Sesame Street had a significant educational impact on its viewers . These studies illustrated the early educational effects of Sesame Street , and have been cited in other studies of the effects of television on young children . ETS reported that the children who watched the show most learned the most , and achieved better results in letter @-@ recognition skills . Three @-@ year @-@ olds who watched regularly scored higher than five @-@ year @-@ olds who did not ; children from low @-@ income households who were regular viewers scored higher than children from higher @-@ income households who watched the show less frequently . Similar results occurred in children from non @-@ English @-@ speaking homes . Although adult supervision was not required for children to learn using the material presented , children who watched and discussed the program with their parents gained more skills than those who did not . Children viewing the show in an informal home setting learned as much as children who watched it at school under a teacher 's supervision . Regular viewers adjusted better to the school environment than non @-@ viewers . They also had a more positive attitude toward school and better peer relations than non @-@ viewers . 
 Despite CTW 's concern that the show would widen the gap between well @-@ to @-@ do children and their less wealthy peers , there was no evidence that this occurred ; gains made by disadvantaged children were as great as those by advantaged children . The show 's positive general effects , as cited by ETS , occurred across all childhood demographics ( gender , age , geographic location and socioeconomic status ) . Studies conducted by ETS seemed to suggest that the program had " a significant impact on children 's social behavior " , although the evidence was not as strong as it was for cognitive effects ; fewer studies exist of social behavior . 
 = = = Later studies = = = 
 CTW enlisted Palmer , in conjunction with Harvard University , in 1979 to conduct a study in Jamaica regarding the effects of Sesame Street on children with no exposure to other children 's television programs , in order to correct for the effects of multimedia exposure on children in the US . Palmer discovered that Jamaican children 's interest dropped during segments with the Muppets , possibly due to language and cultural differences ; musical segments were the most effective . The children 's learning increased after exposure to the show , especially letter and number recognition . 
 In 1995 a longitudinal study was conducted at the University of Kansas , the first large @-@ scale evaluation of Sesame Street 's cognitive effects in over twenty years . Its findings supported those of previous studies : early viewing of educational children 's television appeared to contribute to children 's school readiness . Children from disadvantaged backgrounds learned as much as advantaged children per hour of viewing , but they did not watch enough to gain the program 's maximum benefit . In comparing the effects of watching Sesame Street with other programs , commercial entertainment and cartoons had a negative effect ; watching Sesame Street daily did not increase children 's viewing of other categories of television , nor make them less likely to participate in other educational activities . 
 Other studies have been conducted about the cognitive effects of Sesame Street . In 1990 , a two @-@ year longitudinal study found that viewing the show was a " significant predictor " of improved vocabulary regardless of family size , parent education , child gender or parental attitudes towards television . Another study conducted in 1990 looked at the effect of Sesame Street home videos and discovered gains in vocabulary , letter , and <unk> and spoken @-@ word identification . The videos encouraged discussion with adults , which may have helped reinforce educational messages and content . 
 In 1994 , research was conducted for " The <unk> Study " , funded by the Markle Foundation , which examined the effects of Sesame Street on adolescents who had watched the show as young children . The subjects had participated in previous studies as preschoolers . When the study 's research subjects were statistically equated for parents ' level of education , birth order , residence and gender , it found that adolescents who had watched Sesame Street as preschoolers were positively influenced by it . Compared with children who had not watched it regularly , they had higher grades in English , math , and science ; read for pleasure more often ; perceived themselves as more competent , and expressed lower levels of aggression . The effects were stronger in adolescent boys than in adolescent girls . 
 In early 2001 , the Workshop conducted a summative study about the effects of war , natural disasters , and other events on young children . It demonstrated that little was being done to address the fears and concerns of victims of traumatic events . As a result , the Workshop developed a series of materials it believed would help children ( and their families ) cope with events such as the September 11 terrorist attacks and Hurricane Katrina . 
 Sesame Street has been used to test the attention span of infants and toddlers . In 2004 , children from three months to two years were shown Sesame Street clips and a group of computer @-@ generated black and white patterns . Their attention spans , as determined by the duration of time they looked at the stimuli , significantly increased at six to twenty @-@ four months , but only for the Sesame Street material . A study conducted in 2006 found that infants ' attention span increased more when they were presented with video clips than with still images of the same stimuli , supporting the idea that movement helps young infants gain more information from the world around them . The evidence showed that attention span depended both on age and the on the type of stimuli children viewed . The time they looked at stimuli decreased for all types of stimuli from fourteen to twenty @-@ six weeks , but the time they looked at it increased depending on the stimuli . When older infants ( age fourteen weeks to twelve months ) looked at Sesame Street materials and human faces , their attention increased compared to other types of stimuli . 
 In 2010 , researchers at the University of Michigan studied the effect of combining video clips of Sesame Street and related print materials , online activities , and teacher training and mentoring on learning . They demonstrated that all the subjects they tested at Head Start programs in Detroit scored the same as a middle @-@ class control group in tests later given to both groups . 
 = Pisco sour = 
 A pisco sour is a cocktail typical of South American cuisine . The drink 's name comes from pisco , which is its base liquor , and the cocktail term sour , in reference to sour citrus juice and sweetener components . The Peruvian pisco sour uses Peruvian pisco as the base liquor and adds Key lime ( or lemon ) juice , syrup , ice , egg white , and Angostura bitters . The Chilean version is similar , but uses Chilean pisco and pica lime , and excludes the bitters and egg white . Other variants of the cocktail include those created with fruits like pineapple or plants such as coca leaves . 
 The cocktail originated in Lima , Peru , and was invented by Victor Vaughen Morris , an American bartender , in the early 1920s . Morris left the United States in 1903 to work in Cerro de Pasco , a city in central Peru . In 1916 , he opened Morris ' Bar in Lima , and his saloon quickly became a popular spot for the Peruvian upper class and English @-@ speaking foreigners . The pisco sour underwent several changes until Mario Bruiget , a Peruvian bartender working at Morris ' Bar , created the modern Peruvian recipe of the cocktail in the latter part of the 1920s by adding Angostura bitters and egg whites to the mix . 
 In Chile , folklorist Oreste Plath attributed the invention of the drink to Elliot Stubb , an English steward of a ship named Sunshine , who allegedly mixed Key lime juice , syrup , and ice cubes to create the cocktail in a bar , in 1872 , in the port city of Iquique , which at that time was part of Peru . Regardless , the original source cited by Plath attributed to Stubb the invention of the whiskey sour — not the pisco sour . The oldest known mentions of the pisco sour are from a 1921 magazine attributing Morris as the inventor and a 1924 advertisement for Morris ' Bar published in a newspaper from the port of Valparaíso , Chile . 
 Chile and Peru both claim the pisco sour as their national drink , and each asserts ownership of the cocktail 's base liquor — pisco ; consequently , the pisco sour has become a significant and oft @-@ debated topic of Latin American popular culture . The two kinds of pisco and the two variations in the style of preparing the pisco sour are distinct in both production and taste . Peru celebrates a yearly public holiday in honor of the cocktail during the first Saturday of February . 
 = = Name = = 
 The term sour refers to mixed drinks containing a base liquor ( bourbon or some other whiskey ) , lemon or lime juice , and a sweetener . Pisco refers to the base liquor used in the cocktail . The word as applied to the alcoholic beverage comes from the Peruvian port of Pisco . In the book Latin America and the Caribbean , historian <unk> Blouet and political geographer Brian Blouet describe the development of vineyards in early Colonial Peru and how in the second half of the sixteenth century a market for the liquor formed owing to the demand from growing mining settlements in the Andes . Subsequent demand for a stronger drink caused Pisco and the nearby city of Ica to establish distilleries " to make wine into brandy " , and the product received the name of the port from where it was distilled and exported . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The first grapevines were brought to Peru shortly after its conquest by Spain in the 16th century . Spanish chroniclers from the time note the first winemaking in South America took place in the hacienda <unk> of Cuzco . The largest and most prominent vineyards of the 16th and 17th century Americas were established in the Ica valley of south @-@ central Peru . In the 1540s , Bartolomé de Terrazas and Francisco de <unk> planted vineyards in Peru . <unk> also established vineyards in Ica , from where Spaniards from Andalucia and Extremadura introduced grapevines into Chile . 
 Already in the 16th century , Spanish settlers in Chile and Peru began producing aguardiente distilled from fermented grapes . Since at least 1764 , Peruvian aguardiente was called " pisco " after its port of shipping ; the usage of the name " pisco " for aguardiente then spread to Chile . The right to produce and market pisco , still made in Peru and Chile , is the subject of ongoing disputes between the two countries . 
 According to historian Luciano <unk> , the preparation of pisco with lemon dates as far back as the 18th century . He bases his claim on a source found in the Mercurio <unk> which details the prohibition of aguardiente in Lima 's Plaza de toros de Acho , the oldest bullring in the Americas . At this time , the drink was named <unk> ( Punch ) , and was sold by slaves . <unk> further argues this drink served as the predecessor of the Californian Pisco punch , invented by Duncan Nicol in the Bank Exchange Bar of San Francisco , California . A recipe for a pisco @-@ based punch , including egg whites , was found by researcher Nico Vera in the 1903 Peruvian cookbook Manual de <unk> a la <unk> ; consequently , culinary expert Duggan McDonnell considers that " [ i ] t is entirely possible that the ' Cocktail ' that came to be the pisco sour [ ... ] had been prepared for a reasonable time in Lima before being included in a cookbook . " 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 The pisco sour originated in Lima , Peru . It was created by bartender Victor Vaughen Morris , an American who had moved to Peru in 1904 to work in a railway company in Cerro de Pasco . Morris relocated to Lima in 1915 and , a year later , opened a saloon — Morris ' Bar — which became popular with both the Peruvian upper class and English @-@ speaking foreigners . Chilean historian Gonzalo Vial Correa also attributes the pisco sour 's invention to Gringo Morris from the Peruvian Morris Bar , but with the minor difference of naming him William Morris . Morris often experimented with new drinks , and developed the pisco sour as a variety of the whiskey Sour . 
 Some discrepancy exists on the exact date when Morris created the popular cocktail . <unk> Dale <unk> asserts the drink was invented in 1915 , but other sources argue this happened in the 1920s . The Chilean web newspaper El Mercurio Online specifically contends historians attribute the year of the drink 's invention as 1922 , adding that " one night Morris surprised his friends with a new drink he called pisco sour , a formula which mixes the Peruvian pisco with the American sour " ( in Spanish : " Una noche Morris <unk> a sus <unk> con una nueva <unk> a la que <unk> pisco sour , una <unk> que <unk> lo <unk> del pisco con el ' sour ' <unk> . " ) . 
 The pisco sour 's initial recipe was that of a simple cocktail . According to Peruvian researcher Guillermo Toro @-@ Lira , " it is assumed that it was a crude mix of pisco with lime juice and sugar , as was the whiskey sour of those days . " As the cocktail 's recipe continued to evolve , the bar 's registry shows that customers commented on the continuously improving taste of the drink . The modern Peruvian version of the recipe was developed by Mario Bruiget , a Peruvian from Chincha Alta who worked under the apprenticeship of Morris starting on July 16 , 1924 . Bruiget 's recipe added the Angostura bitters and egg whites to the mix . Journalist Erica <unk> writes that Bruiget 's innovation added " a silky texture and frothy head " to the cocktail . 
 Morris used advertisements to promote his bar and invention . The oldest known mention of the pisco sour appears in the September 1920 edition of the Peruvian magazine Hogar . Another old advertisement appears in the April 22 , 1921 , edition of the Peruvian magazine Mundial . In the magazine , not only is the pisco sour described as a white @-@ colored beverage , but its invention is attributed to " Mister Morris . " Later , in 1924 , with the aid of Morris ' friend Nelson <unk> , the bar advertised its locale and invention in Valparaíso , Chile . The advertisement featured in the Valparaíso newspaper South Pacific Mail , owned by <unk> . By 1927 , Morris ' Bar had attained widespread notability for its cocktails , particularly the pisco sour . Brad Thomas Parsons writes that " the registry at the Morris Bar was filled with high praise from visitors who raved about the signature drink . " 
 Over time , competition from nearby bars and Victor Morris ' deteriorating health led to the decline and fall of his enterprise . During this time , due to his worsening constitution , Morris delegated most of the bartending to his employees . Adding to the problem , nearby competitors , such as the Hotel Bolívar and the Hotel Lima Country Club , housed bars which took clientele away from Morris ' Bar . Moreover , Toro @-@ Lira discovered that Morris accused four of his former bartenders of intellectual property theft after they left to work in one of these competing establishments . In 1929 , Morris declared voluntary bankruptcy and closed his saloon . A few months later , on June 11 , Victor Vaughen Morris died of cirrhosis . 
 = = = Spread = = = 
 Historian Luis Alberto Sánchez writes that , after Morris closed his bar , some of his bartenders left to work in other locales . Bruiget began working as a bartender for the nearby Grand Hotel Maury , where he continued to serve his pisco sour recipe . His success with the drink led local <unk> oral tradition to associate the Hotel Maury as the original home of the pisco sour . As other former apprentices of Morris found other work , they also spread the pisco sour recipe . During the 1930s the drink made its way into California , reaching bars as far north as the city of San Francisco . By at least the late 1960s the cocktail also found its way to New York . 
 Beatriz Jiménez , a journalist from the Spanish newspaper El Mundo , indicates that back in Peru , the luxury hotels of Lima adopted the pisco sour as their own in the 1940s . During the 1940s and 1950s an oil bonanza attracted foreign attention to Peru . Among the visitors to Lima were renowned Hollywood actors who were fascinated by the pisco sour . Jiménez recollected oral traditions claiming an inebriated Ava Gardner had to be carried away by John Wayne after drinking too many pisco sours . Ernest Hemingway and Orson Welles are said to have been big fans of what they described as " that Peruvian drink . " 
 In 1984 , Bolivian journalist Ted Córdova <unk> writes that the Hotel Bolívar stood as a monument to the decadence of Peruvian oligarchy ( in Spanish : " Este hotel es un <unk> a la <unk> de la <unk> <unk> . " ) . He noted the locale as being the traditional home of the pisco sour and recommended it as one of the best hotels in Lima . Nowadays , the Hotel Bolivar continues to offer the cocktail in its " El <unk> " bar , while the Country Club Lima Hotel offers the drink in its " English Bar " saloon . 
 = = = Nationality dispute = = = 
 Victor Vaughen Morris is considered by most historians to be the inventor of the cocktail . Despite this , there exists an ongoing dispute between Chile and Peru over the origin of the pisco sour . In Chile , a local story developed in the 1980s attributing the invention of the pisco sour to Elliot Stubb , an English steward from a sailing ship named " Sunshine . " Chilean folklorist and historian Oreste Plath contributed to the legend 's propagation by writing that , according to the Peruvian newspaper El Comercio de Iquique , in 1872 , after obtaining leave to disembark , Stubb opened a bar in the then @-@ Peruvian port of Iquique and invented the pisco sour while experimenting with drinks . 
 Nevertheless , researcher Toro @-@ Lira argues that the story was refuted after it was discovered El Comercio de Iquique was actually referring to the invention of the whiskey sour . This claim is further certified by the University of Cuyo , Argentina , which in 1962 published the story of Elliot Stubb and his alleged invention of the whiskey sour in Iquique . An excerpt from the newspaper 's story has Elliot Stubb stating , " From now on ... this shall be my drink of battle , my favorite drink , and it shall be named Whisky Sour " ( in Spanish : " En <unk> dijo Elliot — <unk> será mi <unk> de <unk> , — mi <unk> <unk> — , y se <unk> Whisky Sour . " ) . 
 = = Preparation and variants = = 
 The pisco sour has three different methods of preparation . The Peruvian pisco sour cocktail is made by mixing Peruvian pisco with Key lime juice , simple syrup , egg white , Angostura bitters ( for garnish ) , and ice cubes . The Chilean pisco sour cocktail is made by mixing Chilean Pisco with Pica lime juice , powdered sugar , and ice cubes . Daniel <unk> , a food writer and critic , contends that the major difference between both pisco sour versions " is that Peruvians generally include egg whites , while Chileans do not . " The version from the International Bartenders Association , which lists the pisco sour among its " New Era Drinks , " is similar to the Peruvian version , but with the difference that it uses lemon juice , instead of lime juice , and does not distinguish between the two different types of pisco . 
 Considerable variations exist in the pisco used in the cocktails . According to food and wine expert Mark Spivak , the difference is in the way both beverages are produced ; whereas " Chilean pisco is mass @-@ produced " , the Peruvian version " is made in small batches . " Cocktail historian Andrew Bohrer focuses his comparison on taste , claiming that " [ i ] n Peru , pisco is made in a pot still , distilled to proof , and un @-@ aged ; it is very similar to <unk> . In Chile , pisco is made in a column still and aged in wood ; it is similar to a very light cognac . " Chilean <unk> Patricio Tapia adds that while Chilean pisco producers usually mix vine stocks , Peruvian producers have specific pisco types that use the aromatic qualities of vines such as Yellow Muscat and Italia . Tapia concludes this is why Peruvian pisco bottles denote their vintage year and the Chilean versions do not . 
 Variations of the pisco sour exist in Peru , Bolivia , and Chile . There are adaptations of the cocktail in Peru using fruits such as <unk> , <unk> , and apples , or traditional ingredients such as the coca leaf . In Chile , variants include the <unk> Sour ( with a spicy green chili ) , Mango Sour ( with mango juice ) , and Sour de Campo ( with ginger and honey ) . In Bolivia , the <unk> variant ( from its Yungas region ) replaces the lime with orange juice . 
 Cocktails similar to the pisco sour include the Chilean <unk> and the Peruvian <unk> Cocktail . <unk> is made by mixing pisco with cola . The <unk> Cocktail is made from pisco , condensed milk , and sap from the Peruvian <unk> tree . Another similar cocktail , from the United States , is the Californian pisco punch , originally made with Peruvian pisco , pineapples , and lemon . 
 = = Popularity = = 
 Duggan McDonnell describes the pisco sour as " Latin America 's most elegant cocktail , frothy , balanced , bright yet rich , " adding that " <unk> throughout Northern California will attest that they have shaken many a Pisco sour . It is the egg white cocktail of choice and an absolutely beloved one by most . " Australian journalist Kate Schneider writes that the pisco sour " has become so famous that there is an International Pisco Sour Day celebration on the first Saturday in February every year , as well as a Facebook page with more than 600 @,@ 000 likes . " According to Chilean entrepreneur Rolando Hinrichs <unk> , owner of a restaurant @-@ bar in Spain , " The pisco sour is highly international , just like <unk> , and so they are not too unknown " ( Spanish : " El pisco sour es <unk> <unk> , al <unk> que el <unk> , por lo tanto no son tan <unk> " ) . In 2003 , Peru created the " Día Nacional del Pisco Sour " ( National Pisco Sour Day ) , an official government holiday celebrated on the first Saturday of February . 
 During the 2008 APEC Economic Leaders ' Meeting , Peru promoted its pisco sour with widespread acceptance . The cocktail was reportedly the preferred drink of the attendees , mostly leaders , businessmen , and delegates . American celebrity chef Anthony Bourdain also drew attention to the cocktail when , in an episode of his Travel Channel program No Reservations , he drank a pisco sour in Valparaíso , Chile , and said " that 's good , but ... next time , I 'll have a beer . " The broadcaster Radio <unk> del Perú reported that Jorge López Sotomayor , the episode 's Chilean producer and Bourdain 's travel partner in Chile , said Bourdain found the pisco sour he drank in Valparaíso as boring and worthless ( in Spanish : " A <unk> me dijo que el pisco sour lo <unk> <unk> y que no <unk> la <unk> . " ) . Lopez added that Bourdain had recently arrived from Peru , where he drank several pisco sours which he thought tasted better than the Chilean version . 
 In Mexico , singer @-@ songwriter Aleks Syntek controversially posted on Twitter that the pisco sour is Chilean . After receiving critical responses to his statement , Syntek apologized and mentioned he was only joking . Mexican television host and comedian Adal Ramones also joked about pisco sour , in reference to the 2009 Chile – Peru espionage scandal , on November 17 , 2009 . Ramones , a fan of Peruvian Pisco , when asked about the espionage , asked what Chileans were spying on in Peru , suggesting it might be how to make a pisco sour ( in Spanish : " ¿ Qué <unk> <unk> los <unk> ? ¿ Cómo <unk> pisco sour ? " ) . 
 = Boston Society for Medical Improvement = 
 The Boston Society for Medical Improvement was an elite medical society based in Boston , Massachusetts . It was established in 1828 for the purposes of " the cultivation of confidence and good feeling between members of the profession ; the eliciting and imparting of information upon the different branches of medical science ; and the establishment of a Museum and Library of Pathological Anatomy " and continued to hold regular meetings until at least 1917 . 
 = = Founding and organization = = 
 The Society was established February 19 , 1828 by John P. Spooner . By @-@ laws were established at a founding meeting of eleven members , and the first regular meeting was held on March 10 . Within a year the Society had grown to 25 members . 
 Meetings were held on the second and fourth Mondays of each month , originally in Spooner 's home . Usually a member 's reading of a paper was followed by discussion of recent cases of either special interest or on which the attending physician wished the opinion of his colleagues . There were frequent presentations of remarkable tissues and organs obtained during post @-@ mortems , or unusual specimens found in nature , those of particular interest being added to the " Cabinet " of the Society . 
 The Society 's original officers were a committee of four and a secretary , who made up the " Prudential Committee " , as well as a librarian and a cabinet keeper . These offices were filled once a year by vote at the first meeting in January . Members were admitted twice a year , in April and October , with only practicing physicians from Boston being eligible . 
 = = History = = 
 During its first year the Society 's Anatomical Cabinet was established , and several members collaborated to combine the New England Journal of Medicine and Surgery and the Boston Medical Intelligencer into the Boston Medical and Surgical Journal ( now the New England Journal of Medicine ) . The Society 's expenses in the first year were $ 7 @.@ 50 . 
 In 1830 , after resolving to publish their transactions and to have a standing committee , the Society moved to a room on Washington Street , rented for an annual fee of $ 25 . In 1833 The Medical Magazine published a piece praising the Society and encouraging the formation of similar organizations . 
 The Society limited its membership to Boston 's medical elite . In 1835 a number ineligible physicians ( mostly younger , less established members of the profession ) formed a competing organization , the Boston Society for Medical Observation . By 1838 , when the Society was incorporated , membership had grown to 35 , with approximately 25 attending any given meeting . Around 1840 the Society relocated once again , to Tremont Row . Until 1840 the Society often held anniversary celebrations ( frequently including the presentation of an original poem by member Oliver Wendell Holmes ) but after that date they became increasingly rare . 
 Sometime during the summer of 1842 J.B.S. Jackson " asked the opinion of the Society as to the contagion of puerperal fever and the probability of physicians communicating it from one patient to another " following the death of a physician who had treated an infected woman , and the subsequent infection of the patients he had treated in the interim . This piqued the interest of Holmes , who , after a period of research , presented his essay , " The <unk> of <unk> Fever " , to the Society on February 13 , 1843 ; it was later published at the Society 's request in the April issue of the New England Quarterly Journal of Medicine and Surgery . 
 On November 10 , 1849 , Henry Jacob Bigelow presented Phineas Gage to the Society , between the cases of a stalagmite " remarkable for its singular resemblance to a petrified penis " and a child cured of a swollen ankle by a Dr. Strong . 
 By 1853 , the number of members had grown to 60 . The Society 's medical collections were donated to the Warren Anatomical Museum around 1870 , while its library was absorbed into the Boston Medical Library in 1875 . Membership had grown again by 1876 , reaching 79 regular members . In 1878 the Society moved to a building on Boylston Street , the former home of Samuel Gridley Howe , after it was purchased by the Boston Medical Library Association . 
 By 1880 , however , the Society , total membership 99 , had begun to go into a period of slight decline . The office of President was instituted as part of an attempt to stem this decline ; the first president was James H. White . On November 19 , 1890 , the Society held a special meeting in honor of Henry J. Bigelow , who had recently died . 
 The Boston Society for Medical Observation was merged into the Society for Medical Improvement in 1894 . In 1901 , James Gregory Mumford published The Story of the Boston Society for Medical Improvement in the March issue of the Boston Medical and Surgical Journal . 
 In 1905 the members of the Society tendered a proposal to the Boston Medical Library to disband : the proposal was rejected , however , both by the library and by vote at the next meeting . By this time the Society had reduced its meetings to an annual occurrence , and it was generally viewed as " undesirable " to have them more often , due to the fact that the Medical Library and the Suffolk District Medical Society had begun to hold joint sessions . The last record of the Society comes from 1917 . 
 = = Collection = = 
 The Society had an expansive Anatomical Cabinet , begun in 1828 , the year of its founding . It included a number of specimens from the War of 1812 , which had been acquired by the Society from Dr. S. D. Townsend and Charles H. Stedman of the Chelsea Naval Hospital . It also included a number of Chinese paintings of medical cases donated by Robert William Hooper . By 1840 , the cabinet was estimated to contain around 600 specimens . Beginning in 1831 the Cabinet was curated by J.B.S. Jackson ( also curator of the Warren Anatomical Museum from 1847 on ) . The two were merged around 1870 , and Jackson continued his work until his death in 1879 . 
 The curator was tasked with keeping a catalog and a case history of each specimen in the cabinet . Jackson published two descriptions of the collection in 1847 : A Descriptive Catalogue of the Anatomical Museum of the Boston Society for Medical Improvement , and later that year A Descriptive Catalogue of the <unk> in the Cabinet of the Boston Society of Medical Improvement , which focused solely on the anatomical oddities from the cabinet . Both books were abridged versions of the complete catalog . In the first volume , the specimens of the cabinet were divided into fifteen sections : healthy bones , diseased bones , soft parts about the bones , heart and blood vessels , organs of sense , vocal and respiratory organs , alimentary canal , organs accessory to the alimentary canal , urinary organs , female organs of generation , male organs of generation , utero @-@ gestation , monstrosities , and parasites . 
 = = Locations = = 
 When it was first formed , the Society held its meetings at the houses of its members . It then set up a regular establishment over a chemist 's shop on Washington Street . Some years later , it relocated again to Tremont Row , over another chemist 's shop , before moving to Temple Place . When its library was moved to the Boston Medical Library on Boylston Street , the Society relocated there . By 1901 it had moved to Fenway . 
 = = Notable members = = 
 Henry Jacob Bigelow 
 Jacob Bigelow 
 Henry Ingersoll Bowditch 
 Thomas Dwight 
 John Dix Fisher 
 Augustus Addison Gould 
 Richard Hodges 
 Oliver Wendell Holmes , Sr. 
 Charles Thomas Jackson 
 J.B.S. Jackson 
 Nathaniel B. Shurtleff 
 Nathan Ryno Smith 
 David Humphreys Storer 
 Jeffries Wyman 
 = The Old Man and the Lisa = 
 " The Old Man and the Lisa " is the twenty @-@ first episode of The Simpsons ' eighth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on April 20 , 1997 . In the episode , Mr. Burns becomes bankrupt and asks Lisa to help him become rich again . She helps him on the condition that he will lose his evil manners , and the two start making money recycling cans . After a while Mr. Burns has made enough money to start his own recycling plant . However , his true colors are revealed when Mr. Burns shows that , inside the plant , he makes a multi @-@ purpose edible compound made of squished sea life . He then sells the plant for US $ 120 million and offers Lisa 10 % of his profits , but she declines . 
 The episode was directed by Mark Kirkland and written by John Swartzwelder . The writing staff had thought about an episode in which Mr. Burns would lose his money and would have to interact with the outside world . In DVD commentary the writers explained that while Mr. Burns tried to change he " couldn 't help being himself " . Professional wrestler Bret Hart made a cameo as himself , animated in his pink wrestling outfit . " The Old Man and the Lisa " contains cultural references to the television series That Girl and the film Invasion of the Body Snatchers . It was positively received by critics and won the Environmental Media Award for " TV Episodic Comedy " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mr. Burns speaks with the Springfield Elementary School " Junior <unk> Club " and after a conversation with Lisa , he realizes that he does not have nearly as much money as he thought he did . He decides to invest in the stock market to earn his money back . However , in doing so , he makes more questionable investments and becomes bankrupt . The bank <unk> on the plant and puts Lenny in charge , and sells Mr. Burns ' house to pro wrestler Bret Hart . 
 Mr. Burns moves in with Smithers and , wanting to be of use , decides to do Smithers ' grocery shopping . However , he is unfamiliar with grocery stores and becomes confused by the ketchup and catsup , causing the grocer to send Burns to the Springfield Retirement Castle . While at the home , Mr. Burns meets Lisa again , and begs her to help re @-@ build his empire . She eventually agrees on the condition that he drop his evil ways , and the two begin earning money through recycling . 
 Whilst at first he is confused at the practice Mr. Burns enthusiastically begins grabbing every can he can find , causing Lisa to believe that he has changed . Eventually , Burns earns so much money that he is able to open his own recycling plant . Burns gives Lisa its opening tour , showing her that it is environmentally sound and made of recycled materials . At first , Lisa is impressed , but then Burns shows her " the best part " . He has taken a cue from a demonstration Lisa had given him earlier , and attached millions of six @-@ pack holders together into a net which he uses to catch tons of sea life , in order to make " Li 'l Lisa 's Patented Animal <unk> " , a multi @-@ purpose edible compound . Lisa is horrified , proclaiming Burns not only still evil , but even more evil when he tries to be good , and begins running through the streets , helplessly trying to get the seemingly indoctrinated citizens to stop the recycling program she herself started . 
 Mr. Burns later visits Lisa and tells her that he sold the recycling plant for US $ 120 million to a fish stick company , and that he has decided to give her , being his advisor , a 10 % share of the profits . Lisa refuses the money and rips up the cheque . This causes Homer to have four simultaneous heart attacks . While in the hospital , Lisa apologizes to Homer for not accepting the money . He tells her that he understands what she did , but says that the $ 12 @,@ 000 would have been a big financial help . Lisa replies that 10 % of $ 120 million is actually $ 12 million . The hospital 's public address system announces a code blue , signifying that Homer has entered cardiac arrest . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was based on a story idea pitched by David X. Cohen , although it was written by John Swartzwelder , who had written many of the Simpsons episodes that have environmental themes . This habit led to him being called the " conscience of the staff " despite being a " self declared anti @-@ environmentalist . " It was because of this that he was given such episodes , because the staff felt that he would give them just the right amount of sarcasm . In the original script for the episode , he described the recycling center as " a couple of hippies surrounded by garbage " . Two alternate original titles for the episode were Cohen 's " Lisa and Burns " and Swartzwelder 's " Burns Goes Broke " . 
 The writers had wanted an episode where Burns becomes bankrupt and shows what Burns would be like as a person in the real world . The idea with the recycling plant was that Burns did not have any sort of evil plan , he just could not help being himself . Burns really was trying to change and this was reflected in the end when he tried to give Lisa her share of the profits , with Lisa refusing . Burns was drawn without his trademark scowl for this episode . The staff joked about this being a suitable series finale , due to the episode ending with Homer suffering from another heart attack after Lisa tells Homer what 10 % of Burns ' $ 120 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 check really is . 
 Professional wrestler Bret Hart guest starred in the episode as himself , and he was very insistent that he be shown wearing his pink wrestling outfit . He explained that " It 's so cool to be part of a show that makes people laugh really , really hard . " The media , aware that the animated Hart would want to purchase Mr. Burns ' home , mistakenly anticipated that " Bret offers to wrestle him [ Mr. Burns ] for the place . " Later , Hart moved on to do voice work on the animated television series Jacob Two @-@ Two . The press noted that at that time Hart was " no stranger to cartoon @-@ land , " having been " immortalized " by " The Old Man and the Lisa " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Burns 's walk through the supermarket was based on a false rumor that George H. W. Bush visited a store and was confused by the scanner and , in the original draft for the episode , Burns met Bush while there . When bidding farewell to the hippie Mr. Burns says " Shine On You Crazy Diamond " a reference to Pink Floyd 's song of the same name . The hippie responds by saying that Burns needs to stop living in the past . The voice of the hippie is based on Dennis Hopper 's character in Apocalypse Now . " Achy Breaky Heart " , a song by Billy Ray Cyrus , is played at the old folks ' home . The scene where Mr. Burns chases Lisa through town is a spoof of the opening to the TV series That Girl . The scene where Lisa runs through the streets proclaiming recycling as evil spoofs the finales of Soylent Green and the original The Invasion of the Body Snatchers . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " The Old Man and the Lisa " finished 38th in ratings for the week of April 14 – 20 , 1997 , with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 3 , equivalent to approximately 8 @.@ 1 million viewing households . It was tied along with King of the Hill as the third highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ files and Melrose Place . 
 " The Old Man and the Lisa " received the 1997 Environmental Media Award in the " TV Episodic Comedy " category . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , called it " An odd episode with a not @-@ too @-@ unexpected outcome . The best bits are undoubtedly Burns learning his way around a supermarket and Lisa 's realisation of what Burns has been up to . " 
 = Luo Yixiu = 
 Luo Yixiu ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; October 20 , 1889 – February 11 , 1910 ) , a Han Chinese woman , was the first wife of the later Chinese communist revolutionary and political leader Mao Zedong , to whom she was married from 1908 until her death . Coming from the area around Shaoshan , Hunan , in south central China – the same region as Mao – her family were impoverished local landowners . 
 Most of what is known about their marriage comes from an account Mao gave to American reporter Edgar Snow in 1936 , which Snow included in his book Red Star Over China . According to Mao , he and Luo Yixiu were the subject of an arranged marriage organised by their respective fathers , Mao Yichang and Luo Helou . Luo was eighteen and Mao just fourteen years old at the time of their betrothal . Although Mao took part in the wedding ceremony , he later stated that he was unhappy with the marriage , never consummating it and refusing to live with his wife . Socially disgraced , she lived with Mao 's parents for two years until she died of dysentery , while he moved out of the village to continue his studies elsewhere , eventually becoming a founding member of the Communist Party of China . Various biographers have suggested that Mao 's experience of this marriage affected his later views , leading him to become a critic of arranged marriage and a vocal feminist . He would marry three more times throughout his life , to Yang Kaihui , He <unk> and Jiang Qing , the last of whom was better known as Madame Mao . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born on October 20 , 1889 , Luo Yixiu was the eldest daughter of Luo Helou ( <unk> ; 1871 – 1943 ) , a <unk> ( <unk> ) – or rural intellectual who earned his living as a farmer – and his wife ( 1869 – 1912 ) , whose surname was Mao and who was a distant great @-@ aunt of Mao Zedong . Although historian Lee Feigon stated that the Luo family was locally important , Mao biographers Alexander V. Pantsov and Steven I. Levine claimed that they had fallen into poverty . Luo Helou and his wife had five sons and five daughters , but seven of these children died , leaving them only three daughters . The couple 's lack of adult sons diminished their social status , for in Chinese society at the time , only sons could continue the family lineage . 
 = = The marriage = = 
 = = = Preparation = = = 
 Mao Zedong had been born and raised at his father 's farm in Shaoshanchong , a small rural village named for the nearby Shaoshan mountain . His disciplinarian father , Mao Yichang , had decided to deal with Zedong 's rebellious attitude in a manner typical of the time , by forcing him into an arranged marriage that would compel him to take family matters seriously . Yichang also desired a helper for his own wife , Wen Qimei , whose health had deteriorated through years of heavy agricultural labour . He selected Luo Yixiu in either late 1907 or 1908 . Her kinship to the <unk> may have helped in this selection , as Luo Yixiu 's mother 's four brothers , surnamed Mao , lived only two li ( 1 km ) from Mao Yichang 's home in Shaoshanchong . Following traditional procedures , a matchmaker would have been sent to the Luo family house , and the Luo family would have been socially expected to accept the marriage proposal immediately . Luo Helou was happy to see his eldest daughter married . The two families exchanged gifts and signed the marriage contract , after which the marriage was considered inviolable . 
 Zedong first met Yixiu on the day that the contract was signed . Years later , his granddaughter Kong <unk> stated that Mao was unhappy with his father 's choice , and that he instead was in love with his cousin , Wang <unk> . However , marriage to Wang had been ruled out by a local diviner because their horoscopes were incompatible . Although displeased by the arrangement , Mao agreed to marry Luo . At the time he was fourteen , and later erroneously informed Edgar Snow that Luo was aged twenty , a claim independently accepted by Mao biographers Ross Terrill and Philip Short , but later challenged by biographers Jung Chang and Jon Halliday , and Alexander V. Pantsov and Steven I. Levine , who established that she was eighteen . 
 = = = The wedding = = = 
 The wedding took place in 1908 . According to a number of Mao 's biographers , the ceremony would have likely followed traditional rural Hunanese custom . Thus , it probably would have begun with a feast in the groom 's home on the day before the ceremony , to which friends and relatives were invited . The next day , the bride would have been dressed in red , with a red veil over her face , and carried by red palanquin to the groom 's family home . There , her veil would have been removed , and she would have been expected to express unhappiness and dissatisfaction with the groom by publicly insulting him . According to tradition , a display of fireworks would probably have taken place , before both bride and groom would have kowtowed to each guest , to the groom 's ancestral altar , to the spirits , and to one another , concluding the ceremony . 
 If traditional practices were adhered to , feasting would have continued for two days , while guests would have given gifts , mainly of money , to the newlyweds . The wedding ceremony would have culminated with the guests entering the bridal chamber , where they would have made various sexual references and innuendos , led by a figure with his face painted black . In Chinese rural tradition , the bride was expected to show the bloodstains on the bed sheets from her wedding night to prove that her hymen had been broken during sexual intercourse , and that she had therefore been a virgin . 
 = = = Married life = = = 
 According to what he told Snow , Mao refused to live with his wife and claimed that they had never consummated their marriage . Soon after the wedding , he ran away from home to live with an unemployed student in Shaoshan . There he spent much of his time reading , particularly historical works like Sima Qian 's Records of the Grand Historian and Ban Gu 's History of the Former Han Dynasty , and political tracts like Feng <unk> 's Personal Protests from the Study of Jiao Bin . 
 Now considered part of the Mao family , Luo lived with Mao Yichang and Wen Qimei at their home , but was publicly humiliated by her husband 's disappearance ; some locals considered her to be Yichang 's concubine . Luo Yixiu died of dysentery on February 11 , 1910 , the day after Chinese New Year . Mao Zedong returned home ; his father forgave him for his disobedience , and in the autumn of 1910 agreed to finance his son 's studies at the Dongshan Higher Primary School , and so Mao left Shaoshanchong . When in 1936 Mao told Snow " I do not consider her my wife " , he made no mention of her death . Luo Yixiu 's grave is located on the mountain facing Mao Zedong 's former residence in Shaoshanchong , a few steps away from the tomb of his parents . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 When Mao Zedong returned to Shaoshan in 1925 to organize a local peasant movement , he went to visit Luo Yixiu 's relatives , including her father Luo Helou and his nephew Luo Shiquan ( <unk> ) . Luo Shiquan would join the Communist Party in the winter of that year and would remain a peasant activist until the 1949 revolution . Because Luo Yixiu had died without offspring , when the Mao lineage updated its genealogy book in 1941 , Mao <unk> ( <unk> ) , who was Mao Zedong 's third son with his second wife Yang Kaihui , was listed as Luo 's descendant . In 1950 , Mao sent his eldest son Mao <unk> to Shaoshan and instructed him to visit Luo Shiquan . Mao also kept in contact with two men who had married Luo Yixiu 's sisters , and met one of these men when he returned to Shaoshan in 1959 for the first time since the 1920s . 
 = = Influence on Mao = = 
 In Mao : A <unk> , American historian Lee Feigon argued that Mao 's experience with arranged marriage inspired him to become " a vehement advocate of women 's rights " in the late 1910s , as he began to write articles for the left @-@ wing press criticizing the traditional Chinese family system and arguing that love , rather than societal or family pressures , should be the primary determinant in marriage . This idea had previously been expressed by journalist and sinologist Clare Hollingworth . In their biography Mao : The Unknown Story , Jung Chang and Jon Halliday agreed , stating that it was this experience with Luo that turned Mao into a " fierce opponent " of arranged marriage . 
 Mao would marry three more women over the course of his life : Yang Kaihui in December 1920 , He <unk> in May 1928 , and Jiang Qing in November 1939 . 
 = Sector General = 
 Sector General is a series of twelve science fiction novels and various short stories by the Northern Irish author James White . The series derives its name from the setting of the majority of the books , the Sector 12 General Hospital , a huge hospital space station located in deep space , designed to treat a wide variety of life forms with a wide range of ailments and life @-@ support requirements , and to house an equally diverse staff . The Hospital was founded to promote peace after humanity 's first interstellar war , and in the fourth book the authorities conclude that its emergency services are the most effective way to make peaceful contact with new species . 
 In order to treat patients of other species , doctors must download into their brains " Educator tapes " containing the necessary medical knowledge , and these tapes also transmit the personalities of their donors . As a result doctors have to struggle with the tastes imported from their donors , ranging from a dislike of their own species ' normal food to sexual attraction for members of the donor 's species . Other running gags include the acerbic tongue of the Chief Psychologist and one very senior non @-@ human doctor 's love of gossip , especially about the sexual behavior of other species . 
 The series is noted for its diverse and believable non @-@ humanoid alien life forms , and for its pacifist philosophy . White chose the hospital setting as a way to generate dramatic tension without violence , and because in his youth he wanted to be a doctor but had to go to work . Some commentators have praised the whole series , while others have thought there was a decline after the sixth book . One reviewer described the last book as " in a very positive way , a throwback to an earlier era in science fiction " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Sector General is a gigantic multi @-@ species hospital space station founded as a peace @-@ promoting project by two heroes from opposite sides of humanity 's first full interstellar war . The hospital accommodates patients and staff from dozens of species , with different environmental requirements , behaviors and ailments , but many of the stories feature types of patient that the builders did not anticipate . Initially most of the stories center round the career of Doctor Conway , who rises from junior surgeon to the top level , Senior Diagnostician . In the fourth book the Galactic Federation decides that the emergency service which the hospital offers to victims of space accidents and planetary catastrophes is its most effective means of making peaceful contact with new spacefaring species , which allows the series to expand its range of plots , characters and locations . 
 White said that The Troubles in Northern Ireland induced him to write about the sort of world he would like to live in , and that he disliked war and militarists . As a youth he wanted to become a doctor , but had to go out to work . Hence he relied on epidemics and natural disasters to provide the conflicts that stories need to make them interesting . He credited his wife , who was an intensive care nurse at the height of The Troubles , for advice on medical details and for pointing out how padres often did more good than doctors for disturbed patients , which inspired The Genocidal Healer . 
 = = Challenges of inter @-@ species medicine = = 
 Sector General was founded to promote inter @-@ species harmony , and therefore all medical staff must be prepared to treat beings with very different <unk> and behavior patterns , and sometimes with environmental requirements that would be lethal to staff without suitable protection . The hospital uses a four @-@ letter system to assign patients to wards that provide suitable environments , a classification technique used earlier by E. E. " Doc " Smith 's Children of the Lens . White 's Star Healer introduces the classification " <unk> " , which is regarded as an in @-@ joke on the name of the Glasgow science fiction club Friends of Kilgore Trout . The List of Sector General species provides a partial list of the species to be found in the hospital . 
 Early on , it was learned that diseases were species specific , so there was no danger of a disease or virus spreading to other races and potentially causing a pandemic . Extreme care is still taken , as there only has to be single instance of this not being the case to have deadly consequences . 
 When necessary physicians , surgeons and pathologists download information about patients ' species into their minds from " Educator tapes " , recordings of the memories of great practitioners in the appropriate species . However , in addition to medical knowledge , the educator tapes also capture the personalities of the medical experts who recorded them . Thus having an educator tape active threatens the recipient with multiple personality disorder . The new personality is from a vastly different species , often with very different behavior codes and sexual preferences , and , to make matters worse , the donors were often very dominant personalities . The mildest symptom of such conflicts is a running gag in which users of these tapes are often seen in the Sector General 's cafeteria , eating a bland @-@ looking sandwich with closed eyes . On the other hand the risk of finding members of other species sexually attractive is a serious concern . 
 Junior doctors usually have these acquired memories erased as soon as possible . However as a doctor rises up through the hospital hierarchy , and if its mind proves to be sufficiently stable , it may find itself the permanent recipient of one or more tapes . <unk> , the medical elite of Sector General , can have as many as ten different tapes active at one time , as they may have to supervise treatment of many species at the same time . 
 In the case of species with two permanent sexes , including but not limited to Earth @-@ humans , the stories state that females are psychologically incapable of allowing their psyches to be violated to the extent required by the educator tapes . However in one of the later books a very assertive non @-@ human female character accidentally acquires several sets of memories which cannot be erased , and adjusts to this with relative ease . 
 = = Regular characters = = 
 Although many of the characters are " Earth @-@ human " – " human " is ambiguous because all species refers to themselves as " human " in their own languages – the stories feature medical staff from a wide range of species . In each story characters belonging to species different from that of the protagonist are treated as neuter and referred to as " it " . Some species are touchy about any reference to sexual roles and behavior , some have more than two sexes and some change sex once or more during their lifetimes . 
 The following appear in nearly all the stories : 
 Dr. Conway 
 A male Earth @-@ human who starts as a junior intern and , over the course of the series , works his way up to Chief Surgeon and eventually Diagnostician in Charge of Surgery . Conway ( whose first name , Peter , is only revealed in the ninth book ) generally prefers extraterrestrial company to that of his own species , and has a habit of thinking aloud . His passions are healing and Murchison . 
 Murchison 
 A curvaceous female Earth @-@ human first seen as a senior nurse in the Pathology department . She eventually becomes a doctor and a Pathologist herself , and also Conway 's wife . 
 Dr. Prilicla 
 A large but fragile winged insect @-@ like being from the very low @-@ gravity planet <unk> . In addition to being highly skilled in the more delicate types of surgery , Prilicla is an empath and therefore can sense the emotions of most other lifeforms including many non @-@ intelligent animals . Its tact and the desire of colleagues to avoid distressing it by displaying negative emotions generally makes others willing to follow its advice – a pattern that one reviewer described as " a pleasant Machiavellian streak . " Despite its natural timidity and the distress that other beings ' anger , fear and pain cause it , Prilicla uses its empathic ability in prolonged searches for survivors of space combat and accidents . 
 Major O 'Mara 
 The Earth @-@ human head of the hospital 's Psychology department , his job is to ensure that the hospital 's diverse species work together as harmoniously , efficiently and safely as circumstances allow , and particularly to save the staff from being driven insane by over @-@ use of Educator tapes . Since he is a very acute observer of behavior and often uses sarcasm " to shrink heads , not swell them " , he is sometimes called a " latter @-@ day Torquemada " . 
 Charge Nurse Naydrad 
 A member of the <unk> species , Naydrad looks like a giant caterpillar . Since the involuntary movements of <unk> ' fur completely show their emotions , the species is incapable of both lying and tact . Naydrad is a specialist in rescuing victims of space accidents . 
 Thornnastor 
 A native of the high @-@ gravity planet <unk> , Thornnastor ( nicknamed " Thorny " ) has a body like a six @-@ legged elephant , and its own keen senses are supplemented by a symbiont that provides acute vision over up to 360 degrees . Thornnastor is the Diagnostician in Charge of Pathology , and it carries ten Educator tapes . Its fascination with gossip , especially about the scandalous activities of a multi @-@ sexed , methane @-@ breathing , cryogenic species , is a running gag in the series . 
 = = Critical appraisal = = 
 The Sector General series defined the subgenre of multi @-@ species medical stories , although L. Ron Hubbard 's Ole Doc Methuselah stories and Murray Leinster 's Med Service stories , neither of which were highly regarded , had explored some similar themes . Sector General was " the first explicitly pacifist space opera " series , while much of contemporary space opera from the USA was notably military . Mike Resnick described the series ' characters as " the most memorable crew of aliens ever created " . Michael Ashley commented that the setting of the television series Star Trek : Deep Space Nine is reminiscent of Sector General . The Babylon 5 television series was also set in space station with atmospheres for different species . 
 Many commentators attribute the series ' popularity to the altruism of its doctors and the emphasis on seeking to build peaceful relations between different species . John Clute wrote that " in the depiction of goodness may lie the real genius of James White . " White 's hatred of war and xenophobia is a constant theme of the series , notably in : Star Surgeon , where the Monitor Corps fights a savage battle in defence of the hospital space station , to prevent the conflict from escalating into a full interstellar war that can only end in genocide ; and in The Genocidal Healer , where an alien race 's sexual urges are almost eliminated by a plague and can only be stimulated by hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat . 
 The early stories focus almost entirely on medical problems , mainly from Conway 's viewpoint . In Dave Langford 's opinion the <unk> novelties were becoming less credible by the end of Star Healer , and using a variety of alien viewpoint characters gave the later books " considerable new pep " . These also deal with deeper issues , notably in The Genocidal Healer , and better than most science fiction according to Resnick . 
 Opinions differ about the quality of the series as a whole . For example Gary Westfahl wrote that " the Sector General stories remained consistently fresh and involving , and they grew in prominence as the series progressed . " On the other hand Todd White wrote that the series declined after Star Healer ( 1985 ) , hitting a low point with the Galactic Gourmet ( 1996 ) , and that the later books tended to stretch a short story 's worth of content to the length of a novel . However he thought that Mind Changer ( 1998 ) represented an improvement . 
 Publishers Weekly described Mind Changer as " White 's finest performance , replete with wit , originality , medical expertise and sheer decency " and commented that the series shows no signs of aging , and Booklist described the book as an " enjoyable , witty <unk> " of Chief Psychologist O 'Mara 's career . 
 Clinton Lawrence described the last Sector General book , Double Contact ( 1999 ) , as " in a very positive way , a throwback to an earlier era in science fiction " since it is optimistic and depicts several advanced species working harmoniously . The struggle to build trust and produce a successful first contact is , he thought , as exciting and suspenseful as one could wish for . However he noted that the level of characterization was the minimum required to support the plot . 
 = = Stories in the series = = 
 The Sector General series began as short stories published in New Worlds from 1957 onwards . Originally White intended to end the series with Star Healer ( 1985 ) , by which time the central characters had reached the top levels in their careers , but Ballantine Books persuaded him to continue . He extended the stories ' range by introducing new central characters beginning with Code Blue - Emergency ( 1987 ) , and The Genocidal Healer ( 1992 ) focused on psychological and theological issues of guilt and forgiveness rather than strictly medical ones . 
 The books in the series are : 
 Hospital Station ( 1962 : stories published in New Worlds 1957 – 1960 ) 
 Star Surgeon ( 1963 ) 
 Major Operation ( 1971 : stories published in New Worlds 1968 – 1971 ) 
 Ambulance Ship ( 1979 ) 
 Sector General ( 1983 ) 
 Star Healer ( 1985 ) 
 Code Blue - Emergency ( 1987 ) 
 The Genocidal Healer ( 1992 ) 
 The Galactic Gourmet ( 1996 ) 
 Final Diagnosis ( 1997 ) 
 Mind Changer ( 1998 ) 
 Double Contact ( 1999 ) 
 These were also published as omnibus editions : 
 Beginning Operations ( 2001 ) contains Hospital Station , Star Surgeon and Major Operation . 
 Alien Emergencies ( 2002 ) contains Ambulance Ship , Sector General and Star Healer . 
 General Practice ( 2003 ) contains Code Blue - Emergency and The Genocidal Healer . 
 Tales of Sector General ( 1999 ) contains The Galactic Gourmet , Final Diagnosis , and Mind Changer . 
 Notes : 
 White 's short story Sector General is in the book Hospital Station . 
 In addition to these books , several related short stories ( Countercharm , Tableau , Occupation : Warrior , and Custom Fitting ) appear in other collections by White . The first three are in The Aliens Among Us , the fourth in Futures Past . 
 The short story Custom Fitting does not mention Sector General , but does describe the Galactic Federation making its first contact with Earth . Tableau also does not mention Sector General but introduces the alien race , the <unk> , who appear in the series . 
 The short story Occupation : Warrior , published in 1959 , provides the backstory of the Monitor Corps ' Commander <unk> , who appears in some of the books . However the editor of Science Fiction Adventures removed all reference to Sector General from Occupation : Warrior because he thought it was too grim to be treated as part of the series . Countercharm is the only short story actually set in Sector General , not included in a Sector General book . 
 Alan E. Nourse also wrote a science fiction novel called Star Surgeon . 
 = = See Also = = 
 List of Sector General species 
 = Washington State Route 502 = 
 State Route 502 ( SR 502 , officially known as the Battle Ground Highway ) is a 6 @.@ 12 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 9 @.@ 85 km ) state highway in the U.S. state of Washington , serving the city of Battle Ground in Clark County . The highway travels due east from an interchange with Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) north of Mount Vista through Dollars Corner and Battle Ground to an intersection with SR 503 , serving as connector between Battle Ground and I @-@ 5 . Prior to the 1964 highway renumbering , SR 502 was part of Secondary State Highway 1S ( SSH 1S ) , which was established in 1937 . The highway traveled south from its current western terminus until the construction of a new interchange with I @-@ 5 in 2008 , part of a project to widen SR 502 and install a median barrier on the roadway . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 502 begins as the four @-@ lane Battle Ground Highway at exit 11 on I @-@ 5 , a partial cloverleaf interchange located north of Mount Vista , and travels due east as 219th Street , crossing Gee Creek and passing the northbound Gee Creek rest area . The narrowed two @-@ lane highway travels east through rural Clark County and the community of Dollars Corner before it enters the city of Battle Ground , where it becomes four @-@ lane Main Street . SR 502 crosses over Mill Creek and travels through the city , ending at an intersection with SR 503 and Main Street . 
 Every year , the Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2011 , WSDOT calculated that between 8 @,@ 200 and 26 @,@ 000 vehicles per day used the highway , mostly within Battle Ground . The entire route is designated as part of the National Highway System , which includes roadways important to the national economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 SSH 1S was created in 1937 during the formation of the primary and secondary state highways , traveling on a 57 @.@ 60 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 92 @.@ 70 km ) route east from Primary State Highway 1 ( PSH 1 ) and U.S. Route 99 ( US 99 ) north of Mount Vista to intersect SSH 1U in Battle Ground and turned north towards Amboy and west to end at PSH 1 and US 99 in Woodland . After PSH 1 and US 99 was realigned onto a four @-@ lane limited @-@ access highway in the late 1940s , SSH 1S was extended south over the old highway to intersect PSH 1 and US 99 . 
 SR 502 was established during the 1964 highway renumbering and codified in 1970 as the successor to the Mount Vista – Battle Ground section of SSH 1S , while US 99 was replaced by I @-@ 5 . WSDOT constructed a new interchange between I @-@ 5 and 219th Street between April 2007 and October 2008 at a cost of $ 52 million . The new interchange and subsequent realignment shortened the total length of SR 502 by 1 @.@ 46 miles ( 2 @.@ 35 km ) , however , the mileposts were not updated , as of 2011 . During construction of the interchange , WSDOT uncovered archaeological remains belonging to a Coast Salish settlement at Gee Creek that were at least 8 @,@ 000 years old . The entire highway was christened the " Battle Ground Highway " in May 2009 to signify the importance of SR 502 connecting the city of Battle Ground to I @-@ 5 . 
 WSDOT began preparing to install a median barrier and widen SR 502 to four lanes between the I @-@ 5 interchange and the western Battle Ground city limit in July 2012 to accommodate increasing traffic on the highway , which has a speed limit up to 50 miles per hour ( 80 km / h ) . Construction for the $ 85 million project began in earnest in 2014 . New Mill Creek wetlands were created , to mitigate for wetlands buried by construction , which included the driving of 1 @,@ 200 concrete pilings . The new , four @-@ lane highway , which includes 10 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) shoulders for bicycle and pedestrian travel and traffic signals at major intersections , opened on June 27 , 2016 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Clark County . 
 = Carbon monoxide poisoning = 
 Carbon monoxide poisoning occurs after too much inhalation of carbon monoxide ( CO ) . Carbon monoxide is a toxic gas , but , being colorless , odorless , tasteless , and initially non @-@ irritating , it is very difficult for people to detect . Carbon monoxide is a product of incomplete combustion of organic matter due to insufficient oxygen supply to enable complete oxidation to carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) . It is often produced in domestic or industrial settings by motor vehicles that run on gasoline , diesel , methane , or other carbon @-@ based fuels and from tools , gas heaters , and cooking equipment that are powered by carbon @-@ based fuels such as propane , butane and charcoal . Exposure at 100 ppm or greater can be dangerous to human health . 
 Symptoms of mild acute poisoning include lightheadedness , confusion , headache , vertigo , and flu @-@ like effects ; larger exposures can lead to significant toxicity of the central nervous system and heart , and death . After acute poisoning , long @-@ term sequelae often occur . Carbon monoxide can also have severe effects on the fetus of a pregnant woman . Chronic exposure to low levels of carbon monoxide can lead to depression , confusion , and memory loss . Carbon monoxide mainly causes adverse effects in humans by combining with hemoglobin to form carboxyhemoglobin ( <unk> ) in the blood . This prevents hemoglobin from carrying oxygen to the tissues , effectively reducing the oxygen @-@ carrying capacity of the blood , leading to hypoxia . Additionally , myoglobin and mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase are thought to be adversely affected . Carboxyhemoglobin can revert to hemoglobin , but the recovery takes time because the <unk> complex is fairly stable . 
 Treatment of poisoning largely consists of administering 100 % oxygen or providing hyperbaric oxygen therapy , although the optimum treatment remains controversial . Oxygen works as an antidote as it increases the removal of carbon monoxide from hemoglobin , in turn providing the body with normal levels of oxygen . The prevention of poisoning is a significant public health issue . Domestic carbon monoxide poisoning can be prevented by early detection with the use of household carbon monoxide detectors . Carbon monoxide poisoning is the most common type of fatal poisoning in many countries . Historically , it was also commonly used as a method to commit suicide , usually by deliberately inhaling the exhaust fumes of a running car engine . Modern automobiles , even with electronically controlled combustion and catalytic converters , can still produce levels of carbon monoxide which will kill if enclosed within a garage or if the tailpipe is obstructed ( for example , by snow ) and exhaust gas cannot escape normally . Carbon monoxide poisoning has also been speculated as a possible cause of apparent haunted houses ; symptoms such as delirium and hallucinations may have led people suffering poisoning to think they have seen ghosts or to believe their house is haunted . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Carbon monoxide is not toxic to all forms of life . Its harmful effects are due to binding with hemoglobin so its danger to organisms that do not use this compound is doubtful . It thus has no effect on photosynthesising plants . It is easily absorbed through the lungs . Inhaling the gas can lead to hypoxic injury , nervous system damage , and even death . Different people and populations may have different carbon monoxide tolerance levels . On average , exposures at 100 ppm or greater is dangerous to human health . In the United States , the OSHA limits long @-@ term workplace exposure levels to less than 50 ppm averaged over an 8 @-@ hour period ; in addition , employees are to be removed from any confined space if an upper limit ( " ceiling " ) of 100 ppm is reached . Carbon monoxide exposure may lead to a significantly shorter life span due to heart damage . The carbon monoxide tolerance level for any person is altered by several factors , including activity level , rate of ventilation , a pre @-@ existing cerebral or cardiovascular disease , cardiac output , anemia , sickle cell disease and other hematological disorders , barometric pressure , and metabolic rate . 
 The acute effects produced by carbon monoxide in relation to ambient concentration in parts per million are listed below : 
 = = = Acute poisoning = = = 
 The main manifestations of carbon monoxide poisoning develop in the organ systems most dependent on oxygen use , the central nervous system and the heart . The initial symptoms of acute carbon monoxide poisoning include headache , nausea , malaise , and fatigue . These symptoms are often mistaken for a virus such as influenza or other illnesses such as food poisoning or gastroenteritis . Headache is the most common symptom of acute carbon monoxide poisoning ; it is often described as dull , frontal , and continuous . Increasing exposure produces cardiac abnormalities including fast heart rate , low blood pressure , and cardiac arrhythmia ; central nervous system symptoms include delirium , hallucinations , dizziness , unsteady gait , confusion , seizures , central nervous system depression , unconsciousness , respiratory arrest , and death . Less common symptoms of acute carbon monoxide poisoning include myocardial ischemia , atrial fibrillation , pneumonia , pulmonary edema , high blood sugar , lactic acidosis , muscle necrosis , acute kidney failure , skin lesions , and visual and auditory problems . 
 One of the major concerns following acute carbon monoxide poisoning is the severe delayed neurological manifestations that may occur . Problems may include difficulty with higher intellectual functions , short @-@ term memory loss , dementia , amnesia , psychosis , irritability , a strange gait , speech disturbances , Parkinson 's disease @-@ like syndromes , cortical blindness , and a depressed mood . Depression may occur in those who did not have pre @-@ existing depression . These delayed neurological sequelae may occur in up to 50 % of poisoned people after 2 to 40 days . It is difficult to predict who will develop delayed sequelae ; however , advanced age , loss of consciousness while poisoned , and initial neurological abnormalities may increase the chance of developing delayed symptoms . 
 One classic sign of carbon monoxide poisoning is more often seen in the dead rather than the living – people have been described as looking red @-@ cheeked and healthy ( see below ) . However , since this " cherry @-@ red " appearance is common only in the deceased , and is unusual in living people , it is not considered a useful diagnostic sign in clinical medicine . In pathological ( autopsy ) examination the ruddy appearance of carbon monoxide poisoning is notable because <unk> dead persons are normally bluish and pale , whereas dead carbon @-@ monoxide poisoned persons may simply appear unusually lifelike in coloration . The colorant effect of carbon monoxide in such postmortem circumstances is thus analogous to its use as a red colorant in the commercial meat @-@ packing industry . 
 = = = Chronic poisoning = = = 
 Chronic exposure to relatively low levels of carbon monoxide may cause persistent headaches , lightheadedness , depression , confusion , memory loss , nausea and vomiting . It is unknown whether low @-@ level chronic exposure may cause permanent neurological damage . Typically , upon removal from exposure to carbon monoxide , symptoms usually resolve themselves , unless there has been an episode of severe acute poisoning . However , one case noted permanent memory loss and learning problems after a 3 @-@ year exposure to relatively low levels of carbon monoxide from a faulty furnace . Chronic exposure may worsen cardiovascular symptoms in some people . Chronic carbon monoxide exposure might increase the risk of developing atherosclerosis . Long @-@ term exposures to carbon monoxide present the greatest risk to persons with coronary heart disease and in females who are pregnant . 
 = = Causes = = 
 Carbon monoxide is a product of combustion of organic matter under conditions of restricted oxygen supply , which prevents complete oxidation to carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) . Sources of carbon monoxide include cigarette smoke , house fires , faulty furnaces , heaters , wood @-@ burning stoves , internal combustion vehicle exhaust , electrical generators , propane @-@ fueled equipment such as portable stoves , and gasoline @-@ powered tools such as leaf blowers , lawn mowers , high @-@ pressure washers , concrete cutting saws , power <unk> , and welders . Exposure typically occurs when equipment is used in buildings or semi @-@ enclosed spaces . 
 Riding in pickup trucks has led to poisoning in children . Idling automobiles with the exhaust pipe blocked by snow has led to the poisoning of car occupants . Any perforation between the exhaust manifold and shroud can result in exhaust gases reaching the cabin . Generators and propulsion engines on boats , especially houseboats , has resulted in fatal carbon monoxide exposures . 
 Poisoning may also occur following the use of a self @-@ contained underwater breathing apparatus ( SCUBA ) due to faulty diving air compressors . 
 In caves carbon monoxide can build up in enclosed chambers due to the presence of decomposing organic matter . In coal mines incomplete combustion may occur during explosions resulting in the production of afterdamp . The gas is up to 3 % CO and may be fatal after just a single breath . Following an explosion in a colliery adjacent , interconnected , mines may become dangerous due to the afterdamp leaking from mine to mine . Such an incident followed the <unk> Grange explosion which killed men in the <unk> mine . 
 Another source of poisoning is exposure to the organic solvent dichloromethane , found in some paint strippers , as the metabolism of dichloromethane produces carbon monoxide . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 The precise mechanisms by which the effects of carbon monoxide are induced upon bodily systems , are complex and not yet fully understood . Known mechanisms include carbon monoxide binding to hemoglobin , myoglobin and mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase and restricting oxygen supply , and carbon monoxide causing brain lipid peroxidation . 
 = = = Hemoglobin = = = 
 Carbon monoxide has a higher diffusion coefficient compared to oxygen and the only enzyme in the human body that produces carbon monoxide is heme <unk> which is located in all cells and breaks down heme . Under normal conditions carbon monoxide levels in the plasma are approximately 0 mmHg because it has a higher diffusion coefficient and the body easily gets rid of any CO made . When CO is not ventilated it binds to hemoglobin , which is the principal oxygen @-@ carrying compound in blood ; this produces a compound known as carboxyhemoglobin . The traditional belief is that carbon monoxide toxicity arises from the formation of carboxyhemoglobin , which decreases the oxygen @-@ carrying capacity of the blood and inhibits the transport , delivery , and utilization of oxygen by the body . The affinity between hemoglobin and carbon monoxide is approximately 230 times stronger than the affinity between hemoglobin and oxygen so hemoglobin binds to carbon monoxide in preference to oxygen . 
 Hemoglobin is a tetramer with four oxygen binding sites . The binding of carbon monoxide at one of these sites increases the oxygen affinity of the remaining three sites , which causes the hemoglobin molecule to retain oxygen that would otherwise be delivered to the tissue . This situation is described as carbon monoxide shifting the oxygen dissociation curve to the left . Because of the increased affinity between hemoglobin and oxygen during carbon monoxide poisoning , little oxygen will actually be released in the tissues . This causes hypoxic tissue injury . Hemoglobin acquires a bright red color when converted into carboxyhemoglobin , so poisoned cadavers and even commercial meats treated with carbon monoxide acquire an unnatural reddish hue . 
 = = = Myoglobin = = = 
 Carbon monoxide also binds to the <unk> myoglobin . It has a high affinity for myoglobin , about 60 times greater than that of oxygen . Carbon monoxide bound to myoglobin may impair its ability to utilize oxygen . This causes reduced cardiac output and hypotension , which may result in brain ischemia . A delayed return of symptoms have been reported . This results following a recurrence of increased carboxyhemoglobin levels ; this effect may be due to a late release of carbon monoxide from myoglobin , which subsequently binds to hemoglobin . 
 = = = Cytochrome oxidase = = = 
 Another mechanism involves effects on the mitochondrial respiratory enzyme chain that is responsible for effective tissue utilization of oxygen . Carbon monoxide binds to cytochrome oxidase with less affinity than oxygen , so it is possible that it requires significant intracellular hypoxia before binding . This binding interferes with aerobic metabolism and efficient adenosine triphosphate synthesis . Cells respond by switching to anaerobic metabolism , causing anoxia , lactic acidosis , and eventual cell death . The rate of dissociation between carbon monoxide and cytochrome oxidase is slow , causing a relatively prolonged impairment of oxidative metabolism . 
 = = = Central nervous system effects = = = 
 The mechanism that is thought to have a significant influence on delayed effects involves formed blood cells and chemical mediators , which cause brain lipid peroxidation ( degradation of unsaturated fatty acids ) . Carbon monoxide causes endothelial cell and platelet release of nitric oxide , and the formation of oxygen free radicals including peroxynitrite . In the brain this causes further mitochondrial dysfunction , capillary leakage , leukocyte sequestration , and apoptosis . The result of these effects is lipid peroxidation , which causes delayed reversible <unk> of white matter in the central nervous system known as <unk> <unk> , which can lead to edema and necrosis within the brain . This brain damage occurs mainly during the recovery period . This may result in cognitive defects , especially affecting memory and learning , and movement disorders . These disorders are typically related to damage to the cerebral white matter and basal ganglia . Hallmark pathological changes following poisoning are bilateral necrosis of the white matter , globus pallidus , cerebellum , hippocampus and the cerebral cortex . 
 = = = Pregnancy = = = 
 Carbon monoxide poisoning in pregnant women may cause severe adverse fetal effects . Poisoning causes fetal tissue hypoxia by decreasing the release of maternal oxygen to the fetus . Carbon monoxide also crosses the placenta and combines with fetal hemoglobin , causing more direct fetal tissue hypoxia . Additionally , fetal hemoglobin has a 10 to 15 % higher affinity for carbon monoxide than adult hemoglobin , causing more severe poisoning in the fetus than in the adult . Elimination of carbon monoxide is slower in the fetus , leading to an accumulation of the toxic chemical . The level of fetal morbidity and mortality in acute carbon monoxide poisoning is significant , so despite mild maternal poisoning or following maternal recovery , severe fetal poisoning or death may still occur . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 As many symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning also occur with many other types of poisonings and infections ( such as the flu ) , the diagnosis is often difficult . A history of potential carbon monoxide exposure , such as being exposed to a residential fire , may suggest poisoning , but the diagnosis is confirmed by measuring the levels of carbon monoxide in the blood . This can be determined by measuring the amount of carboxyhemoglobin compared to the amount of hemoglobin in the blood . 
 As people may continue to experience significant symptoms of CO poisoning long after their blood carboxyhemoglobin concentration has returned to normal , presenting to examination with a normal carboxyhemoglobin level ( which may happen in late states of poisoning ) does not rule out poisoning . 
 A CO @-@ oximeter is used to determine carboxyhemoglobin levels . Pulse CO @-@ <unk> estimate carboxyhemoglobin with a non @-@ invasive finger clip similar to a pulse oximeter . These devices function by passing various wavelengths of light through the fingertip and measuring the light absorption of the different types of hemoglobin in the capillaries . 
 The use of a regular pulse oximeter is not effective in the diagnosis of carbon monoxide poisoning as people suffering from carbon monoxide poisoning may have a normal oxygen saturation level on a pulse oximeter . This is due to the carboxyhemoglobin being misrepresented as oxyhemoglobin . 
 Breath CO monitoring offers a viable alternative to pulse CO @-@ oximetry . Carboxyhemoglobin levels have been shown to have a strong correlation with breath CO concentration . However , many of these devices require the user to inhale deeply and hold their breath to allow the CO in the blood to escape into the lung before the measurement can be made . As this is not possible in a <unk> patient , these devices are not appropriate for use in on @-@ scene emergency care detection of CO poisoning . 
 = = = Detection in biological specimens = = = 
 Carbon monoxide may be quantitated in blood using spectrophotometric methods or chromatographic techniques in order to confirm a diagnosis of poisoning in a person or to assist in the forensic investigation of a case of fatal exposure . Carboxyhemoglobin blood saturations may range up to 8 – 10 % in heavy smokers or persons extensively exposed to automotive exhaust gases . In symptomatic poisoned people they are often in the 10 – 30 % range , while persons who succumb may have postmortem blood levels of 30 – 90 % . 
 The ratio of carboxyhemoglobin to hemoglobin molecules in an average person may be up to 5 % , although cigarette smokers who smoke two packs / day may have levels up to 9 % . 
 = = = Differential diagnosis = = = 
 There are many conditions to be considered in the differential diagnosis of carbon monoxide poisoning . The earliest symptoms , especially from low level exposures , are often non @-@ specific and readily confused with other illnesses , typically flu @-@ like viral syndromes , depression , chronic fatigue syndrome , chest pain , and migraine or other headaches . Carbon monoxide has been called a " great <unk> " due to the presentation of poisoning being diverse and nonspecific . Other conditions included in the differential diagnosis include acute respiratory distress syndrome , altitude sickness , lactic acidosis , diabetic ketoacidosis , meningitis , methemoglobinemia , or opioid or toxic alcohol poisoning . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 = = = Detectors = = = 
 Prevention remains a vital public health issue , requiring public education on the safe operation of appliances , heaters , fireplaces , and internal @-@ combustion engines , as well as increased emphasis on the installation of carbon monoxide detectors . Carbon monoxide is tasteless and odourless so can not be detected by smell . 
 The United States Consumer Product Safety Commission has stated , " carbon monoxide detectors are as important to home safety as smoke detectors are , " and recommends each home have at least one carbon monoxide detector , and preferably one on each level of the building . These devices , which are relatively inexpensive and widely available , are either <unk> or AC @-@ powered , with or without battery backup . In buildings , carbon monoxide detectors are usually installed around heaters and other equipment . If a relatively high level of carbon monoxide is detected , the device sounds an alarm , giving people the chance to evacuate and ventilate the building . Unlike smoke detectors , carbon monoxide detectors do not need to be placed near ceiling level . 
 The use of carbon monoxide detectors has been standardized in many areas . In the USA , NFPA 720 @-@ 2009 , the carbon monoxide detector guidelines published by the National Fire Protection Association , mandates the placement of carbon monoxide detectors / alarms on every level of the residence , including the basement , in addition to outside sleeping areas . In new homes , AC @-@ powered detectors must have battery backup and be interconnected to ensure early warning of occupants at all levels . NFPA 720 @-@ 2009 is the first national carbon monoxide standard to address devices in non @-@ residential buildings . These guidelines , which now pertain to schools , healthcare centers , nursing homes and other non @-@ residential buildings , include three main points : 
 1 . A secondary power supply ( battery backup ) must operate all carbon monoxide notification appliances for at least 12 hours , 
 2 . Detectors must be on the ceiling in the same room as permanently installed fuel @-@ burning appliances , and 
 3 . Detectors must be located on every habitable level and in every HVAC zone of the building . 
 Gas organizations will often recommend to get gas appliances serviced at least once a year . 
 = = = Legal requirements = = = 
 The NFPA standard is not necessarily enforced by law . As of April 2006 , the U.S. state of Massachusetts requires detectors to be present in all residences with potential CO sources , regardless of building age and whether they are owner @-@ occupied or rented . This is enforced by municipal inspectors , and was inspired by the death of 7 @-@ year @-@ old Nicole Garofalo in 2005 due to snow blocking a home heating vent . Other jurisdictions may have no requirement or only mandate detectors for new construction or at time of sale . 
 Despite similar deaths in vehicles with clogged exhaust pipes ( for example in the Northeastern United States blizzard of 1978 and February 2013 nor 'easter ) and the commercial availability of the equipment , there is no legal requirement for automotive CO detectors . 
 = = = World Health Organization recommendations = = = 
 The following guideline values ( ppm values rounded ) and periods of time @-@ weighted average exposures have been determined in such a way that the <unk> ( <unk> ) level of 2 @.@ 5 % is not exceeded , even when a normal subject engages in light or moderate exercise : 
 100 mg / m3 ( 87 ppm ) for 15 min 
 60 mg / m3 ( 52 ppm ) for 30 min 
 30 mg / m3 ( 26 ppm ) for 1 h 
 10 mg / m3 ( 9 ppm ) for 8 h 
 For indoor air quality 7 mg / m3 ( 6 ppm ) for 24 h ( so as not to exceed 2 % <unk> for chronic exposure ) 
 = = Treatment = = 
 Initial treatment for carbon monoxide poisoning is to immediately remove the person from the exposure without endangering further people . Those who are unconscious may require CPR on site . Administering oxygen via non @-@ rebreather mask shortens the half life of carbon monoxide from 320 minutes to 80 minutes on normal air . Oxygen hastens the dissociation of carbon monoxide from carboxyhemoglobin , thus turning it back into hemoglobin . Due to the possible severe effects in the fetus , pregnant women are treated with oxygen for longer periods of time than non @-@ pregnant people . 
 = = = Hyperbaric oxygen = = = 
 Hyperbaric oxygen is also used in the treatment of carbon monoxide poisoning , as it may hasten dissociation of CO from carboxyhemoglobin and cytochrome oxidase to a greater extent than normal oxygen . Hyperbaric oxygen at three times atmospheric pressure reduces the half life of carbon monoxide to 23 ( ~ 80 / 3 minutes ) minutes , compared to 80 minutes for regular oxygen . It may also enhance oxygen transport to the tissues by plasma , partially bypassing the normal transfer through hemoglobin . However , it is controversial whether hyperbaric oxygen actually offers any extra benefits over normal high flow oxygen , in terms of increased survival or improved long @-@ term outcomes . There have been randomized controlled trials in which the two treatment options have been compared ; of the six performed , four found hyperbaric oxygen improved outcome and two found no benefit for hyperbaric oxygen . Some of these trials have been criticized for apparent flaws in their implementation . A review of all the literature on carbon monoxide poisoning treatment concluded that the role of hyperbaric oxygen is unclear and the available evidence neither confirms nor denies a medically meaningful benefit . The authors suggested a large , well designed , externally audited , multicentre trial to compare normal oxygen with hyperbaric oxygen . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Further treatment for other complications such as seizure , hypotension , cardiac abnormalities , pulmonary edema , and acidosis may be required . Increased muscle activity and seizures should be treated with <unk> or diazepam ; diazepam should only be given with appropriate respiratory support . Hypotension requires treatment with intravenous fluids ; vasopressors may be required to treat myocardial depression . Cardiac dysrhythmias are treated with standard advanced cardiac life support protocols . If severe , metabolic acidosis is treated with sodium bicarbonate . Treatment with sodium bicarbonate is controversial as acidosis may increase tissue oxygen availability . Treatment of acidosis may only need to consist of oxygen therapy . The delayed development of neuropsychiatric impairment is one of the most serious complications of carbon monoxide poisoning . Brain damage is confirmed following MRI or CAT scans . Extensive follow up and supportive treatment is often required for delayed neurological damage . Outcomes are often difficult to predict following poisoning , especially people who have symptoms of cardiac arrest , coma , metabolic acidosis , or have high carboxyhemoglobin levels . One study reported that approximately 30 % of people with severe carbon monoxide poisoning will have a fatal outcome . It has been reported that electroconvulsive therapy ( ECT ) may increase the likelihood of delayed neuropsychiatric sequelae ( DNS ) after carbon monoxide ( CO ) poisoning . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 The true number of incidents of carbon monoxide poisoning is unknown , since many non @-@ lethal exposures go undetected . From the available data , carbon monoxide poisoning is the most common cause of injury and death due to poisoning worldwide . Poisoning is typically more common during the winter months . This is due to increased domestic use of gas furnaces , gas or kerosene space heaters , and kitchen stoves during the winter months , which if faulty and / or used without adequate ventilation , may produce excessive carbon monoxide . Carbon monoxide detection and poisoning also increases during power outages . 
 It has been estimated that more than 40 @,@ 000 people per year seek medical attention for carbon monoxide poisoning in the United States . 95 % of carbon monoxide poisoning deaths in the United States are due to gas space heaters . In many industrialized countries carbon monoxide is the cause of more than 50 % of fatal poisonings . In the United States , approximately 200 people die each year from carbon monoxide poisoning associated with home fuel @-@ burning heating equipment . Carbon monoxide poisoning contributes to the approximately <unk> smoke inhalation deaths each year in the United States . The CDC reports , " Each year , more than 500 Americans die from unintentional carbon monoxide poisoning , and more than 2 @,@ 000 commit suicide by intentionally poisoning themselves . " For the 10 @-@ year period from 1979 to 1988 , 56 @,@ 133 deaths from carbon monoxide poisoning occurred in the United States , with 25 @,@ 889 of those being suicides , leaving 30 @,@ 244 unintentional deaths . A report from New Zealand showed that 206 people died from carbon monoxide poisoning in the years of 2001 and 2002 . In total carbon monoxide poisoning was responsible for 43 @.@ 9 % of deaths by poisoning in that country . In South Korea , 1 @,@ 950 people had been poisoned by carbon monoxide with 254 deaths from 2001 through 2003 . A report from Jerusalem showed 3 @.@ 53 per 100 @,@ 000 people were poisoned annually from 2001 through 2006 . In Hubei , China , 218 deaths from poisoning were reported over a 10 @-@ year period with 16 @.@ 5 % being from carbon monoxide exposure . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 As part of the Holocaust during World War II , German Nazis used gas vans at <unk> camp and elsewhere to kill an estimated over 700 @,@ 000 prisoners by carbon monoxide poisoning . This method was also used in the gas chambers of several death camps such as Treblinka , Sobibor and Belzec . <unk> with carbon monoxide started in action T4 , the euthanasia programme developed by the Nazis in Germany to murder the mentally ill and disabled people before the war started in earnest . Many key personnel were recruited to murder much larger numbers of people in the gas vans and the special gas chambers used in the death camps such as Treblinka . Exhaust fumes from tank engines for example , were used to supply the gas to the chambers . 
 = = Research = = 
 Carbon monoxide is produced naturally by the body as a byproduct of converting protoporphyrin into bilirubin . This carbon monoxide also combines with hemoglobin to make carboxyhemoglobin , but not at toxic levels . 
 Small amounts of CO are beneficial and enzymes exist that produce it at times of oxidative stress . Drugs are being developed to introduce small amounts of CO during certain kinds of surgery , these drugs are called Carbon monoxide @-@ releasing molecules . 
 = The Tribute Money ( Masaccio ) = 
 The Tribute Money is a fresco by the Italian renaissance painter Masaccio , located in the Brancacci Chapel of the basilica of Santa Maria del Carmine , Florence , and completed by his senior collaborator , Masolino . Painted in the 1420s , it is widely considered among Masaccio 's best work , and a vital part of the development of renaissance art . 
 The painting is part of a cycle on the life of Saint Peter , and describes a scene from the Gospel of Matthew , in which Jesus directs Peter to find a coin in the mouth of a fish in order to pay the temple tax . It owes its importance in particular to its revolutionary use of perspective and chiaroscuro . The Tribute Money suffered great damage in the centuries after its creation , until the chapel went through a thorough restoration in the 1980s . 
 = = The Brancacci Chapel = = 
 The Brancacci Chapel , in the basilica of Santa Maria del Carmine , was founded around 1366 / 7 by Piero di <unk> Brancacci . The chapel passed to Piero 's nephew , Felice Brancacci , who some time between 1423 and 1425 commissioned the painter Masolino to decorate the walls with a series of frescoes from the life of Saint Peter . Peter was the name @-@ saint of the founder , and the patron saint of the Brancacci family , but the choice also reflected support for the Roman papacy during the Great Schism . 
 At some point Masolino was joined by another artist , the eighteen years younger Masaccio . Masolino eventually left , either for Hungary in 1425 or for Rome in 1427 , leaving the completion of the chapel to Masaccio . In 1427 or 28 , before the chapel was completed , Masaccio joined Masolino in Rome . Only in the 1480s was the work finished , by Filippino Lippi . The Tribute Money , though , is considered Masaccio 's work entirely . 
 Over the centuries the frescoes were greatly altered and damaged . In 1746 the upper levels were painted over by the artist Vincenzo Meucci , covering up most of Masolino 's work . Then , in 1771 , the church was ruined by fire . The Brancacci Chapel , though structurally undamaged by the fire , suffered great damages to its frescoes . It was not until the years 1981 @-@ 1990 that a full @-@ scale restoration of the chapel was undertaken , restoring the frescoes to approximately their original state . The paintings had suffered some irreparable damage though , particularly the parts that were painted a secco : in The Tribute Money , the leaves on the trees were gone , while Christ 's robe had lost much of its original azure brilliance . 
 = = Subject matter = = 
 The scene depicted in The Tribute Money is drawn from Matthew 17 : 24 – 27 : 
 24 . And when they were come to Capernaum , they that received tribute money came to Peter , and said , Doth not your master pay tribute ? 25 . He saith , Yes . And when he was come into the house , Jesus prevented him , saying , What <unk> thou , Simon ? of whom do the kings of the earth take custom or tribute ? of their own children , or of strangers ? 26 . Peter saith unto him , Of strangers . Jesus saith unto him , Then are the children free . 27 . Notwithstanding , lest we should offend them , go thou to the sea , and cast an hook , and take up the fish that first cometh up ; and when thou hast opened his mouth , thou shalt find a piece of money : that take , and give unto them for me and thee . 
 The story is only found in Matthew , who was himself a tax collector according to Matthew 9 : 9 @-@ 13 . The passage has been used as a Christian justification for the legitimacy of secular authority , and is often seen in conjunction with another passage , the " render unto Caesar ... " story . In Matthew 22 : 15 – 22 , a group of Pharisees try to trick Christ into incriminating himself , by asking if it is " lawful to give tribute unto Caesar , or not . " Pointing out Caesar 's image on the coin , he replies " Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar 's ; and unto God the things that are God 's . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 The painting diverges somewhat from the biblical story , in that the tax collector confronts the whole group of Christ and the disciples , and the entire scene takes place outdoors . The story is told in three parts that do not occur sequentially , but the narrative logic is still maintained , through compositional devises . The central scene is that of the tax collector demanding the tribute . The head of Christ is the vanishing point of the painting , drawing the eyes of the spectator there . Both Christ and Peter then point to the left hand part of the painting , where the next scene takes place in the middle background : Peter taking the money out of the mouth of the fish . The final scene – where Peter pays the tax collector – is at the right , set apart by the framework of an architectural structure . 
 This work maintains a heavy importance in the Art History world , as it is widely believed to be the first painting , since the fall of Rome ( ca . 476 A.D. ) , to use Scientific Linear One Point Perspective , or , all the orthogonals point to one vanishing point , in this case , Christ . Also , it is one of the first paintings that does away with the use of a head @-@ cluster . A technique employed by earlier Proto @-@ Renaissance artists , such as Giotto or Duccio . If you were to walk into the painting , you could walk around Jesus Christ , in the semicircle created , and back out the painting again with ease . 
 Christ and the disciples are placed in a semicircle , reflecting the shape of the chapel 's apse . The tax collector , on the other hand , stands outside the holy space . While the group of holy men are dressed almost entirely in robes of pastel pink and blue , the official wears a shorter tunic of a striking vermilion . The colour adds to the impertinence expressed through his gestures . Another way contrast is achieved is in the way – both in the central scene and on the right – the tax collector 's postures are copying almost exactly those of Peter , only seen from the opposite angle . This gives a three @-@ dimensional quality to the figures , allowing the spectator to view them from all sides . 
 = = Style = = 
 Masaccio is often compared to contemporaries like Donatello and Brunelleschi as a pioneer of the renaissance , particularly for his use of single @-@ point perspective . One technique that was unique to Masaccio , however , was the use of atmospheric , or aerial perspective . Both the mountains in the background , and the figure of Peter on the left are dimmer and paler than the objects in the foreground , creating an illusion of depth . This technique was known in ancient Rome , but was considered lost until reinvented by Masaccio . 
 Masaccio 's use of light was also revolutionary . While earlier artists like Giotto had applied a flat , neutral light from an unidentifiable source , Masaccio 's light emanated from a specific location outside the picture , casting the figures in light and shadow . This created a chiaroscuro effect , sculpting the bodies into three @-@ dimensional shapes . 
 Masaccio is often justly praised for the variety of his facial depictions . In the case of this painting the accolade is somewhat diminished , however , by the fact that the work was unfinished at the time of his death , and the heads of Jesus and St Peter were painted by his senior collaborator Masolino da <unk> , ( who painted the corresponding perspective work on the other side of the Chapel , " Healing of the Cripple and Raising of Tabitha " . 
 = = Interpretations = = 
 Several theories have been proposed as to why this specific subject – not a very common theme in art history – was chosen . One suggestion sees the painting as a justification for the so @-@ called <unk> of 1427 ; a new form of income tax . This is not a very likely explanation , however , as Brancacci would stand to lose from the new taxation , and would probably rather have been among its opponents . A more probable explanation links the painting to Pope Martin V 's 1423 agreement that the Florentine church be subjected to state tax . The money found in the fish 's mouth can also be seen as an expression of how Florence 's wealth came from the sea . Felice Brancacci , a silk merchant involved in Mediterranean trade , was also a member of the city 's Board of Maritime Consuls . 
 Central to an understanding of the painting , as well as the entire series , is the relationship the <unk> and the city of Florence had with the papacy in Rome . Florence was at the time at war with Milan , and needed the support of the Pope . The Brancacci frescos must therefore be seen in the context of a pro @-@ papal policy , and as an attempt to legitimise the Roman see through its association with Saint Peter – the first bishop of Rome , and first pope . 
 In the story , Peter is clearly singled out among the disciples , and his strong connection with Christ can be seen in Christ 's words " for me and thee " . Peter appears a majestic and energetic figure when he is with Christ and when he performs his work , in contrast to the diminutive shape on the left . This all points forward to his apostolic role as Christ 's vicar on earth . As such The Tribute Money represents a transitional scene in the chapel ; in doing Christ 's bidding Peter goes from being a disciple to being the master . 
 Only two of the disciples can be identified with any degree of certainty : Peter with his iconographic grey hair and beard , and blue and yellow attire , and John ; the young beardless man standing next to Christ . John 's head is reminiscent of Roman sculptures , and it is reflected in the very similar face of another disciple on the right . The person next to this disciple is assumed to be Judas , whose dark and sinister face mirrors that of the tax collector . It has been speculated – first by Vasari – that the face on the far right is a self @-@ portrait of Masaccio himself , as Thomas . 
 = 1999 National League Wild Card tie @-@ breaker game = 
 The 1999 National League wild @-@ card tie @-@ breaker game was a one @-@ game extension to Major League Baseball 's ( MLB ) 1999 regular season , played between the New York Mets and Cincinnati Reds to determine the winner of the National League ( NL ) wild card . It was played at Cinergy Field in Cincinnati , on October 4 , 1999 . The Mets won the game 5 – 0 , with starting pitcher Al Leiter pitching a two @-@ hit shutout . As a result , the Mets qualified for the postseason and the Reds did not . 
 The game was necessary after both teams finished the season with identical win – loss records of 96 – 66 . Some described the Mets as collapsing late in the season while the race between the Reds and their division rival Houston Astros was close enough to create the possibility of a three @-@ way tie . The Reds won a coin flip late in the season which , by rule at the time , awarded them home field for the game . Upon winning , the Mets advanced to NL Division Series ( NLDS ) where they defeated the Arizona Diamondbacks , three @-@ games @-@ to @-@ one . They then advanced to the NL Championship Series ( NLCS ) but were defeated by the Atlanta Braves in six games , bringing an end to the Mets ' season . In baseball statistics , the tie @-@ breaker counted as the 163rd regular season game by both teams , with all events in the game added to regular season statistics . 
 = = Background = = 
 Neither the Mets nor the Reds had made the playoffs the previous season . The Mets finished the 1998 season with an 88 – 74 record , while the Reds finished below .500 at 77 – 85 . The Mets had been tied with the Chicago Cubs and San Francisco Giants in the 1998 wild @-@ card race as late in the season as September 25 at 88 – 72 . However , the Mets did not win another game that year and finished their season one game back of the Cubs and Giants who tied at 89 – 73 . The Cubs and Giants played a tie @-@ breaker in 1998 , with the Cubs ultimately winning the wild card . Sports writers said the Mets " blew " their lead and " collapse [ d ] " , later comparing their 1998 season to the Mets ' troubles late in the 1999 season . Rickey Henderson and Robin Ventura joined the Mets prior to the 1999 season and spent the year as their starting left fielder and third baseman . The Reds added right fielder Michael Tucker , center fielder Mike Cameron , and starting pitchers Denny Neagle and Steve Avery during the offseason . 
 The Mets spent 34 days of the 1999 season leading the Eastern Division , but following a seven @-@ game losing streak from September 21 – 28 along with an eight @-@ game winning streak by their division rival Atlanta Braves from September 19 – 28 the Braves took a commanding 8 @-@ game lead in the division that they did not relinquish . Meanwhile , the Reds and Houston Astros were locked in a tight race for the Central division . The Astros led the division for much of the season , but did not lead by more than three games after August 1 except for one day . Ultimately , the Astros won the division with a 97 – 65 record , one game ahead of the 96 – 66 Reds . The Astros won their 97th game on the final day of the season . If Houston had not won that game the Astros , Reds , and Mets would have instead been locked in a three @-@ way tie . Bob Costas suggested that MLB was lucky to avoid this situation as he believed they had " no reasonable tiebreaker " to deal with it . Had this three @-@ way tie arisen the Mets would have won the wild card while the Astros and Reds would have played a tie @-@ breaker for the Central division title . 
 The Mets ' losing streak late in the season led Jayson Stark to label them a " sinking ship " in a column on September 30 . However , the Mets broke this streak with a win over dominant pitcher Greg Maddux and then , following a loss , swept three games from the Pittsburgh Pirates . The sweep included a walk @-@ off win in the final game of the series . The Mets and Pirates were tied 1 – 1 in the bottom of the ninth inning when Pirates closer Brad <unk> threw a wild pitch which allowed Melvin Mora to score and win the game 2 – 1 , tying the Reds ' 96 – 66 record . The New York Daily News described this late @-@ season performance as an " agonizing roller coaster ride " for Mets fans . With the Mets and Reds holding the best non @-@ division winning records in the league a tie @-@ breaker was necessary to determine the wild @-@ card winner . Bob Costas said at the time he did not like the wild @-@ card system as he believed it " diminishes the drama and authenticity of a pennant race " , although he approved of the playoff teams in 1999 . Tim McCarver disagreed , arguing that the late @-@ season race between the Mets , Astros , and Reds showed the excitement a wild card can add to the season . A coin flip conducted earlier that September set the Reds ' home park of Cinergy Field as the location for the tie @-@ breaker game . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 Box score for Monday October 4 , 1999 — 7 : 05 p.m. ( ET ) at Cinergy Field in Cincinnati , Ohio 
 The Mets took a quick 2 – 0 lead with a single by Rickey Henderson to open the game followed immediately by a home run by Edgardo Alfonzo . They added to this lead in the third as Alfonzo drew a walk and then John Olerud hit a double which advanced Alfonzo to third base . Reds starter Steve Parris intentionally walked Mike Piazza to load the bases and was relieved by Denny Neagle . However , Neagle then walked Robin Ventura to score Alfonzo and extend the lead to 3 – 0 . Neagle remained in the game and yielded a home run to Henderson to lead off the fifth inning for the Mets ' fourth run . Neagle then loaded the bases with two outs with walks to Piazza and Ventura followed by a Darryl Hamilton single , but escaped the inning without further scoring . The Reds pinch hit for Neagle in the bottom of the fifth , and Danny Graves entered for them to pitch the sixth inning . Graves walked Rey Ordóñez to leadoff the inning , Mets starter Al Leiter sacrifice bunted Ordóñez to second , and following an out he scored on a double by Alfonzo . Graves remained in the game until Mark Lewis pinch hit for him in the eighth and Dennys Reyes relieved him in the ninth . Graves and Reyes held the score steady after the sixth but the Reds ' offense did not score against Al Leiter and the Mets won the game , and with it the Wild Card , 5 – 0 . 
 Al Leiter pitched a complete game shutout , scattering two hits and four walks across the nine inning start . This was Leiter 's first complete game of the season . Pokey Reese was the only Reds player to reach scoring position for the entire game , doubling to lead off the bottom of the ninth inning and then advancing to third on a ground out . The Bergen Record labeled Leiter the Mets ' " flag bearer " , coming through in games such as this when the team needed him most . For example , Leiter had also defeated Greg Maddux in his previous start on September 29 to snap the Mets ' seven @-@ game losing streak . Leiter 's earned run average in the second half of the 1999 season was 1 @.@ 22 runs lower than in the first . Leiter 's start earned an 86 game score , which tied for the 14th best total in the National League that season . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 New York 's win clinched the team 's fifth postseason berth in franchise history , their first since losing in the 1988 National League Championship Series . The playoff berth made the Mets the second team in MLB history to make the playoffs after being two games back of the leader with three games left to play in the season . The Mets defeated the Arizona Diamondbacks in the NLDS in four games . This win advanced the Mets to the NLCS where they were defeated by the Atlanta Braves in six games . After the defeat , Mets General Manager Steve Phillips summed up the harrowing weeks the team had been through saying that " we had destiny in our own hands , we lost destiny , we got it back in our own hands ... We didn 't choke . We didn 't fold . We won . " 
 The Mets performance in the playoffs drew heavy television viewership , with the decisive game of the NLCS scoring the highest ratings for any League Championship Series broadcast since 1993 . Overall the NLCS averaged 10 @.@ 9 million viewers , 18 % higher than the NLCS had drawn the year before . Variety writer Tom Bierbaum argued this was a good sign for the future of baseball because the Mets and Boston Red Sox had drawn younger viewers during their time in the postseason . Bierbaum believed that baseball needed fresh teams , not just the often @-@ successful Yankees and Braves , to draw new audiences and grow viewership . 
 In baseball statistics tie @-@ breakers count as regular season games , with all events in them added to regular season statistics . For example , Mike Piazza grounded into his 27th double play of the season in the 9th inning , adding to his league @-@ leading total . Similarly , Leiter 's performance advanced his position on several 1999 statistical leaderboards including shutouts and walks issued . Reese , Ventura , and Ordóñez won Rawlings Gold Glove Awards for the season while Piazza and Alfonzo won Silver Sluggers . Robin Ventura also finished sixth in Most Valuable Player voting , with Chipper Jones taking the award . 
 The New York Yankees also made the playoffs in 1999 , eventually advancing to the 1999 World Series where they defeated the Atlanta Braves . Prior to the Mets ' elimination Mike Lupica noted the possibility of a " Subway Series " , a term for a World Series played between two New York @-@ based teams . The 1956 World Series between the Yankees and then @-@ Brooklyn Dodgers was the last such Series . Yankees pitcher David Cone told Lupica " I want a Subway Series , for selfish reasons . I want to play in one . " Although the Mets failed to make the Series in 1999 the two met the following year in the 2000 World Series where the Yankees won in five games . After their 2000 World Series appearance the Mets did not make the playoffs again until 2006 , where they lost in that NLCS in seven games . Meanwhile , the Reds did not place in the top two of their division until returning to the playoffs in 2010 . Jack McKeon managed the Reds from 1998 – 2000 and was fired after the 2000 season when the team finished 10 games back of the division leading Cardinals . 
 = The Open Boat = 
 " The Open Boat " is a short story by American author Stephen Crane ( 1871 – 1900 ) . First published in 1897 , it was based on Crane 's experience of surviving a shipwreck off the coast of Florida earlier that year while traveling to Cuba to work as a newspaper correspondent . Crane was stranded at sea for thirty hours when his ship , the SS Commodore , sank after hitting a sandbar . He and three other men were forced to navigate their way to shore in a small boat ; one of the men , an oiler named Billie Higgins , drowned after the boat overturned . Crane 's personal account of the shipwreck and the men 's survival , titled " Stephen Crane 's Own Story " , was first published a few days after his rescue . 
 Crane subsequently adapted his report into narrative form , and the resulting short story " The Open Boat " was published in Scribner 's Magazine . The story is told from the point of view of an anonymous correspondent , with Crane as the implied author , the action closely resembles the author 's experiences after the shipwreck . A volume titled The Open Boat and Other Tales of Adventure was published in the United States in 1898 ; an edition entitled The Open Boat and Other Stories was published simultaneously in England . Praised for its innovation by contemporary critics , the story is considered an exemplary work of literary Naturalism , and is one of the most frequently discussed works in Crane 's canon . It is notable for its use of imagery , irony , symbolism , and the exploration of such themes as survival , solidarity , and the conflict between man and nature . H. G. Wells considered " The Open Boat " to be " beyond all question , the crown of all [ Crane 's ] work " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Hired by the Bacheller newspaper syndicate to serve as a war correspondent during the Cuban insurrection against Spain , the 25 @-@ year @-@ old Stephen Crane boarded the filibustering steamship SS Commodore on New Year 's Eve , 1896 . The ship sailed from Jacksonville , Florida , with 27 or 28 men and a cargo of supplies and ammunition for the Cuban rebels . On the St. Johns River , less than 2 miles ( 3 km ) from Jacksonville , Commodore struck a sandbar in a dense fog and damaged its hull . Although towed off the sandbar the following day , it was again beached in Mayport , Florida , and further damaged . A leak began in the boiler room that evening , and as a result of malfunctioning water pumps , the ship came to a standstill about 16 miles ( 26 km ) from Mosquito Inlet ( now called Ponce de León Inlet ) . As the ship took on more water , Crane described the engine room as resembling " a scene at this time taken from the middle kitchen of Hades . " 
 Commodore 's lifeboats were lowered in the early hours of the morning on January 2 , 1897 , and the ship sank at 7 a.m. Crane was one of the last to leave the ship in a 10 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) dinghy . He and three other men ( including the captain , Edward Murphy ) floundered off the coast of Florida for a day and a half before attempting to land their craft at Daytona Beach . The small boat , however , overturned in the surf , forcing the exhausted men to swim to shore ; one of them , an oiler named Billie Higgins , died . The disaster was front @-@ page news in newspapers across the country ; rumors that the ship had been sabotaged were widely circulated but never substantiated . 
 Crane was reunited with his partner , Cora , several days after the ordeal , and quickly wrote his initial report of the sinking while waiting in Jacksonville for another ship . Desperate for work , he soon left for New York to secure a job covering the impending Greco @-@ Turkish War . Crane completed the story that would become " The Open Boat " a few weeks later , in mid @-@ February . According to fellow correspondent Ralph D. Paine , Crane had the opportunity to show the first draft of the short story to Murphy when Crane again passed through Jacksonville . When Crane asked his opinion , Murphy allegedly replied , " You 've got it , Steve ... That is just how it happened , and how we felt . Read me some more of it " . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Crane 's report of the incident appeared on the front page of the New York Press on January 7 , 1897 , only three days after his rescue , and was quickly reprinted in various other papers . The account , titled " Stephen Crane 's Own Story " , concentrates mainly on the sinking of the Commodore , and the ensuing chaos . Crane dedicates just two paragraphs to the fate of his compatriots and himself on the dinghy , while detailing their inability to save those stranded on the sinking ship : 
 The cook let go of the line . We rowed around to see if we could not get a line from the chief engineer , and all this time , mind you , there were no shrieks , no groans , but silence , silence and silence , and then the Commodore sank . She lurched to windward , then swung afar back , righted and dove into the sea , and the rafts were suddenly swallowed by this frightful maw of the ocean . And then by the men on the ten @-@ foot dingy were words said that were still not words — something far beyond words . 
 The report caused a sensation and spurred the author to write a narrative version of the events . The short story first appeared in the June 1897 issue of Scribner 's Magazine . A second and lesser story , " Flanagan and His Short <unk> Adventure " , based upon the same shipwreck but told from the point of view of the captain , was published in McClure 's Magazine in October 1897 . " The Open Boat " was published in the United States by Doubleday & McClure in April 1898 as part of the book The Open Boat and Other Tales of Adventure , which included additional works by Crane such as " The Bride Comes to Yellow Sky " , " Death and the Child " , and " The Wise Men " . The English volume , published simultaneously with the American one , was titled The Open Boat and Other Stories and published by William Heinemann . Both editions included the subtitle " A Tale Intended to Be after the Fact . Being the Experience of Four Men from the Sunk Steamer ' Commodore ' " , and were dedicated " To the late William Higgins and to Captain Edward Murphy and Steward C. B. Montgomery of the Sunk Steamer Commodore " . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 None of them knew the color of the sky . Their eyes glanced level , and were fastened upon the waves that swept toward them . These waves were of the hue of slate , save for the tops , which were of foaming white , and all of the men knew the colors of the sea . The horizon narrowed and widened , and dipped and rose , and at all times its edge was jagged with waves that seemed thrust up in points like rocks . 
 " The Open Boat " is divided into seven sections , each told mainly from the point of view of the correspondent , based upon Crane himself . The first part introduces the four characters — the correspondent , a condescending observer detached from the rest of the group ; the captain , who is injured and morose at having lost his ship , yet capable of leadership ; the cook , fat and comical , but optimistic that they will be rescued ; and the oiler , Billie , who is physically the strongest , and the only one in the story referred to by name . The four are survivors of a shipwreck , which occurred before the beginning of the story , and are drifting at sea in a small dinghy . 
 In the following four sections , the moods of the men fluctuate from anger at their desperate situation , to a growing empathy for one another and the sudden realization that nature is indifferent to their fates . The men become fatigued and bicker with one another ; nevertheless , the oiler and the correspondent take turns rowing toward shore , while the cook bails water to keep the boat afloat . When they see a lighthouse on the horizon , their hope is tempered with the realization of the danger of trying to reach it . Their hopes dwindle further when , after seeing a man waving from shore , and what may or may not be another boat , they fail to make contact . The correspondent and the oiler continue to take turns rowing , while the others sleep fitfully during the night . The correspondent then notices a shark swimming near the boat , but he does not seem to be bothered by it as one would expect . In the penultimate chapter , the correspondent wearily recalls a verse from the poem " Bingen on the Rhine " by Caroline Norton , in which a " soldier of the Legion " dies far from home . 
 The final chapter begins with the men 's resolution to abandon the floundering dinghy they have occupied for thirty hours and to swim ashore . As they begin the long swim to the beach , Billie the oiler , the strongest of the four , swims ahead of the others ; the captain advances towards the shore while still holding onto the boat , and the cook uses a surviving oar . The correspondent is trapped by a local current , but is eventually able to swim on . After three of the men safely reach the shore and are met by a group of rescuers , they find Billie dead , his body washed up on the beach . 
 = = Style and genre = = 
 Although autobiographical in nature , " The Open Boat " is a work of fiction ; it is often considered a principal example of Naturalism , an offshoot of the Realist literary movement , in which scientific principles of objectivity and detachment are applied to the study of human characteristics . While a majority of critics agree that the story acts as a paradigm of the human situation , they disagree as to its precise nature . Some believe the story affirms man 's place in the world by concentrating on the characters ' isolation , while others — including those who call " The Open Boat " ideologically Symbolist — insist that the story questions man 's place in the universe through metaphorical or indirect means . 
 Like other major works by Stephen Crane , " The Open Boat " contains numerous examples of symbolism , imagery and metaphor . Vibrant descriptions of color , combined with simple , clear writing , are also apparent throughout , and humor in the form of irony serves in stark opposition to the dreary setting and desperate characters . Editor Vincent Starrett stated in his introduction to the 1921 collection of Crane 's work entitled Men , Women and Boats that the author keeps " down the tone where another writer might have attempted ' fine writing ' and have been lost . " Other critics have noted similarities between the story and shipwreck @-@ related articles Crane wrote while working as a reporter for the New York Tribune earlier in his career . Articles such as " The Wreck of the New Era " , which describes a group of castaways drowning in sight of a helpless crowd , and " Ghosts on the Jersey Coast " contain stark imagery that strongly prefigures that of " The Open Boat " . 
 = = Major themes = = 
 = = = Man vs. nature = = = 
 Similar to other Naturalist works , " The Open Boat " scrutinizes the position of man , who has been isolated not only from society , but also from God and nature . The struggle between man and the natural world is the most apparent theme in the work , and while the characters at first believe the turbulent sea to be a hostile force set against them , they come to believe that nature is instead ambivalent . At the beginning of the last section , the correspondent rethinks his view of nature 's hostility : " the serenity of nature amid the struggles of the individual — nature in the wind , and nature in the vision of men . She did not seem cruel to him , nor beneficent , nor treacherous , nor wise . But she was indifferent , flatly indifferent . " The correspondent regularly refers to the sea with feminine pronouns , pitting the four men in the boat against an intangible , yet effeminate , threat ; critic <unk> <unk> further pointed to the story 's seeming denigration of women , noting the castaways ' personification of Fate as " an old <unk> @-@ woman " and " an old hen " . That nature is ultimately disinterested is an idea that appears in other works by Crane ; a poem from Crane 's 1899 collection War is Kind and Other Lines also echoes Crane 's common theme of universal indifference : 
 A man said to the universe : 
 " Sir , I exist ! " 
 " However , " replied the universe , 
 " The fact has not created in me 
 A sense of obligation . " 
 The metaphysical conflicts born from man 's isolation are also important themes throughout the story , as the characters cannot rely on a higher cause or being for protection . The correspondent laments the lack of religious support , as well as his inability to blame God for his misfortunes , musing : " When it occurs to a man that nature does not regard him as important , and that she feels she would not maim the universe by disposing of him , he at first wishes to throw bricks at the temple , and he hates deeply that there are no bricks and no temples . " Man 's perception of himself and the world around him are also constantly questioned ; the correspondent regularly refers to the way things " seemed " or " appeared " , leaving how a thing actually " was " entirely ambiguous . Wolford similarly pointed to the importance of the story 's strong yet problematic opening line — " None of them knew the color of the sky " — as one that sets the scene for the story 's sense of unease and uncertainty . 
 = = = Survival and solidarity = = = 
 Chester Wolford noted in his critical analysis of Crane 's short fiction that although one of the author 's most familiar themes deals with a character 's seeming insignificance in an indifferent universe , the correspondent 's experience in " The Open Boat " is perhaps more personal than what was described in earlier stories because of Crane 's obvious connection to the story . Sergio Perosa similarly described how Crane " transfigures an actual occurrence into existential drama , and confers universal meaning and poetic value on the simple retelling of man 's struggle for survival " . 
 Facing an ultimately detached nature , the characters find solace in human solidarity . They are often referred to collectively as " the men " , rather than singularly by their professions , creating a silent understanding between them of their togetherness . The first few sentences of section three attest to this connection : " It would be difficult to describe the subtle brotherhood of men that was here established on the seas . No one said that it was so . No one mentioned it . But it dwelt in the boat , and each man felt it warm him . They were a captain , an oiler , a cook , and a correspondent , and they were friends , friends in a more curiously iron @-@ bound degree than may be common . " Survival is also an important thematic element in itself , as it is contingent upon the men to battle the elements in order to save themselves . The correspondent 's desire to survive is evident in his refrain of the lyrical line : " If I am going to be drowned — if I am going to be drowned — if I am going to be drowned , why , in the name of the seven mad gods who rule the sea , was I allowed to come thus far and contemplate sand and trees ? " By repeating himself , the correspondent expresses himself ritualistically , and yet he remains existentially adrift . 
 = = = Sympathy = = = 
 In his 1990 book Sea @-@ Brothers : The Tradition of American Sea Fiction from Moby @-@ Dick to the Present , author Bert Bender noted Crane 's sympathetic portrayal of the oiler Billie , the most physically able of the four characters , and yet the only one to perish . The correspondent even notes with wonder Billie 's exceptional ability to row despite having worked a double shift before the ship sank . Bender wrote that Crane " emphasizes that Billie 's steady , simple labor is the tangible basis for his role here as a savior , " and that the oiler 's portrayal as a " simple , working seaman , clearly expresses his sympathy with the democratic ideal of the sailor before the mast that figures so crucially in the tradition of American sea fiction . " That Billie does not survive the ordeal , however , can be seen as an antithesis to Darwinism in that the only person to not survive was in fact the strongest physically . 
 " The Open Boat " directly references Lady Caroline Norton 's 1883 poem " Bingen on the Rhine " , which focuses on the death of a French Foreign Legionnaire , far from home , while grasping the hand of a comrade . Recalling the poem , the correspondent sees how the soldier 's dire circumstances mirror his own , leading him to feel sorry for the anonymous poetic figure ; noting the similarities between the dying soldier and the shipwrecked correspondent , critics such as Edward Stone and Max Westbrook believe this realization causes the correspondent to discover the necessity for human sympathy in an uncaring world . While the literary reference may be considered ironic , unsympathetic , and only of minor interest , Stone for one argued that this poem may also have served as a source for The Red Badge of Courage , which also explores man 's relationship with the metaphysical . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 " The Open Boat " is one of the most frequently discussed works in Crane 's canon , and is regularly anthologized . Wilson Follett included the story in the twelfth volume of his 1927 collection of Crane 's work , and it also appeared in Robert Stallman 's 1952 volume Stephen Crane : An Omnibus . The story and its subsequent eponymous collections received high acclaim from contemporary critics and authors . Praising the merit of the story and his friend 's literary importance , journalist Harold Frederic wrote in his review for The New York Times that " even if he had written nothing else , [ " The Open Boat " would ] have placed [ Crane ] where he now undoubtedly stands . " English poet Robert Bridges likewise praised the story in his review for Life , stating that Crane " has indelibly fixed the experience on your mind , and that is the test of a literary artisan " . American <unk> and author Harry Esty <unk> praised the story as chief among Crane 's work , despite its seemingly simple plot , writing for the New York Evening Sun that " those who have read ' The Open Boat ' will forget every technical feat of construction before they forget the long , heartbreaking mockery of the day , with land so near , the bailing , the egg @-@ shell changes of seats , the terrible , steady cheerfulness and brotherhood of the queer little human group " . 
 After Crane 's premature death from tuberculosis at the age of 28 , his work enjoyed a resurgence of popularity . Author and critic Elbert Hubbard wrote in Crane 's obituary in the Philistine that " The Open Boat " was " the sternest , creepiest bit of realism ever penned " . Also noting the depressing Realism utilized in the story , editor Vincent Starrett stated : " It is a desolate picture , and the tale is one of our greatest short stories . " Another of the author 's friends , H. G. Wells , wrote that " The Open Boat " was " beyond all question , the crown of all [ Crane 's ] work . " Singling out Crane 's usage of color and chiaroscuro in his writing , Wells continued : " It has all the stark power of the earlier stories , with a new element of restraint ; the color is as full and strong as ever , fuller and stronger , indeed ; but those chromatic splashes that at times deafen and confuse in The Red Badge , those images that astonish rather than enlighten , are disciplined and controlled . " The story remains popular with critics ; Thomas Kent referred to " The Open Boat " as Crane 's " magnum opus " , while Crane biographer Stanley Wertheim called it " Crane 's finest short story and one of the masterworks of late nineteenth @-@ century American literature " . 
 = Usain Bolt = 
 Usain St. Leo Bolt , OJ , CD ( / <unk> / ; born 21 August 1986 ) , is a Jamaican sprinter . Regarded as the fastest person ever timed , he is the first man to hold both the 100 metres and 200 metres world records since fully automatic time measurements became mandatory in 1977 . Along with his teammates , he also set the world record in the 4 × 100 metres relay . He is the reigning Olympic champion in these three events , and the first man at the modern Olympic Games to win six gold medals in sprinting , and an eleven @-@ time World champion . He was the first in the modern Olympics era to achieve the " double double " of winning 100 m and 200 m titles at consecutive games ( 2008 and 2012 ) , and topped this through the first " double triple " ( including 4 × 100 m relays ) . 
 Although gaining worldwide popularity for a sprint double victory at the Beijing Games , Bolt has had more victories as a 200 m runner . While he had not won any significant 100 m title prior to the 2008 Olympics , he had won numerous crowns in the 200 m event at the youth , junior and senior levels . Further , at the 2013 World Championships in Moscow , Bolt completed a hat @-@ trick of 200 m world titles by winning his third straight gold in the event . His 2009 record breaking margin for 100 m , from 9 @.@ 69 seconds ( his own previous world record ) to 9 @.@ 58 , is the highest since the start of fully automatic time measurements . 
 Bolt 's achievements in sprinting have earned him the media nickname " Lightning Bolt " , and awards including the IAAF World Athlete of the Year , Track & Field Athlete of the Year , and Laureus World Sportsman of the Year ( three times ) . He is the highest paid athlete ever in track and field . He has been called the world 's most marketable athlete . By winning three gold medals at the 2015 World Championships , Bolt became the first athlete in the 32 @-@ year history of the IAAF athletics world championships to complete a " triple triple " making him the most successful athlete at the IAAF championships . 
 On 14 February 2015 , Bolt announced that he intends to retire from athletics after the 2017 World Championships in London . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Bolt was born on 21 August 1986 in Sherwood Content , a small town in Trelawny , Jamaica , and grew up with his parents , Wellesley and Jennifer Bolt , his brother Sadiki , and his sister Sherine . His parents ran the local grocery store in the rural area , and Bolt spent his time playing cricket and football in the street with his brother , later saying , " When I was young , I didn 't really think about anything other than sports " . 
 As a child , Bolt attended <unk> Primary , where he first began to show his sprinting potential , running in the annual national primary @-@ schools ' meeting for his parish . By the age of twelve , Bolt had become the school 's fastest runner over the 100 metres distance . 
 Upon his entry to William <unk> Memorial High School , Bolt continued to focus on other sports , but his cricket coach noticed Bolt 's speed on the pitch and urged him to try track and field events . Pablo McNeil , a former Olympic sprint athlete , and Dwayne Jarrett coached Bolt , encouraging him to focus his energy on improving his athletic abilities . The school had a history of success in athletics with past students , including sprinter Michael Green . Bolt won his first annual high school championships medal in 2001 , taking the silver medal in the 200 metres with a time of 22 @.@ 04 seconds . McNeil soon became his primary coach , and the two enjoyed a positive partnership , although McNeil was occasionally frustrated by Bolt 's lack of dedication to his training and his penchant for practical jokes . 
 = = = Early competitions = = = 
 Performing for Jamaica in his first Caribbean regional event , Bolt clocked a personal best of 48 @.@ 28 s in the 400 metres in the 2001 CARIFTA Games , winning a silver medal . The 200 m also yielded a silver as Bolt finished in 21 @.@ 81 s . 
 He made his first appearance on the world stage at the 2001 IAAF World Youth Championships in Debrecen , Hungary . Running in the 200 m event , he failed to qualify for the finals , but he still set a new personal best of 21 @.@ 73 s . Bolt still did not take athletics or himself too seriously , however , and he took his mischievousness to new heights by hiding in the back of a van when he was supposed to be preparing for the 200 m finals at the CARIFTA Trials . He was detained by the police for his practical joke , and there was an outcry from the local community , which blamed coach McNeil for the incident . However , the controversy subsided , and both McNeil and Bolt went to the CARIFTA Games , where Bolt set championship records in the 200 m and 400 m with times of 21 @.@ 12 s and 47 @.@ 33 s , respectively . He continued to set records with 20 @.@ 61 s and 47 @.@ 12 s finishes at the Central American and Caribbean Junior Championships . 
 Bolt is one of only nine athletes , ( along with Valerie Adams , Veronica Campbell @-@ Brown , Jacques Freitag , Yelena Isinbayeva , Jana Pittman , Dani Samuels , David <unk> , <unk> James ) to win world championships at the youth , junior , and senior level of an athletic event . Former Prime Minister P. J. Patterson recognised Bolt 's talent and arranged for him to move to Kingston , along with Jermaine Gonzales , so he could train with the Jamaica Amateur Athletic Association ( JAAA ) at the University of Technology , Jamaica . 
 = = = Rise to prominence = = = 
 The 2002 World Junior Championships before a home crowd in Kingston , Jamaica , gave Bolt a chance to prove his credentials on the world stage . By the age of 15 , he had grown to 1 @.@ 96 metres ( 6 ft 5 in ) tall , and he physically stood out among his peers . He won the 200 m , in a time of 20 @.@ 61 s , 0 @.@ 03 seconds slower than his personal best of 20 @.@ 58 s set in the 1st round . Bolt 's 200 m win made him the youngest world @-@ junior gold medalist ever . The expectation from the home crowd had made him so nervous that he had put his shoes on the wrong feet . However , it turned out to be a revelatory experience for Bolt as he vowed never again to let himself be affected by pre @-@ race nerves . As a member of the Jamaican sprint relay team , he also took two silver medals and set national junior records in the 4 × 100 metres and 4 × 400 metres relay , running times of 39 @.@ 15 s and 3 : 04 @.@ 06 minutes respectively . 
 The flow of medals continued as he won four gold medals at the 2003 CARIFTA Games , and was awarded the Austin Sealy Trophy for the most outstanding athlete of the games . He won another gold at the 2003 World Youth Championships . He set a new championship record in the 200 m with a time of 20 @.@ 40 s , despite a 1 @.@ 1 m / s head wind . Michael Johnson , the 200 m world @-@ record holder , took note of Bolt 's potential but worried that the young sprinter might be over @-@ pressured , stating , " It 's all about what he does three , four , five years down the line " . Bolt had also impressed the athletics hierarchy , and he received the IAAF Rising Star Award for 2002 . 
 In his final Jamaican High School Championships in 2003 , he broke both the 200 m and 400 m records with times of 20 @.@ 25 s and 45 @.@ 35 s , respectively . Bolt 's runs were a significant improvement upon the previous records , beating the 200 m best by more than half a second and the 400 m record by almost a second . While Bolt improved upon the 200 time three months later , setting the still standing World youth best at the 2003 Pan American Junior Championships , it remains the No. 2 youth time . The 400 time remains No. 6 on all time youth list , only surpassed once since by future Olympic champion <unk> James . 
 Bolt turned his main focus to the 200 m and equalled Roy Martin 's world junior record of 20 @.@ 13 s at the Pan @-@ American Junior Championships . This performance attracted interest from the press , and his times in the 200 m and 400 m led to him being touted as a possible successor to Johnson . Indeed , at sixteen years old , Bolt had reached times that Johnson did not register until he was twenty , and Bolt 's 200 m time was superior to Maurice Greene 's season 's best that year . 
 Bolt was growing more popular in his homeland . Howard Hamilton , who was given the task of Public Defender by the government , urged the JAAA to nurture him and prevent burnout , calling Bolt " the most phenomenal sprinter ever produced by this island " . His popularity and the attractions of the capital city were beginning to be a burden to the young sprinter . Bolt was increasingly unfocused on his athletic career and preferred to eat fast food , play basketball , and party in Kingston 's club scene . In the absence of a disciplined lifestyle , he became ever @-@ more reliant on his natural ability to beat his competitors on the track . 
 As the reigning 200 m champion at both the World Youth and World Junior championships , Bolt hoped to take a clean sweep of the world 200 m championships in the Senior World Championships in Paris . He beat all comers at the 200 m in the World Championship trials . Bolt was pragmatic about his chances and noted that , even if he did not make the final , he would consider setting a personal best a success . However , he suffered a bout of conjunctivitis before the event , and it ruined his training schedule . Realising he would not be in peak condition , the JAAA refused to let him participate in the finals on the grounds that he was too young and inexperienced . Bolt was dismayed at missing out on the opportunity , but focused on getting himself in shape to gain a place on the Jamaican Olympic team instead . Even though he missed the World Championships , Bolt was awarded the IAAF Rising Star Award for the 2003 season on the strength of his junior record @-@ equalling run . 
 = = Professional athletics career = = 
 = = = 2004 – 2007 Early professional career = = = 
 Under the guidance of new coach Fitz Coleman , Bolt turned professional in 2004 , beginning with the CARIFTA Games in Bermuda . He became the first junior sprinter to run the 200 m in under twenty seconds , taking the world junior record outright with a time of 19 @.@ 93 s . For the second time in the role , he was awarded the Austin Sealy Trophy for the most outstanding athlete of the 2004 CARIFTA Games . A hamstring injury in May ruined Bolt 's chances of competing in the 2004 World Junior Championships , but he was still chosen for the Jamaican Olympic squad . Bolt headed to the 2004 Athens Olympics with confidence and a new record on his side . However , he was hampered by a leg injury and was eliminated in the first round of the 200 metres with a disappointing time of 21 @.@ 05 s . American colleges offered Bolt track scholarships on the strength of his performances , but the teenager from Trelawny refused them all , stating that he was content to stay in his homeland of Jamaica . Bolt instead chose the surroundings of the University of Technology , Jamaica , as his professional training ground , staying with the university 's primitive track and weight room that had served him well in his amateur years . 
 The year 2005 signaled a fresh start for Bolt in the form of a new coach , Glen Mills , and a new attitude toward athletics . Mills recognised Bolt 's potential and aimed to cease what he considered an unprofessional approach to the sport . Bolt began training with Mills in preparation for the upcoming athletics season , partnering with more seasoned sprinters such as Kim Collins and Dwain Chambers . The year began well , and in July , he knocked more than a third of a second off the 200 m CAC Championship record with a run of 20 @.@ 03 s , then registered his 200 m season 's best at London 's Crystal Palace , running in 19 @.@ 99 s . 
 Misfortune awaited Bolt at the next major event , the 2005 World Championships in Helsinki . Bolt felt that both his work ethic and athleticism had much improved since the 2004 Olympics , and he saw the World Championships as a way to live up to expectations , stating , " I really want to make up for what happened in Athens . Hopefully , everything will fall into place " . Bolt qualified with runs under 21 s , but he suffered an injury in the final , finishing in last place with a time of 26 @.@ 27 s . Injuries were preventing him from completing a full professional athletics season , and the eighteen @-@ year @-@ old Bolt still had not proven his mettle in the major world @-@ athletics competitions . However , his appearance made him the youngest ever person to appear in a 200 m world final . Bolt was involved in a car accident in November , and although he suffered only minor facial lacerations , his training schedule was further upset . His manager , Norman Peart , made Bolt 's training less intensive , and he had fully recuperated the following week . Bolt had continued to improve his performances , and he reached the world top @-@ 5 rankings in 2005 and 2006 . Peart and Mills stated their intentions to push Bolt to do longer sprinting distances with the aim of making the 400 m event his primary event by 2007 or 2008 . Bolt was less enthusiastic , and demanded that he feel comfortable in his sprinting . He suffered another hamstring injury in March 2006 , forcing him to withdraw from the 2006 Commonwealth Games in Melbourne , and he did not return to track events until May . After his recovery , Bolt was given new training exercises to improve flexibility , and the plans to move him up to the 400 m event were put on hold . 
 Upon his return to competition , the 200 m remained Bolt 's primary event , beating Justin Gatlin 's meet record in Ostrava , Czech Republic . Bolt had aspired to run under twenty seconds to claim a season 's best but , despite the fact that bad weather had impaired his run , he was happy to end the meeting with just the victory . However , a sub @-@ 20 @-@ second finish was soon his , as he set a new personal best of 19 @.@ 88 s at the 2006 Athletissima Grand Prix in Lausanne , Switzerland , finishing behind Xavier Carter and Tyson Gay to earn a bronze medal . Bolt had focused his athletics aims , stating that 2006 was a year to gain experience . Also , he was more keen on competing over longer distances , setting his sights on running regularly in both 200 m and 400 m events within the next two years . 
 Bolt claimed his first major world medal two months later at the IAAF World Athletics Final in Stuttgart , Germany . He passed the finishing post with a time of 20 @.@ 10 s , gaining a bronze medal in the process . The IAAF World Cup in Athens , Greece , yielded Bolt 's first senior international silver medal . Wallace Spearmon from the United States won gold with a championship record time of 19 @.@ 87 s , beating Bolt 's respectable time of 19 @.@ 96 s . Further 200 m honours on both the regional and international stages awaited Bolt in 2007 . He yearned to run in the 100 metres but Mills was skeptical , believing that Bolt was better suited for middle distances . The coach cited the runner 's difficulty in smoothly starting out of the blocks , and poor habits such as looking back at opponents in sprints . Mills told Bolt that he could run the shorter distance if he broke the 200 m national record . In the Jamaican Championships , he ran 19 @.@ 75 s in the 200 m , breaking the 36 @-@ year @-@ old Jamaican record held by Don Quarrie by 0 @.@ 11 s . 
 Mills complied with Bolt 's demand to run in the 100 m , and he was entered to run the event at the 23rd <unk> meeting in Rethymno , Crete . In his debut tournament run , he set a personal best of 10 @.@ 03 s , winning the gold medal and feeding his enthusiasm for the event . 
 He built on this achievement at the 2007 World Championships in Osaka , Japan , winning a silver medal . Bolt recorded 19 @.@ 91 s with a headwind of 0 @.@ 8 m / s . The race was won by Tyson Gay in 19 @.@ 76 s , a new championship record . 
 Bolt was a member of the silver medal winning relay team with Asafa Powell , Marvin Anderson , and Nesta Carter in the 4 × 100 metres relay . Jamaica set a national record of 37 @.@ 89 s . Bolt did not win any gold medals at the major tournaments in 2007 , but Mills felt that Bolt 's technique was much improved , pinpointing improvements in Bolt 's balance at the turns over 200 m and an increase in his stride frequency , giving him more driving power on the track . 
 = = = World @-@ record breaker = = = 
 The silver medals from the 2007 Osaka World Championships boosted Bolt 's desire to run , and he took a more serious , more mature stance towards his career . Bolt continued to develop in the 100 m , and he entered to run in the event at the Jamaica Invitational in Kingston . On 3 May 2008 , Bolt ran a time of 9 @.@ 76 s , with a 1 @.@ 8 m / s tail wind , improving his personal best from 10 @.@ 03 s . This was the second @-@ fastest legal performance in the history of the event , second only to compatriot Asafa Powell 's 9 @.@ 74 s record set the previous year in Rieti , Italy . Rival Tyson Gay lauded the performance , praising Bolt 's form and technique especially . Michael Johnson , who was observing the race , said that he was shocked at how quickly he had improved over the 100 m distance . The Jamaican surprised even himself with the time , but coach Glen Mills remained confident that there was more to come . 
 Bolt set a new 100 m world record on 31 May 2008 . At the Reebok Grand Prix held in the Icahn Stadium in New York City , Bolt ran 9 @.@ 72 s with a tail wind of 1 @.@ 7 m / s . This race was Bolt 's fifth senior 100m . Gay again finished second and said of Bolt : " It looked like his knees were going past my face . " Commentators noted that Bolt appeared to have gained a psychological advantage over fellow Olympic contender Gay . 
 In June 2008 , Bolt responded to claims that he was a lazy athlete , saying that the comments were unjustified , and he trained hard to achieve his potential . However , he surmised that such comments stemmed from his lack of enthusiasm for the 400 metres event , and chose to not make the effort to train for distance running . Turning his efforts to the 200 m , Bolt proved that he could excel in multiple events — first setting the world @-@ leading time in Ostrava , then breaking the national record for the second time with a 19 @.@ 67 s finish in Athens , Greece . Although Mills still preferred that Bolt focus on the longer distances , the acceptance of Bolt 's demand to run in the 100 m worked for both sprinter and trainer . Bolt was more focused in practice , and a training schedule to boost his top speed and his stamina , in preparation for the Olympics , had improved both his 100 m and 200 m times . 
 = = = 2008 Summer Olympics = = = 
 Bolt announced that he would double @-@ up with the 100 metres and 200 metres events at the Beijing Summer Olympics , and the new 100 m world @-@ record holder was the favourite to win both . Michael Johnson , the 200 m and 400 m record holder , personally backed the sprinter , saying that he did not believe that a lack of experience would work against him . Bolt qualified for the 100 m final with times of 9 @.@ 92 s and 9 @.@ 85 s in the quarter @-@ finals and semi @-@ finals , respectively . 
 In the Olympic 100 m final , Bolt broke new ground , winning in 9 @.@ 69 s ( unofficially 9 @.@ 683 s ) with a reaction time of 0 @.@ 165 s . This was an improvement upon his own world record , and he was well ahead of second @-@ place finisher Richard Thompson , who finished in 9 @.@ 89 s . Not only was the record set without a favourable wind ( + 0 @.@ 0 m / s ) , but he also visibly slowed down to celebrate before he finished and his shoelace was untied . Bolt 's coach reported that , based upon the speed of Bolt 's opening 60 m , he could have finished with a time of 9 @.@ 52 s . After scientific analysis of Bolt 's run by the Institute of Theoretical Astrophysics at the University of Oslo , Hans Eriksen and his colleagues also predicted a sub 9 @.@ 60 s time . Considering factors such as Bolt 's position , acceleration and velocity in comparison with second @-@ place @-@ finisher Thompson , the team estimated that Bolt could have finished in 9 @.@ 55 ± 0 @.@ 04 s had he not slowed to celebrate before the finishing line . 
 Bolt stated that setting a record was not a priority for him , and that his goal was just to win the gold medal , Jamaica 's first of the 2008 Games . Olympic medalist Kriss <unk> construed Bolt 's chest slapping before the finish line as showboating , noting that the actions cost Bolt an even faster record time . IOC president Jacques Rogge also condemned the Jamaican 's actions as disrespectful . Bolt denied that this was the purpose of his celebration by saying , " I wasn 't bragging . When I saw I wasn 't covered , I was just happy " . Lamine <unk> , president of the IAAF , supported Bolt and said that his celebration was appropriate given the circumstances of his victory . Jamaican government minister Edmund Bartlett also defended Bolt 's actions , stating , " We have to see it in the glory of their moment and give it to them . We have to allow the personality of youth to express itself " . 
 Bolt then focused on attaining a gold medal in the 200 m event , aiming to emulate Carl Lewis ' double win in the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics . Michael Johnson felt that Bolt would easily win gold but believed that his own world record of 19 @.@ 32 s set at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta would remain intact at the Olympics . Bolt eased through the first and second rounds of the 200 m , jogging towards the end of his run both times . He won his semi @-@ final and progressed to the final as the favourite to win . Retired Jamaican sprinter Don Quarrie praised Bolt , saying he was confident that Johnson 's record could be beaten . The following day , at the final , he won Jamaica 's fourth gold of the Games , setting a new world and Olympic record of 19 @.@ 30 s . Johnson 's record fell despite the fact that Bolt was impeded by a 0 @.@ 9 m / s headwind . The feat made him the first sprinter since Quarrie to hold both 100 m and 200 m world records simultaneously and the first since the introduction of electronic timing . Furthermore , Bolt became the first sprinter to break both records at the same Olympics . Unlike in the 100 m final , Bolt sprinted hard all the way to the finishing line in the 200 m race , even dipping his chest to improve his time . Following the race , " Happy Birthday " was played over the stadium 's sound system as his 22nd birthday would begin at midnight . 
 Two days later , Bolt ran as the third leg in the Jamaican 4x100 metres relay team , increasing his gold medal total to three . Along with teammates Nesta Carter , Michael Frater , and Asafa Powell , Bolt broke another world and Olympic record , their 37 @.@ 10 s finish breaking the previous record by three @-@ tenths of a second . Powell , who anchored the team to the finishing line , lamented the loss of his 100 m record to Bolt but showed no animosity towards his Jamaican rival , stating that he was delighted to help him set his third world record . Following his victories , Bolt donated US $ 50 @,@ 000 to the children of the Sichuan of China to help those harmed by the 2008 Sichuan earthquake . 
 Bolt 's record @-@ setting runs caused commentators not only to praise his achievements but also to speculate about his potential to become one of the most successful sprinters ever . Critics hailed his Olympic success as a new beginning for a sport that had long suffered through high @-@ profile drug scandals . The previous six years had seen the BALCO scandal , Tim Montgomery and Justin Gatlin stripped of their 100 m world records , and Marion Jones returning three Olympic gold medals . All three sprinters were disqualified from athletics after drugs tests detected banned substances in their systems . Bolt 's record @-@ breaking performances caused suspicion among some commentators , including Victor Conte , and the lack of an independent Caribbean anti @-@ doping federation raised more concerns . The accusations of drug use were vehemently rejected by Glen Mills ( Bolt 's coach ) and Herb Elliott ( the Jamaican athletics team doctor ) . Elliott , a member of the IAAF anti @-@ doping commission , urged those concerned about the issue to " come down and see our programme , come down and see our testing , we have nothing to hide " . Mills had been equally ardent that Bolt was a clean athlete , declaring to the Jamaica Gleaner : " We will test any time , any day , any part of the body ... [ he ] doesn 't even like to take vitamins " . Bolt stated that he had been tested four times prior to the Olympics , and all had tested negative for banned substances . He also welcomed anti @-@ doping authorities to test him to prove that he was clean , stating , " We work hard and we perform well and we know we 're clean " . 
 I was slowing down long before the finish and wasn 't tired at all . I could have gone back to the start and done it all over again . 
 = = = After the 2008 Olympics = = = 
 The end of the 2008 athletics season saw Bolt compete in the ÅF Golden League , beginning in Weltklasse Zürich . Despite having the slowest start among his competitors in the 100 m race , he still crossed the finishing line in 9 @.@ 83 s . Even though the time was slower than both his newly set world record and Asafa Powell 's track record , it was still among the top @-@ fifteen 100 m finishes by any sprinter to that date . Bolt admitted that he was not running at full strength , suffering from a cold , but he had concentrated on both winning the race and finishing the season in good health . At the Super Grand Prix final in Lausanne , Bolt ran his second @-@ fastest 200 m with a time of 19 @.@ 63 s , equalling Xavier Carter 's track record . However , it was the 100 m final , featuring Asafa Powell , that drew the most interest . Powell had moved closer to Bolt 's world record after setting a new personal best of 9 @.@ 72 s , reaffirming his status as Bolt 's main contender . Bolt 's final event of the season came three days later at the Golden League final in Brussels . This was the first 100 m race featuring both Bolt and Powell since the final in the Olympics . Both Jamaicans broke the track record , but Bolt came out on top with a time of 9 @.@ 77 s , beating Powell by 0 @.@ 06 s . Victory , however , did not come as smoothly as it had in Beijing . Bolt made the slowest start of the nine competitors and had to recover ground in cold conditions and against a 0 @.@ 9 m / s headwind . Yet the results confirmed Jamaican dominance in the 100 m , with nine of the ten @-@ fastest legal times in history being recorded by either Bolt or Powell . On his return to Jamaica , Bolt was honoured in a homecoming celebration and received an Order of Distinction in recognition of his achievements at the Olympics . 
 Additionally , Bolt was selected as the IAAF Male Athlete of the year and won a Special Olympic Award for his performances . However , he turned his attention to future events , suggesting that he could aim to break the 400 metres world record in 2010 as no major championships were scheduled that year . 
 = = = 2009 Berlin World championships = = = 
 Bolt started the season competing over 400 metres in order to improve his speed , winning two races and registering 45 @.@ 54 s in Kingston , and windy conditions gave him his first sub @-@ 10 second finish of the season in the 100 m in March . In late April Bolt suffered minor leg injuries in a car crash . However , he quickly recovered following minor surgery and ( after cancelling a track meet in Jamaica ) he stated that he was fit to compete in the 150 metres street race at the Manchester Great City Games . Bolt won the race in 14 @.@ 35 s , the fastest time ever recorded for 150 m . Despite not being at full fitness , he took the 100 and 200 m titles at the Jamaican national championships , with runs of 9 @.@ 86 s and 20 @.@ 25 s respectively . This meant he had qualified for both events at the 2009 World Championships . Rival Tyson Gay suggested that Bolt 's 100 m record was within his grasp , but Bolt dismissed the claim and instead noted that he was more interested in Asafa Powell 's return from injury . Bolt defied unfavourable conditions at the Athletissima meet in July , running 19 @.@ 59 seconds into a 0 @.@ 9 m / s headwind and rain , to record the fourth fastest time ever over 200 m , one hundredth off Gay 's best time . 
 At the 2009 World Championships in August , Bolt eased through the 100 m heats , clocking the fastest ever pre @-@ final performance of 9 @.@ 89 seconds . The final was the first time Bolt and Gay had met in the season , and Bolt improved his world record with a time of 9 @.@ 58 s to win his first World Championship gold medal . Taking over a tenth of a second off the previous best mark , this was the largest ever margin of improvement in the 100 m world record since the beginning of electronic timing . Gay finished with a time of 9 @.@ 71 s , 0 @.@ 02 s off Bolt 's 9 @.@ 69 s world @-@ record run in Beijing . Although Gay withdrew from the second race of the competition , the Jamaican once again produced world record @-@ breaking form in the 200 metres final . He broke his own record by 0 @.@ 11 seconds , finishing with a time of 19 @.@ 19 seconds . He won the 200 m race by the biggest margin in World Championships history , even though the race had three other athletes running under 19 @.@ 90 seconds , the greatest number ever in the event . Bolt 's pace impressed even the more experienced of his competitors ; third @-@ placed Wallace Spearmon complimented his speed , and the Olympic champion in Athens 2004 Shawn Crawford said " Just coming out there ... I felt like I was in a video game , that guy was moving – fast " . Bolt pointed out that an important factor in his performance at the World Championships was his improved start to the races : his reaction times in the 100 m ( 0 @.@ 146 ) and 200 m ( 0 @.@ 133 ) were significantly faster than those he had produced in his world record runs at the Beijing Olympics . However , he , together with other members of Jamaican 4x100 m relay team , fell short of their own world record of 37 @.@ 10 s set at 2008 Summer Olympics by timing 37 @.@ 31 s , which is , however , a championship record and the second fastest time in history at that date . 
 On the last day of the Berlin Championships , the Governing Mayor of Berlin , Klaus Wowereit , presented Bolt with a 12 @-@ foot high section of the Berlin Wall in a small ceremony , saying Bolt had shown that " one can tear down walls that had been considered as insurmountable . " The nearly three @-@ ton segment was delivered to the Jamaica Military Museum in Kingston . 
 Several days after Bolt broke the world records in 100 and 200 metres events , Mike Powell , the world record holder in long jump ( 8 @.@ 95 metres set in 1991 ) argued that Bolt could become the first man to jump over 9 metres , the long jump event being " a perfect fit for his speed and height " . At the end of the season , he was selected as the IAAF World Athlete of the Year for the second year running . 
 = = = 2010 Diamond League and broken streak = = = 
 Early on in the 2010 outdoor season , Bolt ran 19 @.@ 56 seconds in the 200 m in Kingston , Jamaica for the fourth @-@ fastest run of all @-@ time , although he stated that he had no record breaking ambitions for the forthcoming season . He took to the international circuit May with wins in East Asia at the Colorful Daegu Pre @-@ Championships Meeting and then a comfortable win in his 2010 IAAF Diamond League debut at the Shanghai Golden Grand Prix . Bolt made an attempt to break Michael Johnson 's best time over the rarely competed 300 metres event at the Golden Spike meeting in Ostrava . He failed to match Johnson 's ten @-@ year @-@ old record of 30 @.@ 85 and suffered a setback in that his 30 @.@ 97 @-@ second run in wet weather had left him with an Achilles tendon problem . 
 On his return from injury a month later , Bolt asserted himself with a 100 m win at the Athletissima meeting in Lausanne ( 9 @.@ 82 seconds ) and a victory over Asafa Powell at Meeting Areva in Paris ( 9 @.@ 84 seconds ) . Despite this run of form , he suffered only the second loss of his career in a 100 m final at the DN Galan . Tyson Gay soundly defeated him with a run of 9 @.@ 84 to Bolt 's 9 @.@ 97 seconds , and the Jamaican reflected that he had slacked off in training early in the season while Gay had been better prepared and in a better condition . This marked Bolt 's first loss to Gay in the 100 m , which coincidentally occurred in the same stadium where Powell had beaten Bolt for the first time two years earlier . 
 = = = 2011 World championships = = = 
 Considered the overwhelming favourite to win in the 100 metres at the 2011 World Championships in Daegu , Bolt was eliminated from the final , breaking " ridiculously early " according to the starter in an interview for BBC Sport , and receiving a false start . Usain Bolt 's countryman , Yohan Blake , won in a season best of 9 @.@ 92 seconds . In the 200 m , Bolt cruised through to the final which he won in a time of <unk> Bolt also won gold in 4 × 100 metres relay with team Jamaica setting a world record time of 37 @.@ 04 . 
 In June 2012 , Usain Bolt won the 100 m race in Diamond League in 9 @.@ 79 seconds . 
 = = = 2012 Summer Olympics , The Double Triple = = = 
 Before the 2012 Summer Olympics in London , Bolt came in second at the Jamaican trials in both 100 m and 200 m . However , at the Olympics , he won the 100 metres gold medal with a time of 9 @.@ 63 seconds , setting a new Olympic record for that distance and defending his gold medal from the 2008 Beijing Summer Olympics . He was followed by fellow Jamaican , Yohan Blake , who won silver with a time of 9 @.@ 75 seconds . 
 Following the race , seventh @-@ place finisher Richard Thompson of Trinidad and Tobago declared " There 's no doubt he 's the greatest sprinter of all time " , while USA Today referred to Bolt as a Jamaican " national hero " , noting that his victory came just hours before Jamaica was to celebrate the 50th anniversary of its independence from the United Kingdom . With his 2012 win , Bolt became the first man to defend an Olympic sprint title since Carl Lewis in 1988 . 
 I 'm now a legend . I 'm also the greatest athlete to live . 
 Bolt then " re @-@ defined everything " , by following up that impressive performance with a successful defence of his 200 metres gold medal with a time of 19 @.@ 32 seconds , followed by fellow Jamaicans second @-@ place Yohan Blake at 19 @.@ 44 and bronze medalist Warren Weir at 19 @.@ 84 . With this , Bolt became the first man in history to defend both the 100 m and 200 m Olympic sprint titles . In fact , Bolt was so comfortably ahead near the finish that he was able to slow down , put his left finger to his mouth and " tell everyone to shush . " As soon as Bolt crossed the finish line , he did five push @-@ ups , one for each of his Olympic gold medals . Following the race , eighth @-@ place finisher <unk> <unk> of South Africa compared Bolt to a " ghost " who " disappears in front of you " . When asked about his greatness as a sprinter following his victory , Bolt placed himself in the category of Michael Jordan and Muhammad Ali , in their respective sports . International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) President Jacques Rogge initially stated that Bolt was not yet a " legend " and would not deserve such acclaim until the end of Bolt 's career , but later called him the best sprinter of all time . 
 On the final day of the 2012 Olympics ' athletics , Bolt participated in Jamaica 's gold medal @-@ winning 4 × 100 metres relay team consisting of Bolt , Nesta Carter , Michael Frater and Yohan Blake . With a running time of 36 @.@ 84 seconds , they broke Jamaica 's previous world record of 37 @.@ 04 from 2011 . He celebrated by doing the " <unk> " in tribute to distance runner Mo Farah . 
 = = = 2013 = = = 
 On 6 June 2013 , Justin Gatlin beat Bolt by one @-@ hundredth of a second and won the 100 metres at the Golden Gala meet in Rome , Italy . Bolt appeared at the 2013 London Anniversary Games winning the 100 metres in 9 @.@ 85 seconds . He also participated in the 4 x 100m relay that was won by Jamaica . 
 On 11 August 2013 , Bolt regained the title as world 's fastest man by winning the World Championships 100m in Moscow , with a time of <unk> ( − 0 @.@ 3 m / s wind ) , ahead of Justin Gatlin in second with a time of <unk> On 17 August , Bolt won the 200 @-@ metre race for his 2nd gold medal of the world championships with a time of <unk> Bolt won a third gold in the 4x100 m relay , which made him the most successful athlete in the 30 @-@ year history of the world championships . 
 For the fifth time in six years , Bolt was named IAAF World Male Athlete of the Year . 
 = = = 2014 Commonwealth Games = = = 
 An injury to Bolt 's hamstring in March 2014 caused him to miss nine weeks of training . Having recovered from surgery , Bolt competed in the 4 × 100 metres relay of the 2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow , Scotland . Bolt said that he was " ... going there for my fans and I 'm going there to show I 'm getting back into shape and they can look for great things now and for the years to come . " Bolt and his teammates won the 4x100 relay in 37 @.@ 58 seconds ; a Commonwealth Games record . 
 In August 2014 Bolt set the indoor 100m world record in Warsaw with a time of 9 @.@ 98 seconds . Soon afterwards he ended his season early in order to be fit for the 2015 season . 
 = = = 2015 Beijing World championships = = = 
 On 23 August 2015 , Bolt won the final of the 100 metres with a time of 9 @.@ 79 seconds at the 2015 Beijing World Champions . On 27 August 2015 , Bolt won the 200 metres with a time of 19 @.@ 55 seconds . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In his personal life , Bolt expresses a love for dancing and his character is frequently described as laid @-@ back and relaxed . His Jamaican track and field idols include Herb <unk> and former Jamaican 100m and 200m world record holder , Don Quarrie . Michael Johnson , the former 200 m world and Olympic record holder , is also held in high esteem by Bolt . 
 Bolt is Catholic and known for making the sign of the cross before racing competitively , and he wears a Miraculous Medal during his races . His middle name is St. Leo . 
 In 2010 , Bolt also revealed his fondness of music , when he played a reggae DJ set to a crowd in Paris . 
 The first sport to interest Bolt was cricket and he said if he was not a sprinter he would be a fast bowler instead . As a child he was a supporter of the Pakistani cricket team and admired the bowling of Waqar Younis . He is also a fan of Indian batsman Sachin Tendulkar , West Indian opener Chris Gayle and Australian opener Matthew Hayden . During a charity cricket match Bolt clean @-@ bowled Chris Gayle . Gayle was complimentary of Bolt 's pace and swing . Bolt also struck a six off Chris Gayle 's bowling . Another bowler complimentary of Bolt 's pace was former West Indies fast @-@ bowling great Curtly Ambrose . 
 The Australian cricketer Shane Warne said in 2012 that Bolt would be interested in playing in the cricket Big Bash League , this was later confirmed by Bolt who said that " [ Shane Warne ] contacted me and asked me about if I am serious and if I really want to do it then he can put in a few words that should get it done . So we will see if I get the time off . I will try . " He also said he likes the Twenty20 version of the game : " Just the fact that it is so exciting , it 's about going hard the whole time , not just about playing shots . It 's about being aggressive and I like that style of batsman . If I get the chance I will definitely try because I know it 's going to be a lot of fun . I don 't know how good I am . I will probably have to get a lot of practice in . " In response to Bolt 's interest , Melbourne Stars chief executive Clint Cooper said : " We 're going to wait until the Olympics is over and re @-@ engage with him and his management company . We 've got a couple of spots left on our list . " 
 Bolt is also a fan of Premier League football team Manchester United . He has declared he is a fan of Dutch striker Ruud van Nistelrooy . Bolt was a special guest of Manchester United at the 2011 UEFA Champions League Final in London , where he stated that he would like to play for them after his retirement . 
 In 2013 , Bolt played basketball in the NBA All @-@ Star Weekend Celebrity Game . He scored two points from a slam dunk but acknowledged his other basketball skills were lacking . 
 = = Sponsorships and advertising work = = 
 After winning the 200 m title in the 2002 World Junior Championships in Kingston , Bolt signed a sponsorship deal with Puma . To promote Bolt 's chase for Olympic glory in the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , China , Puma released a series of videos including Bolt 's then @-@ world @-@ record @-@ setting run in Icahn Stadium and his Olympic preparations . After his world record breaking run in New York City , which was preceded by a lightning storm , the press frequently made puns on the Jamaican 's name , nicknaming him " Lightning Bolt " and the " Bolt from the blue " . During the Beijing 2008 100 m final , Bolt wore golden Puma Complete Theseus spikes that had " Beijing 100 m Gold " emblazoned across them . Writing of Bolt 's performance at the Olympics , the The Associated Press said : 
 Almost single @-@ handedly , Bolt has helped track transform itself from a dying sport to one with a singular , smiling , worldwide star . 
 In September 2010 , Bolt travelled to Australia where his sponsor Gatorade was holding an event called the " Gatorade Bolt " to find Australia 's fastest footballer . The event was held at the Sydney International Athletic Centre and featured football players from rugby league , rugby union , Australian rules football , and soccer . Prior to the race Bolt gave the runners some private coaching and also participated in the 10th anniversary celebrations for the 2000 Summer Olympic Games held in Sydney . Rugby Union international Lachlan Turner won the race in a time of 11 @.@ 10 seconds . His Sydney club team mate John Grant finished second in 11 @.@ 15 , with rugby league international <unk> Hayne finishing 3rd with 11 @.@ 20 seconds . 
 In January 2012 , Bolt impersonated Richard Branson in an advertising campaign for Virgin Media . The campaign was directed by Seth Gordon and features the Virgin founder Branson to promote its broadband service . In March 2012 , Bolt starred in an advert for Visa and the 2012 Summer Olympics . In July 2012 , Bolt and <unk> launched Bolt ! , an Apple iOS game based on his exploits . Bolt ! quickly became the No. 1 app in Jamaica and climbed the UK iTunes charts to reach No. 2 on the list of Top Free Apps 
 Bolt 's autobiography ; My Story : 9 @.@ 58 : Being the World 's Fastest Man , was released in 2010 . Bolt had previously said that the book " ... should be exciting , it 's my life , and I 'm a cool and exciting guy . " His athletics agent is PACE Sports Management . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 IAAF World Athlete of the Year : 2008 , 2009 , 2011 , 2012 , 2013 
 Track & Field Athlete of the Year : 2008 , 2009 
 Laureus World Sportsman of the Year : 2009 , 2010 , 2013 
 BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year : 2008 , 2009 , 2012 
 L 'Équipe Champion of Champions : 2008 , 2009 , 2012 , 2015 
 Jamaica Sportsman of the year : 2008 , 2009 , 2011 , 2012 , 2013 
 <unk> Male Athlete of the Year : 2015 
 Marca Leyenda ( 2009 ) 
 In October 2008 , he was made a Commander of the Order of Distinction , which entitles him to use the post nominal letters CD . 
 In 2009 , at age 23 , Usain Bolt became the youngest member so far , of the Order of Jamaica . The award was ' for outstanding performance in the field of athletics at the international level ' . In the Jamaican honours system , this is considered the equivalent of a knighthood in the British honours system , and entitles him to be formally styled " The Honourable " , and to use the post nominal letters OJ . 
 = = Personal appearances = = 
 Bolt made a cameo appearance in the opening sketch of 13 October 2012 broadcast of Saturday Night Live , hosted by Christina Applegate . The segment was a parody of the Vice Presidential debate between Joe Biden and Paul Ryan . In the sketch , Taran Killam mimicking Ryan had just lied about running a 2 : 50 marathon , a sub @-@ 4 @-@ minute mile on no training and winning the 100 metres in London when Bolt was introduced as his partner to confirm . 
 When Ryan asked Bolt " Who won the 100 metres ? " the Jamaican gold @-@ medalist answered simply . " I did . " Ryan followed up by asking Bolt about his ( Ryan 's ) finish . " You didn 't finish . You weren 't even there . " 
 Bolt appeared later in another sketch . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = = Personal bests = = = 
 = = = Records = = = 
 Bolt 's personal best of 9 @.@ 58 seconds in the 100 metres is the fastest ever run . Bolt also holds the second fastest time of 9 @.@ 63 seconds , the current Olympic record , and set two previous world records in the event . Bolt 's personal best of 19 @.@ 19 s in the 200 metres is the world record . This was recorded at the 2009 World Championships in Athletics in Berlin against a headwind of − 0 @.@ 3 m / s . This performance broke his previous world record in the event , his 19 @.@ 30 s clocking in winning the 2008 Olympic 200 metres title . 
 Bolt has been on three world @-@ record @-@ setting Jamaican relay teams . The first record , 37 @.@ 10 seconds , was set in winning gold at the 2008 Summer Olympics . The second record came at the 2011 World Championships in Athletics , a time of 37 @.@ 04 seconds . The third world record was set at the 2012 Summer Olympics , a time of 36 @.@ 84 seconds . 
 Bolt also holds the 200 metres world teenage best results for the age categories 15 ( 20 @.@ 58 s ) , 16 ( 20 @.@ 13 s , world youth record ) , 17 ( 19 @.@ 93 s ) and 18 ( 19 @.@ 93 s , world junior record ) . He also holds the 150 metres world best set in 2009 , during which he ran the last 100 metres in 8 @.@ 70 seconds , the quickest timed 100 metres ever . 
 = = = Average speed = = = 
 From his record time of 9 @.@ 58 s for the 100 m sprint , Usain Bolt 's average ground speed equates to 37 @.@ 58 km / h ( 23 @.@ 35 mph ) . However , once his reaction time of 0 @.@ 15 s is subtracted , his time is closer to 9 @.@ 43 s , making his average speed closer to 38 @.@ 18 km / h ( 23 @.@ 72 mph ) . Bolt 's top speed , based on his split time of 1 @.@ 61 s for the 20 metres from the 60- to 80 @-@ metre marks ( made during the 9 @.@ 58 WR at 100m ) , is 12 @.@ 42 m / s ( 44 @.@ 72 km / h ( 27 @.@ 79 mph ) ) . 
 = = = International competition record = = = 
 = = = Images = = = 
 Lightning Strikes Twice in 2008 – slideshow by The First Post 
 Usain Bolt Wins 100 @-@ Meter Gold at 2012 Olympics – slideshow by USA Today 
 = = = Video = = = 
 Science Of Olympics : Usain Bolt 's Biomechanics – by NBC 
 Bolt Wins 2nd Consecutive 100m Gold – by NBC 
 Bolt Wins 2nd Consecutive 200m Gold – by NBC 
 = Amrullah Saleh = 
 Amrullah Saleh ( Persian : <unk> <unk> ; born 1971 ) is a politician in Afghanistan who served as head of the National Directorate of Security from 2004 until his resignation in 2010 . Prior to that he was a member of Ahmad Shah Massoud 's Northern Alliance . 
 In 1997 , Saleh was appointed by mujahideen leader Massoud to serve as Northern Alliance 's liaison office inside the Afghan Embassy in Dushanbe , Tajikistan , handling contacts to international non @-@ governmental ( humanitarian ) organizations and intelligence agencies . In late 2010 , Saleh created a pro @-@ democracy and anti @-@ Taliban movement called Basej @-@ e Milli ( National Mobilization ) and Green Trend . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Saleh was born in 1971 in the Panjshir Province of Afghanistan . He belongs to the Tajik group . 
 = = Careers = = 
 In 1990 , in order to avoid being conscripted into the Soviet @-@ backed Afghan army , Saleh joined the opposition mujahideen forces . He received military training in neighboring Pakistan and fought under mujahideen commander Ahmad Shah Massoud . 
 In the late 1990s , Saleh was a member of the Northern Alliance ( also known as the United Front ) and was fighting against the Taliban expansion . In 1997 , Saleh was appointed by Massoud to lead the United Front 's international liaison office at the Embassy of Afghanistan in Dushanbe , Tajikistan , where he served as a coordinator for non @-@ governmental ( humanitarian ) organizations and as a liaison partner for foreign intelligence agencies . 
 After the September 11 , 2001 attacks in the United States , Saleh participated in leading intelligence operations of the United Front on the ground during the toppling of the Taliban regime . 
 = = = National Directorate of Security = = = 
 After the formation of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan in December 2004 , Saleh was appointed as head of the National Directorate of Security ( NDS ) by President Hamid Karzai . Saleh initiated structural reforms and helped rebuild the Afghan intelligence service . Saleh and former interior minister Hanif Atmar were viewed by the international community as two of the most competent cabinet members in the Afghan government . A western security expert told The Guardian that both men had a reputation for " clearing corruption within " their organs . 
 In 2005 , Saleh engaged several NDS agents infiltrating the Pakistani tribal areas to search for bin Laden and other al @-@ Qaeda and Taliban leaders . Several al @-@ Qaeda members could be identified , but it was determined that Bin Laden was not in the area . In 2006 , Saleh was presented with evidence that bin Laden was living in a major settled area of Pakistan just 20 miles from the town of Abbottabad , Pakistan . He shared the intelligence with former Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf who angrily brushed off the claim , taking no action . 
 After the 2009 Afghan presidential election , Afghan President Karzai 's views about the security issues confronting Afghanistan and how best to deal with them reportedly changed . This impacted the working relationship between the President of Afghanistan and some of his cabinet ministers including his intelligence chief . Saleh said , " He [ Karzai ] thought democracy had hurt him as a person . His family had been attacked by the media unfairly , and the West was criticizing him unfairly . So after a presidential election , he was a changed man , and we could not have the same relationship as before the presidential election . " Political analyst Ahmed Rashid in 2010 observed the same , " Karzai 's new outlook is the most dramatic political shift he has undergone in the twenty @-@ six years that I have known him . " Both Saleh and Interior Minister Hanif Atmar subsequently had strong disagreements with Karzai on how to proceed against the Taliban , who Karzai began referring to as " brothers " . At that point Saleh and Atmar were increasingly isolated in the Karzai administration . 
 In early 2010 , an Afghan man approached the NDS claiming to represent senior Taliban commander Mullah Akhtar Muhammad Mansour . Offering a letter allegedly written by Mansour , he said Mansour was interested to open a channel for negotiations . Saleh 's people started testing the credentials of the supposed messenger , and judged them to be false , closing the case . The man then approached other Afghan government institutions . Saleh recounts , " When I learned ... that he was going through a different avenue , I warned the government that if it is this <unk> , if he claims this , and if it is this guy , trust me , he is not representing anybody ; it 's a scam . ... Be careful . This is not Mansour . But there was a perception that Amrullah is against talks , so let 's sideline him . " The Afghan man , who lived in Pakistan where the Taliban 's leadership council is based , subsequently held three meetings with NATO and Afghan officials . Having been flown from Pakistan to Kabul on a NATO airplane , the man met with President Karzai in the presidential palace . In late 2010 , it turned out , that the supposed representative for Mansour was an impostor as Saleh had previously warned . The New York Times writes : " In an episode that could have been lifted from a spy novel , United States and Afghan officials now say the Afghan man was an impostor . " 
 On June 6 , 2010 , Saleh resigned from the NDS while Atmar resigned from his position as interior minister after a militant attack against the national peace jirga , although nobody had been killed or wounded and the attackers had been arrested . A few days after the jirga , Karzai had summoned Atmar and Saleh to discuss the attack against the jirga . After the meeting both men officially resigned because of the failure to stop the attack on the jirga . <unk> writes : " Saleh told reporters he had submitted his resignation as general director of National Security because he had lost Karzai 's trust as a result of the attack . He said he and Atmar had briefed the president on the security preparations for the jirga , and the subsequent " success in ... capturing the facilitators " , but Karzai had not been satisfied . He had therefore felt unable to continue in his post . He also said there were " tens " of reasons for leaving his position , but would not elaborate on others . " The two men 's resignation led to widespread concerns among Afghanistan experts . Concerns were voiced over the direction the country was moving in . 
 The former United Nation 's Special Representative to Afghanistan Kai Eide writes : 
 " In June 2010 Atmar and Saleh were also gone . All ... had been highly respected among Afghans and among international partners . Since late 2008 I had been enthusiastic about the number of new reform @-@ oriented politicians in key government positions . That trend now seemed to have been reversed . " 
 President Karzai 's national security adviser , <unk> <unk> <unk> , was quoted as saying : 
 " With Amrullah Saleh , the Afghan people have lost a huge treasure of commitment , awareness and experience in this struggle against terrorism , Al Qaeda and the ISI . I can ’ t think of anyone who will be able to even slightly fill the vacuum that he leaves behind . Besides being a highly efficient chief at the <unk> , he is a man of knowledge and research with an incredible memory and intellect . When he analyzed issues at international meetings , he exhibited tremendous ability at logical reasoning . He was head and shoulder above others . ... I had many differences in arguments with him , but I always saw his presence at the <unk> as a huge advantage to this country and this government . Despite my high respects for the president 's decisions , I am extremely mournful about Saleh 's departure . Extremely mournful . " 
 According to Ambassador Hank Crumpton from the CIA , who led the Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan in 2001 , Saleh possessed " good technical skills and emerging leadership traits " . Ambassador Crumpton also writes in his recent book that he found Saleh to be “ young , brilliant , honest , and devoted to a free Afghanistan " . 
 The resignation of Saleh and Atmar came amidst heavy disagreement between Hamid Karzai and Amrullah Saleh on how to proceed against the Taliban . Daoud <unk> , a member of the Afghan parliament , said , he had observed that disagreement between Karzai on the one side and cabinet members such as Saleh and Atmar on the other side had been going on for a while . Saleh publicly blamed Pakistan for its support to the Taliban and other extremist groups and said talks with the Taliban should take place but not at the cost of democratic structures . Meanwhile Karzai had increasingly been placing his hopes on his attempts to reach a secret deal with the Taliban and Pakistan . Pakistan had repeatedly urged Karzai to oust Saleh from his position . 
 The Afghan media extensively covered the resignations with the daily liberal newspaper <unk> @-@ e Subh headlining an article : " Resignation of Atmar and Saleh : Accountability to the People or Tribute to Pakistan ? " Saleh said he considered Karzai a patriot , but that the president was making a mistake if he planned to rely on Pakistani support as Pakistan was trying to reimpose the Taliban . 
 " They are weakening him under the disguise of respecting him . They will embrace a weak Afghan leader , but they will never respect him . " 
 Saleh on the BBC 's Hard Talk explained and reiterated that Karzai in hoping to reach a deal with the Taliban and Pakistan 's ISI through appeasement policy had alienated his internal allies as well as Afghanistan 's external allies and had undermined the morale of Afghan security forces . 
 It was reported in 2010 that the Inter @-@ Services Intelligence ( ISI ) and the Taliban " regarded Saleh as their fiercest opponent . " He subsequently founded the Basej @-@ e Milli ( National mobilization ) and Green Trend as a pro @-@ democracy and anti @-@ Taliban movement . 
 = = Bin Laden – Musharraf controversy = = 
 Saleh has repeatedly stated that Afghan intelligence believed and had shared information about Osama Bin Laden hiding in an area close to Abbottabad , Pakistan , four years before he ( Bin Laden ) was killed there . Saleh had shared the information with Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf who had angrily brushed off the claim taking no action . 
 As early as 2004 , agents working for Afghan intelligence determined that Bin Laden was living in a major settled area in Pakistan proper , rather than the semi @-@ autonomous tribal areas on the Afghan @-@ Pakistan border , Amrullah Saleh told The Guardian . Leading Saleh and Afghan intelligence to that conclusion were " thousands of interrogation reports " and the assumption that Bin Laden " a millionaire with multiple wives and no background of toughness would not be living in a tent " . " I was pretty sure he was in the settled areas of Pakistan because in 2005 it was still very easy to infiltrate the tribal areas , and we had massive numbers of informants there . They could find any Arab but not Bin Laden . " 
 In 2007 , the Afghans specifically identified two Al @-@ Qaeda safe houses in <unk> , a town just miles from Abbottabad , leading them to believe that Bin Laden was possibly hiding there . But Amrullah Saleh says that Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf angrily smashed his fist on a table when Saleh presented the information to him during a meeting in which Afghan President Hamid Karzai also took part . According to Saleh , " He said , ' Am I the president of the Republic of Banana ? ' Then he turned to President Karzai and said , ' Why have you brought this <unk> guy to teach me intelligence ? ' " 
 A BBC journalist confronting Musharraf with Saleh 's allegations writes : " The former leader of Pakistan plays the dispassionate broker very well . ... [ But ] this is when Mr Musharraf 's camouflage starts to slip . The substance of the claim he handles like a politician ( it was actually a case of mistaken identity involving the CIA , he says ) . But he bristles with anger at the mention of Amrullah Saleh 's name . " Accusing Saleh of " impertinence " and being " lowly " , Musharraf stated : " Amrullah Saleh I have never liked and therefore he has no right to present anything to me . " 
 A December 2011 analysis report by the Jamestown Foundation , however , came to the conclusion that " in spite of denials by the Pakistani military , evidence is emerging that elements within the Pakistani military harbored Osama bin Laden with the knowledge of former army chief General Pervez Musharraf and possibly current Chief of Army Staff ( <unk> ) General Ashfaq Pervez Kayani . Former Pakistani Army Chief General Ziauddin Butt ( a.k.a. General Ziauddin Khawaja ) revealed at a conference on Pakistani – U.S. relations in October 2011 that according to his knowledge the then former Director @-@ General of Intelligence Bureau of Pakistan ( 2004 – 2008 ) , Brigadier Ijaz Shah ( retd . ) , had kept Osama bin Laden in an Intelligence Bureau safe house in Abbottabad . " Pakistani General Ziauddin Butt said Bin Laden had been hidden in Abbottabad " with the full knowledge " of Pervez Musharraf . Butt later denied making any such statement . 
 = = Activity after resignation = = 
 In 2010 Saleh launched a peaceful campaign to warn that Hamid Karzai had lost conviction in the fight against the Taliban and was pursuing a compromise that could come at the cost of democracy , stability and human rights , especially women 's rights . He criticized Karzai 's policy , which he called a " fatal mistake and a recipe for civil war " . 
 " My view is there must not be a deal with the Taliban . Ever . There must be a process . And according to that process , based on that process , the Taliban should become part of the society and play according to the script of democracy . They should be demobilized , disarmed , reintegrated the way the Northern Alliance was . ... And also they should denounce violence . And that process will bring a lasting stability . Minus that , if there is a deal , deals never bring stability . They create fragile peace . ... if there is a deal , we will resist against the deal , " we " meaning all the forces who fought the Taliban . ... [ T ] he Taliban have no message , no vision except intimidation , spreading fear , bringing exclusion in the Afghan society , stopping development and destroying pluralism . ... We all want to make peace , but we do not want to <unk> Afghanistan . " 
 He also warned : 
 " Psychologically , there is no government . People do not recognize an authority . There are people who are paid by the government , who protect themselves and there are Taliban groups who go around and spread intimidation and fear . In between , the population is caught between two fighting forces and they do not go to [ either ] for a solution . " 
 Amrullah Saleh consequently founded the Basej @-@ e Milli ( National Movement ) , also known as Afghanistan Green Trend , a political movement which has successfully established itself in Afghanistan . In May 2011 , more than 20 @,@ 000 of his followers took part in an anti @-@ Taliban demonstration in the capital Kabul . 
 In December 2011 , Saleh also criticized the corruption of the Karzai government . He warned that if the Afghan government did not commit itself to necessary reforms and to battling corruption , the year 2014 - when international troops plan on having finalized their exit strategy - would be " a year of challenges rather than opportunities " . Saleh especially emphasized the need for fundamental reforms in Afghanistan 's Independent Electoral Commission . 
 " 2014 is a year of opportunities , some coalitions will form and whoever wins transparently or in an almost transparent situation , the Afghan people will support the new order ... If there are no reforms , I can foresee a popular uprising , a just uprising different from the Taliban 's . 
 Amrullah Saleh has been speaking and writing extensively on these issues in both local and international media . He maintains that the Taliban need to disarm and honor the integrity of the Afghan constitution before they could be considered for any reconciliation process . 
 In an article that he wrote for the Wall Street Journal in February 2012 , he mentioned , " Talks and a potential ceasefire may provide the U.S. and its NATO allies their justification for a speedy withdrawal , but it won 't change the fundamentals of the problem in Afghanistan . Striking a deal with the Taliban without disarming them will shatter the hope of a strong , viable , pluralistic Afghan state . " 
 In his commentaries , Amrullah Saleh also discusses the negative influence of parochial politics and lack of incentives on the development of the Afghan National Security Forces . In an article for Al Jazeera in April 2012 , he wrote , " Idealism and belief in values are crucial to strengthening the ranks . But when the security forces witness the decay of values at the leadership level , the incentive for sacrifice plummets . The effectiveness of the force declines . And in such situations ethnic and regional divides , personal connections , and mistrust creep in . " 
 He warns that ethnic politics and internal fragmentation are serious challenges for Afghanistan . In an article for Al Jazeera in June 2012 , he wrote , " Pan @-@ Afghan parties don ’ t exist . Afghans of all ethnic groups have stood together for a common cause but they have failed to share a common platform . " 
 With the imminent draw @-@ down of the international assistance to Afghanistan and its implications on the programs and projects supporting Afghan economy and public institutions , Amrullah Saleh warns that , " The task of absorbing tens of thousands of low @-@ quality degree holders , hundreds of thousands of unskilled , unemployed youth , and an ever @-@ increasing ethnic quota in civil service and development projects will be monumentally difficult . This internal stress can only be overcome if Afghanistan <unk> its income sources and expands its extractive industries . " 
 He also mentions , " The Afghan Local Police should be strengthened ... but be insulated from political influence of current government stakeholders . " 
 Explaining the reason why the West has not succeeded in Afghanistan , Amrullah emphasized the lack of effort towards creating an anti @-@ Taliban constituency . He wrote , " The anti @-@ Taliban constituency is not an ethnic alliance against the south , but rather a political umbrella for all Afghans who seek a pluralistic society and oppose the <unk> of the society as part of a so @-@ called reconciliation deal . Perhaps 80 percent of Afghans oppose the Taliban . Such an umbrella will be Afghans ’ best representative in any talks with the Taliban , since Karzai and his High Peace Council lack credibility among Afghans who experienced the Taliban ’ s oppressive rule . " 
 Speaking during the inauguration of an Islamic foundation in Kabul , Saleh said the Karzai government and the United States of America cannot represent the anti @-@ Taliban Afghan civilians and initiate peace talks while simultaneously excluding them . The former Afghan Intelligence Chief insisted on considering the views of the Afghan people during the peace talks process , as a majority of Afghans both in the northern and southern regions , he said , have negative views of the Taliban . He also questioned the honesty of the Taliban 's involvement in peace talks . The recent objections by nearly all major opposition parties come amid growing efforts by the US and Hamid Karzai to make headway in secret talks with the Taliban and Gulbuddin Hekmatyar 's <unk> @-@ i Islami . In these talks representatives from the anti @-@ Taliban United Front , which fought the Taliban from 1994 until 2001 and unites leaders representing roughly 60 % of Afghanistan 's population , are being excluded . Criticizing the secretive nature of US talks with the Taliban , which they suspect might end in a return of the Taliban to power , opposition leaders have asked for a transparent UN @-@ led peace process . 
 In a recent article for Foreign Policy , titled , “ What went wrong with Afghanistan ? ” published in March 2013 , Amrullah Saleh mentioned that the key reason for the current problematic situation in Afghanistan was the West 's ( US and NATO 's ) mistaken belief that Pakistan would change its policies in Afghanistan . 
 Starting with a rhetorical question – Is NATO losing and the Taliban winning ? – Amrullah Saleh discusses the uncertainty among the Afghans about 2014 – when NATO ends its combat mission in Afghanistan . He then mentions Afghans ’ perception that the US is funding both sides of the conflict because Pakistan remains the key country supporting the insurgency . Amrullah Saleh also discusses why the NATO and the US remain unwilling to confront Pakistan because of their own security concerns . He advocates for a surge in the capacity of the Afghan National Security Forces . Amrullah Saleh highlights the importance of both training and equipment to ensure that cleared areas of Afghanistan are held , communication lines are kept open , and major population centers are defended . 
 He specifically mentions , “ Maintaining military pressure on the Taliban is key for survival of the pluralistic state in Afghanistan . Otherwise , the democratic space will shrink , and the Taliban 's bargaining power in future talks will increase further . ” He then concludes presciently , “ Some analysts have tried to paint this war as a conflict between Afghans . It isn 't . In reality , it is a war between a Pakistan @-@ supported militant group and the rest of the world . There are only two possible solutions : A Western @-@ backed Afghan government decisively defeats the Taliban , or the Taliban agree to demilitarize and join the political process . The United States , however , should understand one thing very clearly : It would be making a huge error -- and confirming the Afghan people 's worst fears -- if it picked up and left Afghanistan to the Taliban 's brutal ways . ” 
 On May 3 , 2013 , the Afghan Green Trend - the grassroots movement led by Amrullah Saleh - organized a large athletic demonstration in support of the Afghan National Security Forces ( ANSF ) . It also aimed at denouncing corruption , calling for a clean city and a clean municipality . The demonstration passed through the Afghan parliament building . The demonstrators chanted against the parliament ’ s alleged corruption and denounced MPs who take bribes . 
 They ended their run at the steps of the historical <unk> palace and read a declaration : “ Our aim is to announce our political and moral support for those who are in the trenches defending the country ’ s sovereignty . ” Amrullah Saleh said , “ To the soldiers who are martyred in line of duty – you lost your lives , but your dreams live on ” . He also warned against the “ politicization of the country ’ s security forces and their misuse towards political means . ” 
 On June 9 , 2013 , in the 10th annual US @-@ Islamic forum organized in Doha by the Brookings institution in partnership with the state of Qatar , Amrullah Saleh spoke in a plenary session titled “ Transitions in Afghanistan and Pakistan ” . Amrullah Saleh warned , “ While America ’ s war on terror may be winding down , the war between democratic forces and extremist groups in Afghanistan has not come to an end due to the widespread presence of terrorist sanctuaries , ongoing hostilities between Afghanistan and Pakistan , and the rising momentum in the Taliban 's insurgency . ” 
 He added , “ A British soldier was cut into pieces [ in ] broad daylight in London or near London . Will [ the ] British government ever , instead of putting that guy to justice , put him in a five @-@ star hotel and say , ' Brother , what made you do this ? Can we accommodate your grievances ? ' That is what the West is expecting [ of ] us - to bring the killers of our brothers , to bring those who cut the noses of the Afghan women , to bring those who do suicide bombings in our wedding parties , to put them on the other side of the table and say , ' Brother , you represent our religion and I have lost my direction . Let us talk . ' That is because there is not much respect for the dignity of the nation called Afghanistan when it comes to geopolitics . ” 
 = = Assassination attempts = = 
 Saleh has become a target of assassination a number of times . During a 60 Minutes interview in the United States , Saleh stated : 
 " Sure , and if they kill me , I have told my family and my friends not to complain about anything , because I have killed many of them with pride , so , I am a very , very legitimate target , very legitimate , because when I stand against them , the desire to stand against them is part of my blood . I believe they are wrong . " 
 = Over the Rainbow ( Connie Talbot album ) = 
 Over the Rainbow is the debut album of child singer Connie Talbot , and was released 26 November 2007 by Rainbow Recording Company . Most of the album 's recording was done in a spare room in the house of Talbot 's aunt , in an attempt to preserve her childhood by not interrupting her regular activities . Although initially public appearances were kept to a minimum , Talbot did make appearances to promote the album , and performed in public several times after the British release . It received poor reviews from critics and peaked at number 35 on the UK Albums Chart . Despite this , additional copies of the album had to be pressed after sales were higher than expected . She later toured Asia in support of the album . Over the Rainbow achieved more success on the Asian charts , reaching number one in Taiwan , South Korea and Hong Kong . 
 Over the Rainbow was rereleased on 18 June 2008 with an updated track list , replacing some of the Christmas themed tracks of the original with more general covers . The first single from the album , " Three Little Birds , " was released in June 2008 , and a music video for the song was shot in Jamaica . On 14 October , the album was released in the US , appearing on several Billboard charts . Talbot visited the US to promote the album , appearing on national television . 
 = = Recording and release = = 
 Connie Talbot raised to prominence after reaching the final of the first series of Britain 's Got Talent . After briefly recording with Sony BMG , Talbot was signed to Rainbow Recording Company , an offshoot of Rhythm Riders made specifically for her . To produce Over the Rainbow , Talbot worked with John Arnison , then @-@ manager to Gabrielle and Billy Ocean , and Marc Marot , former managing director of Island Records . It was produced and mixed by Simon Hill and Rob May . A recording schedule was worked out so Talbot could continue with her normal school activities while recording the album in her aunt Vicky 's spare bedroom , which her mother described as " a better solution " than the one offered by Sony BMG , " which has not robbed her of her childhood " . Talbot said that " it was just amazing that we could do it in my auntie 's house " . Arnison and Marot asked the Talbot family to " write down a list of the songs that Connie would sing at her birthday party " to help choose the track listing , and then " thought long and hard " about including more adult songs on the album . Talbot herself insisted that they should . The final version of Over the Rainbow was recorded at Olympic Studios , on 12 October 2007 . Arnison described the recording process by saying that Talbot " hadn 't sung nursery rhymes ; she 'd always sung classic tracks . So it was actually quite an easy task to make the record . " The album was released on 26 November 2007 , with an initial pressing of 50 @,@ 000 copies . However , an additional 120 @,@ 000 had to be pressed after the album sold out in a matter of days . The album was released in the US on 14 October 2008 . 
 Over the Rainbow was rereleased on 18 June 2008 , and was available for preorder in May , with three new tracks to replace the Christmas @-@ themed songs on the original album . The new tracks were made available from Talbot 's official website so that those who bought the original need not buy the rerelease . Talbot 's song " Three Little Birds " , a cover of the Bob Marley song of the same name , was released as a single on 10 June 2008 , and a music video was shot in Jamaica to for the release . The album was released in the US on 14 October , and Talbot travelled to America with her family to publicise it . Talbot 's cover of " I Will Always Love You " was released as a single in the US on 7 April , along with a newly recorded " You Raise Me Up " . 
 = = Publicity = = 
 Although Arnison claimed he did not " want to put [ Talbot ] through the promotional grind which most artists go through because she is too young " , Talbot made several public appearances after the album 's release . These included headlining the Great Bridge Christmas and Winter Festival , which local police threatened to cancel unless crowds clamouring to reach the tent in which Talbot was performing could be brought under control . At the event , on 7 December 2007 , Talbot was quoted as saying " I love it here , it 's brilliant , really fun " , but she had to be ushered off @-@ stage by the police . Talbot performed publicly in Walsall 's HMV store , and in Birmingham 's Centenary Square . TV appearances included GMTV and Channel 5 news , both on the day of the album 's release . 
 In April and May 2008 , Talbot toured Asia to promote Over the Rainbow . Asian press attributed her success to her videos on YouTube , with writers for the <unk> noting that her most viewed video had been watched over 14 million times , and Bernard Koh , of The Straits Times , saying that videos of Talbot 's performances have been watched over 30 million times . The tour made stops in South Korea , Taiwan , Hong Kong and Singapore , and Talbot and her family returned to England in late May . News that Talbot was to release the album in the US resulted in attention from American press sources including Fox Business Network and MarketWatch . Kerri Mason , writing for Reuters , described Talbot 's videos as " viral " , and added that she had been watched on YouTube over 46 million times . Talbot travelled to the US for a promotional tour to coincide with the release , where she performed on The Ellen DeGeneres Show , appeared as a guest on The Oprah Winfrey Show , and appeared in Los Angeles , Philadelphia , New York City and Washington D.C. Following the television appearances , sales of the album were boosted in the US . Talbot again travelled to the US to promote her single " I Will Always Love You " on 30 April 2009 , and returned again in May . Appearances have included a performance on Good Day New York on Fox Broadcasting Company 's WNYW . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The album was received mostly negatively by critics . Sharon Mawer , of Allmusic , praised Over the Rainbow by saying " [ Talbot ] can sing , for a seven @-@ year @-@ old , and most of the notes ( if not all of them ) are in the right order and sung to the right pitch ; the timing is fine too " . However , she criticised the album , saying " there 's no feeling , no emotion , no realization of what each song is about ; they 're just pretty little songs " , giving the album 2 / 5 . Nick Levine , of Digital Spy , said in a review of the album that Talbot had a " sweet , pure voice " , but that there is " no nuance or depth to her performance " . However , he said that " There 's something inherently wrong about awarding a star rating to a seven @-@ year @-@ old " , and that " the decidedly adult concept of musical merit should have nothing to do with [ her music ] " , rating the album 2 / 5 . Reviewers in the Harlow Star also commented on her age , saying " There 's no doubt she 's a sweet little girl with a nice voice , but surely there 's something inherently wrong with thrusting a child into the limelight at such a young age ? " <unk> Bedi , writing for Malaysian newspaper The Star , praised the album , saying that " Connie sings with ease and manages the high notes admirably " , but asked whether " people would buy an album of the same songs sung by a 20 @-@ year @-@ old girl " . 
 = = Chart performance and sales = = 
 The album entered in the British album charts at 35 on 8 December 2007 , but was at the bottom of the charts by Christmas , despite having been tipped as a potential Christmas number one . It remained in the charts for five weeks , peaking at 35 . However , the album was certified gold in Britain in early December , with Talbot being presented a gold disc by Phillip Schofield on daytime television programme This Morning . Following Talbot 's tour of Asia , it was reported that the album had reached number one on the charts in Taiwan , South Korea and Hong Kong , as well as reaching number three in Singapore . The album has gone platinum in Taiwan and Hong Kong , and double platinum in Korea , selling 30 @,@ 000 copies . In the US , the album appeared on three charts . It featured on the Top Heatseekers for nine weeks , peaking at number 7 , on the Kid Albums for four weeks , peaking at number 8 , and on Top Independent Albums for one week , at number 43 . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Orchestra = = = 
 = = = Choir = = = 
 = = = Production and publicity = = = 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = = Original track listing = = = 
 = = = <unk> track listing = = = 
 = Martin AM Mauler = 
 The Martin AM Mauler ( originally XBTM ) was a single @-@ seat shipboard attack aircraft built for the United States Navy . Designed during World War II , the Mauler encountered development delays and did not enter service until 1948 in small numbers . The aircraft proved troublesome and remained in front @-@ line service only until 1950 , when the Navy switched to the smaller and simpler Douglas AD Skyraider . Maulers remained in reserve squadrons until 1953 . A few were built as AM @-@ 1Q electronic @-@ warfare aircraft with an additional crewman in the fuselage . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 In the 1930s and early 1940s , the Navy divided carrier @-@ borne bombers into two types : the torpedo bomber and the dive bomber , each with crews of two or three men . Wartime experience showed that pilots could aim bombs and torpedoes without assistance from other crewmembers as well navigate with the aid of radio beacons and the development of more @-@ powerful engines meant that faster aircraft no longer needed a rear gunner for self @-@ defense . Furthermore , the consolidation of the two types of bombers greatly increased the flexibility of a carrier 's air group and allowed the number of fighters in an air group to be increased . 
 In 1943 the US Navy invited proposals for a new multi @-@ purpose bomber and selected four designs in September : the Curtiss <unk> , Douglas <unk> Skyraider , Kaiser @-@ <unk> <unk> and the Martin XBTM . Martin was tasked to provide a back @-@ up to the Curtiss design which had been selected as a replacement to the Curtiss SB2C Helldiver . Due to the US Navy 's concern that the Curtiss design was overly complex and that the company 's record was particularly poor during the Helldiver 's development , Martin was instructed to create an " <unk> " design that would be a reliable platform for the Pratt & Whitney R @-@ 4360 Wasp Major radial engine that powered both aircraft . Two prototypes were ordered from Martin on 31 May 1944 with the internal designation of Model 210 . 
 The XBTM @-@ 1 was a low @-@ winged , all @-@ metal monoplane with folding wings to allow more compact storage in carrier hangar decks and conventional landing gear . Its fuselage was an oval @-@ shaped stressed @-@ skin semi @-@ monocoque with the single @-@ seat cockpit and its teardrop @-@ shaped canopy positioned just aft of the air @-@ cooled engine . Just behind the cockpit was a 150 @-@ US @-@ gallon ( 570 l ; 120 imp gal ) fuel tank . The large wing consisted of a two @-@ spar center section with hydraulically @-@ folded three @-@ spar outer panels . A large dive brake was positioned on the trailing edge of the wing . When closed it could be lowered for use as a landing flap or it could be split into alternating upper and lower section with inter @-@ meshing " fingers " for use in its intended role . It was very effective in this role , mainly due to its great surface area , but this was at the cost of the width of the ailerons , which significantly reduced their efficiency . A pair of 180 @-@ US @-@ gallon ( 680 l ; 150 imp gal ) fuel tanks were positioned in the roots of the center section . All fuel tanks were self sealing and the pilot and oil cooler were protected by 297 pounds ( 135 kg ) of armor . 
 The fixed armament of four 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) T @-@ 31 autocannon was fitted in the center section adjacent to the outer wing panels with 200 rounds per gun . A centerline hardpoint and a pair of outer hardpoints were installed on the center section and rated to take bombs , fuel tanks or torpedoes up to 2 @,@ 300 pounds ( 1 @,@ 043 kg ) in weight . The outer hardpoints could also carry an AN / APS @-@ 4 search radar in a pod . A dozen hardpoints could be installed on the outer wing panels to carry 250 @-@ pound ( 113 kg ) bombs or 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) High Velocity Aircraft Rockets . In service the Mauler earned the nickname " Able Mable " because of its remarkable load @-@ carrying ability , once lifting 10 @,@ 648 pounds ( 4 @,@ 830 kg ) of ordnance ( three 2 @,@ 200 @-@ pound ( 998 kg ) torpedoes , a dozen 250 @-@ pound bombs plus its 20 mm guns and their ammunition ) on 30 March 1949 , perhaps the heaviest load ever carried by a single @-@ engine , piston @-@ powered aircraft . 
 The first XBTM @-@ 1 made its maiden flight on 26 August 1944 and began flight testing after it reached the Naval Air Test Center ( NATC ) on 11 December . The Navy ordered 750 more aircraft on 15 January 1945 although this was reduced to 99 aircraft after the surrender of Japan in August . The second prototype made its first flight on 20 May . Initial flight tests conducted with the first two prototypes revealed significant problems with the engine , its cowling , the vertical stabilizer and rudder . In response , the cowling was lengthened 6 inches ( 152 mm ) and the engine mount was canted two degrees to the right to offset the engine 's tremendous torque . The length of the carburetor air scoop was extended and the propeller spinner , rudder , and the vertical stabilizer were redesigned . In April 1946 the aircraft designation was changed to AM @-@ 1 when the Navy replaced its Bomber @-@ Torpedo classification with Attack , well before the redesign was completed in early 1947 . 
 First deliveries began in March 1947 and a flight test program began that month that lasted three years before the major deficiencies identified were fully corrected . Carrier landing trials revealed a structural weakness of the rear fuselage when one aircraft was severed in half during a heavy landing . Severe vibrations in the tail upon engaging the arresting wire were cured by adding a roller bearing to the tailhook to counter the sideways forces placed on the tailhook . Other necessary changes were the addition of spoiler ailerons and an elevator control boost to improve the aircraft 's poor controllability at low speeds . In addition the cockpit layout was unsatisfactory and had to be redesigned . The NATC finally deemed the Mauler acceptable for carrier landings in August 1948 even though aircraft had been issued to one squadron earlier in the year and a new batch of 50 aircraft had been ordered in May . Despite all of the modifications to the aircraft over its short life , it remained a maintenance nightmare , especially the leaky hydraulic systems . 
 The AM @-@ 1Q was developed for electronic countermeasures ( ECM ) duties . The fuselage fuel tank was removed to make room for the ECM operator and his equipment in a windowless compartment . The aircraft carried several radio and radar receivers , transmitters and a signal analyzer . The operator could also drop bundles of chaff through a chute to block radar signals . 
 Pilots found the Mauler a heavy handling aircraft that was difficult to fly in formation , and hard to land aboard a carrier because a less than perfect landing often caused the aircraft to bounce over the arresting wires and into the safety barrier . It was a very stable dive bomber , more so than the Skyraider , and could carry more ordnance . Maintenance problems and the difficulty of landing aboard a carrier caused some pilots give it the nickname of " Awful Monster " . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 With the prospect of flying the AD @-@ 1 Skyraider and AM @-@ 1 in carrier operations , the US Navy assigned the Maulers to Atlantic Fleet squadrons . Attack Squadron 17A ( VA @-@ 17A ) was the first unit to get the AM @-@ 1 and received its 18 aircraft in March and April 1948 . It was redesignated as VA @-@ 174 on 11 August and began carrier qualification trials aboard the USS Kearsarge on 27 – 28 December and completed them aboard the USS Leyte in January 1949 with all assigned pilots completing their day qualifications . During this latter deployment the squadron participated in the unsuccessful search for a British South American Airways Avro Tudor airliner missing in the Caribbean . The squadron made a brief deployment aboard the USS Midway , one of the largest carriers in the US Navy , in early 1949 . The longer flight deck of the Midway @-@ class carriers made landings easier for the AM @-@ 1 pilots and the squadron did not have a single landing accident during its deployment . Upon its return the unit transferred its aircraft to VA @-@ 44 and VA @-@ 45 , both newly assigned to the Midway , and converted to the Skyraider before being disbanded in January 1950 . 
 The two squadrons began receiving their aircraft in March 1949 and conduced their carrier qualifications from 2 to 7 May . VA @-@ 45 became the only Mauler squadron to complete qualification without any accidents . They made a short deployment aboard the carrier from 1 to 9 September and began converting back to Skyraiders the following month . 
 Carrier Air Group 8 ( CVG @-@ 8 ) was established on 15 September 1948 in response to the Berlin Blockade with newly qualified pilots and reservists who volunteered for active duty . VA @-@ 84 and VA @-@ 85 , the air group 's attack squadrons , began receiving Maulers in November and the last aircraft was delivered in January 1949 . Later that month the air group made a flyover of President Harry Truman 's Inauguration ceremony . The squadron conducted their qualifications aboard the Midway from 3 to 6 May with 10 Maulers crashing into the safety barrier between them . CVG @-@ 8 made a two @-@ week cruise aboard the Midway beginning on 27 June along the East Coast of the United States before it was disbanded in November after the peaceful resolution of the Berlin Blockade . 
 Many of the AM @-@ 1Q electronic @-@ warfare variants were assigned to Composite Squadron 4 ( VC @-@ 4 ) , based at NAS Atlantic City , and were detached in small groups for each Atlantic Fleet carrier deployment . Little is known about their service and the squadron is last known to have Maulers assigned on 1 October 1950 . 
 Although the Skyraider was a third smaller and carried a third less bombload , it proved more reliable in service and easier to fly and land , and Navy pilots preferred it . In 1950 the decision was made to use the Mauler only from shore @-@ based units and later that year all but Naval Reserve units abandoned the type . The aircraft operated with reserve squadrons until 1953 . 
 = = Variants = = 
 XBTM @-@ 1 
 Two prototypes built . 
 <unk> @-@ 1 / AM @-@ 1 
 A total of 131 production aircraft , another 651 aircraft were cancelled . 
 AM @-@ 1Q 
 A electronic @-@ warfare variant , 18 aircraft built and / or converted . 
 <unk> @-@ 1 
 Proposed carrier onboard delivery variant of the AM , named Mercury ; not built . 
 = = Operators = = 
 United States 
 United States Navy 
 VA @-@ 44 , VA @-@ 45 , VA @-@ 84 , VA @-@ 85 , VA @-@ 174 , VC @-@ 4 . 
 Reserve attack squadrons at NAS Grosse Ile , NAS St. Louis , NAS Glenview , NAS Dallas , NAS Columbus , and NAS Atlanta . 
 = = Survivors = = 
 Out of 151 Maulers built , only four complete air @-@ frames are known to still exist with a fifth partial air @-@ frame in storage : 
 On display 
 AM @-@ 1 
 <unk> - National Naval Aviation Museum in Pensacola , Florida . 
 <unk> - Tillamook Air Museum , Tillamook , Oregon . ( formerly from the Erikson Aircraft Collection in Madras , Oregon ) 
 In storage or under restoration 
 AM @-@ 1 
 <unk> - this aircraft formerly belonged to the Commemorative Air Force ( formerly the Confederate Air Force ) . In storage , ( along with <unk> ) at the Glenn L. Martin Maryland Aviation Museum in Middle River , Maryland . Not currently listed on the museum 's website and the museum did not respond to a query on its status . Previously restored to airworthy status in 1984 and subsequently crashed same year . 
 <unk> - Partial air frame stored ( along with <unk> ) , at the Glenn L. Martin Maryland Aviation Museum in Middle River , Maryland . 
 <unk> - in storage at the Planes of Fame in Chino , California as of 2014 . 
 = = Specifications ( AM @-@ 1 Mauler ) = = 
 Data from American Combat Aircraft of the 20th Century 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 1 ( 2 for AM @-@ 1Q ) 
 Length : 41 ft 3 in ( 12 @.@ 57 m ) 
 Wingspan : 50 ft 0 in ( 15 @.@ 24 m ) 
 Height : 16 ft 10 in ( 5 @.@ 13 m ) 
 Wing area : 496 sq ft ( 46 @.@ 1 m2 ) 
 Empty weight : 15 @,@ 257 lb ( 6 @,@ 920 kg ) 
 Gross weight : 25 @,@ 737 lb ( 11 @,@ 674 kg ) 
 Fuel capacity : 510 US gallons ( 1 @,@ 900 l ; 420 imp gal ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × Pratt & Whitney R @-@ 4360 @-@ 4 Wasp Major Radial , 3 @,@ 000 hp ( 2 @,@ 200 kW ) 
 Propellers : 4 @-@ bladed , 14 ft 8 in ( 4 @.@ 47 m ) diameter 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 334 mph ( 538 km / h ; 290 kn ) 
 Cruise speed : 189 mph ( 164 kn ; 304 km / h ) 
 Combat range : 1 @,@ 524 mi ; 2 @,@ 452 km ( 1 @,@ 324 nmi ) 
 Service ceiling : 27 @,@ 000 ft ( 8 @,@ 230 m ) 
 Time to altitude : 5 @.@ 9 minutes to 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 048 m ) 
 Wing loading : 48 @.@ 7 lb / sq ft ( 238 kg / m2 ) 
 Armament 
 Guns : 4 × 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) T @-@ 31 cannon @ 200 <unk> 
 Hardpoints : 15 
 Rockets : 12 × 5 @-@ inch ( 130 mm ) <unk> 
 Missiles : 3 × Mark 13 torpedoes 
 = Dracula 's Daughter = 
 Dracula 's Daughter is a 1936 American vampire horror film produced by Universal Studios as a sequel to the 1931 film Dracula . Directed by Lambert Hillyer from a screenplay by Garrett Fort , the film stars Otto Kruger , Gloria Holden in the title role , Marguerite Churchill and features , as the only cast member to return from the original , Edward Van Sloan – although his character 's name was altered from Van Helsing to Von Helsing . 
 Dracula 's Daughter tells the story of Countess Marya Zaleska , the daughter of Count Dracula and herself a vampire . Following Dracula 's death , she believes that by destroying his body she will be free of his influence and can live as a human . When this fails , she turns to psychiatry and Dr. Jeffrey Garth . When his efforts fail , she kidnaps Janet , the woman Jeffrey loves , and flees with her to Transylvania in an attempt to bind Jeffrey to her . She is foiled and destroyed when her jealous manservant shoots her with an arrow . 
 Ostensibly based on a short story titled " Dracula 's Guest " by Bram Stoker , the film bears little or no resemblance to the original source material . David O. Selznick initially purchased the rights to the story for Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer . Selznick , probably knowing he could not legally make the film because of Universal 's copyright on the original film , sold the rights to Universal . After first assigning the picture to James Whale , Universal production head Carl Laemmle , Jr. finally put Hillyer in the director 's chair . 
 Dracula 's Daughter was not as successful as the original upon its release , although it was generally critically well @-@ reviewed . In the intervening decades , criticism has been deeply divided . Modern critics and scholars have noted the strong lesbian overtones of the film , which Universal acknowledged from the start of filming and exploited in some early advertising . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dracula 's Daughter begins a few moments after Dracula ends . Count Dracula has just been destroyed by Professor Von Helsing ( Edward Van Sloan ) . Von Helsing is taken by police to Scotland Yard , where he explains that he indeed did destroy Count Dracula , but because he had already been dead for over 500 years , it cannot be considered murder . Instead of hiring a lawyer , he enlists the aid of a psychiatrist , Dr. Jeffrey Garth ( Otto Kruger ) , who was once one of his star students . 
 Meanwhile , Dracula 's daughter , Countess Marya Zaleska ( Gloria Holden ) , with the aid of her manservant , Sandor ( Irving Pichel ) , steals Dracula ’ s body from Scotland Yard and ritualistically burns it , hoping to break her curse of vampirism . However , Sandor soon makes her realize that her thirst for blood has not been quenched and that all that is in her eyes is " Death " . The Countess resumes her hunting , mesmerizing her victims with her exotic jeweled ring . After a chance meeting with Dr. Garth at a society party , the Countess asks him to help her overcome the influence she feels from beyond the grave . The doctor advises her to defeat her cravings by confronting them and the Countess becomes hopeful that her will plus Dr. Garth 's science will be strong enough to overcome Dracula 's malevolence . 
 The Countess sends Sandor to fetch her a model to paint ; he returns with Lili ( Nan Grey ) . Countess Zaleska initially resists her urges but succumbs and attacks Lili . Although the girl survives the attack , when Dr. Garth tries to hypnotize her to learn what happened , she suffers heart failure and dies . As the Countess comes to accept that a cure is not possible — and the doctor discovers the truth about her condition — she lures him to Transylvania by kidnapping Janet ( Marguerite Churchill ) , the woman he loves . She intends to transform him into a vampire to be her eternal companion ; Dr. Garth agrees to exchange his life for Janet 's . Before he can be transformed , Countess Zaleska is destroyed when Sandor shoots her through the heart with an arrow as revenge for her breaking her promise to make him immortal . He takes aim at Dr. Garth but is shot dead by a policeman . 
