 = = Cast = = 
 Otto Kruger as Dr. Jeffrey Garth 
 Gloria Holden as Countess Marya Zaleska - Dracula 's Daughter 
 Marguerite Churchill as Janet 
 Edward Van Sloan as Professor Von Helsing 
 Gilbert Emery as Sir Basil Humphrey , Scotland Yard 
 Irving Pichel as Sandor 
 Halliwell Hobbes as Hawkins 
 Billy Bevan as Albert 
 Nan Grey as Lili 
 Hedda Hopper as Lady Esme Hammond 
 Claud Allister as Sir Aubrey 
 Edgar Norton as Hobbs 
 E. E. Clive as Sergeant Wilkes 
 Vernon Steele as Squires 
 <unk> Reicher as the innkeeper 's wife ( uncredited ) 
 = = Production = = 
 Universal originally did not hold the rights to " Dracula 's Guest " , a chapter excised from Bram Stoker 's original novel and the purported source material for the film . The story includes an encounter between a man ( presumed by some to be Jonathan Harker although the character is not identified as such ) and a female vampire . The story does not establish a filial relationship between the female vampire and Dracula . Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer executive David O. Selznick negotiated a contract in 1933 with Stoker 's widow , Florence , to buy the rights to the chapter for an advance of $ 500 against a purchase price of $ 5 @,@ 000 . MGM 's lawyers and executives were worried about the use of the word " Dracula " in the film 's title , fearing that Universal would take legal action , although <unk> 's contract with Stoker explicitly listed " Dracula 's Daughter " as a possible alternate title . The project was code @-@ named " Tarantula " in correspondence . 
 Selznick hired John L. Balderston , who had previously worked on the 1931 Dracula and Frankenstein , to write the screenplay . Balderston 's screenplay involved tying up loose ends from the original film . In it , Von Helsing returns to Transylvania to destroy the three vampire brides seen in Dracula but overlooks a fourth tomb concealing Dracula 's daughter . She follows him back to London and operates under the name " Countess <unk> " . She attacks a young aristocrat and Von Helsing and the aristocrat 's fiancée track her back to Transylvania and destroy her . The script included scenes that implied that Dracula 's daughter enjoyed torturing her male victims and that while under her control the men liked it too . Also included were shots of the Countess 's chambers being stocked with whips and straps , which she would never use on @-@ screen but whose uses the audience could imagine . Regardless of any objections that the Production Code Administration ( PCA ) would have raised to many aspects of the scenario , Balderston 's script could never have been filmed because Selznick 's contract with Stoker expressly barred him from using any Bram Stoker characters that did not appear in " Dracula 's Guest " . Selznick re @-@ sold the rights to " Dracula 's Guest " to Universal in September 1935 for $ 12 @,@ 500 , which included the rights to Balderston 's scenario . Horror film scholar David J. Skal theorizes that this was Selznick 's actual motivation in buying the rights in the first place , to profit from Universal 's desire for a sequel by tying up the only obvious source material . 
 = = = Director = = = 
 Universal studio head Carl Laemmle , Jr . ( nicknamed " Junior " ) wanted James Whale , fresh from his great success with Bride of Frankenstein , to direct Dracula 's Daughter . Whale was idle , waiting for Irene Dunne to finish work on Magnificent Obsession so she could begin work on Whale 's Show Boat . Wary of directing two horror films in a row , Whale instead convinced Laemmle to buy the rights to a mystery novel called The Hangover Murders . Laemmle agreed only after extracting a promise from Whale that he would direct Dracula 's Daughter next . Whale completed work on the film , titled Remember Last Night ? for release , on September 14 , 1935 . Magnificent Obsession completed filming on October 29 . With Dunne freed up , Whale went to work on Show Boat . Laemmle replaced him with A. Edward Sutherland , who was best known for his work on comedies . Sutherland had as little interest in Dracula 's Daughter as Whale and soon left the studio , and Hillyer came on to direct . 
 = = = Universal script = = = 
 The earliest scenario for the Universal film was written by R. C. Sherriff . It began with three scenes set in the 14th Century and centered on the Dracula legend . It then switched to the present day , focusing on two engaged couples who visit Transylvania . The men explore the ruins of Dracula 's castle . One is later found , insane , and the other goes missing . Professor Von Helsing is summoned and he tracks the missing man to London , where he is in thrall to Dracula 's daughter , the Countess <unk> ( sic ) . When she attempts to flee with her thrall to the Orient by ship , Von Helsing and three others book passage on the same ship . During a violent storm , Von Helsing destroys Dracula 's daughter and , with her hold over the men broken , the scenario closes with a double wedding . This version was submitted on August 28 , 1935 to the British Board of Film Censors , which rejected it , saying in part " ... Dracula 's Daughter would require half a dozen ... languages to adequately express its beastliness . " On September 10 Sherriff met with BBFC representatives and submitted a revised scenario two days later . This scenario was passed but because its details were not recorded by the BBFC it is unknown how much it differed from the original or how much if any of that scenario was retained in the final script . 
 Universal also submitted Sheriff 's first draft to the PCA on September 5 , 1935 and encountered stronger resistance from PCA enforcer Joseph Breen than it had from the British . Breen reported back that the script " contains countless offensive stuff which makes the picture utterly impossible for approval under the Production Code . " A second draft was submitted on October 21 , but it too was rejected , with many of Breen 's objections centering on the 14th Century scenes in which Dracula himself appeared . It is unclear whether this submission was the same submission that the BBFC had previously passed . A third Sheriff draft was submitted on October 24 and Sherriff 's fourth and final draft on November 10 . All remained unacceptable , and Whale biographer James Curtis suggests that Whale , who had no interest in the project and feared that his commitment to it might cost him control over the filming of Show Boat , encouraged Sherriff to submit ever more wildly unacceptable versions in hopes of getting himself off the film . On January 14 , 1936 , producer E. M. Asher advised Breen that the Sherriff script was not going to be used and that a new script would be put together from scratch . Screenwriting duties were assigned to Garrett Fort . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Dracula 's Daughter was Gloria Holden 's first starring role and reportedly she was extremely displeased at having been assigned it . Like many actors , Holden looked down on horror films . She had also seen Bela Lugosi struggle over the years since Dracula was made to free himself from typecasting and feared that the role would lead to the same fate for her . Critic Mark Clark believes that ironically it may have been Holden 's disgust for the role that led to the quality of her performance . " Her disdain for the part translates into a kind of self @-@ loathing that perfectly suits her troubled character . " 
 Initially Lugosi and Jane Wyatt were set to star in the film . Universal also announced that Boris Karloff and Colin Clive , who had starred together in Frankenstein and Bride of Frankenstein , would appear , and that Cesar Romero would play Dr. Garth . According to the Hollywood Reporter , before casting Pichel Universal had sought Herbert Marshall for the role of Sandor . None of them appeared except , after a fashion , Lugosi , in the form of a wax bust molded in his image for use in Dracula 's coffin . Some sources report that Lugosi was paid as much as $ 4 @,@ 000 for his abortive involvement , but the only confirmed record of any financial arrangement is a letter in which Lugosi consents to the use of his likeness at no cost to create the wax bust . 
 = = = Shooting = = = 
 Shooting on Dracula 's Daughter began on February 4 , 1936 , rushed into production before Fort had completed the script , because of a deadline clause in Universal 's option of the property from Selznick . The script was not finalized until shooting had been underway for three weeks . The film was completed on March 10 . Despite studio orders that the film be shot on a seven @-@ day @-@ per @-@ week schedule , filming ran seven days over its schedule and $ 50 @,@ 000 over budget , with the final cost of the film tallied at $ 278 @,@ 380 . 
 Dracula 's Daughter was the last in the first cycle of Universal Horror films that reached back into the 1920s . Publicly , Universal said it was because a British ban on horror films would cut too deeply into the revenue such films could generate . In truth , the cycle was suspended because , just before filming on Dracula 's Daughter had wrapped , the Laemmle family had lost control of Universal . Because of cost overruns on a number of pictures , Junior Laemmle was forced to borrow $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 on November 1 , 1935 . The money came from J. Cheever <unk> , head of the Standard Capital Corporation , and from Charles R. Rogers . When the loan was called in March of the following year , Universal was unable to repay it . Standard assumed control of the studio on March 4 , 1936 and Rogers replaced Junior as head of production . Rogers did not like horror films and he shut down production on them following the release of Dracula 's Daughter to focus on fare like Deanna Durbin musicals . Universal would not return to the horror genre for three years , when it released Son of Frankenstein in 1939 . 
 = = = Other production aspects = = = 
 Makeup artist Jack Pierce and special effects supervisor John P. Fulton worked together closely , especially on Holden 's make @-@ up design . They combined special lighting with a greyish @-@ green make @-@ up for Holden 's final scenes , creating a pallor that contrasted with the more normally flesh @-@ toned make @-@ ups of the others in the scene . Heinz <unk> composed the score and Albert S. D 'Agostino redressed Charles D. Hall 's set of Dracula 's castle and created new sets including a London bridge , the moor where Dracula 's body is burned and Countess Zaleska 's apartment . 
 = = Reception and influence = = 
 The New York Times gave Dracula 's Daughter a solid , albeit somewhat tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek , review upon its release , citing the film 's " blood @-@ curdling events " and noting that " Gloria Holden is a remarkably convincing bat @-@ woman " in concluding that the film is both " quite terrifying " and " a cute little horror picture . " Variety also praised the production and Holden 's performance in particular . Despite critical approval , Dracula 's Daughter did not have the same box office success as the original . 
 Recent reviews of Dracula 's Daughter are sharply split . Entertainment Weekly , reviewing the film following its video release , called it " one of the most satisfying vampire pictures ever made " . Describing director Hillyer 's visuals as " lush , evocative , and suffused with just the right gothic chiaroscuro " and noting that " Gloria Holden , as the reluctant vampire protagonist , absolutely drips patrician eroticism " , EW concludes that this film is better than Lugosi 's original Dracula . 
 Ryan Cracknell of Apollo Movie Guide , while echoing the praise for Holden 's performance , nonetheless found that the film " doesn 't hold up so well today " . Citing what he sees as slow pacing and " long bouts of over @-@ the @-@ top dialogue " , Cracknell compares the film to " reading a textbook – not the most exciting thing in the world , but it does provide insights into and perspectives on the foundation of early horror movies and how many similarities carry over into movies half a century and more later . " Michael W. Phillips , Jr. concurs , calling the film " a marked improvement on the original film [ but ] still a bit of a snooze , relying too much on forced comedy and not enough on suspense or fright . " Phillips again praises Holden 's performance and also Pichel 's portrayal of Sandor , but finds the rest of the cast weak . 
 Horror author Anne Rice has named Dracula 's Daughter as a direct inspiration for her own homoerotic vampire fiction . She named a bar in her novel Queen of the Damned " Dracula 's Daughter " in honor of the film . Author Ramsey Campbell , under the pseudonym " Carl <unk> " , wrote a novelization of the film also entitled Dracula 's Daughter that was published in 1977 . A juvenile fiction version , written by Carl R. Green , William R. Sanford and Howard Schroeder , was published in 1985 . Some observers have suggested that the film served as an inspiration for Sunset Blvd . , noting similarities between the outlines of each film . Michael Almereyda 's 1994 film Nadja has been described as an " unofficial remake " of Dracula 's Daughter . 
 = = Lesbian implications = = 
 The lesbian vampire has been a trope in literature dating back to Joseph Sheridan le Fanu 's 1872 novella " Carmilla " . Dracula 's Daughter marked the first time that the trope was incorporated into a film . The lesbian implications of Dracula 's Daughter were obvious from the start and were of great concern to the Production Code Administration . PCA head Breen took special notice of the scene between the Countess and her model , Lili , writing , " This will need very careful handling to avoid any questionable flavor . " The day before the scene was to be shot , Universal 's Harry <unk> asked Breen to read a draft of the scene . In response , Breen wrote : 
 " The present suggestion that ... Lili poses in the nude will be changed . She will be posing her neck and shoulders , and there will be no suggestion that she undresses , and there will be no exposure of her person . It was also stated that the present incomplete sequence will be followed by a scene in which Lili is taken to a hospital and there it will be definitely established that she has been attacked by a vampire . The whole sequence will be treated in such a way as to avoid any suggestion of perverse sexual desire on the part of Marya or of an attempted sexual attack by her upon Lili . " 
 Gay film historian Vito Russo noted in his book The Celluloid Closet that Universal highlighted Countess Zaleska 's attraction to women in some of its original advertising for the film , using the tag line " Save the women of London from Dracula 's Daughter ! " He further cited Countess Zaleska as an example of the presentation of the " essence of homosexuality as a predatory weakness " . Some reviewers of the day picked up on and condemned the lesbian content , including the New York World @-@ Telegram which noted the Countess 's tendency to wander around " giving the eye to sweet young girls " . Other reviews missed it entirely , including the aforementioned New York Times which advised " Be sure to bring the kiddies . " Entertainment Weekly describes the encounter between the Countess and Lili as " so hot it 's impossible to imagine how it ever got past ' 30s censors " whereas Time Out London finds only a " subtle suggestion " of lesbianism . Horror scholar Skal notes that the scene has come to be seen as a " classic ' lesbian ' sequence , although of a decidedly negative stripe " . The scene between Countess Zaleska and Lili was included in the 1995 documentary film adaptation of Russo 's book . 
 Another lesbian @-@ tinged scene which has received less critical attention comes when the Countess is holding Janet captive . Described as " the longest kiss never filmed " , Countess Zaleska " hovers lovingly over Janet ... hovers ... and hovers ... slowly descending to kiss the recumbent Janet ... " until interrupted by the arrival of Dr. Garth . 
 Bright Lights Film Journal , after noting that " Gloria Holden in the title role almost singlehandedly redefined the ' 20s movie vamp as an impressive Euro @-@ butch dyke bloodsucker " , draws an implicit comparison between Countess Zaleska 's seeking to cure her vampirism through psychiatry and the former position of mainstream psychiatry of homosexuality as a mental illness ( a view still held by a minority in the profession ) . Zaleska 's cruising the streets of London is seen as parallel to cruising for sex ( although that tends to be a gay male activity ) and as suggesting " society 's image of the lesbian as soulless predator " but the conclusion is that " Holden 's striking , <unk> face and haunting , luminous eyes [ are ] the intoxicating essence of transgressive lesbian power . " 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 A joke pop @-@ song Dracula 's Daughter was issued in 1962 by Screaming Lord Sutch and the Savages , a British rock group with an ever @-@ changing line @-@ up of musicians and a taste for horror themes and zany humour . 
 = Weiquan movement = 
 The Weiquan movement is a non @-@ centralized group of lawyers , legal experts , and intellectuals in China who seek to protect and defend the civil rights of the citizenry through litigation and legal activism . The movement , which began in the early 2000s , has organized demonstrations , sought reform via the legal system and media , defended victims of human rights abuses , and written appeal letters , despite opposition from Communist Party authorities . Among the issues adopted by Weiquan lawyers are property and housing rights , protection for AIDS victims , environmental damage , religious freedom , freedom of speech and the press , and defending the rights of other lawyers facing disbarment or imprisonment . 
 Individuals involved in the Weiquan movement have met with occasionally harsh reprisals from Chinese officials , including disbarment , detention , harassment , and , in extreme instances , torture . Authorities have also responded to the movement with the launch of an education campaign on the " socialist concept of rule of law , " which reasserts the role of the Communist Party and the primacy of political considerations in the legal profession , and with the Three Supremes , which entrenches the supremacy of the Communist Party in the judicial process . 
 = = Background = = 
 Since the legal reforms of the late 1970s and 1980s , the Chinese Communist Party ( CCP ) has moved to embrace the language of the rule of law and establish a modern court system . In the process , it has enacted thousands of new laws and regulations , and begun training more legal professionals . The concept of " rule of law " was enshrined in the constitution , and the CCP embarked on campaigns to publicize the idea that citizens have protection under the law . At the same time , however , a fundamental contradiction exists in the implementation of rule of law wherein the CCP insists that its authority supersedes that of the law ; the constitution enshrines rule of law , but also emphasizes the principle of the " leadership of the Communist Party . " The judiciary is not independent , and is therefore subject to politicization and control by the Communist Party . This has produced a system that is often described as " rule by law , " rather than rule of law . 
 Because judicial decisions are subject to the sometimes arbitrary assessments of the CCP , citizens who attempt to make use of the legal system to pursue grievances find that , if their cause is determined to have the potential to undermine the authority of the Communist Party , they may be suppressed . Defendants who find themselves facing criminal charges , such as for conducting activism or for their religious beliefs , often have few means of pursuing an effective defense . 
 The Weiquan movement coalesced in the early 2000s in response to these inherent contradictions and the arbitrary exercise of legal authority in China , though its roots could be traced to the consumer protection movement that began in the 1990s . The movement is informal , and can be understood as including lawyers and legal activists who advocate for civil rights and defend the interests of citizens against corporations , government or Communist Party organs . Fu <unk> and Richard Cullen note that Weiquan lawyers " are generally always on the side of the weaker party : ( migrant ) workers v. employers in labor disputes ; peasants in cases involving taxation , persons contesting environmental pollution , land appropriation , and village committee elections ; journalists facing government censorship ; defendants subject to criminal prosecution ; and ordinary citizens who are discriminated against by government policies and actions . " 
 The emergence of the Weiquan movement was made possible by a confluence of factors , including a market for their services , and an emerging rights consciousness . It was also facilitated by the 1996 " Lawyers Law , " which changed the definition of lawyers from " state legal workers " to professionals holding a legal certificate who perform legal services . The law effectively delinked lawyers from the state , and gave lawyers greater ( though still limited ) autonomy within the profession . 
 Weiquan lawyers tend to be especially critical of the lack of judicial independence in China . Rather than challenging particular laws , they frame their work as being in keeping with Chinese laws , and describe their activities as a means of defending and upholding the Constitution against abuses . As such , Weiquan <unk> has been described as a form of Rightful resistance . 
 = = Weiquan lawyers = = 
 Weiquan Lawyers ( Chinese : <unk> ) , or " rights protection " lawyers , refer to a small but influential movement of lawyers , legal practitioners , scholars and activists who help Chinese citizens to assert their constitutional , civil rights and / or public interest through litigation and legal activism . In the context of a rising number of lawyers in China , the proportion of Weiquan lawyers is very small Weiquan Lawyers face considerable personal , financial and professional risks . 
 Notable Weiquan Lawyers include He <unk> , Xu Zhiyong , Teng Biao , Guo <unk> and Chen Guangcheng , Gao Zhisheng , Zheng <unk> , and Li Heping . Many barefoot lawyers are peasants who teach themselves enough law to file civil complaints , engage in litigation , and educate fellow citizens about their rights . Some Weiquan lawyers are the pragmatists and some are more radical . 
 = = Major fields = = 
 = = = Freedom of expression = = = 
 Although freedom of speech is enshrined in Article 35 of the Constitution of the People 's Republic of China , Chinese authorities enforce restrictions on political and religious expression . Such restrictions are sometimes in accordance with Article 105 of the criminal code , which contains vague and broadly defined provisions against " inciting subversion of state power " . Weiquan lawyers , along with international human rights organizations , have argued that the provisions against subversion are inconsistent both with China 's own constitution and with international human rights standards , particularly in light of the lack of transparency and clear guidelines used in applying the laws . 
 Several Weiquan lawyers have been involved in litigation and other forms of advocacy to defend the rights to free expression for individuals charged with the crime of subversion . Notable cases include that of Liu Xiaobo , a prominent Beijing intellectual sentenced to 11 years in prison for inciting subversion in December 2009 . Chengdu activist Tan Zuoren was sentenced to five years for inciting subversion for publishing writings on the 1989 Tiananmen Square Massacre , advocating for the families of the 2008 Sichuan earthquake victims , and accepting interviews from the Falun Gong @-@ affiliated Sound of Hope radio . His lawyers were reportedly barred from entering the courtroom . In October 2009 , intellectual Guo Quan was sentenced to 10 years in prison for publishing " reactionary " articles online . 
 Weiquan lawyers have also challenged the application of state secret laws , which are sometimes used to prosecute individuals who disseminate information on politically sensitive issues . In November 2009 , for instance , lawyers were involved in arguing for Huang Qi , a Sichuan activist who had advocated online for the parents of Sichuan earthquake victims . Huang was sentenced to three years in prison for possession of state secrets . 
 = = = Judicial independence = = = 
 The Chinese Constitution enshrines rule of law , but simultaneously emphasizes the principle of the " leadership of the Communist Party . " The legal profession itself is subordinate to the authority of the Communist Party ; the Ministry of Justice , not the bar associations , is responsible for issuing and renewing lawyers ' licenses . Weiquan lawyers have argued that this structure precludes the emergence of genuine rule of law , and in some cases have advocated for reforms to advance judicial independence and the protection of legal professionals . 
 In late August 2008 , a collection of several dozen Beijing lawyers signed a petition stating that the Beijing Bar Association leaders should be elected by the organization 's members , rather than being appointed . The petition letter stated that selection process in place for the Association 's directors is inconsistent with official guidelines and the Chinese constitution , and should be replaced with a democratic voting process . The Beijing Bar Association responded to the campaign by asserting that " Any individual who uses text messages , the web or other media to privately promote and disseminate the concept of direct elections , express controversial opinions , thereby spreading rumors within the Beijing Bar Association , confuse and poison people 's minds , and convince people of circumstances that do not exist regarding the so @-@ called ' Call For Direct Elections For the Beijing Bar Association ' is illegal . " The following year , the Beijing Bureau of Justice refused to renew the licenses of 53 Beijing Weiquan lawyers , all of whom had signed the petition for elections to the Bar Association . 
 = = = Land rights = = = 
 Under Chinese property law , there is no privately held land ; " urban land " is owned by the state , which grants land rights for a set number of years . Rural , or " collectively owned land , " is leased by the state for periods of 30 years , and is theoretically reserved for agricultural purposes , housing and services for farmers . 
 Forced evictions are forbidden under International Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights , which China has ratified . Under China 's constitution and other property laws , expropriation of urban land is permitted only if it is for the purpose of supporting the " public interest , " and those being evicted are supposed to receive compensation , resettlement , and protection of one 's living conditions . The " public interest " is not defined , however , and abuses are common in the expropriation process , with many citizens complaining of receiving little or no compensation . 
 Forced evictions with little or no compensation occur frequently in both urban and rural China , with even fewer legal protections for rural citizens . Collectively owned rural land may be " reallocated " at the discretion of authorities , and in many regions local governments collude with private developers to reclassify rural land as urban land , which can then be sold. from the mid @-@ 1990s to mid @-@ 2000s , an estimated 40 million Chinese peasants were affected by land requisitions . Citizens who resist or protest the evictions have reportedly been subjected to harassment , beatings , or detention , and land @-@ related grievances occasionally escalate into large @-@ scale protests or riots . 
 Several Weiquan lawyers have advocated for the rights of individual citizens whose land and homes were taken with inadequate compensation , including Shanghai lawyer Zheng <unk> . Ni <unk> , a Beijing lawyer , was herself left homeless by forced eviction , and became an outspoken advocate for victims before being sentenced to two years in prison . 
 In 2007 , a 54 @-@ year @-@ old farmer in Heilongjiang Yang Chunlin published numerous articles on human rights and land rights , and helped to organise a petition entitled : " We want human rights , not the Olympics . " The petition reportedly collected over ten thousand signatures . Yang was put to trial , and sentenced to five years in prison , where he has allegedly been tortured . Li Fangping was hired to defend him , but was denied access to his client . 
 = = = Defense of ethnic minorities = = = 
 Several Weiquan lawyers , including Teng Biao , Jiang Tianyong , and Li Fangping , offered legal aid to Tibetans in the wake of the March 2008 Tibetan protests . The protests resulted in the imprisonment of at least 670 Tibetans , and the execution of at least four individuals . Chinese government sources asserted that the unrest and violence in Tibet had been masterminded by the Dalai Lama and executed by his followers for the purpose of fomenting unrest and disrupting the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing . The Open Constitution Initiative ( OCI ) , operated by several Weiquan lawyers and intellectuals , issued a paper in May 2009 challenging the official narrative , and suggesting that the protests were instead a response to economic inequities , Han Chinese migration , and religious sentiments . The OCI recommended that Chinese authorities better respect and protect the rights and interests of the Tibetan people , including religious freedom , and pursue the reduction of economic inequality and official corruption . 
 Tibetan Filmmaker Dhondup <unk> was sentenced to six years in prison for making a documentary on human rights in Tibet in the run @-@ up to the Beijing Olympics . Two lawyers who sought to represent him , Chang <unk> and Li Dunyong , faced threats and harassment for their advocacy . 
 In July 2010 , a group of Chinese activists including Teng Biao co @-@ signed a letter to the Chinese leadership to protest the 15 @-@ year prison sentence that had been meted out to Uighur journalist <unk> Niyaze . Niyaze was not permitted to have a lawyer at his trial , where he was charged with " endangering state security . " According to reports , Niyaze was being charged because he had criticized the Chinese government in an interview with a Hong Kong news agency for not doing enough to prevent the July 2009 Ürümqi riots . 
 = = = Falun Gong = = = 
 Falun Gong , a spiritual qigong discipline that once claimed tens of million adherents in China , was banned in July 1999 under the leadership of the Communist Party , and a campaign was launched to suppress the group . In an attempt to have Falun Gong adherents renounce their belief in the practice , they are subject to state @-@ sanctioned , systematic violence in custody , sometimes resulting in death . Some sources indicate hundreds of thousands may have been detained in reeducation @-@ through @-@ labor camps for practicing Falun Gong and / or resisting persecution . 
 In November 1999 , the Supreme People 's Court offered a judicial interpretation of article 300 of the criminal code , stating that Falun Gong should be regarded as a " <unk> <unk> , " or cult . Large numbers were subsequently sentenced to long prison terms , often under article 300 , in what are typically very short trials without the presence of a lawyer . In 2009 alone , the Falun Dafa Information Center reported that several hundred Falun Gong adherents have been sentenced to prison terms of up to 18 years . Human rights groups , including Amnesty International , note that the application of the law to persecute Falun Gong adherents contravenes both China 's own constitution and international standards . Several Weiquan lawyers have argued similarly while defending Falun Gong adherents who face criminal or administrative sentencing for their beliefs . Lawyers who have defended Falun Gong include Guo <unk> , Zhang Kai and Li <unk> , Wang <unk> , Tang Jitian and Liu Wei , among others . 
 In addition to litigation work , Weiquan lawyers like Gao Zhisheng have also advocated publicly and in the media for human rights for Falun Gong . In 2004 and 2005 , Gao wrote a series of letters to China 's top leadership detailing accounts of torture and sexual abuse against Falun Gong practitioners , and calling for an end to the persecution of the group . In response , Gao lost his legal license , was put under house arrest , detained , and was reportedly tortured . 
 = = = HIV / AIDS = = = 
 Some Weiquan lawyers have advocated for the rights of HIV / AIDS victims who contracted the virus as a result of state @-@ sponsored blood drives . In the 1990s , government officials in central China , and especially in Henan , encouraged rural citizens to sell blood plasma in order to supplement their incomes . Gross mismanagement of the process resulted in hundreds of thousands of individuals being infected with HIV . According to activists , victims have not been compensated , and no government officials were held accountable . Authorities continue to suppress information about the epidemic , which is particularly sensitive in light of the involvement of Li Changchun , the Communist Party Propaganda head and formerly Party chief in Henan . 
 Hu Jia is arguably the most well known advocate for HIV / AIDS victims , having served as the executive director of the Beijing <unk> Institute of Health Education and as one of the founders of the non @-@ governmental organization Loving Source . 
 = = = Women 's rights = = = 
 Chen Guangcheng , a blind self @-@ taught Weiquan lawyer , rose to prominence for defending victims of China 's one @-@ child policy . First implemented in 1979 , the one @-@ child policy mandates that couples may only have one child , though there are exceptions for some rural citizens , ethnic minorities , and couples who were themselves only children . Though Chinese laws condemn harsh enforcement measures , Chinese authorities and family planning staff have been accused of carrying out coercive , late @-@ term forced abortions , sterilization , incarceration and torture to enforce the policy . In 2005 , Chen Guangcheng filed a class action case against family planning officials in Linyi , Shandong , who were accused of subjecting thousands of women to sterilization or forced abortions . 
 = = = Underground Christians = = = 
 China 's constitution guarantees freedom of religion , yet also provides a caveat specifying that only " normal " religious activities are permitted . In practice , religious freedom is granted only within the strictly prescribed parameters of the five officially sanctioned " patriotic " religious associations of Buddhism , Taoism , Islam , Protestantism and Catholicism . Groups falling outside the state @-@ administered religions , including " underground " or " house church " Christians , are subject to varying degrees of repression and persecution . 
 Although there are no definitive figures on the number of underground Christians in China , some estimates have put their total number in excess of 70 million . At least 40 Catholic bishops operate independent of official sanction , and some are under surveillance , house arrest , detention , or have disappeared . Several leaders and members of underground Protestant churches have also been detained and sentenced to reeducation through labor or prison terms . Violent raids and demolitions have been carried out on underground churches , sometimes resulting in injury to congregants inside . Chinese officials have labelled several underground Protestant churches as a <unk> <unk> ( translated literally as " evil religion " ) , or cult , thus providing a pretext for harsher punishment of members . 
 Several prominent Weiquan lawyers themselves identify with the underground Protestant movement , and have sought to defend church members and leaders facing imprisonment . These include Zhang Kai , Li Heping , and Gao Zhisheng . Former house church leader Bob Fu 's US @-@ based organization " <unk> " has sponsored legal cases , and provided " rule @-@ of @-@ law training " and legal help for distressed clients in China . 
 = = = Other initiatives = = = 
 A number of specific events have attracted the help and attention of Weiquan activists . In the March 2008 earthquake in Sichuan province , shoddy school construction resulted in the collapse of several schools full of students . A number of Weiquan lawyers , including Tan Zuoren , were involved in advocating for the rights of parents , and in investigating allegations that corrupt officials were responsible for the poor construction . Parents and lawyers met with reprisals from Chinese officials for their activism . 
 Later the same year , it was revealed that large quantities of infant formula had been tainted with <unk> , causing 300 @,@ 000 infants to fall ill and resulting in several deaths . A group of parents of the victims were reportedly detained for attempting to draw media attention to their plight . Dozens of lawyers — particularly from the provinces of Hebei , Henan and Shandong — offered pro @-@ bono legal services to victims , but their efforts were obstructed by authorities . 
 Individual human rights cases , such as the Deng <unk> incident and the death of Qian <unk> , have also drawn help from rights defenders such as Wu Gan . 
 In 2003 , a group of legal scholars , including Teng Biao and Xu Zhiyong , formed the Open Constitution Initiative ( Chinese : <unk> ) to advocate for greater rule of law . The organization was involved in the Sun <unk> case , and has advocated for petitioners , labor rights , freedom of expression , HIV / AIDS victims , Tibetans , land rights , and protection of public health , among other issues . 
 = = Government response = = 
 = = = Retrenchment on rule of law = = = 
 In response to the emergence of the Weiquan movement , which often makes use of the official language about " rule of law " to justify its work , in April 2006 a political campaign was launched to solidify the Communist Party 's leadership over judicial work , combat the idea of greater independence for judges and lawyers , and educate people and judicial authorities about the " socialist concept of rule of law . " The campaign was announced by Luo Gan , then the head of the Party Central Committee 's Political and Legislative Affairs Committee . Luo urged that in order to protect political stability , " forceful measures " be adopted " against those who , under the pretext of rights @-@ protection ( <unk> ) , carry out sabotage . " The launch of the campaign coincided with a crackdown on Weiquan lawyers . 
 Shortly after the campaign 's launch , Party Committees provided instruction to judges reminding them of the political goals that their work must uphold . According to one document issued to judges in Zhejiang and quoted by Human Rights Watch , " Recently , some judges have started to believe that to be a judge you just have to strictly apply the law in a case . In fact , this kind of concept is erroneous [ ... ] all the legal formulations have a clear political background and direction [ ... ] We must stamp out the kind of narrow viewpoint that thinks that you can also do court work by having judicial independence . " 
 During a December 2007 conference on political @-@ legal work , CCP general secretary Hu Jintao articulated the theory of the " Three Supremes , " which emphasized again that legal work should regard as supreme the concerns and interests of the Communist Party . In March 2008 , Wang <unk> was confirmed as the new head of the Supreme People 's Court . Wang , who has no formal legal training himself , abandoned the efforts of his predecessors to improve judicial competence , training , and autonomy , and instead placed primary importance on the ideological implications of the " Three Supremes " theory and upholding the leadership of the Communist Party . 
 In 2010 , China 's Ministry of Justice issued two new regulations intended to " strengthen the supervision and management of lawyers and law firms " . According to the Associated Press , the new regulations would serve to " allow authorities to punish lawyers ... for actions such as talking to the media or even causing ' traffic troubles . ' " 
 In March 2012 , China 's Ministry of Justice issued a new directive requiring lawyers first obtaining their license or renewing an existing license to swear an oath of loyalty to the Communist Party . According to the Ministry 's website , a section of oath includes the following : “ I swear to faithfully fulfill the sacred mission of legal workers in socialism with Chinese characteristics . I swear my loyalty to the motherland , to the people , to uphold the leadership of the Communist Party of China and the socialist system , and to protect the dignity of the Constitution and laws . " 
 = = = Suppression of lawyers and coercive measures = = = 
 Weiquan lawyers have faced various challenges to their work from the Chinese government , including disbarment or suspension , violence , threats , surveillance , arbitrary detention , and prosecution . This is particularly true for lawyers who take up politically sensitive cases . Reports of harassment , intimidation , and violence against Weiquan lawyers increased in 2006 following the launch of the campaign to promote the " socialist concept of the rule of law . " Authorities have refused to renew the licenses of several dozen Weiquan lawyers , and several have effectively been banned for life from the legal profession . In 2009 , for instance , at least 17 Weiquan lawyers were not permitted to renew their legal licenses after taking on politically sensitive cases . Several Weiquan lawyers have themselves been sentenced to prison in response to their activism . A selection of notable instances of suppression are listed here : 
 Gao Zhisheng , once recognized as one of China 's ten most promising lawyers , was an advocate for a range of disenfranchised individuals and minorities . In 2006 , after he wrote a series of letters to the Chinese leadership concerning the torture of Falun Gong adherents , Gao had his legal license revoked and his law firm was shut down . His family was placed under house arrest , and he was detained for six months . Gao was sentenced , with a five @-@ year reprieve , to four years in prison . He has been the subject of several prolonged disappearances into custody , during which he has reportedly been tortured . 
 On 27 December 2007 , AIDS and pro @-@ democracy activist Hu Jia was detained as part of a crackdown on dissents during the run @-@ up to the 2008 Beijing Olympics . A well known rights advocate who had advocated on behalf of AIDS victims , peasants , victims of land requisitions , Hu had also been critical of the lack of human rights progress that had been made ahead of the Olympic games . Hu pleaded not guilty at his trial in March 2008 . On 3 April 2008 , he was sentenced to 3 @.@ 5 years in prison for " inciting subversion of state power . " He had previously been under house arrest , and has reportedly been beaten by police . 
 In response to his work to bring a class action lawsuit against family planning authorities in Linyi , Shandong Province in 2005 , Chen Guangcheng was put under house arrest , threatened , detained , and beaten . Three other Weiquan activists – Li Fangping , Li <unk> , and Xu Zhiyong — visited him to offer support , but were themselves beaten and interrogated . On 24 August 2006 , he was sentenced to four years and three months in prison for " damaging property and gathering crowds to disturb transport order . " Following his release , he remains under house arrest . 
 On 22 April 2010 , Beijing lawyers Liu Wei and Tang Jitian were permanently disbarred for defending Falun Gong practitioners . 
 On 13 May 2009 , lawyers Zhang Kai and Li <unk> are violently beaten and detained in Chongqing for investigating the death of Jiang <unk> , a 66 @-@ year @-@ old Falun Gong practitioner killed in a labor camp . One month earlier , Beijing lawyer Cheng Hai was similarly beaten by police in Sichuan province for seeking to defend a Falun Gong adherent . 
 Yang Chunlin was arrested in July 2007 and charged with " inciting subversion of state power " . His trial began in February 2008 in the city of <unk> . Yang was sentenced to five years in prison on 24 March 2008 . He maintained his innocence throughout the trial . During and after the hearing at which he was sentenced , Yang was reportedly beaten with an electric rod on at least two occasions . 
 On 4 July 2009 , around 20 security agents broke into the home of Wang <unk> . Wang , a Weiquan lawyer from Dalian City , had defended Falun Gong adherents . He was taken into custody for interrogation and was reportedly beaten severely . Wang 's lawyers were not permitted to contact him . In November 2009 , Wang was sentenced in a closed court to seven years in prison for his advocacy on behalf of Falun Gong practitioners . When his lawyers were permitted to see him in January 2010 , they reported that he had been tortured . 
 On 17 July 2009 , authorities in Beijing raided and shuttered the Open Constitution Initiative , an NGO established by legal scholars Teng Biao and Xu Zhiyong . 
 On 20 February 2011 , several Weiquan activists were detained following online calls for pro @-@ democracy protests in China , including Chen Wei , Jiang Tianyong , Tang Jitian , and Teng Biao . 
 In May 2014 , as multiple Chinese activists began preparing for the 25th anniversary of the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 , a number of lawyers were arrested for planning or being suspected of planning demonstrations . Among those arrested was Pu <unk> , a lawyer who was involved in organising the demonstrations in 1989 . 
 = = International response = = 
 Although there is relatively little awareness of the Weiquan phenomenon as a movement outside of China , Western governments and human rights organizations have consistently expressed concern over the treatment of individual Weiquan lawyers in China , some of whom have faced disbarment , imprisonment , prolonged disappearance , sentencing and alleged torture for their work in promoting civil rights and speaking out against one @-@ party rule . In October 2010 , a bipartisan group of 29 members of the U.S. House of Representatives pressed President Obama to raise the cases of Liu Xiaobo and Gao Zhisheng with the Chinese leadership , writing of Gao <unk> 's prolonged detention : " If lawyers are hauled away for the " crime " of defending their clients , then even the pretense of rule of law in China has failed . " The U.S. State Department claims to have raised the cases of these two individuals with their Chinese counterparts . 
 In 2008 , Hu Jia was awarded the Sakharov Prize by the European Parliament recognizing his human rights advocacy . The same year , Hu and Gao Zhisheng received nominations for the Nobel Peace Prize , and were considered to be favorites for the award . Two years later , seven members of the U.S. House of Representatives nominated imprisoned lawyers Gao Zhisheng and Chen Guangcheng , along with fellow dissident Liu Xiaobo for the prize . The letter noted that these individuals have sought to " raise the Chinese people 's awareness of their dignity and rights , and to call their government to govern within its constitution , its laws , and the international human rights agreements it has signed , " and thereby made a significant contribution to peace . The Nobel Prize Committee awarded the honor to Liu in absentia in December 2010 . 
 = Federal prosecution of public corruption in the United States = 
 Several statutes , mostly codified in Title 18 of the United States Code , provide for federal prosecution of public corruption in the United States . Federal prosecutions of public corruption under the Hobbs Act ( enacted 1934 ) , the mail and wire fraud statutes ( enacted 1872 ) , including the honest services fraud provision , the Travel Act ( enacted 1961 ) , and the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act ( RICO ) ( enacted 1970 ) began in the 1970s . " Although none of these statutes was enacted in order to prosecute official corruption , each has been interpreted to provide a means to do so . " The federal official bribery and gratuity statute , 18 U.S.C. § 201 ( enacted 1962 ) , the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act ( <unk> ) ( enacted 1977 ) , and the federal program bribery statute , 18 U.S.C. § 666 ( enacted 1984 ) directly address public corruption . 
 The statutes differ in their jurisdictional elements , the mens rea that they require ( for example , a quid pro quo or a nexus ) , the species of official actions that are cognizable , whether or not non @-@ public official defendants can be prosecuted , and in the authorized sentence . The statutes most often used to prosecute public corruption are the Hobbs Act , Travel Act , RICO , the program bribery statute , and mail and wire fraud statutes . 
 These statutes have been upheld as exercises of Congress 's Commerce Clause power , or in the case of the mail fraud and program bribery statutes , the Postal Clause and the Spending Clause , respectively . In the special case where a member of Congress is the defendant , the Speech or Debate Clause places certain restrictions on the actions that can be prosecuted and proved up . Some commentators have argued that prosecutions of state and local officials under these statutes pose substantial federalism questions , while others argue that the Guarantee Clause provides additional authority for such prosecutions . 
 = = History = = 
 Article Two , Section Four of the United States Constitution provides that : " The President , Vice President and all civil Officers of the United States , shall be removed from Office on Impeachment for , and Conviction of , Treason , Bribery , or other High crimes and Misdemeanors . " For a time in the early history of the country , corrupt public officials could be charged with the common law crimes related to corruption ; such crimes could continue to be charged in the D.C. circuit court , where the laws of Maryland and Virginia remained in force , even after the Supreme Court 's decision abolishing federal common law crimes in United States v. Hudson ( 1812 ) . 
 The First Congress passed the " first federal law against bribery " in 1789 , which provided that bribed customs officers would be disqualified from office and payors would be liable for the amount of the bribe . The judicial bribery provision of the Crimes Act of 1790 , passed the following year , provided for disqualification , and a fine and imprisonment " at the discretion of the court , " for both the judge and the payor . The Crimes Act of 1825 added the offenses of extortion under color of office , theft or embezzlement by a Second Bank employee , and coin embezzlement or dilution by a Mint employee . 
 The mail fraud statute , 18 U.S.C. § 1341 , " [ t ] he oldest statute used to address public corruption , " was enacted in 1872 and first used against public corruption in the 1940s . While several early cases employed the " intangible right to honest government , " United States v. States ( 8th Cir . 1973 ) was the first case to rely on honest services fraud as the sole basis for a conviction . 
 The prosecution of state and local political corruption became a " major federal law enforcement priority " in the 1970s . United States v. Addonizio ( 3d Cir . 1971 ) and United States v. Kenny ( 3d Cir . 1972 ) — both brought by U.S. Attorney for the District of New Jersey , Herbert Jay Stern ( later a federal judge ) — were the first prosecution of political corruption pursuant to the economic fear prong and the " under color of official right " prong of the Hobbs Act , respectively . Henderson describes these cases as the " New Jersey breakthroughs . " 
 In 1976 , the Public Integrity Section was established within United States Department of Justice Criminal Division with general supervisory jurisdiction over public corruption offenses . By 1977 , " [ t ] he four United States attorney 's offices most active in this field — the Southern District of New York , New Jersey , Maryland , and the Northern District of Illinois — " had " developed coteries of high skilled prosecutors and a tradition of success that encourages an atmosphere of alertness to potential corruption cases . " 
 In 1977 , Thomas H. Henderson , Jr . , the Chief of the Public Integrity Section , wrote : 
 Until recently , the full panoply of potential federal resources had not been brought to bear effectively on corruption schemes at the state and local level . These schemes are at least as corrosive of the governmental process as corruption at the federal level . From the time of Tammany Hall this country has been painfully aware of the existence of corrupt practices in many of our metropolitan areas , and of the " machines " and " rings " which siphon off millions of dollars from public treasuries for private gain . Most state and local prosecutors , beset by inadequate resources and the overwhelming demands of a rising rate of street crime , are simply unable to deal with this type of corruption . Moreover , in some cases , local law enforcement is part and parcel of the problem itself , due to the outright corruption of its own establishment . 
 To fill this enforcement role , federal prosecutors during the last decade began to assume a much more active and creative role in attempting to use federal statutes to attack corruption at the state and local level . 
 In 1976 , there were 337 indictments of state and local officials for public corruption , compared to 63 in 1970 . Between 1970 and 1981 , there were 520 federal indictments of state officials , and 1 @,@ 757 indictments of local officials , for public corruption ; over that period , 369 state officials , and 1 @,@ 290 local officials , were convicted . In 1986 , there were 916 indictments of public officials for corruption , 320 of which concerned state and local officials . In 1990 , there were 968 such indictments , 353 of which were against state and local officials . 
 The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act ( <unk> ) , 15 U.S.C. § <unk> @-@ 1 , was passed in 1977 . The program bribery statute , 18 U.S.C. § 666 , was passed in 1984 . In the program bribery statute , " Congress , for the first time , directly federalized the crime of bribery of or by local officials . " 
 For example , between 1985 and 1991 , over 75 public officials were convicted of corruption offenses in the Southern District of West Virginia alone . By comparison , the only appellate court decision citing West Virginia 's Bribery and Corrupt Practices Act , in 1991 , was a federal court decision involving the state statute as a federal RICO predicate . And it goes much deeper than that . There have been many cases filed against corruption and other crimes by former agents who commit crimes , as well as attorneys , judges , etc. that can be easily found online , although the option of finding those actual cases continues to diminish even further , in preferential interests of commerce and social media markets taking precedence . Internet searches are becoming intentionally narrowed to restrict citizen 's awareness of such corruption . <unk> by both media and law @-@ enforcement in failing to implement the very legislation they create at tax @-@ payer expense , continues unabated in many cases that can be found online . 
 = = Doctrinal overview = = 
 The legal elements and features of the major federal public corruption offenses differ . The various jurisdictional elements of the offenses require that the prosecution prove , alternatively : that the payee was a federal official ; that the payee organization received $ 10 @,@ 000 in federal funds ; that the corrupt communications involved the use of the mail or interstate wires ; that the corruption affected interstate commerce or interstate travel . The mens rea elements differ in whether they require a quid pro quo ; a mere nexus is an easier element to prove ; more difficult elements to prove include the intent to be influenced and inducement . The offenses also differ in whether the act to be procured from the public official must be an official , a violation of an official duty , a fraud on the United States , or an official transaction . The offenses also differ in whether the payor may be prosecuted in addition to the public official . Finally , the offenses differ in whether they are predicates for Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act and money laundering prosecutions , and in the maximum authorized prison sentence that may be imposed upon conviction . 
 = = Federal officials = = 
 The federal bribery and gratuity statute , 18 U.S.C. § 201 , was enacted in 1962 as part of a comprehensive conflict @-@ of @-@ interest legislative reform . The Supreme Court considers subsections ( b ) and ( c ) to be " to separate crimes — or two pairs of crimes . " 
 In Dixson v. United States ( 1984 ) , the Court held that , under the federal bribery and gratuity statute , the definition of a " public official " includes anyone in a " position of public trust with official federal responsibilities , " including for example the employees of a non @-@ profit that administers a federal block housing grant . The term " official act " is limited to acts which are performed within the scope of the official 's employment . It is no defense that the official action was otherwise meritorious . 
 For both the bribery and gratuity subsections , the courts have interpreted an implicit exception for campaign contributions . 
 = = = Bribery = = = 
 The federal bribery statute , 18 U.S.C. § 201 ( b ) , criminalizes the corrupt promise or transfer of any thing of value to influence an official act of a federal official , a fraud on the United States , or the commission or omission of any act in violation of the official 's duty . 18 U.S.C. § 201 ( b ) ( 1 ) – ( 2 ) provides : 
 ( b ) Whoever – 
 ( 1 ) directly or indirectly , corruptly gives , offers or promises anything of value to any public official or person who has been selected to be a public official , or offers or promises any public official or any person who has been selected to be a public official to give anything of value to any other person or entity , with intent – 
 ( A ) to influence any official act ; or 
 ( B ) to influence such public official or person who has been selected to be a public official to commit or aid in committing , or collude in , or allow , any fraud , or make opportunity for the commission of any fraud , on the United States ; or 
 ( C ) to induce such public official or such person who has been selected to be a public official to do or omit to do any act in violation of the lawful duty of such official or person ; 
 ( 2 ) being a public official or person selected to be a public official , directly or indirectly , corruptly demands , seeks , receives , accepts , or agrees to receive or accept anything of value personally or for any other person or entity , in return for : 
 ( A ) being influenced in the performance of any official act ; 
 ( B ) being influenced to commit or aid in committing , or to collude in , or allow , any fraud , or make opportunity for the commission of any fraud , on the United States ; or 
 ( C ) being induced to do or omit to do any act in violation of the official duty of such official or person . . . 
 shall be fined under this title or not more than three times the monetary equivalent of the thing of value , whichever is greater , or imprisoned for not more than fifteen years , or both , and may be disqualified from holding any office of honor , trust , or profit under the United States . 
 = = = Gratuity = = = 
 Text 
 The federal gratuity statute , 18 U.S.C. § 201 ( c ) , criminalizes the transfer of any thing of value to a federal official for or because of an official act . 18 U.S.C. § 201 ( c ) ( 1 ) provides : 
 ( c ) Whoever – 
 ( 1 ) otherwise than as provided by law for the proper discharge of official duty – 
 ( A ) directly or indirectly gives , offers , or promises anything of value to any public official , former public official , or person selected to be a public official , for or because of any official act performed or to be performed by such public official , former public official , or person selected to be a public official ; or 
 ( B ) being a public official , former public official , or person selected to be a public official , otherwise than as provided by law for the proper discharge of official duty , directly or indirectly demands , seeks , receives , accepts , or agrees to receive or accept anything of value personally for or because of any official act performed or to be performed by such official or person . . . 
 shall be fined under this title or imprisoned for not more than two years , or both . 
 Interpretation 
 In United States v. Sun @-@ Diamond Growers of California ( 1999 ) , the Supreme Court held that the gratuity statute required a nexus to an official act , but not a quid pro quo . Both past and future official acts are cognizable , but not payments for status , access , generalized goodwill , or unspecified acts . Sun @-@ Diamond defined the nexus as follows : " We hold that , in order to establish a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 201 ( c ) ( 1 ) ( A ) , the Government must prove a link between a thing of value conferred upon a public official and a specific ' official act ' for or because of which it was given . " 
 = = Program bribery = = 
 The program bribery statute , 18 U.S.C. § 666 , was enacted in 1984 . Previous prohibitions required the specific funds to have been under federal control ( 18 U.S.C. § 641 ) or the involvement of federal employees ( 18 U.S.C. § 201 ) . 
 Text 
 The program bribery statute , 18 U.S.C. § 666 , criminalizes the corrupt offer of anything of value intending to influence an agent in connection with a transaction exceeding $ 5 @,@ 000 , and involving a government or organization receiving at least $ 10 @,@ 000 in federal funds . 18 U.S.C. § 666 ( a ) – ( c ) provides : 
 ( a ) Whoever , if the circumstance described in subsection ( b ) of this section exists – 
 ( 1 ) being an agent of an organization , or of a State , local , or Indian tribal government , or any agency thereof . . . 
 ( B ) corruptly solicits or demands for the benefit of any person , or accepts or agrees to accept , anything of value from any person , intending to be influenced or rewarded in connection with any business , transaction , or series of transactions of such organization , government , or agency involving any thing of value of $ 5 @,@ 000 or more ; or 
 ( 2 ) corruptly gives , offers , or agrees to give anything of value to any person , with intent to influence or reward an agent of an organization or of a State , local or Indian tribal government , or any agency thereof , in connection with any business , transaction , or series of transactions of such organization , government , or agency involving anything of value of $ 5 @,@ 000 or more ; 
 shall be fined under this title , imprisoned not more than 10 years , or both . 
 ( b ) The circumstance referred to in subsection ( a ) of this section is that the organization , government , or agency receives , in any one year period , benefits in excess of $ 10 @,@ 000 under a Federal program involving a grant , contract , subsidy , loan , guarantee , insurance , or other form of Federal assistance . 
 ( c ) This section does not apply to bona fide salary , wages , fees , or other compensation paid , or expenses paid or reimbursed , in the usual course of business . 
 Interpretation 
 In Fischer v. United States ( 2000 ) , the Court held that the jurisdictional requirement of $ 10 @,@ 000 in federal funds can be satisfied by any funds that flow through the organization , for example Medicaid reimbursements which a hospital receives indirectly through the patients . The only requirement is that the funds be traced to a statutory appropriation , and that their receipt be in furtherance of a federal policy . 
 Despite academic suggestions to the contrary , in Salinas v. United States ( 1997 ) , the Supreme Court held that the transaction itself need not involve federal funds . The $ 5 @,@ 000 transactional amount may be satisfied by the value of intangible goods or services . 
 § 666 does not apply to the corrupt solicitation of political services in exchange for a municipal job . 
 Both § 666 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( B ) and § 666 ( a ) ( 2 ) contain both an " intent to influence " and an " intent to reward " prong . Under " intent to influence " prong , both a quid pro quo and an actual intent to influence / be influenced are required . Under the " intent to reward " prong , the majority of circuits permit prosecutions for mere gratuities , but some do not . 
 Because " organization " is defined as non @-@ governmental and " local government " is defined as a subdivision of a state , public officials of federal territories cannot be prosecuted under § 666 . Members of tribal governments may be prosecuted . 
 = = Foreign Corrupt Practices Act = = 
 The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act , 15 U.S.C. § <unk> @-@ 1 , criminalizes the corrupt offer , by mail or in commerce , of anything of value from a publicly traded company to a foreign official for an official act to do business . 
 = = Mail and wire fraud = = 
 = = = Obtaining money or property = = = 
 Text 
 The federal mail fraud , 18 U.S.C. § 1341 , and federal wire fraud , 18 U.S.C. § 1343 , statutes criminalize any scheme or artifice to obtain money or property by fraud in connection with a mail or wire communication , respectively . The mail fraud statute , § 1341 provides , in relevant part : 
 Whoever , having devised or intending to devise any scheme or artifice to defraud , or for obtaining money or property by means of false or fraudulent pretenses , representations , or promises , or to sell , dispose of , loan , exchange , alter , give away , distribute , supply . . . for the purpose of executing such scheme or artifice or attempting so to do , places in any post office or authorized depository for mail matter , any matter or thing whatever to be sent or delivered by the Postal Service , or deposits or causes to be deposited any matter or thing whatever to be sent or delivered by any private or commercial interstate carrier , or takes or receives therefrom , any such matter or thing , or knowingly causes to be delivered by mail or such carrier according to the direction thereon , or at the place at which it is directed to be delivered by the person to whom it is addressed , any such matter or thing , shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 20 years , or both . 
 The wire fraud statute , § 1343 provides , in relevant part : 
 Whoever , having devised or intending to devise any scheme or artifice to defraud , or for obtaining money or property by means of false or fraudulent pretenses , representations , or promises , transmits or causes to be transmitted by means of wire , radio , or television communication in interstate or foreign commerce , any writings , signs , signals , pictures , or sounds for the purpose of executing such scheme or artifice , shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 20 years , or both . 
 Interpretation 
 The mail and wire fraud statutes may be used to prosecute public corruption by both elected and appointed public officials , political party officials , candidates for party offices , members of tribal governments , and others , including foreign public officials . 
 " The major problems faced by federal prosecutors in applying [ the mail and wire fraud statutes ] to political schemes is establishing that the defendant intentionally attempted to defraud the victims of something of value within the meaning of the States . " The salary and benefits of an elected public employee are not " property " for the purposes of the mail and wire fraud statutes , but the salary and benefits of an unelected public employee are . One intangible form of property recognized under the mail and wire fraud statutes is the right to control the disposition of government funds . 
 In 1983 , <unk> et al. noted that : 
 [ F ] <unk> courts and prosecutors are now realizing the potential uses for the mail fraud statute in combating political corruption . The relative ease of proving mail fraud violations and the apparent increase in corrupt political activities have caused more political officials to face mail fraud prosecutions . The recent successful prosecution of a non @-@ elected political official foreshadows the continuing evolution of the mail fraud act as one of the public 's protectors against bribery and extortion committed by government personnel . 
 = = = Honest services fraud = = = 
 At least from the 1970s , and perhaps earlier , the federal appellate courts permitted mail fraud prosecutions of public officials deprive the public of their intangible right to honest services . According to Professor John C. Coffee , " [ t ] he mid 1970s saw the flowering of the ' intangible rights doctrine , ' an exotic flower that quickly <unk> the legal landscape in the manner of the kudzu vine until by the mid @-@ 1980s few ethical or fiduciary breaches seemed beyond its potential reach . " In McNally v. United States ( 1987 ) , the Supreme Court held that a " scheme or artifice to defraud " under the mail and wire fraud statutes did not include a scheme or artifice to defraud another of the intangible right to honest services . In 1988 , Congress responded by adding 18 U.S.C. § 1346 which provides : 
 For the purposes of this chapter , the term “ scheme or artifice to defraud ” includes a scheme or artifice to deprive another of the intangible right of honest services . 
 § 1346 was known as the " McNally fix . " In Skilling v. United States ( 2010 ) , the Court construed § 1346 to apply only to bribes and kickbacks . Post @-@ Skilling is it unclear whether a mere gratuity can be prosecuted as a " kickback . " Skilling adopted the definition of " kickback " used in 41 U.S.C. § 52 ( 2 ) : 
 " [ K ] <unk> " means any money , fee , commission , credit , gift , gratuity , thing of value , or compensation of any kind which is provided , directly or indirectly , to any prime contractor , prime contractor employee , subcontractor , or subcontractor employee for the purpose of improperly obtaining or rewarding favorable treatment in connection with a prime contract or in connection with a subcontract relating to a prime contract . 
 Post @-@ Skilling , some courts have held that gratuities may be reached as kickbacks , while others have held that they may not . Prof. Coffee has argued that honest services fraud doctrine should explicitly distinguish between public and private corruption . 
 = = Hobbs Act = = 
 The Hobbs Act , 18 U.S.C. § 1951 , provides , in relevant part : 
 ( a ) Whoever in any way or degree obstructs , delays , or affects commerce or the movement of any article or commodity in commerce , by . . . extortion or attempts or conspires so to do . . . shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than twenty years , or both . 
 ( b ) As used in this section . . . 
 ( 2 ) The term “ extortion ” means the obtaining of property from another , with his consent , induced by wrongful use of actual or threatened . . . fear , or under color of official right . 
 The Hobbs Act 's definition of " extortion " was " copied from the New York Code substantially . " The New York extortion law provided : " Extortion is the obtaining of property from another , or the obtaining the property of a corporation from an officer , agent , or employee thereof , with his consent , induced by a wrongful use of force or fear , or under color of official right . " Blackstone described extortion as " an abuse of public justice , which consists of an officer 's unlawfully taking , by colour of his office , from any man , any money or thing of value that is not due to him , or more than is due , or before it is due . " 
 = = = Fear = = = 
 The Hobbs Act criminalizes , inter alia , the obtaining of property with consent by actual or threatened fear , if interstate commerce is affected . The economic fear prong of the Hobbs Act may be used to prosecute political corruption , as long as there is an affirmative act of inducement ; but only the <unk> ( bribe @-@ takers ) , and not the payors may be reached ( the latter have a defense of duress ) . Under the economic fear prong , " [ t ] he absence or presence of fear of economic loss must be considered from the perspective of the victim , not the extortionist ; the proof need establish that the victim reasonably believed : first , that the defendant had the power to harm the victim , and second , that the defendant would exploit that power to the victim 's detriment . " 
 = = = Under color of official right = = = 
 The Hobbs Act also criminalizes the obtaining of property under color of official right , if interstate commerce is affected . In a law review article published while the appeal in Kenny was pending , Stern wrote : 
 At a time when the institutions of government , both local and federal , are being subjected to increasing attack and cynicism , those responsible of the enforcement of the law and the administration of justice cannot afford to allow one of the most powerful means of combatting official corruption to be emasculated by unwarranted , restrictive interpretation . The distinction between bribery and extortion that has developed under the Hobbs Act is unnecessary when that Act is used to prosecute corruption in public office . The phrase " under color of official right " which appears in the Act 's definition of extortion renders that distinction moot . 
 In 1971 , Stern wrote that the Hobbs Act was " one of the major statutes under which the federal government can combat local political corruption where the state is either unable or unwilling to do so , " citing the Travel Act as the " other major statute . " In 1977 , Charles Ruff wrote that the Hobbs Act " has become the principal vehicle for this rapidly expanding federal effort . " Ruff describes Stern 's article as " [ t ] he only detailed analysis of the problem before the recent flood of cases . " By 1977 , the Third Circuit 's interpretation in Kenny had been adopted by the First , Second , Fourth , Seventh , Eighth , and Tenth Circuits . The Fifth , Sixth , and Ninth Circuits followed suit by 1986 . Some commentators have argued that the Hobbs Act should not be interpreted to reach public corruption at all . 
 In McCormick v. United States ( 1991 ) , the Supreme Court held that the " under color of official right " prong of the Hobbs Act could be used to prosecute political corruption as long as there was a quid pro quo . Prior to McCormick , there was a circuit split on this question . The next year , in Evans v. United States ( 1992 ) , the Court held that no affirmative act of inducement is required on the part of the public official . Prior to Evans , there was also a circuit split on this question . Nor is a nexus required ; nor is the quo required to be within the de jure power of the public official , as opposed to access , generalized goodwill , or unspecific acts . 
 <unk> may not be prosecuted under the " under color of official right " prong , but have no duress defense under other statutes . Successful candidate for public office may be prosecuted for their pre @-@ election actions , but unsuccessful candidates may not . 
 = = Travel Act = = 
 The Travel Act , 18 U.S.C. § 1952 , criminalizes , inter alia , the use of interstate travel or the mail to distribute the proceeds of , or promote or manage , unlawful activity , including extortion or bribery . The Travel Act has been used to prosecute political corruption . For example , the Travel Act may be used to prosecute public officials for extortion and bribery in violation of state law , as the Supreme Court held in United States v. <unk> ( 1969 ) . According to <unk> et al . : 
 From passage in 1961 until approximately 1971 , political officials were not prosecuted under the Travel Act . Since then , however , prosecutors and courts alike have found the Travel Act to be another valuable weapon in their continuing battle against the debilitating effects of political corruption . 
 = = As a predicate = = 
 = = = RICO = = = 
 " In the 1970s , federal prosecutors began to argue that RICO was applicable to corrupt state and local government bodies . " With the exception of program bribery , all of the aforementioned offenses are predicates for liability under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act ( RICO ) . A state or local governmental unit may be named as part of the charged RICO " enterprise . " As Henderson wrote in 1977 , " if a governmental unit can be classified as an enterprise within the meaning of the statute , it could have great impact on the ability of prosecutors to reach political crimes . " 
 = = = Money laundering = = = 
 All RICO predicates are also money laundering predicates . Federal program bribery , while not a RICO predicate , is a money laundering predicate . 
 = = Other statutes = = 
 Chapter 11 - Bribery , Graft , and Conflicts of Interest 
 18 U.S.C. § 203 : unauthorized compensation of officials for representing persons before the government ( formerly codified at Rev. Stat . § 1782 ) ( enacted 1864 ) 
 18 U.S.C. § 204 : prohibiting members of Congress from practicing before the United States Court of Claims or the Federal Circuit 
 18 U.S.C. § 205 : officials prosecuting claims against or before the United States ( enacted 1962 ) 
 18 U.S.C. § 207 : " revolving door " statute ( enacted 1962 ) 
 18 U.S.C. § 208 : executive branch conflict of interest ( enacted 1962 ) 
 18 U.S.C. § 209 : executive branch salary supplementation ( enacted 1962 ) 
 18 U.S.C. § 211 : sale of appointive office ( formerly codified at 18 U.S.C. § 150 , and then 18 U.S.C. § 215 ) ( enacted 1926 ) 
 Other 
 18 U.S.C. § 371 : conspiracy to defraud the United States ( formerly codified at Rev. Stat . § <unk> , and then 18 U.S.C. § 88 ) ( enacted 1867 ) 
 18 U.S.C. § 610 : coercion of political activity 
 18 U.S.C. § 872 : extortion under color of office ( enacted 1825 ) 
 = = Constitutional issues = = 
 = = = <unk> powers = = = 
 The Hobbs Act , the Travel Act , and the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act ( RICO ) have been upheld under the Commerce Clause . The mail fraud statute has been justified under the Postal Clause . In Sabri v. United States ( 2004 ) , the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the program bribery statute , 18 U.S.C. § 666 , under the Spending Clause ( with Justice Clarence Thomas citing the Commerce Clause in concurrence ) . Prior to Sabri , several circuit courts had already so held . 
 Professor Adam Kurland has proposed the Guarantee Clause of Article Four of the United States Constitution — which provides that " [ t ] he United States shall guarantee to every State in the Union a Republican Form of Government " — as a constitutional basis for corruption statutes as applied to state and local officials . Professor John C. Coffee argues that " there is a more modest role for the Guarantee Clause " in distinguishing between public and private corruption under the same statutes . 
 = = = Speech or Debate Clause = = = 
 The Speech or Debate Clause of Article One of the United States Constitution provides that : " [ F ] or any Speech or Debate in either House , [ Senators or Representatives ] shall not be questioned in any other Place . " United States v. Johnson ( 1966 ) was the first case in which the Supreme Court held that the Clause barred a corruption prosecution . Specifically , the Court held that a floor speech by a Congressperson could not be admitted as evidence in a prosecution under 18 U.S.C. § 281 ( the federal conflict @-@ of @-@ interest statute ) or § 371 ( conspiracy to defraud the United States ) to show the motivation for the introduction of a private bill . Representative Thomas Francis Johnson had agreed to make a speech in the House and intercede with the Department of Justice on behalf of a savings and loan association in exchange for a campaign contribution and legal fees . 
 The Court has twice considered the role of the Clause in the prosecution of federal members of Congress for bribery under § 201 . In United States v. Brewster ( 1972 ) , the Court held that a § 201 prosecution of a Congressperson does not violate the Clause so long as " no inquiry into legislative acts or motivation for legislative acts is necessary for the Government to make out a prima facie case . " Brewster reinstated a dismissed § 201 indictment because the crime of bribery is complete once the bribe is accepted , whether or not the official performs the promised act . In United States v. <unk> ( 1979 ) , the Court held that the prosecution may not introduce any evidence of a past " legislative act " at trial . According to Weeks , " [ a ] s a practical matter , it is extremely difficult to successfully prosecute a section 201 action if reference to a defendant 's legislative acts is forbidden . " 
 = = = Federalism = = = 
 Charles Ruff referred to " the prosecution of local officials for acts of public corruption " as " perhaps the most sensitive area of federal @-@ state cooperation . " Several other commentators have expressed federalism concerns about such prosecutions . Others have disagreed . But , as Whitaker notes , " Congress and the courts have not raised potential federalism concerns and , in fact , appear to approve of increased use of federal law to prosecute low @-@ level bribery at the state and local levels . " According to Professor John C. Coffee , " [ a ] lthough this prophesy that the Supreme Court will curb the federal fraud statutes may yet prove accurate , that is not the direction in which the lower federal courts have been moving . " 
 In United States v. <unk> ( 1980 ) , a prosecution under the Hobbs Act and Travel Act , the Supreme Court declined to recognize a legislative act privilege for state legislators analogous in scope to the Speech or Debate Clause , either under the Tenth Amendment or Federal Rule of Evidence 501 . <unk> argued that " recognition of an evidentiary privilege for state legislators for their legislative acts would impair the legitimate interest of the Federal Government in enforcing its criminal statutes with only speculative benefit to the state legislative process . " Similarly , the courts have consistently rejected claims by convicted state legislators that their prosecutions violate the Tenth Amendment . 
 = Hurricane Keith = 
 Hurricane Keith was a storm in October 2000 that caused extensive damage in Central America , especially in Mexico and Belize . It was the fifteenth tropical cyclone , eleventh named storm , and seventh hurricane of the that year 's Atlantic hurricane season . Keith developed as a tropical depression from a tropical wave in the western Caribbean Sea on September 28 . The depression gradually strengthened , and became Tropical Storm Keith on the following day . As the storm tracked westward , it continued to intensify and was upgraded to a hurricane on September 30 . Shortly thereafter , Keith began to rapidly deepen , and peaked as a Category 4 hurricane less than 24 hours later . Keith then began to meander erratically offshore of Belize , which significantly weakened the storm due to land interaction . By late on October 2 , Keith made landfall in Ambergris Caye , Belize as a minimal hurricane . It quickly weakened to a tropical storm , before another landfall occurred near Belize City early on the following day . While moving inland over the Yucatán Peninsula , Keith weakened further , and was downgraded to a tropical depression before emerging into the Gulf of Mexico on October 4 . Once in the Gulf of Mexico , Keith began to re @-@ strengthen and was upgraded to a tropical storm later that day , and a hurricane on the following day . By late on October 5 , Keith made its third and final landfall near Tampico , Tamaulipas , Mexico as a moderately strong <unk> hurricane . The storm quickly weakened inland and dissipated as a tropical cyclone by 24 hours after landfall . 
 Keith brought heavy rainfall to several countries in Central America , which resulted in extensive flooding , especially in Belize and Mexico . In Guatemala , the storm flooded 10 towns , and caused one fatality . Similarly , one fatality also occurred in El Salvador , and at least 300 people were affected by flooding in that country . Thirteen communities in Nicaragua were completely isolated after Keith made roads impassable . Twelve deaths were reported in Nicaragua , all of which were flood @-@ related . Five people were presumed dead in Honduras after an aircraft disappeared near Roatán ; one other fatality occurred due to flooding . The storm brought torrential rainfall to Belize , with many areas reporting at least 10 inches ( 250 mm ) of rain , while highest reported amount of precipitation was greater than 30 inches ( 760 mm ) . In Belize , a village reported that only 12 houses remained , while elsewhere in the country , at least 60 homes were destroyed or damaged ; several houses in Belize City suffered minor roof damage . At least 19 people were killed in Belize and damages totaled to $ 280 million ( 2000 USD ) . Heavy rainfall also occurred in Mexico , especially in the states of Nuevo León and Tamaulipas . Flooding from Keith caused several mudslides and a few rivers reached historic levels . Throughout Mexico , at least 460 houses were damage or destroyed and other losses in infrastructure occurred . In addition , one person drowned due to heavy rainfall . Damages incurred in associated with Keith in Mexico totaled to approximately $ 365 @.@ 9 million ( 2000 MXN , $ 38 @.@ 7 million 2000 USD ) . Overall , Keith was responsible for 40 deaths and $ 319 million ( 2000 USD ) in damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On September 16 , 2000 a tropical wave – an elongated area of low air pressure moving from east to west – exited the west coast of Africa . It moved westward across the Atlantic Ocean without development due to the presence of upper @-@ level wind shear . After moving across the Caribbean Sea , a disturbance along the wave started to become better organized on September 27 . The next day , a Hurricane Hunters flight indicated a closed circulation and winds of 37 mph ( 60 km / h ) ; upon receiving the data , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) initiated advisories on Tropical Depression Fifteen at 2100 UTC . The NHC later estimated the depression had formed three hours earlier , about 70 mi ( 110 km ) north @-@ northeast of Cabo Gracias a Dios . Upon forming , the depression had good outflow , although the convection was not as organized . With an anticyclone over the system , the depression was expected to gradually intensify while moving slowly to the west @-@ northwest , a motion caused by weak steering winds . Late on September 28 , the NHC upgraded the depression to tropical storm status and named it Keith , after another Hurricane Hunters mission reported flight @-@ level winds of 61 mph ( 98 km / h ) . 
 By the time Keith became a tropical storm , it was beginning to undergo rapid deepening , fueled by warm waters , low wind shear , and an organizing cloud pattern . There initially was uncertainty in the storm 's future movement , due to a ridge in the Gulf of Mexico . Tropical cyclone prediction models differed on their assessments ; three models anticipated a turn to the northeast toward Florida due to a trough , while others predicted a continued slow motion to the west @-@ northwest , eventually reaching the Bay of Campeche . After continued strengthening , Keith became a hurricane on September 30 , just 18 hours after becoming a tropical storm , and making it the seventh such storm of that intensity of the season . That day , an eye began developing as the structure became much better organized . In a 13 ‑ hour period beginning at 1808 UTC on September 30 , Keith underwent explosive deepening , as its barometric pressure dropped at a rate of nearly 3 mbar ( 0 @.@ 089 inHg ) per hour . The NHC noted that Keith experienced conditions " ideal for strengthening " , with the exception of the approaching land interaction with the Yucatán peninsula . The hurricane slowed until stalling offshore eastern Belize , caused by the ridge to the north and the precursor to Tropical Storm Leslie forming over Cuba . By early on October 1 , Keith had developed a well @-@ defined eye about 20 mi ( 32 km ) in diameter , with what the NHC described as a " spectacular appearance . " Later that day , Hurricane Hunters estimated a minimum pressure of 939 mbar ( 27 @.@ 7 inHg ) and deployed a dropsonde that observed peak winds of 176 mph ( 283 km / h ) . Based on the data , the NHC estimated that Keith attained peak winds of 140 mph ( 230 km / h ) at 0700 UTC on October 1 , while just offshore eastern Belize . This made it a Category 4 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . 
 Shortly after Keith reached peak intensity , the eye had moved over portions of Belize , causing it to lose definition . Outflow became restricted , and the developing disturbance to the northeast increased wind shear . As a result , Keith began to weaken steadily , moving over Ambergris Cay and Caye Caulker as a Category 3 hurricane late on October 1 . While remaining nearly stationary , Keith made a second landfall on Ambergris Cay late on October 2 as a minimal hurricane . Shortly thereafter , Keith weakened into a tropical storm , and its convection became limited to the southeastern quadrant . At 0300 UTC , the storm made landfall about 30 mi ( 48 km ) north of Belize City , and within nine hours weakened into a tropical depression . The building ridge to the north caused the system to accelerate more to the west @-@ northwest across the Yucatán peninsula . Early on October 4 , Keith emerged into the Bay of Campeche , where favorable conditions allowed convection to quickly redevelop . Later that day , it re @-@ intensified into a tropical storm , with improved outflow and convective organization . On October 5 , the Hurricane Hunters reported a circular eye had reformed along with winds supporting an upgrade to hurricane status . Keith intensified further that day , until it made its final landfall 23 mi ( 37 km ) north of Tampico with winds of 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) . It rapidly weakened over the high terrain of northeastern Mexico , dissipating late on October 6 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 On September 29 , shortly after Keith formed , a hurricane watch was issued for the Yucatán peninsula from Chetumal to Cabo Catoche in Quintana Roo . The next day as Keith was nearing hurricane intensity , the watch was upgraded to a warning , and a tropical storm warning and hurricane watch was issued for the Belize coastline from Belize City to the Mexican border . At that time , the trajectory was expected to go more to the northwest , and when the storm turned to a slow westward drift , hurricane warnings were issued for the Belize coast with only about 24 hours of lead time for the offshore islands . The warnings for the Yucatán peninsula were dropped as Keith weakened . 
 On October 2 , the government of Belize declared a state of emergency and activated the entire Belize Defence Force due to the storm 's threat . The airport in Belize City was closed during Keith 's passage , limiting transportation from the country 's mainland to its offshore islands . In Corozal , Belize , authorities evacuated the entire city of 10 @,@ 000 people to numerous shelters in Orange Walk . Officials were also ordered evacuations for Belize City , setting up shelters in Belmopan . Overall , about 25 @,@ 000 people evacuate , or about 10 % of Belize 's population . Three hospitals were evacuated in the country . In a post @-@ storm assessment , residents on the offshore islands acknowledged they were unprepared for the storm and did not anticipate such intensity . 
 In Quintana Roo , 5 @,@ 000 people from Chetumal and surrounding low @-@ lying areas were forced to evacuate to 30 shelters . Offshore along a coral reef , about 50 fishermen stayed on a coral reef during the storm . In the Bay of Campeche , Pemex evacuated about 6 @,@ 300 workers from its offshore oil platforms . Officials in Yucatán and Veracruz declared states of emergency . When Keith reached the Gulf of Mexico and began re @-@ intensifying , a hurricane warning was issued from Tuxpan to Matamoros in northeastern Mexico , with a tropical storm watch issued northward to Port Mansfield , Texas . About 3 @,@ 000 residents in Tamaulipas evacuated to 250 shelters , and in neighboring Veracruz , about 175 people left their houses before the storm struck . The threat of Hurricane Keith caused Mexican authorities to close most ports along the gulf coast , and many schools in the area were closed . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Keith 's slow and erratic movement caused it to produce strong winds and heavy rainfall in Central America . Belize bore the brunt of the storm , with about $ 280 million in damage and 19 confirmed fatalities , primarily related to flooding . Several other countries reported significant but less severe flooding , including El Salvador , Guatemala , Honduras , Mexico , and Nicaragua . Overall , Keith was responsible for 40 deaths , as well as approximately $ 319 million in damage . 
 = = = Belize = = = 
 While Keith was offshore from Belize , northerly winds blew water out of the Bay of Chetumal . There were reports of people walking onto the temporarily dry bay floor , despite the potential for the waters to return in the event of shifting winds . At Caye Caulker , the hurricane produced a 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) storm surge from the west . Winds were unofficially estimated to have reached 125 mph ( 201 km / h ) in the offshore islands of Belize . Wind gusts on the mainland reached 61 mph ( 98 km / h ) at Philip S. W. Goldson International Airport . Due to its slow motion , Keith dropped heavy rainfall , amounting to over 10 in ( 250 mm ) in many parts of the country . The highest recorded precipitation total was 32 @.@ 67 inches ( 830 mm ) at the international airport in Belize City . 
 The strong winds destroyed 130 houses in Belize . Two hotel roofs were wrecked , and the winds knocked down trees and power lines . Widespread areas of Belize lost power and telephone service , including Belize City . There , the heavy rainfall flooded streets , reaching 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) deep . Twenty homes were damaged to some degree in the capital , while many more suffered minor roof damage . The rains flooded the first floor of the primary hospital in the city , causing severe damage . Nationwide , 11 health facilities were damaged . Elsewhere in the country , the rains increased levels along rivers , including the Belize River , Rio Hondo , and New River . The Belize River rose for several days after the storm , reaching record levels of 21 ft ( 6 @.@ 6 m ) in width , which isolated 15 villages . Flooding covered Northern Highway and Western Highway as well as the primary bridge from Belmopan to the rest of Cayo District . Residual floodwaters persisted due to the low @-@ lying land of the country and poor drainage . Floods contaminated water supply in the northern four districts , causing an E. coli outbreak and food poisoning . In Belize , Corozal , and Orange Walk districts , about 30 % of the houses were severely damaged by flooding . 
 Damage was heaviest in the northern offshore islands and in the northern portion of the mainland . On the offshore islands , downed trees and power lines blocked most roads . In Caye Caulker and San Pedro , Keith damaged the roofs of about 90 % of houses and damaged or destroyed 676 houses , leaving 3 @,@ 279 people homeless . About 50 % of the houses in Caye Caulker were destroyed , with reports of only five dwellings still standing after the storm . In San Pedro , about 30 % of houses , or at least 50 , were wrecked . On Ambergris Caye , four airplanes were destroyed . At Turneffe Atoll , about 35 % of the landmass was affected , with many trees in that section uprooted and numerous tree branches snapped . 
 Five individuals died in maritime accidents involving at least one catamaran . There was an accident involving a bus carrying evacuees , killing four people on board . Three people died on the offshore Ambergris Caye . Overall , 19 people perished in the country . Several injuries , mainly from flying debris , were reported in San Pedro , and there were 142 people who were injured in the storm . Throughout the country , approximately 3 @,@ 279 homes were either damaged or destroyed . The damage total from Keith was initially estimated at $ 200 million , about half of which to tourism facilities ; the remainder was roughly split between crop and infrastructure damage . About 75 % of the crops in the country were damaged , including much of the corn harvest that was expected to begin in October . The damage total was later estimated at $ 280 million , most of it on the offshore Ambergris Cay and Caye Caulker . 
 = = = Mexico = = = 
 Hurricane Keith caused damage in three Mexican states – Quintana Roo along the Yucatán peninsula , Tamaulipas where the hurricane made landfall , and Sonora farther inland . In Quintana Roo , Keith left $ 2 @.@ 7 million ( 2000 MXN , $ 294 @,@ 000 2000 USD ) in damage , and caused an additional $ 39 @.@ 7 million ( 2000 MXN , $ 4 @.@ 2 million 2000 USD ) in indirect costs . While crossing the Yucatán peninsula , Keith dropped heavy rainfall , including over 10 in ( 250 mm ) in Campeche state . Chetumal , Quintana Roo reported 9 @.@ 65 in ( 245 mm ) of precipitation . 
 When Keith made its final landfall , Tampico reported tropical storm force winds , with gusts to 63 mph ( 101 km / h ) . The winds damaged billboards and some trees in the city , and elsewhere along the coast , Keith knocked down trees and power lines . About 200 @,@ 000 people in northeastern Mexico lost power , and 100 @,@ 000 people were left without water . About 400 houses were damaged in Veracruz , and many roads and bridges were destroyed . Heavy rainfall occurred in the interior of northeastern Mexico , peaking at 24 @.@ 55 in ( 624 mm ) in González , Tamaulipas . In a reporting station in the municipality of Gómez Farías , the <unk> reported a 24 @-@ hour rain total of 13 @.@ 24 inches ( 336 mm ) , and a storm total of 18 @.@ 44 inches ( 468 mm ) , which broke the precipitation record for that location , which counted with 35 years of data . This rain also caused rivers to reach record levels , as the Sabinas River rose 10 @.@ 95 m ( 35 @.@ 9 ft ) on October 6 , to a new historical peak , and the <unk> River rose 77 @.@ 46 ft ( 23 @.@ 61 m ) , slightly under the 1976 record . This rainfall caused the Las <unk> dam to catch 525 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 648 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) of water between October 5 and October 17 ; however , some of this water had to be released , as the upstream face of the dam was damaged by debris , and had to be repaired . Overall , the storm produced $ 117 @.@ 8 million in damage ( 2000 MXN , $ 12 @.@ 4 million 2000 USD ) in the state . 
 In Nuevo León , the remnants of Keith interacted with a cold front to produce heavy rainfall , reaching 14 @.@ 43 in ( 367 mm ) in Sabinas . The average precipitation in the state was 5 inches ( 130 mm ) , and the deluge caused causing mudslides in several cities , including San Pedro , Guadalupe and Escobedo . High rainfall also caused flash flood in mountainous areas near Monterrey , forming swift river currents that rose up to 9 @,@ 000 ft ³ / s ( 250 m ³ / s ) , and dragged 130 people into local rivers ; however , all were rescued . The rivers also dragged 30 vehicles , all of which were moderate to total losses . The storm runoff caused the El Cuchillo dam to receive 105 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 130 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) of water daily , and the La Boca dam to receive 810 acre feet ( 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) per hour . About 13 @,@ 000 residents lost power . About 5 @,@ 000 people were forced evacuated from several municipalities in the state , including 2 @,@ 465 from Monterrey and 1 @,@ 900 from rural areas , at a cost of $ 400 @,@ 000 ( 2000 MXN ) . The total damages in the state rose to $ 115 @.@ 6 million ( 2000 MXN , US $ 12 @.@ 2 million in year 2000 ) , with the damage to urban infrastructure being the most expensive portion of the damage , with $ 44 @.@ 2 million ( 2000 MXN , US $ 4 @.@ 6 million in 2000 ) used to repair damage in eight municipalities ; in particular , San Pedro Garza García received approximately three quarters of the infrastructure damage , with $ 30 @.@ 8 million ( 2000 MXN , $ 3 @.@ 3 million 2000 USD ) . Additionally , about 460 homes were damaged or destroyed , and 300 families had to be relocated to safer areas . 
 In other states , damage was lighter , but still significant . In Sonora , total damages rose to $ 64 @.@ 4 million ( 2000 MXN , $ 6 @.@ 8 million 2000 USD ) ; in Chiapas , $ 25 @.@ 6 million ( 2000 MXN , $ 2 @.@ 7 million 2000 USD ) of property damage were caused by the storm . This brings up the total damage in Mexico to $ 365 @.@ 9 million ( 2000 MXN , $ 38 @.@ 7 million 2000 USD ) . In Tabasco , flooding damaged 7 @,@ 896 houses . Approximately 24 @,@ 000 residents in the state were impacted by flooding . At the capital city of Villahermosa , large rivers in the area overflowed , flooding some streets . However , dikes and sandbags along the banks of the rivers prevented further flooding . Overall , about 46 @,@ 000 people had to evacuate Mexico due to the storm and its flooding . There was one fatality when a man in Tampico was electrocuted by a downed power line . In <unk> , Tamaulipas , a swollen river killed a family of six when their house was flooded . Overall , Keith killed 23 people in Mexico – 13 in Veracruz , 4 in Puebla , and 6 in Tamaulipas . There were six indirect deaths when a plane crashed while attempting to land in Reynosa , Tamaulipas . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 The outerbands of Keith brought intermittent rainfall to several areas of Cuba , though the amounts were very light . While Keith was organizing , the storm drew moisture from the eastern Pacific Ocean across Central America , producing heavy rainfall . In Guatemala , the rains caused flooding in ten towns and inundated approximately 500 farms in the Melchor de Mencos municipality with about 4 inches ( 100 mm ) of water . Additionally , one fatality was reported . Governor of Petén Department <unk> Regalado remarked that , " many communities are cut off by flooded rivers " . In El Salvador , a 20 @-@ year @-@ old man drowned in a river , and 200 families had to evacuate after several houses were damaged or destroyed . Rainfall in Honduras forced over 200 families to evacuate their houses . One person died when a wall collapsed , and there were five other fatalities an aircraft disappeared near <unk> Island . A bridge along the Pan @-@ American Highway between Honduras and Nicaragua was destroyed , which had been rebuilt following Hurricane Mitch . Additionally , a government agency reported that as many as 80 @,@ 000 people in southern Honduras were left isolated . 
 In Nicaragua , floods from the storm forced 3 @,@ 962 people to evacuate their houses to 57 shelters , many of which were schools . Floods affected 11 of the 17 Departments of Nicaragua , which began receding on October 5 as Keith exited the region . The floods caused several landslides and covered roads , which isolated communities . Keith damaged 436 houses in the country and destroyed another 160 . There were 12 fatalities due to the storm in Nicaragua , one of whom a boy who was swept away by a fast moving flooded river northeast of Managua , while another death occurred after a man drowned in Lake Managua . A man in the western portions of the country died after stepping on a power lines , which had fallen due to strong winds . Fifty communities were isolated , with at least thirteen of them due to impassable roads . Several neighborhoods in Corinto flooded , forcing the Civil Defense to evacuate 9 families . One house collapsed in Los Ángeles , though its ten occupant escape without injury . After rainfall lashed In Villanueva , Chinandega , for six days , the resultant flooding forced 300 families evacuated , while there was significant losses the corn , beans and plantains crops . An additional 20 families left their homes due to flooding in <unk> . About 15 families in the port city of Puerto Sandino were evacuated after the El <unk> river overflowed . Another 18 homes were flooded in the region of Salinas Grandes . About 52 fled <unk> after at least 11 homes flooded . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On October 3 , a Belize ambassador issued an appeal to the international community for food and money due to the damage from Keith . United Nations Development Programme received $ 30 @,@ 000 from the Government of Norway to give immediate relief to the country of Belize . United Nations Children 's Fund also gave out $ 150 @,@ 000 for relief in areas not focused on by other relief groups . The Peace Corps , the Red Cross , and the United States Navy black hawk helicopters worked together to deliver rice , corn , sugar , salt , cooking oil , toilet paper , and medications to about 700 families in Bermuda Landings and adjacent isolated villages . The American Red Cross donated about $ 28 @,@ 500 and 4 @,@ 080 family hygiene kits . Between October and November 2000 , the National Society distributed 5 @,@ 289 food and hygiene parcels to 26 @,@ 293 people in Belize City , Orange Walk , and Belmopan . Around that time , the Belize Red Cross Society ( <unk> ) distributed relief items to 4 @,@ 622 victims in Belize City . The <unk> also shipped two containers with kitchen sets and water buckets for 1 @,@ 600 families , donated by the German Red Cross . A donation account to help the relief effort , titled Hurricane Keith Relief Fund , was set up by the town of Placencia , in the local Atlantic Bank . The Belize Consulate in California also set up a donation fundraiser . Placencia also delivered a boat full of donated food , clothing , and building supplies to the San Pedro and Caye Caulker area . 
 In the immediate aftermath , officials enacted a curfew for Belize City , Caye Caulker and San Pedro to curtail looting , and the latter two areas were declared disaster areas . The entirety of the northern three districts ( out of six total ) were also declared disaster areas . There were initial difficulties in determining the needs in the affected residents , due to cut communications . The government sent planes with emergency supplies to the most affected offshore islands . Several emergency teams were sent to Caye Caulker and San Pedro as soon as weather conditions permitted it . Widespread road repairs also began almost immediately after Keith 's occurrence . The Belize International Airport was back online by the morning of October 4 , only a single day after the tropical cyclone passed through the area . By that time , boat service was re @-@ instated with the most affected areas to pick up stranded tourists . Workers quickly restored power and water in Belize City . In the days after the storm struck , residual flooding sparked fears for the spread of disease . In Orange Walk and Cayo District , residents were advised to stay indoors to avoid bites from poisonous snakes . 
 In Nicaragua , the United States ambassador declared a disaster , which prompted various United Nations departments to provide $ 25 @,@ 000 to the country . 
 The name Keith was retired in the spring of 2001 and will never again be used for a North Atlantic hurricane . The name was replaced with Kirk for the 2006 Atlantic hurricane season . However , since the name Kirk was not used during the course of 2006 , it was then first used during the 2012 Atlantic hurricane season . 
 = Typhoon Yagi ( 2006 ) = 
 Typhoon Yagi was an intense typhoon , the strongest of the 2006 Pacific typhoon season , which reached the equivalence of Category 5 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . Forming out of a tropical depression on September 16 , Yagi quickly strengthened as it executed a slow clockwise loop over the open waters of the western Pacific Ocean . On September 19 , Yagi strengthened into a typhoon as a subtropical ridge steered the storm towards the west . Two days later , the storm reached its peak intensity with winds of 195 km / h ( 120 mph 10 @-@ minute winds ) with a minimum pressure of 910 hPa ( mbar ) . The typhoon gradually weakened as it recurved towards the northeast and was downgraded to a severe tropical storm on September 24 and became extratropical the next day . The storm was last noted near the Aleutian Islands on September 27 . The typhoon caused severe damage on the island of Chichijima but no injuries were reported as a result of the storm . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On September 16 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) began monitoring an area of convection as a tropical depression about 1 @,@ 270 km ( 790 mi ) east @-@ northeast of Guam . The depression was located within an area of low to moderate wind shear under an upper @-@ level anticyclone . <unk> convection was noted along the eastern portion of the developing system before the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert later that day . Early on September 17 , the JTWC began issuing advisories on Tropical Depression 16W . Located within a weak steering environment , the storm executed a clockwise loop while quickly strengthening . Several hours after the JTWC issued their first advisory , the JMA upgraded the system to a tropical storm and gave it the name Yagi ; the name was contributed by Japan , and is the Japanese word for " goat " . Late on September 18 , the JMA upgraded Yagi to a severe tropical storm while the JTWC classified the storm as a minimal typhoon . 
 Early on September 19 , the JMA upgraded Yagi to a typhoon . After completing the loop , Yagi 's track was influenced by a subtropical ridge located to the southeast of Japan . The typhoon continued to intensify and reached its peak intensity on September 21 with winds of 195 km / h ( 120 mph 10 @-@ minute winds ) with a minimum pressure of 910 hPa ( mbar ) , making it the strongest storm of the season according to the JMA . At the same time , the JTWC classified Yagi as a Category 5 super typhoon with winds of 260 km / h ( 160 mph 1 @-@ minute winds ) . On September 22 , Yagi passed by the islands of Iwo Jima and Chichijima as the storm recurved towards the northeast . With increasing wind shear , the typhoon began to weaken and also began to undergo an extratropical transition . Late on September 24 , the JTWC classified the storm as an extratropical cyclone and issued their final advisory . The JMA kept Yagi as a tropical system for another day as it weakened to a severe tropical storm . Early on September 25 , they classified it as extratropical . The remnants of Yagi continued towards the northeast and crossed the International Date Line on September 27 . The storm was last noted near the Aleutian Islands . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 On September 23 , Typhoon Yagi passed directly over the resort island of Chichijima which has a population of about 2 @,@ 000 . The cyclone brought winds up to 210 km / h ( 130 mph ) , making it the strongest typhoon in 20 years to hit the island . About 1 @,@ 000 of the 1 @,@ 270 homes were without power during the height of the storm . About 150 residents evacuated to local shelters during the storm to escape the high winds and heavy rains . At least one structure was destroyed and numerous others sustained damage . The storm reportedly produced torrential rains , but there are no known measurements . Several homes had their roofs blown off and windows broken . Street lamps were knocked down by the strong winds produced by Yagi . Ferry service for several ports was cancelled for 29 days following the typhoon . Fallen trees knocked down power lines and cut communications . Some homes were reported to have lost water pressure also . The storm passed close to Iwo Jima on September 22 , with the island being within the range of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) winds . No loss of life or injuries were related to Typhoon Yagi . 
 = MILF Island = 
 " MILF Island " is the eleventh episode of NBC 's second season of 30 Rock and thirty @-@ second episode overall . It was written by the series ' creator , executive producer and lead actress Tina Fey and producer Matt Hubbard . The director of the episode was Kevin Rodney Sullivan . It aired on April 10 , 2008 on the NBC network in the United States . Guest stars in this episode include Timothy Adams , Tim Conway , <unk> Francesca , Deidre Goodwin , Rob Huebel , Christina <unk> , John Lutz and Maulik Pancholy . 
 The episode revolves around the season finale of Jack Donaghy 's ( Alec Baldwin ) reality television show hit , MILF Island , which parallels the " real world " incidents happening in the office . Someone tells a reporter for The New York Post that Jack is a " Class A Moron " and that he can " eat my poo . " The writers of TGS with Tracy Jordan argue as they suspect one of them made the comment . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The cast and crew of TGS with Tracy Jordan gather to watch the season finale of Jack 's summer reality show hit MILF Island , a series the plot of which is described as " 25 Super @-@ Hot Moms , 50 eighth grade boys , no rules . " The staff soon discover that one of them told a reporter for The New York Post that Jack was a " Class A Moron " and that " He can eat my poo . " They then spiral into an argument as they try to find out who made the statement . Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) later recalls that he heard Liz , in an elevator , making the statement to the journalist . Liz makes a false promise that she will tell Jack that it was her to avoid him hearing the truth from Kenneth . Liz finally reveals the truth to Jack only to find out that he already knew it was she who said it , and he 's not going to fire her — instead , she has to put together a new TV series for MILF Island 's manipulative competitor Deborah . 
 Meanwhile , as he is planning to watch the season finale of MILF Island alone in his office , Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) gets stuck in a vending machine while trying to steal a candy bar . Pete 's many attempts to break free from the machine end in failure when the machine ends up falling on him . 
 = = Production = = 
 " MILF Island " was filmed in early March 2008 . The episode of 30 Rock which aired the following week , " Subway Hero , " was originally expected to air on April 10 , 2008 in place of this episode , but for unknown reasons " MILF Island " aired on that date instead . This marked the only time in the series ' first four seasons that completed episodes were not broadcast in the same order as they were produced . 
 Confusion was caused prior to the broadcast of this episode when many critics speculated about how the episode would tackle the use of the word MILF without actually explaining that it is an acronym for " Mother I 'd Like to Fuck " , as that would have broken Federal Communications Commission rules . The situation was compared to the episode of Seinfeld called " The Contest " which features the subject of masturbation but the characters could never actually say the word " masturbation " and did so via metaphors . 
 " MILF Island " was the first episode of 30 Rock to be broadcast since " Episode 210 , " on January 10 , 2008 , due to the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike . The Writers Guild of America ( WGA ) went on strike at 12 : 01AM Eastern Standard Time on November 5 , 2007 . Filming of 30 Rock 's final written episode concluded on November 9 , 2007 . Members of Writers Guild of America , East and Writers Guild of America , West voted to end the 100 @-@ day strike on February 12 , 2008 . Writers were allowed to return to work on the same day . The WGA allowed for show runners to return to work on February 11 , in preparation for the conclusion of the strike . The show runner for 30 Rock is executive producer Robert Carlock . The writers returned to work on February 13 . During the strike , executive producer , writer and star of 30 Rock Tina Fey had to balance her duties in order not to breach WGA strike rules . Fey took to the picket lines along with co @-@ star Jack McBrayer , while Alec Baldwin also blogged on The Huffington Post website in support of the WGA writers . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " MILF Island " brought in an average of 5 @.@ 7 million American viewers , performing similarly to previous episodes of the second season . This episode achieved a 2 @.@ 7 / 7 in the key 18 – 49 demographic ; the 2 @.@ 7 refers to 2 @.@ 7 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds in the U.S. while the 7 refers to 7 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast in the U.S. 
 Jeff Labrecque of Entertainment Weekly wrote that " after three months of strike @-@ enforced exile , [ this episode of ] 30 Rock generated the expectations and excitement normally reserved for a season premiere , " also saying that " the show [ is ] in midseason form . " Matt Webb Mitovich of TV Guide said that he would " be lying if [ he ] said this was a super @-@ great episode . " Webb Mitovich went on to say that " [ He ] did like , though — and thought they should have done a lot more with — the " parallels " between the MILF events and the strategizing staff . " Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad thought that " It 's almost as if this was the season opener " and that this episode was " ambitious . " Michael N of Television Without Pity awarded the episode a grade of B. Robert Canning of IGN said that " the overall story arc was less than what we had anticipated from this critical favorite making its post @-@ writers @-@ strike return , the episode was still pretty damn funny . " Canning also said that this was " an episode that was divided between a less @-@ than @-@ average story and many hilarious moments . " Canning criticized how " 30 Rock has never really given [ Pete Hornberger and Scott Adsit ] ( the character or the actor ) the showcase that he deserves . " 
 = HMS Amphion ( 1911 ) = 
 HMS Amphion was an Active @-@ class scout cruiser built for the Royal Navy before the First World War . Completed in 1913 , she was initially assigned to the First Fleet and became a destroyer flotilla leader in mid @-@ 1914 . When the war began , her flotilla was assigned to the Harwich Force . While patrolling on the first full day of the war , Amphion and her destroyers encountered and sank a German minelayer , SMS Königin Luise , but not before she had laid many of her mines . While returning from patrolling the following morning , Amphion accidentally struck a mine on 6 August 1914 off the Thames Estuary and sank with the loss of 132 crewmen killed . She was the first ship of the Royal Navy to be sunk in the First World War . The wreck site is protected and may not be dived upon without permission from the Ministry of Defence . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Active @-@ class ships were the last class of turbine @-@ powered scout cruisers ordered by the Admiralty . These ships were intended to work with destroyer flotillas , leading their torpedo attacks and backing them up when attacked by other destroyers , although they quickly became less useful as destroyer speeds increased before the First World War . Amphion had a length between perpendiculars of 405 feet ( 123 @.@ 4 m ) , a beam of 41 feet ( 12 @.@ 5 m ) and a draught of 14 feet 6 inches ( 4 @.@ 4 m ) . She displaced 3 @,@ 340 long tons ( 3 @,@ 394 t ) at normal load and 3 @,@ 945 long tons ( 4 @,@ 008 t ) at deep load . Her crew consisted of 289 officers and other ranks . 
 The main armament of the Active class consisted of ten breech @-@ loading ( BL ) 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) Mk VII guns . The forward pair of guns were mounted side by side on a platform on the forecastle , six were amidships , three on each broadside , and the two remaining guns were on the centreline of the quarterdeck , one ahead of the other . The guns fired their 31 @-@ pound ( 14 kg ) shells to a range of about 11 @,@ 400 yards ( 10 @,@ 400 m ) . Her secondary armament was four quick @-@ firing ( QF ) three @-@ pounder ( 1 @.@ 9 in ( 47 mm ) ) Vickers Mk I guns and two submerged 18 @-@ inch ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes . 
 As scout cruisers , the ships were only lightly protected to maximise their speed . They had a curved protective deck that was one inch ( 25 mm ) thick on the slope and 0 @.@ 5 inches ( 13 mm ) on the flat . Their conning tower was protected by four inches of armour . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Ordered as part of the 1910 Naval Programme , Amphion was laid down at Pembroke Dockyard 's No. 5 Slipway on 15 March 1911 and launched on 4 December by Mrs. Mundy , wife of the dockyard 's Captain @-@ Superintendent , Captain Geoffrey Mundy . She was completed in March 1913 and her first commander was Captain Frederic Dreyer with Lieutenant John Tovey as his First Lieutenant . Amphion was commissioned on 2 April and assigned to the 4th Battle Squadron of the First Fleet . A month later , the ship was assigned to the 1st Light Cruiser Squadron by 18 May . She remained with the squadron for nearly a year and was serving as the flotilla leader of the 3rd Destroyer Flotilla by 18 June 1914 . 
 By the start of the First World War in August , Amphion and her flotilla was assigned to the Harwich Force , defending the eastern approaches to the English Channel , under the command of Captain Cecil H. Fox . In the morning of 5 August , Amphion and the 3rd Flotilla sortied into the North Sea to patrol the area between Harwich and the Dutch island of Terschelling for German activity . At 10 : 15 a ship in the black , buff , and yellow colours of the Great Eastern Railway 's steamers that plied between Harwich and the Hook of Holland was spotted . Fox sent the destroyers Lance and Landrail to investigate and shortly afterwards another destroyer reported that a trawler had seen a suspicious ship , ' throwing things overboard , presumably mines ' . Amphion led the flotilla to investigate and observed that the fleeing ship was deploying mines even then . At 10 : 45 , Lance opened fire at a range of 4 @,@ 400 yards ( 4 @,@ 000 m ) . 
 The target was SMS Königin Luise , a former Hamburg @-@ Heligoland excursion boat that had been converted to an auxiliary minelayer by the Germans . They had planned to mount a pair of 8 @.@ 8 @-@ centimetre ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) guns on board , but they did not have the time to do so ; her only armament was a pair of lighter guns and 180 mines . On the night of 4 August , she had departed Emden and headed into the North Sea to lay mines off the Thames Estuary , which she began at to do at dawn . 
 The fire from the destroyers was ineffective until Amphion closed to a range of 7 @,@ 000 yards ( 6 @,@ 400 m ) and began hitting the German ship at about 11 : 15 . By noon , Königin Luise was sinking and the three British ships rescued 5 officers and 70 ratings . The flotilla proceeded onwards with their patrol until they reached the Dutch coast around 21 : 00 and turned for home . Fox was uncertain as to the locations of the mines laid by Königin Luise and laid a course that was seven nautical miles ( 13 km ; 8 @.@ 1 mi ) west of where he thought the mines were . He guessed wrongly and led his flotilla over the danger area . 
 At 06 : 35 , Amphion struck a mine that detonated underneath her bridge . The explosion set her forecastle on fire and broke the ship 's keel . The destroyer Linnet attempted to tow the cruiser , but a deep crack across her upper deck showed that she was hogging badly and Fox ordered his crew to abandon ship . Shortly afterwards , her forward magazine exploded , throwing one 4 @-@ inch gun into the air that narrowly missed Linnet . One of Amphion 's shells burst on the deck of the destroyer Lark , killing two of her men and the only German prisoner rescued from the cruiser . Amphion then rapidly sank within 15 minutes of the explosion losing 1 officer and 131 ratings killed in the sinking , plus an unknown number of the crew rescued from Königin Luise . The wreck is a protected site under the Protection of Military Remains Act 1986 . 
 = Gerlachovský štít = 
 Gerlachovský štít ( Slovak pronunciation , translated into English as Gerlach Peak ) is the highest peak in the High Tatras , in Slovakia , and in the whole 1 @,@ 500 km ( 930 mi ) long Carpathian mountain chain , as well as in northern and central Europe ( Visegrád Group ) . 
 Usually listed at 2 @,@ 655 metres AMSL ( 8 @,@ 711 ft ) , its exact elevation is actually 0 @.@ 6 metres ( 2 @.@ 0 feet ) lower . The pyramidal shape of the massif is marked by a huge cirque . Despite its relatively low elevation , the about 2 @,@ 000 m vertical rise from the valley floor makes Gerlachovský štít soar . Mistaken for an average mountain in the rugged High Tatras range in the more distant past , it has since played a symbolic role in the eyes of the rulers and populations of several Central European nations , to the point that between the 19th and mid @-@ 20th century , it had four different names with six name reversals . It managed to be the highest mountain of the Kingdom of Hungary , and of the countries of Czechoslovakia and Slovakia within the span of only about two decades of the 20th century . 
 Gerlachovský štít shares its geology and ecology with the rest of the High Tatras , but provides a worthwhile environment for biologists as the highest ground anywhere in Europe north of the parallel linking approximately Munich , Salzburg , and Vienna . With the travel restrictions imposed by the Eastern Bloc , the mountain was particularly treasured as the loftiest point available to climb to by Czechs , East Germans , Hungarians , Poles , and Slovaks . It continues to attract its share of visitors although the local authorities have been continually adding new restrictions on access . 
 = = Names = = 
 = = = Present = = = 
 Gerlachovský štít means the " Peak ( of the village ) of Gerlachov " . The Slovak colloquial name is Gerlach . The Polish names are Gerlach or <unk> , while its Polish colloquial names are <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = = Past = = = 
 The peak 's earliest recorded name was the Szepes @-@ German <unk> ( Cauldron Mountain ) on a map from 1762 . The Slovak name of the mountain was first recorded as <unk> , also meaning " Cauldron " , in 1821 . Both names referred to the peak 's characteristic cauldron @-@ like cirque . 
 The name that became common in travel books and other literature in the 19th century , however , is its current name , linking the mountain to the village of Gerlachov at its foot . It echoed the oldest known undifferentiated reference to the peaks on or near Gerlachov 's municipal lands , <unk> montes ( Latin with Hungarian elements for the " Gerlachov Village Mountains " ) , in a drawing of the High Tatras from 1717 . It also paralleled the name <unk> <unk> ( Gerlachov Peak ) used by the first person to identify it as the highest peak in the Tatras in 1838 ( see below ) , which was rendered as <unk> <unk> ( Gerlach crest ) in a Slovak version of his report in 1851 . Several other mountains in the High Tatras have acquired their names from villages in the foothills . 
 Once it was determined that the mountain was the highest point in the region , the succession of the authorities that held control over it took an interest in its name and changed it periodically for symbolic reasons . In 1896 , as part of Austria @-@ Hungary , the highest peak of the Carpathians received its first government @-@ sponsored name − after the contemporary head of state Emperor Francis Joseph I. Guidebooks sometimes did not catch up on these name changes . After the dissolution of the monarchy in 1918 , the mountain continued to be known simply as Gerlachovský štít because it belonged to the village of Gerlachov . The Polish government , claiming the territory of the High Tatras for Poland , simultaneously called the mountain <unk> Polski ( Polish Peak ) , but never gained control over it . The new Czechoslovak government changed the name to <unk> <unk> ( Legionnaires Peak ) in honor of the Czechoslovak Legions in 1923 , but the name was dropped in favor of the earlier Gerlachovský štít in 1932 . As a result of the Communist coup d 'état in 1948 , the mountain was renamed once more − to <unk> štít ( Stalin Peak ) in 1949 . Its traditional name Gerlachovský štít was restored yet again a decade later and has remained unchanged through the present . 
 = = History = = 
 Gerlachovský štít was not always considered the highest mountain in the Tatras . After the first official measurement of peaks in the Tatras during the period of the Habsburg Monarchy in the 18th century , <unk> ( 2 @,@ 494 m ) was considered the highest . Other candidate peaks for the status of the highest mountain at that time were <unk> štít ( 2 @,@ 633 m ) and <unk> štít ( 2 @,@ 627 m ) . The first person to accurately name Gerlachovský štít as the highest peak was the forester <unk> ( Ludwig ) Greiner in 1838 . Greiner 's measurement was formally confirmed by an Austrian Army survey party in 1868 . However , it was generally accepted only after the Vienna Military Institute for Geography issued a new , authoritative collection of maps of Central Europe in ca . 1875 . 
 The first confirmed ascent was made by Ján ( Johann ) Still from the village of Nová <unk> in 1834 . In 1880 , the routes through the Velická próba ( Velická Challenge ) and Batizovská próba ( Batizovská Challenge ) were secured by chains . 
 = = Access = = 
 Only members of a national UIAA club are allowed to climb the peak on their own . Other visitors have to take a certified mountain guide . The two easiest routes , usually up the Velická próba and down the Batizovská próba named after their respective valleys , are protected by chains . Because of an exposed section along the Velická próba and tricky orientation especially on the ridge , both are among the more difficult scrambling routes in the High Tatras , although it 's rather climbing , since there are many moments when one must rely on ones hands to hold ones bodyweight . With no snow , guidebooks grade the routes as a II or III climb ( UIAA scale ) or lower . The total elevation gain is about 1 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) for those who spend the night at the Sliezsky Dom Hotel or are driven there by a mountain guide , and about 1 @,@ 665 m ( 5 @,@ 463 ft ) for those who hike from <unk> <unk> . In winter , Gerlachovský štít offers a challenging alpine climb , with mixed climbing and a risk of avalanches . 
 The unmarked trailhead is on the green @-@ marked trail leading up Velická Valley near the southern edge of the first plateau ( <unk> ) above the Sliezsky Dom . The equally unmarked , indistinct route to Gerlach veers off north @-@ west towards the mountain 's eastern slopes at the elevation of ca . 1 @,@ 815 m ( 5 @,@ 955 ft ) , but occasional cairns begin to appear farther on . The fastest and easiest descent is down the Batizovská próba . Mountain guides always follow the route in the east @-@ west direction , ascending from Velická Valley and descending into Batizovská Valley , in order to reduce <unk> . 
 Two most popular multi @-@ pitch routes for technical climbing are on the eastern and south @-@ western walls . Both are exceptionally long and situated on solid granite walls . The best season for climbing is mid September to mid October or until the snow falls . Another good season lasts from late June to early August . 
 The route to Gerlachovský štít falls under the Tatra National Park ordinance , according to which hikers who depart from marked trails may be subject to fines unless they are UIAA members , or are led by an <unk> @-@ certified mountain guide . Camping is subject to similar restrictions . Rangers and some mountain guides are authorized to collect fines on the spot . Cairns that hikers build to mark the trailhead are periodically taken apart . 
 = = Conditions at the summit = = 
 = = = Human response = = = 
 Although authors estimate that at least some of the manifestations of altitude sickness may appear at elevations as low as 1 @,@ 500 – 2 @,@ 400 m ( 4 @,@ 900 – 7 @,@ 900 ft ) and it affects the fit and unfit in equal measure , its incidence is reported as lower than 1 % even at elevations of 4 @,@ 600 m ( 15 @,@ 100 ft ) and has not been reported in the Tatras . Low air pressure begins to have marginal but detectable effects at the summit ( 2 @,@ 654 @.@ 4 m ; 8 @,@ 709 ft ) . Water boils at about 91 @.@ 5 ° C ( 196 @.@ 7 ° F ) and arterial oxygen saturation is about 8 % lower than at most visitors ' places of residence , but it is difficult to distinguish slight oxygen deprivation at the summit from fatigue caused by the exertion required to reach it . Authors speak of possible minimal sensory impairment above 1 @,@ 500 m ( 4 @,@ 900 ft ) . Unlike fitness , age in itself is not a determinant factor in reaching the highest point in the Tatras . The famed Tatra guide Ján <unk> took clients to the summit of Gerlach until the age of 76 . 
 = = = View = = = 
 Like a 19th @-@ century comment in a British guidebook , " impressive and picturesque " , modern hikers usually appreciate the panoramic view of the highest and many other peaks in the High Tatras , from <unk> in the west to <unk> in the north and <unk> štít in the east . Farther on , but often visible , are the eastern Low Tatras in the south and part of the <unk> Tatras in the east . Better than usual visibility , a rare occurrence except in the fall and winter , is needed to see the <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , the Slovak Paradise region , and <unk> . Quite exceptionally , visibility may extend to the Austrian Alps and the Polish – Czech Giant Mountains hundreds of miles away . 
 Hikers ' reported enjoyment of the view is at least partly attributable to their awareness that they are at the highest point in all of northern and central Europe ( Visegrád countries ) . Visibility is merely 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) or less on most summer afternoons because of the amount of water vapor in the air or because of cloudiness ( fog ) . Days with afternoon visibility of 50 km ( 31 mi ) or more are common only later in the fall and in winter . The view is partly blocked by the long ridge of <unk> in the west , areas near the mountain towards the south and north are obscured by the Gerlach massif itself . Several other summits in the High Tatras , including some with marked trails , offer more spectacular views with precipitous drops , varied scenery , and encompassing vistas . 
 = = = Weather = = = 
 The effects of high @-@ altitude weather on those who ascend Gerlachovský štít may be more pronounced than its altitude alone . The temperature gradient between the Tatra mountain resorts ( 900 – 1 @,@ 350 m or 2 @,@ 950 – 4 @,@ 430 ft ) and the summit can be steep . Low air temperature higher up can be masked by high insolation under clear skies , but will take its effect with increased cloud cover . Combined with windy conditions , the impact may be considerably detrimental even without rain or snow . The summit disappears in the clouds for periods of time on most days , which translates to fog at that elevation and possible disorientation as well as anxiety . 
 While temperatures are somewhat lower on Gerlachovský štít because of its elevation , the weather and its potential impact on visitors is little different from other summits in the High Tatras both with and without marked trails . The typical daily weather pattern in the summer is a clear morning , clouds gathering by mid @-@ morning — noon , occasional showers and storms in the afternoon . The chance of rain is lowest between 9 – 10 am and peaks between 2 – 3 pm , with a drop @-@ off after 6 pm . The frequency of storms with lightning ( as opposed to rainstorms ) on Gerlach 's summit and on the other highest ridges is little different from lower elevations , too , but people exposed to wind , ( sometimes freezing ) rain , and lightning have greater difficulty to cope . The nearest shelter for those who ascend Gerlach is the Sliezsky Dom Hotel , there are no natural shelters along the route . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 = Wetheral Priory Gatehouse = 
 Wetheral Priory Gatehouse is a 15th @-@ century stone fortification in Wetheral , Cumbria . The priory was founded at the start of the 12th century and the gatehouse controlled the entrance to its outer courtyard . When the priory was dissolved in 1538 the gatehouse and a nearby stretch of wall were the only parts to survive . The gatehouse passed into the control of Carlisle Cathedral and became the local vicarage during the 16th and 17th centuries , before being used to store hay . Now part of a modern farm that occupies the former priory site , it is controlled by English Heritage and open to visitors . The crenellated gatehouse has three storeys , with the main entrance and porters ' lodge on the ground floor and two domestic chambers on the upper floors . English Heritage considers the building to be " the finest medieval gatehouse in Cumbria " . 
 = = History = = 
 Wetheral Priory Gatehouse was probably built in the 15th century and formed the entrance to the priory 's outer courtyard . Wetheral Priory was a small Benedictine institution , founded by Ranulf le Meschin following the Norman invasion of Cumbria at the beginning of the 12th century . The <unk> of the priory was St Mary 's Abbey in York . The priory was known for a special right of sanctuary for criminals that had been granted to it by Henry I , allowing the priory to shelter felons who could reach the church and ring the bell there . 
 The gatehouse originally formed part of a range of buildings running along the side of the outer courtyard , and would have controlled access to the institution , as well as symbolising its power and status . The Anglo @-@ Scottish border was also still dangerous in the 15th century , and many monasteries in the area , like Wetheral , had protective fortifications . 
 By the 16th century , the priory was in decline , but its closure came as a result of the dissolution of the monasteries in England and Wales under Henry VIII . To help speed the process of closing the institution , Ralf Hartley was appointed as the prior of Wetheral by Henry 's minister , Thomas Cromwell ; royal commissioners visited in 1536 , and the priory was finally surrendered to the Crown in 1538 . The priory 's belongings were sold off or taken by Henry , depending on their value , but the lands were given to Carlisle Cathedral . Although the rest of the priory soon fell into disrepair , the gatehouse became the local vicarage ; it was still intact and in use by the minister in 1687 . 
 The gatehouse was later used as a hayloft . In 1978 it passed into the guardianship of the state , and is now in the care of English Heritage and open to the public . Still well preserved , it is protected under UK law as a Grade I listed building . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 English Heritage considers the building to be " the finest medieval gatehouse in Cumbria " . It closely resembles the larger fortifications at Thornton and Tynemouth abbeys , forming a three @-@ storey building built of coursed red sandstone , and now stands on the edge of the modern Wetheral Priory Farm , which occupies the site of the original priory . The gatehouse is 12 @.@ 5 by 8 @.@ 9 metres ( 41 by 29 ft ) across , with the floors linked by a spiral staircase in the north @-@ east corner , and an adjacent barrel vaulted cellar . The marks of the range of buildings that once ran alongside the gatehouse can be seen on the external walls , and the gatehouse is topped by battlements . 
 The ground floor includes a barrel vaulted entrance passageway and a porters ' lodge , the latter 5 @.@ 3 by 3 metres ( 17 @.@ 4 by 9 @.@ 8 ft ) in size . The first and second floors both formed single rooms , approximately 7 @.@ 6 by 5 @.@ 2 metres ( 25 by 17 ft ) across internally , and would have been used as domestic chambers for the officials of the priory . They had fireplaces , garderobes and small bed chambers in the walls . The roof is predominantly built of timbers dating from between 1512 to 1536 ; the current structure was probably built around 1540 , possibly when the building was converted for use as a vicarage . 
 North @-@ east of the gatehouse is a 23 metres ( 75 ft ) medieval , red sandstone wall , 2 @.@ 4 metres ( 7 ft 10 in ) high , probably originally the east wall of the priory 's chapter house . This medieval wall had four windows running along it , with a staircase at one end . 
 = Air well ( condenser ) = 
 An air well or aerial well is a structure or device that collects water by promoting the condensation of moisture from air . Designs for air wells are many and varied , but the simplest designs are completely passive , require no external energy source and have few , if any , moving parts . 
 Three principal designs are used for air wells , designated as high mass , radiative , and active : 
 High @-@ mass air wells : used in the early 20th century , but the approach failed . 
 Low @-@ mass , radiative collectors : Developed in the late 20th century onwards , proved to be much more successful . 
 Active collectors : these collect water in the same way as a <unk> ; although the designs work well , they require an energy source , making them uneconomical except in special circumstances . New , innovative designs seek to minimise the energy requirements of active condensers or make use of renewable energy resources . 
 = = Background = = 
 All air well designs incorporate a substrate with a temperature sufficiently low so that dew forms . Dew is a form of precipitation that occurs naturally when atmospheric water vapour condenses onto a substrate . It is distinct from fog , in that fog is made of droplets of water that condense around particles in the air . Condensation releases latent heat which must be dissipated in order for water collection to continue . 
 An air well requires moisture from the air . Everywhere on Earth , even in deserts , the surrounding atmosphere contains at least some water . According to <unk> and <unk> : " The atmosphere contains 12 @,@ 900 cubic kilometres ( 3 @,@ 100 cu mi ) of fresh water , composed of 98 percent water vapour and 2 percent condensed water ( clouds ) : a figure comparable to the renewable liquid water resources of inhabited lands ( 12 @,@ 500 km3 ) . " The quantity of water vapour contained within the air is commonly reported as a relative humidity , and this depends on temperature — warmer air can contain more water vapour than cooler air . When air is cooled to the dew point , it becomes saturated , and moisture will condense on a suitable surface . For instance , the dew temperature of air at 20 ° C ( 68 ° F ) and 80 percent relative humidity is 16 ° C ( 61 ° F ) . The dew temperature falls to 9 ° C ( 48 ° F ) if the relative humidity is 50 percent . 
 A related , but quite distinct , technique of obtaining atmospheric moisture is the fog fence . 
 An air well should not be confused with a dew pond . A dew pond is an artificial pond intended for watering livestock . The name dew pond ( sometimes cloud pond or mist pond ) derives from the widely held belief that the pond was filled by moisture from the air . In fact , dew ponds are primarily filled by rainwater . 
 A stone mulch can significantly increase crop yields in arid areas . This is most notably the case in the Canary Islands : on the island of Lanzarote there is about 140 millimetres ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) of rain each year and there are no permanent rivers . Despite this , substantial crops can be grown by using a mulch of volcanic stones , a trick discovered after volcanic eruptions in 1730 . Some credit the stone mulch with promoting dew ; although the idea has inspired some thinkers , it seems unlikely that the effect is significant . Rather , plants are able to absorb dew directly from their leaves , and the main benefit of a stone mulch is to reduce water loss from the soil and to eliminate competition from weeds . 
 = = History = = 
 Beginning in the early 20th century , a number of inventors experimented with high @-@ mass collectors . Notable investigators were the Russian engineer Friedrich Zibold ( sometimes given as Friedrich Siebold ) , the French <unk> Leon Chaptal , the German @-@ Australian researcher Wolf Klaphake and the Belgian inventor Achille Knapen . 
 = = = Zibold 's collector = = = 
 In 1900 , near the site of the ancient Byzantine city of Theodosia , thirteen large piles of stones were discovered by Zibold who was a forester and engineer in charge of this area . Each stone pile covered just over 900 square metres ( 9 @,@ 700 sq ft ) and was about 10 metres ( 33 ft ) tall . The finds were associated with the remains of 75 @-@ millimetre diameter ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) terracotta pipes that apparently led to wells and fountains in the city . Zibold concluded that the stacks of stone were condensers that supplied Theodosia with water ; and calculated that each air well produced more than 55 @,@ 400 litres ( 12 @,@ 200 imp gal ; 14 @,@ 600 US gal ) each day . 
 To verify his hypothesis Zibold constructed a stone @-@ pile condenser at an altitude of 288 metres ( 945 ft ) on mount Tepe @-@ Oba near the ancient site of Theodosia . Zibold ’ s condenser was surrounded by a wall 1 metre ( 3 ft 3 in ) high , 20 metres ( 66 ft ) wide , around a bowl @-@ shaped collection area with drainage . He used sea stones 10 – 40 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 – 15 @.@ 7 in ) in diameter piled 6 metres ( 20 ft ) high in a truncated cone that was 8 metres ( 26 ft ) in diameter across the top . The shape of the stone pile allowed a good air flow with only minimal thermal contact between the stones . 
 Zibold 's condenser began to operate in 1912 with a maximum daily production that was later estimated to have been 360 litres ( 79 imp gal ; 95 US gal ) – Zibold made no public record of his results at the time . The base developed leaks that forced the experiment to end in 1915 and the site was partially dismantled before being abandoned . ( The site was rediscovered in 1993 and cleaned up . ) Zibold 's condenser was approximately the same size as the ancient stone piles that had been found , and although the yield was very much less than the yield Zibold had calculated for the original structures , the experiment was an inspiration for later developers . 
 = = = Chaptal 's collector = = = 
 Inspired by Zibold 's work , Chaptal built a small air well near Montpellier in 1929 . Chaptal 's condenser was a pyramidal concrete structure 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) square and 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 ft 2 in ) high , it was filled with 8 cubic metres ( 280 cu ft ) of limestone pieces being about 7 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) in diameter . Small vent holes ringed the top and bottom of the pyramid . These holes could be closed or opened as required to control the flow of air . The structure was allowed to cool during the night , and then warm moist air was let in during the day . Dew formed on the limestone pieces and collected in a reservoir below ground level . The amount of water obtained varied from 1 litre ( 0 @.@ 22 imp gal ; 0 @.@ 26 US gal ) to 2 @.@ 5 litres ( 0 @.@ 55 imp gal ; 0 @.@ 66 US gal ) per day depending on the atmospheric conditions . 
 Chaptal did not consider his experiment a success . When he retired in 1946 , he put the condenser out of order , possibly because he did not want to leave an improper installation to mislead those who might later continue studies on air wells . 
 = = = Klaphake 's collectors = = = 
 Wolf Klaphake was a successful chemist working in Berlin during the 1920s and 1930s . During that time , he tested several forms of air wells in Yugoslavia and on Vis Island in the Adriatic Sea . Klaphake 's work was inspired by Zibold and by the works of Maimonides , a known Jewish scholar who wrote in Arabic about 1 @,@ 000 years ago and who mentioned the use of water condensers in Palestine . 
 Klaphake experimented with a very simple design : an area of mountain slope was cleared and smoothed with a watertight surface . It was shaded by a simple canopy supported by pillars or ridges . The sides of the structure were closed , but the top and bottom edges were left open . At night the mountain slope would cool , and in the day moisture would collect on and run down the smoothed surface . Although the system apparently worked , it was expensive , and Klaphake finally adopted a more compact design based on a masonry structure . This design was a sugarloaf @-@ shaped building , about 15 metres ( 49 ft ) high , with walls at least 2 metres ( 6 ft 7 in ) thick , with holes on the top and at the bottom . The outer wall was made of concrete to give a high thermal capacity , and the inner surface was made of a porous material such as sandstone . According to Klaphake : 
 Traces of Klaphake 's condensers have been tentatively identified . 
 In 1935 , Wolf Klaphake and his wife Maria emigrated to Australia . The <unk> ' decision to emigrate was probably primarily the result of Maria 's encounters with Nazi authorities ; their decision to settle in Australia ( rather than , say , in Britain ) was influenced by Wolf 's desire to develop a dew condenser . As a dry continent , Australia was likely to need alternative sources of fresh water , and the Premier of South Australia , whom he had met in London , had expressed an interest . Klaphake made a specific proposal for a condenser at the small town of Cook , where there was no supply of potable water . At Cook , the railway company had previously installed a large coal @-@ powered active condenser , but it was prohibitively expensive to run , and it was cheaper to simply transport water . However , the Australian government turned down Klaphake 's proposal , and he lost interest in the project . 
 = = = Knapen 's aerial well = = = 
 Knapen , who had previously worked on systems for removing moisture from buildings , was in turn inspired by Chaptal 's work and he set about building an ambitiously large <unk> <unk> ( aerial well ) on a 180 metres ( 590 ft ) high hill at Trans @-@ en @-@ Provence in France . Beginning in 1930 , Knapen 's dew tower took 18 months to build ; it still stands today , albeit in dilapidated condition . At the time of its construction , the condenser excited some public interest . 
 The tower is 14 metres ( 46 ft ) high and has massive masonry walls about 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) thick with a number of apertures to let in air . Inside there is a massive column made of concrete . At night , the whole structure is allowed to cool , and during the day warm moist air enters the structure via the high apertures , cools , descends , and leaves the building by the lower apertures . Knapen ’ s intention was that water should condense on the cool inner column . In keeping with Chaptal ’ s finding that the condensing surface must be rough and the surface tension must be sufficiently low that the condensed water can drip , the central column 's outer surface was studded with projecting plates of slate . The slates were placed nearly vertically to encourage dripping down to a collecting basin at the bottom of the structure . Unfortunately , the aerial well never achieved anything like its hoped @-@ for performance and produced no more than a few litres of water each day . 
 = = = International Organisation for Dew Utilization = = = 
 By the end of the twentieth century , the mechanics of how dew condenses were much better understood . The key insight was that low @-@ mass collectors which rapidly lose heat by radiation perform best . A number of researchers worked on this method . In the early 1960s , dew condensers made from sheets of polyethylene supported on a simple frame resembling a ridge tent were used in Israel to irrigate plants . Saplings supplied with dew and very slight rainfall from these collectors survived much better than the control group planted without such aids – they all dried up over the summer . In 1986 in New Mexico condensers made of a special foil produced sufficient water to supply young saplings . 
 In 1992 a party of French academics attended a condensed matter conference in Ukraine where physicist Daniel <unk> introduced them to the story of how ancient Theodosia was supplied with water from dew condensers . They were sufficiently intrigued that in 1993 they went to see for themselves . They concluded that the mounds that Zibold identified as dew condensers were in fact ancient burial mounds ( a part of the necropolis of antic Theodosia ) and that the pipes were medieval in origin and not associated with the mounds . They found the remains of Zibold 's condenser , which they tidied up and examined closely . Zibold 's condenser had apparently performed reasonably well , but in fact his exact results are not at all clear , and it is possible that the collector was intercepting fog , which added significantly to the yield . If Zibold 's condenser worked at all , this was probably due to fact that a few stones near the surface of the mound were able to lose heat at night while being thermally isolated from the ground ; however , it could never have produced the yield that Zibold envisaged . 
 Fired with enthusiasm , the party returned to France and set up the International Organisation for Dew Utilization ( OPUR ) , with the specific objective of making dew available as an alternative source of water . 
 OPUR began a study of dew condensation under laboratory conditions ; they developed a special hydrophobic film and experimented with trial installations , including a 30 square metres ( 320 sq ft ) collector in Corsica . Vital insights included the idea that the mass of the condensing surface should be as low as possible so that it cannot easily retain heat , that it should be protected from unwanted thermal radiation by a layer of insulation , and that it should be hydrophobic , so as to shed condensed moisture readily . 
 By the time they were ready for their first practical installation , they heard that one of their members , <unk> Sharan , had obtained a grant to construct a dew condenser in <unk> , India . In April 2001 , Sharan had incidentally noticed substantial condensation on the roof of a cottage at Toran Beach Resort in the arid coastal region of Kutch , where he was briefly staying . The following year , he investigated the phenomenon more closely and interviewed local people . Financed by the Gujarat Energy Development Agency and the World Bank , Sharan and his team went on to develop passive , radiative condensers for use in the arid coastal region of Kutch . Active commercialisation began in 2006 . 
 Sharan tested a wide range of materials and got good results from galvanised iron and aluminium sheets , but found that sheets of the special plastic developed by the OPUR just 400 micrometres ( 0 @.@ 016 in ) thick generally worked even better than the metal sheets and were less expensive . The plastic film , known as OPUR foil , is hydrophilic and is made from polyethylene mixed with titanium dioxide and barium sulphate . 
 = = Types = = 
 There are three principal approaches to the design of the heat sinks that collect the moisture in air wells : high mass , radiative and active . Early in the twentieth century , there was interest in high @-@ mass air wells , but despite much experimentation including the construction of massive structures , this approach proved to be a failure . 
 From the late twentieth century onwards , there has been much investigation of low @-@ mass , radiative collectors ; these have proved to be much more successful . 
 = = = High @-@ mass = = = 
 The high @-@ mass air well design attempts to cool a large mass of masonry with cool nighttime air entering the structure due to breezes or natural convection . In the day , the warmth of the sun results in increased atmospheric humidity . When moist daytime air enters the air well , it condenses on the presumably cool masonry . None of the high @-@ mass collectors performed well , Knapen 's aerial well being a particularly conspicuous example . 
 The problem with the high @-@ mass collectors was that they could not get rid of sufficient heat during the night – despite design features intended to ensure that this would happen . While some thinkers have believed that Zibold might have been correct after all , an article in Journal of Arid Environments discusses why high @-@ mass condenser designs of this type cannot yield useful amounts of water : 
 Although ancient air wells are mentioned in some sources , there is scant evidence for them , and persistent belief in their existence has the character of a modern myth . 
 = = = Radiative = = = 
 A radiative air well is designed to cool a substrate by radiating heat to the night sky . The substrate has a low mass so that it cannot hold onto heat , and it is thermally isolated from any mass , including the ground . A typical radiative collector presents a condensing surface at an angle of 30 ° from the horizontal . The condensing surface is backed by a thick layer of insulating material such as polystyrene foam and supported 2 – 3 metres ( 7 – 10 ft ) above ground level . Such condensers may be conveniently installed on the ridge roofs of low buildings or supported by a simple frame . Although other heights do not typically work quite so well , it may be less expensive or more convenient to mount a collector near to ground level or on a two @-@ storey building . 
 The 600 square metres ( 6 @,@ 500 sq ft ) radiative condenser illustrated near the start of this article is built near the ground . In the area of north @-@ west India where it is installed dew occurs for 8 months a year , and the installation collects about 15 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) of dew water over the season with nearly 100 dew @-@ nights . In a year it provides a total of about 9 @,@ 000 litres ( 2 @,@ 000 imp gal ; 2 @,@ 400 US gal ) of potable water for the school which owns and operates the site . 
 Although flat designs have the benefit of simplicity , other designs such as inverted pyramids and cones can be significantly more effective . This is probably because the designs shield the condensing surfaces from unwanted heat radiated by the lower atmosphere , and , being symmetrical , they are not sensitive to wind direction . 
 New materials may make even better collectors . One such material is inspired by the Namib Desert beetle , which survives only on the moisture it extracts from the atmosphere . It has been found that its back is coated with microscopic projections : the peaks are hydrophilic and the troughs are hydrophobic . Researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology have emulated this capability by creating a textured surface that combines alternating hydrophobic and hydrophilic materials . 
 = = = Active = = = 
 Active atmospheric water collectors have been in use since the commercialisation of mechanical refrigeration . Essentially , all that is required is to cool a heat exchanger below the dew point , and water will be produced . Such water production may take place as a by @-@ product , possibly unwanted , of dehumidification . The air conditioning system of the Burj Khalifa in Dubai , for example , produces an estimated 15 million US gallons ( 57 @,@ 000 m3 ) of water each year that is used for irrigating the tower 's landscape plantings . 
 Because mechanical refrigeration is energy intensive , active collectors are typically restricted to places where there is no supply of water that can be desalinated or purified at a lower cost and that are sufficiently far from a supply of fresh water to make transport uneconomical . Such circumstances are uncommon , and even then large installations such as that tried in the 1930s at Cook in South Australia failed because of the cost of running the installation – it was cheaper to transport water over large distances . 
 In the case of small installations , convenience may outweigh cost . There is a wide range of small machines designed to be used in offices that produce a few litres of drinking water from the atmosphere . However , there are circumstances where there really is no source of water other than the atmosphere . For example , in the 1930s , American designers added condenser systems to airships – in this case the air was that emitted by the exhaust of the engines , and so it contained additional water as a product of combustion . The moisture was collected and used as additional ballast to compensate for the loss of weight as fuel was consumed . By collecting ballast in this way , the airship 's buoyancy could be kept relatively constant without having to release helium gas , which was both expensive and in limited supply . 
 More recently , on the International Space Station , the Zvezda module includes a humidity control system . The water it collects is usually used to supply the Elektron system that <unk> water into hydrogen and oxygen , but it can be used for drinking in an emergency . 
 There are a number of designs that minimise the energy requirements of active condensers : 
 One method is to use the ground as a heat sink by drawing air through underground pipes . This is often done to provide a source of cool air for a building by means of a ground @-@ coupled heat exchanger ( also known as Earth tubes ) , wherein condensation is typically regarded as a significant problem . A major problem with such designs is that the underground tubes are subject to contamination and difficult to keep clean . Designs of this type require air to be drawn through the pipes by a fan , but the power required may be provided ( or supplemented ) by a wind turbine . 
 Cold seawater is used in the Seawater Greenhouse to both cool and <unk> the interior of greenhouse @-@ like structure . The cooling can be so effective that not only do the plants inside benefit from reduced transpiration , but dew collects on the outside of the structure and can easily be collected by gutters . 
 Another type of atmospheric water collector makes use of desiccants which adsorb atmospheric water at ambient temperature , this makes it possible to extract moisture even when the relative humidity is as low as 14 percent . Systems of this sort have proved to be very useful as emergency supplies of safe drinking water . For regeneration , the desiccant needs to be heated . In some designs regeneration energy is supplied by the sun ; air is ventilated at night over a bed of desiccants that adsorb the water vapour . During the day , the premises are closed , the greenhouse effect increases the temperature , and , as in solar desalination pools , the water vapour is partially <unk> , condenses on a cold part and is collected . 
 A French company has recently designed a small wind turbine that uses a 30 kW electric generator to power an onboard mechanical refrigeration system to condense water . 
 = DragonFly BSD = 
 DragonFly BSD is a free and open source Unix @-@ like operating system created as a fork of FreeBSD 4 @.@ 8 . Matthew Dillon , an Amiga developer in the late 1980s and early 1990s and a FreeBSD developer between 1994 and 2003 , began work on DragonFly BSD in June 2003 and announced it on the FreeBSD mailing lists on 16 July 2003 . 
 Dillon started DragonFly in the belief that the methods and techniques being adopted for threading and symmetric multiprocessing in FreeBSD 5 would lead to poor system performance and cause maintenance difficulties . He sought to correct these suspected problems within the FreeBSD project . Due to ongoing conflicts with other FreeBSD developers over the implementation of his ideas , his ability to directly change the FreeBSD codebase was eventually revoked . Despite this , the DragonFly BSD and FreeBSD projects still work together contributing bug fixes , driver updates , and other system improvements to each other . 
 Intended to be the logical continuation of the FreeBSD <unk> series , DragonFly 's development has diverged significantly from FreeBSD 's , including a new Light Weight Kernel Threads ( LWKT ) implementation , a lightweight ports / messaging system , and feature @-@ rich HAMMER file system . Many concepts planned for DragonFly were inspired by the AmigaOS operating system . 
 = = System design = = 
 = = = Kernel = = = 
 DragonFly 's kernel is a hybrid , containing features of both monolithic and microkernels , such as the message passing capability of microkernels enabling larger portions of the OS to benefit from protected memory , as well as retaining the speed of monolithic kernels for certain critical tasks . The messaging subsystem being developed is similar to those found in microkernels such as Mach , though it is less complex by design . DragonFly 's messaging subsystem has the ability to act in either a synchronous or asynchronous fashion , and attempts to use this capability to achieve the best performance possible in any given situation . 
 According to developer Matthew Dillon , progress is being made to provide both device input / output ( I / O ) and virtual file system ( <unk> ) messaging capabilities that will enable the remainder of the project goals to be met . The new infrastructure will allow many parts of the kernel to be migrated out into userspace ; here they will be more easily debugged as they will be smaller , isolated programs , instead of being small parts entwined in a larger chunk of code . Additionally , the migration of select kernel code into userspace has the benefit of making the system more robust ; if a userspace driver crashes , it will not crash the kernel . 
 System calls are being split into userland and kernel versions and being encapsulated into messages . This will help reduce the size and complexity of the kernel by moving variants of standard system calls into a userland compatibility layer , and help maintain forwards and backwards compatibility between DragonFly versions . Linux and other Unix @-@ like OS compatibility code is being migrated out similarly . 
 = = = = Threading = = = = 
 As support for multiple processor architectures complicates symmetric multiprocessing ( SMP ) support , DragonFly BSD now limits its support to the x86 @-@ 64 platform . DragonFly originally ran on the x86 architecture , however as of version 4 @.@ 0 it is no longer supported . Since version 1 @.@ 10 , DragonFly supports 1 : 1 userland threading ( one kernel thread per userland thread ) , which is regarded as a relatively simple solution that is also easy to maintain . Inherited from FreeBSD , DragonFly also supports multi @-@ threading . 
 In DragonFly , each CPU has its own thread scheduler . Upon creation , threads are assigned to processors and are never preemptively switched from one processor to another ; they are only migrated by the passing of an inter @-@ processor interrupt ( IPI ) message between the CPUs involved . Inter @-@ processor thread scheduling is also accomplished by sending asynchronous IPI messages . One advantage to this clean compartmentalization of the threading subsystem is that the processors ' on @-@ board caches in Symmetric <unk> Systems do not contain duplicated data , allowing for higher performance by giving each processor in the system the ability to use its own cache to store different things to work on . 
 The LWKT subsystem is being employed to partition work among multiple kernel threads ( for example in the networking code there is one thread per protocol per processor ) , reducing competition by removing the need to share certain resources among various kernel tasks . 
 = = = = Shared resources protection = = = = 
 In order to run safely on multiprocessor machines , access to shared resources ( like files , data structures ) must be serialized so that threads or processes do not attempt to modify the same resource at the same time . In order to prevent multiple threads from accessing or modifying a shared resource simultaneously , DragonFly employs critical sections , and serializing tokens to prevent concurrent access . While both Linux and FreeBSD 5 employ fine @-@ grained <unk> models to achieve higher performance on multiprocessor systems , DragonFly does not . Until recently , DragonFly also employed <unk> , but these were replaced with critical sections . 
 Much of the system 's core , including the LWKT subsystem , the IPI messaging subsystem and the new kernel memory allocator , are <unk> , meaning that they work without using mutexes , with each process operating on a single CPU . Critical sections are used to protect against local interrupts , individually for each CPU , guaranteeing that a thread currently being executed will not be preempted . 
 <unk> tokens are used to prevent concurrent accesses from other CPUs and may be held simultaneously by multiple threads , ensuring that only one of those threads is running at any given time . Blocked or sleeping threads therefore do not prevent other threads from accessing the shared resource unlike a thread that is holding a <unk> . Among other things , the use of serializing tokens prevents many of the situations that could result in deadlocks and priority inversions when using mutexes , as well as greatly simplifying the design and implementation of a many @-@ step procedure that would require a resource to be shared among multiple threads . The serializing token code is evolving into something quite similar to the " Read @-@ copy @-@ update " feature now available in Linux . Unlike Linux 's current <unk> implementation , DragonFly 's is being implemented such that only processors competing for the same token are affected rather than all processors in the computer . 
 DragonFly switched to multiprocessor safe slab allocator , which requires neither mutexes nor blocking operations for memory assignment tasks . It was eventually ported into standard C library in the userland , where it replaced FreeBSD 's <unk> implementation . 
 = = = = Virtual kernel = = = = 
 Since release 1 @.@ 8 DragonFly has a virtualization mechanism similar to <unk> , allowing a user to run another kernel in the userland . The virtual kernel ( vkernel ) is run in completely isolated environment with emulated network and storage interfaces , thus simplifying testing kernel subsystems and clustering features . 
 The vkernel has two important differences from the real kernel : it lacks many routines for dealing with the low @-@ level hardware management and it uses C standard library ( libc ) functions in place of in @-@ kernel implementations wherever possible . As both real and virtual kernel are compiled from the same code base , this effectively means that platform @-@ dependent routines and re @-@ implementations of libc functions are clearly separated in a source tree . 
 The virtualized platform vkernel runs on is built on top of high @-@ level abstractions provided by the real kernel . These abstractions include the <unk> @-@ based timer , the console ( mapped to the virtual terminal where vkernel is executed ) , the disk image and virtual kernel Ethernet device ( <unk> ) , tunneling all packets to the host 's tap interface . 
 = = = Package management = = = 
 Third @-@ party software is available on DragonFly as binary packages via <unk> or from a native ports collection – <unk> . 
 DragonFly originally used the FreeBSD Ports collection as its official package management system , but starting with the 1 @.@ 4 release switched to NetBSD 's <unk> system , which was perceived as a way of lessening the amount of work needed for third @-@ party software availability . Eventually , maintaining compatibility with <unk> proved to require more effort than was initially anticipated , so the project created <unk> , an overlay on top of the FreeBSD Ports collection . 
 = = = CARP support = = = 
 The initial implementation of Common Address Redundancy Protocol ( commonly referred to as CARP ) was finished in March 2007 . As of 2011 , CARP support is integrated into DragonFly BSD . 
 = = = HAMMER file system = = = 
 Alongside the Unix File System , which is typically the default file system on BSDs , DragonFly BSD supports HAMMER file system . It was developed specifically for DragonFly BSD to provide a feature @-@ rich yet better designed analogue of the increasingly popular ZFS . HAMMER supports configurable file system history , snapshots , <unk> , data deduplication and other features typical for file systems of its kind . 
 The next generation of HAMMER file system ( <unk> ) is being developed by Dillon . DragonFly BSD 3 @.@ 8 @.@ 0 was the first released to include support for <unk> , though it is declared as not ready for general use in release notes . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In 2007 DragonFly BSD received a new device file system ( <unk> ) , which dynamically adds and removes device nodes , allows accessing devices by connection paths , recognises drives by serial numbers and removes the need for pre @-@ populated / dev file system hierarchy . It was implemented as a Google Summer of Code 2009 project . 
 = = = Application snapshots = = = 
 DragonFly BSD supports Amiga @-@ style resident applications feature : it takes a snapshot of a large , dynamically linked program 's virtual memory space after loading , allowing future instances of the program to start much more quickly than it otherwise would have . This replaces the <unk> capability that was being worked on earlier in the project 's history , as the resident support is much more efficient . Large programs like those found in KDE Software Compilation with many shared libraries will benefit the most from this support . 
 = = Development and distribution = = 
 As with FreeBSD and OpenBSD , the developers of DragonFly BSD are slowly replacing K & R style C code with more modern , ANSI equivalents . Similar to other operating systems , DragonFly 's version of the GNU Compiler Collection has an enhancement called the Stack @-@ Smashing Protector ( <unk> ) enabled by default , providing some additional protection against buffer overflow based attacks . It should be noted that as of 23 July 2005 , the kernel is no longer built with this protection by default . 
 Being a derivative of FreeBSD , DragonFly has inherited an easy @-@ to @-@ use integrated build system that can rebuild the entire base system from source with only a few commands . The DragonFly developers use the Git version control system to manage changes to the DragonFly source code . Unlike its parent FreeBSD , DragonFly has both stable and unstable releases in a single source tree , due to a smaller developer base . 
 Like the other BSD kernels ( and those of most modern operating systems ) , DragonFly employs a built @-@ in kernel debugger to help the developers find kernel bugs . Furthermore , as of October 2004 , a debug kernel , which makes bug reports more useful for tracking down kernel @-@ related problems , is installed by default , at the expense of a relatively small quantity of disk space . When a new kernel is installed , the backup copy of the previous kernel and its modules are stripped of their debugging symbols to further minimize disk space usage . 
 = = = Distribution media = = = 
 The operating system is distributed as a Live CD and Live USB ( full X11 flavour available ) that boots into a complete DragonFly system . It includes the base system and a complete set of manual pages , and may include source code and useful packages in future versions . The advantage of this is that with a single CD you can install the software onto a computer , use a full set of tools to repair a damaged installation , or demonstrate the capabilities of the system without installing it . Daily snapshots are available from the master site for those who want to install the most recent versions of DragonFly without building from source . 
 Like the other free open source BSDs , DragonFly is distributed under the terms of the modern version of the BSD license . 
 = = = Release history = = = 
 = Terri Schuester = 
 Terri Schuester ( née Del Monico ) is a fictional character from the Fox musical comedy @-@ drama series Glee . The character is portrayed by actress Jessalyn Gilsig , and has appeared in Glee from its pilot episode , first broadcast on May 19 , 2009 . Terri was developed by Glee creators Ryan Murphy , Brad Falchuk and Ian Brennan . She is introduced as the wife of glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) . Her storylines have seen her experience a false pregnancy , attempt to adopt the baby of pregnant glee club member Quinn Fabray ( Dianna Agron ) , and become involved in a love triangle between herself , Will and school guidance counsellor Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) . 
 Gilsig has characterized Terri as being emotionally still in high school , and lacking the skills to make her marriage work . She has explained that Terri feels threatened by her husband 's commitment to the glee club , worried that it is pulling him away from her , and will stop at nothing to keep her marriage together . She does not know how long Terri will be featured in the series , as she was initially created simply as an obstacle to come between Will and Emma . 
 Terri has been poorly received by critics . The Chicago Tribune 's Maureen Ryan has called her " the worst thing about Glee " , and the show 's " one big flaw " . Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly has described her as a " shrill , lying nag " , whose main function is to bring the audience down . Gerrick Kennedy of the Los Angeles Times , however , has praised Gilsig 's acting in the role , and stated that his hatred of the character dissipated once her fake pregnancy was exposed . He noted that : " Gilsig 's superb acting isn 't exactly doing anything to extinguish those flames " , and while he still isn 't " in full @-@ on Team Terri uniform [ ... ] she did at least have my attention on the sidelines , as opposed to filing my nails until halftime . Baby steps , right ? " 
 = = Storylines = = 
 = = = Season 1 = = = 
 Terri is the wife of glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) . Believing herself to be pregnant , Terri pressures Will to quit his job as a Spanish teacher at William McKinley High School , in order to take a better paying job as an accountant . She later discovers she has actually experienced a hysterical pregnancy , but hides this from Will , afraid he will leave her . After she confides her deception in her sister Kendra ( Jennifer Aspen ) , Terri approaches the recently revealed to be pregnant cheerleader Quinn Fabray ( Dianna Agron ) , with an interest in her baby . Terri briefly becomes the school nurse , albeit unqualified , and uses the position to keep a closer eye on Will , whom she believes may be cheating on her with guidance counsellor Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) . She is fired as the nurse by Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) , however , after it is discovered that she has given the glee club members pseudoephedrine tablets . Terri and Kendra bully her OB @-@ GYN ( Kenneth Choi ) into faking an ultrasound to convince Will the baby is real . In the episode " Mattress , " Will uncovers Terri 's ruse when he discovers her pregnancy pad in a drawer . He angrily confronts her , then walks out , but remains undecided over whether to end their marriage . Terri begins attending therapy , but Will tells her he no longer loves her and is leaving her . Later , in " Hell @-@ O , " Terri returns to warn Emma that she is not going to give Will up without a fight , and also reveals that the song that Will planned on dancing with Emma is also the song Terri and Will had danced to at their prom . Despite this attempted sabotage , Terri and Will still finalize their divorce ; Terri then briefly befriends Glee member and newly hired Finn Hudson ( Cory Monteith ) as her protegee at Sheets @-@ N @-@ Things , because he reminds her of a younger Will . 
 = = = Season 2 = = = 
 At the start of the second season , Terri still wants her ex @-@ husband Will back . She is nearly run over as she confronts Will and Emma when they begin to go for a test drive in his spontaneously acquired Corvette . Terri tells Will to get out of the car and they get into an argument , which causes Emma to leave the scene . The words simmer down and Terri advises Will to return the car to the dealership , because he cannot afford it . Before leaving , she says that Emma will break Will 's heart again and he 'll return to her eventually . In " The Substitute " , Terri returns to take care of a sick Will . They have sex , but the next day when she sees Will 's substitute , Holly Holliday ( Gwyneth Paltrow ) at his apartment having a beer with him , she becomes suspicious and makes several snarky comments to Holly . Even after Terri apologizes , Will tells her it is over . A heartbroken Terri promises Will he will regret it , and she storms out of the door . In the episode " A Night of Neglect " , Sue Sylvester recruits Terri for her " League of Doom " , a new group that Sue hopes will help her bring down Will and the glee club before they can compete in Nationals . In " Funeral " , Terri succeeds in sabotaging the club 's travel plans to New York , but fixes the damage and tells Will that she has been promoted to manager for Sheets @-@ N @-@ Things at a location in Miami . She plans to take the job as a chance to move on with her life and give herself a fresh start in a new location . 
 = = = Season 4 = = = 
 In Season 4 's Christmas episode " Glee , Actually " , Terri made a cameo appearance in Artie Abrams 's ( Kevin McHale ) dream sequence , where she successfully did her false pregnancy and Will , who is an alcoholic , is too drunk to recognize that the baby Terri is carrying is a baby doll . She also tells Artie that Emma and Ken are married and living in Hawaii . 
 = = = Season 6 = = = 
 Terri appears in the first part of the series finale , " 2009 " , which is a parallel episode to the pilot . She is not happy that Will takes over the Glee Club and rudely dismiss Rachel Berry 's ( Lea Michele ) request to convince Will to stay for the newly reformed Glee Club , as Terri wants Will to get a better job for a better living , ignoring his dreams . In the series finale " Dreams Come True " , during the last moments of the series , Terri returns to Lima for the first time since season 2 . She joins in to attend a rededication to the McKinley 's auditorium to the late Finn Hudson and enjoys the final performance by the New Directions of all generation . She reunites with Will and takes a bow with the rest of the Glee Cast . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Casting and creation = = = 
 Terri Schuester is portrayed by actress Jessalyn Gilsig . Prior to her casting in Glee , Gilsig was an established actress in both the television and film industry , but had little theatrical experience . In casting Glee , series creator Ryan Murphy sought actors who could identify with the rush of starring in theatrical roles . For the first two seasons of Glee , Gilsig was billed as a contract player for the show . However , it was reported that Gilsig has been bumped down to a recurring character for the show 's third season , set to air in September 2011 . 
 When asked what originally drew her to the role of Terri in an interview with <unk> , Gilsig said : " Well , first of all , Ryan Murphy . Because I had worked with him on Nip / Tuck . And that was one of the best experiences as an actor I ’ ve ever had in my career . He really challenges you as an actor , and he really pushes you , and he really puts a lot of faith in actors to be able to — I think go further than they ’ ve ever gone before . Certainly for me on Nip / Tuck . You know , for obvious reasons … things I never thought I ’ d do . ( laughs ) But also just emotionally and character @-@ wise and comedically . Every script was just this amazing emotional gymnastics . So that first of all : I was like great , I ’ d love to work with Ryan . And for me , the opportunity to do a comedy is something that I ’ ve been itching to do for many years now and also if I was going to do that – which is kind of a big risk for me – to be able to do that with Ryan , who I know so well , and then so much of the crew that I was familiar with from Nip / Tuck was kind of a dream scenario I would say . " 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 Discussing the workplace flirtation between Will and Emma , Gilsig deemed Terri " a woman of conviction " , willing to do " whatever it takes " to keep Will from leaving her , " even if that means finding this woman and hunting her down " . She explained that Will and Terri 's communication is weak and that Terri is " missing a lot of the skills for the marriage " , and commented that Terri feels threatened by Will 's commitment to the glee club , worried that it will pull him away from her . Gilsig characterized Terri as emotionally still being in high school , and explained : " I think Terri still lives in that world , where I can move the pieces in such a way to create a picture , and that will make it real . I don 't think she 's learned that you can actually just have open conversations and talk about your fears and ask for your needs to be met in a direct , compassionate way . I think she 's still in high school and thinking whatever you do , just don 't let anybody know that you don 't know what you 're doing . " Discussing Terri 's relationship with her sister Kendra , Gilsig commented : " When Kendra tells Terri to do something , Terri does it . As crazy as Terri might be , she 's actually pretty normal in the face of her sister . This [ fake pregnancy ] is Kendra 's brainchild , and she just trusts her implicitly . " 
 Gilsig referred to the confrontation between Terri and Will in the episode " Mattress " as " The Reckoning " . She described it as sad to shoot , as she and Morrison were so invested in the storyline , and explained : " What I hope is conveyed is that you see the child inside Terri . You see the fear . " Gilsig commented that viewers had been wondering why Will was taking so long to discover Terri was not actually pregnant : " I think people have been asking ' How slow is this guy ? ! ' . But [ in " Mattress " ] Will finally reflects that he is a fully evolved human being and puts two and two together . " She noted that while Will and Emma " are adorable together " , she still believes in Terri and Will as a couple : " I think that she really loves him . People do crazy things out of deep , deep insecurity . She 's obviously flawed , but I think she has love in her heart . " Gilsig has further discussed the development of Terri 's relationship with Will : 
 Overall , while fan reaction to her character had previously resulted in a backlash Gilsig found " tough " , she hoped that " Mattress " would be the episode in which " anti @-@ Terri fans joined Team Terri " . Asked how she felt about Terri being a ' love to hate ' character , Gilsig replied : " As long as you love to hate her , that 's OK . It would be a different show if there weren 't characters like Terri or Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) , otherwise you 'd be at Disneyland . It would be the happiest place on Earth . " Gilsig does not know how long her character will feature in the series , and has explained " When Terri was created , she was created obviously to be an obstacle between Emma and Will . They needed an obstacle , otherwise there 's no show . What 's been fun about it is that she 's managed to emerge as a character unto herself with her own complexities . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The critical reception of the character has been generally negative . Robert A. George of the New York Post has written that Glee has : " the most unpleasant pack of female characters of any show in recent memory " , and deemed Terri the " biggest culprit " . George called Terri 's hysterical pregnancy " Freudian " and wrote : " The Terri @-@ Quinn plot sends the message that the devious gender will use every trick to lure and trap its mate — including lying about pregnancy . " Variety 's Brian Lowry commented : " Perhaps to foster a rooting interest ( or at least sympathy ) for a Will @-@ Emma pairing , [ Terri ] ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) is initially presented as a ditsy shrew . " The Chicago Tribune 's Maureen Ryan has called Terri " the worst thing about Glee " , and opined : " As written by Murphy and played by Gilsig , the character is screechy , unfunny and deeply unpleasant . It 's as if Ryan didn 't trust that the audience would get behind Will and the saga of his ragtag glee club and so saw fit to give the teacher the shrewish , nagging wife from hell . " Ryan later deemed Terri the " one big flaw in Glee , commenting that she : " manages to drain all the fun out of Glee every time she appears . Not only is this shrill character intensely annoying , but she makes you wonder whether Will has brain damage . What other explanation could there be for his ending up with this materialistic harpy ? " . Furthermore , Terri was included in TV Guide 's list of The Most <unk> TV Characters . 
 Robert Bianco for USA Today noted after the episode " Showmance " : " Jessalyn Gilsig 's self @-@ centered , ridiculously strident Terri just needs to go , period . " Shawna Malcom for the Los Angeles Times deemed Terri " beyond annoying " in the following episode , " Acafellas " , but wrote : " I have confidence that creator Ryan Murphy will flesh out Jessalyn Gilsig ’ s character over time . Her seemingly sincere apology to Will for not being more supportive of his boy band was a nice first step . " Eric Goldman for IGN commented after the episode " Preggers " : " So far , Terri has been an incredibly unlikable character . More firmly establishing her as this devilish type of schemer at least pushes her far enough to make her actions entertaining , even as we root against her . " Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly noted of the episode " Throwdown " : " the pregnancy subplot is dragging down the show , and tonight that subplot nearly derailed an otherwise @-@ excellent episode . Terri 's fake pregnancy and Quinn ’ s real one started out a few weeks ago as an interesting way to insert some realism and tension into a delightfully surreal musical @-@ comedy universe . By now , however , I watch Glee and feel sorry for Jessalyn Gilsig . I ’ ll bet the actress didn ’ t initially sign on to have her character Terri become a shrill , lying nag whose main function is to bring husband Will — and by extension , us — down . " 
 Gerrick Kennedy , in a review of " Mattress " for the Los Angeles Times , noted that in previous reviews he had " never been shy of [ his ] disdain for Mrs. Schuester " . He called her " manipulative , heartless [ and ] shrill " , and added that " this whole train wreck of a fake pregnancy just added fuel to the fire that became a raging inferno of hate for Terri . " He also noted : " Gilsig 's superb acting isn 't exactly doing anything to extinguish those flames " , and while he still isn 't " in full @-@ on Team Terri uniform [ ... ] she did at least have my attention on the sidelines , as opposed to filing my nails until halftime . Baby steps , right ? " Kennedy praised the confrontation scene , and wrote that it was " devastating " to watch and that his hate for Terri " vanished " once the lie was over . Kennedy described : 
 = Voyage of the Damned ( Doctor Who ) = 
 " Voyage of the Damned " is an episode of the British science fiction television programme Doctor Who . First broadcast on 25 December 2007 , it is 72 minutes long and the third Christmas special since the show 's revival in 2005 . The narrative continues from the final scenes of both " Last of the Time Lords " and the mini @-@ episode " Time Crash " , when a luxury space liner called the Titanic , a pastiche of the historical ocean liner , breached the walls of the TARDIS . The ship 's captain , Hardaker ( Geoffrey Palmer ) , sabotages the ship shortly after the Titanic 's collision with the TARDIS . The Doctor ( David Tennant ) works with a waitress named Astrid Peth ( Kylie Minogue ) to prevent an imminent collision with Earth . 
 The episode features the only performance in Doctor Who by the Australian singer and actress Kylie Minogue . Executive producer and writer Russell T Davies described her casting as a " very exceptional case " , having written the part of Astrid specifically for Minogue . On its original airdate , " Voyage of the Damned " was watched by 13 @.@ 31 million viewers , the highest viewing figure for Doctor Who since the 1979 serial City of Death and as of December 2015 it still has the highest viewership of any episode since the show 's revival . It was the second most @-@ watched programme of 2007 , beaten only by the episode of EastEnders which aired immediately after it . Critical opinion about the episode was divided ; the writing and Minogue 's performance were both praised and criticised . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode opens immediately following the events of " Time Crash " , with the bow of the Titanic crashing into the TARDIS . The Doctor repairs the damage before landing the TARDIS on the ship . He discovers it 's not the famed RMS Titanic , but instead is a starliner hailing from the planet Sto . 
 The Titanic is orbiting present day Earth to observe the traditions of primitive cultures , specifically Christmas . The Doctor dons a tuxedo and joins the reception on board , meeting waitress Astrid Peth . The Doctor convinces Astrid to join him on a brief excursion to the surface of Earth . They are accompanied by married couple Morvin and Foon Van Hoff , a <unk> named Bannakaffalatta , and historian and guide Mr. Copper . While on Earth , specifically a commercial district of London , the Doctor notes that London seems abandoned , and questions a man in a newspaper stand about it . The man , Wilfred Mott , tells the Doctor that most people have left London because of the previous two years of alien activity in London on Christmas ( " The Christmas Invasion " and " The Runaway Bride " ) . 
 Back on the Titanic , Captain Hardaker dismisses the ship 's officers from the bridge . Citing regulations , that require at least two officers remain on the bridge at all times , Midshipman Alonso Frame stays . After the group returns from their excursion , Hardaker drops the vessel 's protective shielding and <unk> the hull . This causes nearby meteors to be pulled toward the ship on a collision course . Midshipman Frame attempts to reactivate the shields but is shot by Hardaker as the meteors collide with the ship . The collision causes hull breaches , most of the 2 @,@ 000 passengers and staff are killed , and the vessel begins plunging toward the Earth . The Doctor makes contact with the wounded Midshipman Frame , who stabilises and maintains the power from the damaged engines . 
 The Doctor and the rest of the excursion party attempt to reach the bridge but are repeatedly attacked by the ship 's Angel Hosts , androids resembling angels who were programmed to supply information but are now eliminating all passengers and crew . Morvin falls off of a ledge into the ship 's engine , and the rest of the group are surrounded by Angel Hosts . Bannakaffalatta reveals that he is a cyborg , and uses his internal EMP device to disable the Hosts . The EMP burst drains the <unk> 's power cells and he dies . Mr. Copper takes the EMP device , saying that if they can manage to recharge it , they can use it against the Hosts again . A lone Angel Host attacks them again , and Foon ties herself to it and throws them both into the ship 's engine . The Doctor separates from the rest and attempts to reach Deck 31 , where he hopes to find the controls for the Heavenly Hosts . He convinces the Hosts that he is a stowaway - neither passenger nor crew and thus not in the Hosts ' kill mandate - and the confused androids take him to see their operator , Max Capricorn . Max explains that he planned the Titanic 's inevitable collision with Earth to bankrupt the company that voted him out . To save the Doctor , Astrid uses a forklift to ram Max Capricorn and push him into the ship 's engine . The forklift falls on top of him , seemingly killing Astrid as well . 
 With Max Capricorn dead , the Heavenly Host divert to the next highest authority , the Doctor , and aid him in quickly reaching the bridge . Together with Midshipman Frame , he uses the heat from the entry into the Earth 's atmosphere to restart the ship 's auxiliary engines . The ship stabilises and narrowly avoids a collision with Buckingham Palace . The Doctor then realizes that Astrid was wearing a teleport bracelet when she fell into the engine . In an emergency , the teleport bracelets were programmed to hold a person 's molecular pattern in stasis until it can be recovered . The Doctor frantically attempts to retrieve Astrid 's pattern , but the machine is too badly damaged . The Doctor reluctantly allows the ghostly remains of Astrid 's atoms to dissipate into space . As the surviving passengers wait for rescue , the Doctor and Mr. Copper , who would otherwise be sent to prison for committing fraud in order to get a job with the company , teleport to Earth and find that the TARDIS landed unharmed , thrown from the ship after the collision . An ecstatic Mr. Copper is left to live on Earth with a credit card he preloaded with a million pounds , unaware of the conversion between pound sterling and Sto credits . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 During the third series press launch in March 2007 , the production team was approached by Will Baker , Kylie Minogue 's creative director , about her appearing in the show . Executive producer Julie Gardner replied that Minogue could guest star if her schedule was free . Minogue officially registered her interest on 26 March 2007 and was subsequently given a one @-@ off role as the Doctor 's companion . Minogue 's appearance would allow the show to easily transfer the lead companion role from Martha Jones ( Freema Agyeman ) to " Penny " — the intended companion for the fourth series , eventually replaced by Catherine Tate as Donna Noble — and provide a " big name " star to appear in the Christmas special . Her casting was first reported in the News of the World in April 2007 . Davies initially dismissed the story , but Baker and Minogue contemporaneously confirmed she would star in the show . Her role was officially confirmed on 3 July 2007 . Both Minogue and Doctor Who had acknowledged each other before : " The Idiot 's Lantern " mentions Minogue as a real person ; and Baker , a fan of Doctor Who , included aspects of the classic series in Minogue 's tours : the <unk> Warriors ( from The Five Doctors ) in the Fever tour ; and the Cybermen in the Showgirl tour . 
 Clive Swift and Geoffrey Palmer have had previous roles in Doctor Who . Swift portrayed <unk> in Revelation of the Daleks , while Palmer played Undersecretary Masters in Doctor Who and the Silurians , and the Administrator in The Mutants . Jessica Martin had played Mags in The Greatest Show in the Galaxy . In addition , Bernard Cribbins played Tom Campbell in Daleks ' Invasion Earth : 2150 A.D. , the second Doctor Who feature @-@ film adaptation starring Peter Cushing as well as Arnold <unk> in the audio play Horror of Glam Rock . Colin McFarlane , who provided the voices of the Heavenly Host for the episode , went on to play General Pierce in Torchwood : Children of Earth , before later reappearing in Doctor Who as Moran in " Under the Lake " . 
 = = = Minogue 's costume = = = 
 Minogue met designer Louise Page four times during pre @-@ production to discuss her costume . Page rejected a long dress because it was atypical to Minogue ; she instead elected for a " cigarette girl " image , similar to a " 1950s [ ... ] cinema usherette " . Five costumes were made for different scenes and Minogue 's stunt doubles , and each part of each costume was made separately to keep Minogue 's role secret . After filming , Minogue told Page that the costume was " the most comfortable [ she ] had worn in years " . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The episode was primarily written by Russell T Davies after Minogue was cast . Davies described his pitch to Minogue as " busking " . The character of Astrid Peth was written for Minogue . Davies later stated that Minogue was a " very exceptional case " ; he considered writing a role specifically for one actor " dangerous territory " because the desired actor may be unavailable or decline the part . In early drafts of the episode , Astrid did not die . Davies decided Astrid 's death was necessary to allow Minogue focus on her musical career . Davies described the original nature of her death — falling over a precipice during a fight with Capricorn — as " fleeting " . He intensified the scene by changing Max from mobile to cybernetic and Astrid 's attack from an altercation to a fork @-@ lift truck . Davies felt the revised scene was " such a beautiful image " and romanticised Astrid 's " ultimate sacrifice " . 
 Davies based the episode on the traditional disaster film format . He was highly influenced by the 1972 film The Poseidon Adventure : he considered " [ turning ] the spaceship upside down " before cutting the concept for monetary constraints ; and the character of Foon Van Hoff ( Debbie <unk> ) was heavily based on Belle Rosen ( Shelley Winters ) . He diverged from the trope in its climax ; the format of Doctor Who dictated the requirement of an antagonist : Max Capricorn , whose plan was to sabotage the ship as part of an insurance scam . Davies based the portrayal of Kansas in the 1939 film The Wizard of Oz as an analogue for Sto . 
 The episode includes several references to outside the show 's fictional universe : the episode is dedicated to Verity Lambert , Doctor Who 's founding producer , who died on 22 November 2007 , a day before the show 's forty @-@ fourth anniversary ; and the malfunctioning Host stuttering over the name " Max " is a reference to 1980s virtual presenter Max Headroom ; Davies inserted references to other Doctor Who episodes in the script : he emphasised society 's increasing awareness of aliens and the tradition of London 's consecutive Christmas attacks in the script , describing the latter as " becoming a bit of an in @-@ joke " ; the Doctor 's use of the catchphrase " <unk> @-@ y Alonso " in the episode when he helps Frame stabilise the ship continues a running gag originating in " Army of Ghosts " ; and the Host continue the thematic motif of angels . Angels previously appeared in " Blink " , where the antagonists of the episode were Weeping Angels , and in " The Sound of Drums " and " Last of the Time Lords " , where the Master 's communication network was called the " Archangel Network " . Despite angels being the antagonist in two episodes that aired close to each other , which dismayed writer and executive producer Russell T Davies when he read Steven Moffat 's script for " Blink " , the Host are functionally different as subordinate " robot butlers " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming primarily took place between 9 July and 11 August 2007 ; the first scene filmed depicted the group being accosted by the Host while crossing over the engines . On 12 July , Tennant 's mother , Helen McDonald , began to succumb to her cancer . Filming was rescheduled to allow Tennant to be present when she died and was buried ; she died on 15 July and was buried on 21 July . During Tennant 's absence , scenes in the Titanic 's reception area were filmed at the Exchange in Swansea and the Coal Exchange in Cardiff Bay . Tennant filmed his scenes in the area on 16 and 17 July . The last use of the Coal Exchange was on the 18th ; scenes depicting the ship 's collision with meteors were filmed on that day . 
 One week of filming was conducted primarily at the old DuPont site in Pontypool which provided the sets for Deck 31 — Capricorn 's refuge and command centre , Much of the old extrusion machinery still in situ and their corresponding control " Thorn Drive " panels — and the various stairwells and corridors of the ship . Scenes on Deck 31 were filmed on 19 and 20 July . A double , Danielle de Costa , operated the fork @-@ lift truck because Minogue didn 't have the required license . Shooting was staggered as a result of Tennant 's departure : 21 July focused on the supporting characters ; and 23 July focused on Tennant . The aftermath of the meteor strike was filmed between 25 July and 27 July . 
 Filming returned to the Exchange in Swansea to film two more scenes : The <unk> of the episode was filmed on 28 July ; and the pre @-@ credits sequence on 30 July . The most important day of filming was on 31 July 2007 : an evening location shoot of the party 's arrival in London . Before filming commenced , Minogue covered her death scene above a chroma key mattress . The scene in London commenced filming at sunset in Cardiff city centre . For security concerns — specifically , protecting Minogue — the street was sealed off for the first time since the show 's revival in 2005 . 
 Filming finished in the first two weeks of August 2007 : the closing scene was filmed in Cardiff Docks on 1 August ; Hardaker 's death was filmed at Upper Boat on 2 August ; scenes in the ship 's kitchen was filmed on 3 August ; and scenes on the bridge were filmed on 6 — 8 August . The last day of filming was on 21 August 2007 ; cameo scenes by BBC reporters Jason Mohammad and Nicholas <unk> were filmed at BBC 's broadcasting houses in Llandaff and London . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Composer Murray Gold , arranger Ben Foster , and singer <unk> Mamo make cameo appearances as part of the ship 's band . Mamo , primarily a soul singer , was approached by Gold after his friends saw her performing , and she unconditionally accepted his offer . She performed the songs " My Angel Put the Devil in Me " and " The Stowaway " on the third series soundtrack . The latter was specifically composed for this episode and was recorded in September 2007 at AIR Studios in London . The song features everyone who was present in the studios during recording as backing vocals . " The Stowaway " continues the tradition of a Christmas song from " The Christmas Invasion " ( " Song for Ten " ) and " The Runaway Bride " ( " Love Don 't Roam " ) . The song was influenced by Irish folk music , and contrasts the upbeat " under deck " feeling with melancholy lyrics about unrequited love . The episode features a new version of the theme tune during its credits , comparable to Peter Howell 's version from the 1980s , which contains a new bass line , drums , and piano . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 Overnight figures estimated that the episode 's Christmas Day broadcast was watched by 12 @.@ 2 million viewers . The final viewing figures were 13 @.@ 31 million viewers with a peak of 13 @.@ 8 million , the second highest audience for any programme during 2007 : the episode of BBC soap EastEnders which aired after " Voyage of the Damned " was watched by 13 @.@ 9 million viewers . The viewing figure is the highest for the new series , exceeding the previous record set by " Rose " . The figure is also the highest for Doctor Who overall since 1979 , specifically , the final episode of " City of Death " . The episode 's Appreciation Index rating was 86 ( " excellent " ) , above the average score of 77 for drama programmes , and was the highest Index rating for any programme shown on terrestrial television on Christmas Day . Although not filmed in HD , the BBC aired it on BBC One HD , Wednesday 29 December 2010 , having up @-@ scaled the program to HD and also including Dolby Surround sound . This is the first Doctor Who episode , filmed in SD , to have been up @-@ scaled to HD for broadcast on television , and the second episode , overall , to be up @-@ scaled from SD to HD , the first being the 2008 Christmas Special , The Next Doctor , for the Blu @-@ ray release of the Complete Specials <unk> . 
 This special first aired in Canada on Space in April 2010 . 
 = = = Criticism and review = = = 
 The episode was criticised by Millvina Dean , the last survivor of the 1912 Titanic sinking , who stated that it was " disrespectful to make entertainment of such a tragedy . " The organisation Christian Voice expressed offence at the religious imagery of a scene in which the Doctor is lifted through the ship by robot angels , believing the messianic portrayal of the Doctor as " inappropriate " ; however , in April 2008 , vicars were encouraged to use the same scene to " illustrate themes of resurrection , redemption and evil " to young people . 
 Gareth McLean , who reviewed a preview screening for The Guardian 's TV and radio weblog , appreciated the episode 's use of " the disaster movie template " and came to a favourable overall conclusion : " For the most part , The Voyage of the Damned is absolutely smashing . " Its main flaw , in his view , was the " blank and insipid " acting of Kylie Minogue . James Walton of The Daily Telegraph gave the episode a positive review , summarising it as " a winning mixture of wild imagination and careful writerly calculation " . Alex Clark of The Observer commented that the death toll was rather high , but she still thought the episode was " an oasis of cheeky nonsense and careless invention " . Harry Venning of The Stage concluded his positive review of the episode by stating it " was well up to Doctor Who 's impeccably high standards " . Doctor Who Magazine placed two of the deaths in the episode in its list of the top 100 deaths in the history of the show . Bannakaffalatta 's death , a self @-@ sacrifice to save the Doctor 's party , was placed in the " top 20 <unk> " category . Astrid 's death was given the title of " Doctor Who 's all @-@ time greatest death scene " , commenting it " ticks boxes in all of our main categories [ ( gruesome , scary , self @-@ sacrifice , tearjerking , surprising ) ] " , and " her death would truly make a glass eye cry . " Tim Teeman of The Times gave the episode a negative review , stating that " It was boring , despite the endless dashing about and CGI <unk> . " The Daily Mirror commented the episode had " some brilliant psychedelic Pink Floyd @-@ esque imagery " , " great baddies " , and " neat jokes " , but lamented that " the plot was a mess , consisting mostly of one hi @-@ tech chase scene after another , and it descended into noise and bluster . " 
 = = = DVD release = = = 
 The ten Christmas specials between " The Christmas Invasion " and " Last Christmas " inclusive were released in a boxset titled Doctor Who – The 10 Christmas Specials on 19 October 2015 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Voyage of the Damned " reviews at The Doctor Who Ratings Guide - Fan reviews 
 = = = BBC trailers = = = 
 BBC Christmas 2007 publicity trailer 
 First teaser trailer 
 Cinematic trailer 
 " Trailer A " 
 " Trailer B " 
 20 @-@ second trailer 
 = Zoe Arancini = 
 Zoe Arancini ( born 14 July 1991 ) is an Australian club water polo player who plays driver , counter @-@ attacker , or outside shooter . Several of her family members have represented her country in water polo . She plays club water polo in the National Water Polo League for the Fremantle Marlins , where she has won the league championship in 2005 , 2007 and 2008 and is coached by her mother . She has represented the country as a member of the Australia women 's national water polo team on the junior and senior level , with over eighty appearances for national team between the two levels . She has earned a gold medal at the 2011 Canada Cup , silver medals at the 2010 FINA World League Super Finals and 2010 FINA World Cup , and bronze medals at the 2009 FINA World League Super Finals and 2011 FINA Junior World Championships . She has been included on the roster to represent the country at the 2012 Summer Olympics . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Arancini was born on 14 July 1991 in Perth , Western Australia . She attends Curtin University where she is working on a degree in Agriculture and Environment majoring in Coastal Zone Management . She lives in East Victoria Park , Western Australia . She is 170 cm ( 5 ft 7 in ) tall , weighs 70 kilograms ( 150 lb ) and is right @-@ handed . 
 Several of Arancini 's family members have represented Australia in water polo on the international level including her mother , Wendy <unk> , her father Peter Arancini and her aunt Megan <unk> . Her parents involvement were one of the reasons she chose to compete in water polo , alongside the fact she found the sport more interesting to play than swimming . 
 = = Water polo = = 
 Arancini plays driver , counter @-@ attacker , or outside shooter , and has held a water polo scholarship from the Western Australian Institute of Sport and the Australian Institute of Sport . She plays club water polo for the Melville , Western Australia team in the Premier League . In 2009 , she played for them in a match against City Beach and scored three goals where her team won 9 – 8 . She is a member of the Fremantle Marlins of the National Water Polo League from 2005 to the present . In her first season in the league , she scored 7 goals . During the 2007 and 2008 season , she scored 42 and 32 goals respectively . In the 2009 and 2010 seasons , she scored 64 goals and followed this up with 66 in the 2011 season . As of April 2012 she has scored 63 goals in the season . Her mother is her coach on the Marlins . Between the junior and senior sides , she has represented Australia in over eighty games . Her club won the league championships in 2005 , 2007 and 2008 . 
 = = = Junior national team = = = 
 Arancini has represented Australia on the junior national team . In July 2006 , she was a member of the Youth Girls squad that competed in an international series in Auckland , New Zealand . In 2007 , she was a member of the U16 national team . She was a member of the junior national side at the 2007 FINA U20 World Championships in Porto , Portugal . In January 2009 , she was a member of the national team that competed at the Australian Youth Olympic Festival held in Sydney . She competed in the preliminary match against China where Australia won 17 – 10 . She scored three goals in the match . She also scored three goals in a 19 – 17 preliminary round loss to Hungary . At the same tournament , she competed in the gold medal finals where her team took silver following a 10 – 9 loss to Hungary . She scored one goal in the finals match . She represented Australia at the 2009 FINA Junior World Championships , where she was the team captain . Her team finished seventh in the tournament . She was a member of the Australian side that finished third at the 2011 FINA Junior World Championships . 
 = = = Senior national team = = = 
 Arancini is a member of the Australia women 's national water polo team . She made her debut on the senior side in May 2009 in Auckland , New Zealand in a game against China . In 2009 , she was a member of national team that competed at the World Championships , which were held in Russia . That year , she also competed at the 2009 FINA World League Super Finals held in Russia , and where her team finished third . She was a member of the national team that competed in the preliminary rounds of the 2010 FINA World League in Japan from 21 – 23 May and in China from 26 – 28 May . The team went on to play in the finals of the World League , and finished second overall in the tournament , behind the victorious Americans . She was a member of the 2010 Stingers squad that competed at the FINA World Cup in Christchurch , New Zealand . In the team 's finals 10 – 8 victory over the United States , she scored a goal . Her team finished second in the tournament . Late in August 2010 , she competed for the national team at the 10th Anniversary Tournament at Sydney Olympic Park . In the preliminaries , she competed in the team 's 10 – 8 win over the United States . She scored a goal from five metres out that helped provide the Australian side with a two @-@ goal lead . In late 2010 , she had her 50th cap with the national team . At the 2011 Canada Cup , she scored a goal in the third period in the gold medal match against China that the Australian team ended up winning . She competed in the Pan Pacific Championships in January 2012 for the Australian Barbarians . In February 2012 , she was named to the final training squad for the 2012 Summer Olympics . She attended training camp that started on 20 February 2012 at the Australian Institute of Sport . The team of seventeen players will be cut to thirteen before the team departs for the Olympic games , with the announcement being made <unk> June 2012 . She was part of the Stingers squad that competed in a five @-@ game test against Great Britain at the AIS in late February 2012 . This was the team 's first matches against Great Britain 's national team in six years . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 In 2009 , Arancini was named the Australian Junior Women 's Player of the Year . In 2010 , the Australian Water Polo Hall of Fame named her as the female young player of the year . 
 = Sun Tzu = 
 Sun Tzu ( / <unk> / ; also rendered as Sun Zi ) was a Chinese general , military strategist , and philosopher who lived in the Spring and Autumn period of ancient China . Sun Tzu is traditionally credited as the author of The Art of War , a widely influential work of military strategy that has affected both Western and Eastern philosophy . Aside from his legacy as the author of The Art of War , Sun Tzu is revered in Chinese and Asian culture as a legendary historical figure . His birth name was Sun Wu , and he was known outside of his family by his courtesy name <unk> . The name Sun Tzu by which he is best known in the West is an honorific which means " Master Sun " . 
 Sun Tzu 's historicity is uncertain . Sima Qian and other traditional historians placed him as a minister to King <unk> of Wu and dated his lifetime to 544 – 496 BC . Modern scholars accepting his historicity nonetheless place the existing text of The Art of War in the later Warring States period based upon its style of composition and its descriptions of warfare . Traditional accounts state that the general 's descendant Sun Bin also wrote a treatise on military tactics , also titled The Art of War . Since both Sun Wu and Sun Bin were referred to as Sun Tzu in classical Chinese texts , some historians believed them identical prior to the rediscovery of Sun Bin 's treatise in 1972 . 
 Sun Tzu 's work has been praised and employed throughout East Asia since its composition . During the twentieth century , The Art of War grew in popularity and saw practical use in Western society as well . It continues to influence many competitive endeavors in Asia , Europe , and America including culture , politics , business , and sports , as well as modern warfare . 
 = = Life = = 
 The oldest available sources disagree as to where Sun Tzu was born . The Spring and Autumn Annals states that Sun Tzu was born in Qi , while Sima Qian 's later Records of the Grand Historian states that Sun Tzu was a native of Wu . Both sources agree that Sun Tzu was born in the late Spring and Autumn Period and that he was active as a general and strategist , serving king <unk> of Wu in the late sixth century BC , beginning around 512 BC . Sun Tzu 's victories then inspired him to write The Art of War . The Art of War was one of the most widely read military treatises in the subsequent Warring States period , a time of constant war among seven nations – Zhao , Qi , Qin , Chu , Han , Wei , and Yan – who fought to control the vast expanse of fertile territory in Eastern China . 
 One of the more well @-@ known stories about Sun Tzu , taken from Sima Qian , illustrates Sun Tzu 's temperament as follows : Before hiring Sun Tzu , the King of Wu tested Sun Tzu 's skills by commanding him to train a harem of 180 concubines into soldiers . Sun Tzu divided them into two companies , appointing the two concubines most favored by the king as the company commanders . When Sun Tzu first ordered the concubines to face right , they giggled . In response , Sun Tzu said that the general , in this case himself , was responsible for ensuring that soldiers understood the commands given to them . Then , he reiterated the command , and again the concubines giggled . Sun Tzu then ordered the execution of the king 's two favored concubines , to the king 's protests . He explained that if the general 's soldiers understood their commands but did not obey , it was the fault of the officers . Sun Tzu also said that , once a general was appointed , it was his duty to carry out his mission , even if the king protested . After both concubines were killed , new officers were chosen to replace them . Afterwards , both companies , now well aware of the costs of further frivolity , performed their maneuvers flawlessly . 
 Sima Qian claimed that Sun Tzu later proved on the battlefield that his theories were effective ( for example , at the Battle of Boju ) , that he had a successful military career , and that he wrote The Art of War based on his tested expertise . However , the <unk> , a historical text written centuries earlier than the Records of the Grand Historian , provides a much more detailed account of the Battle of Boju , but does not mention Sun Tzu at all . 
 = = The Art of War = = 
 The Art of War is traditionally ascribed to Sun Tzu . It presents a philosophy of war for managing conflicts and winning battles . It is accepted as a masterpiece on strategy and has been frequently cited and referred to by generals and theorists since it was first published , translated , and distributed internationally . 
 There are numerous theories concerning when the text was completed and concerning the identity of the author or authors , but archeological recoveries show The Art of War had taken roughly its current form by at least the early Han . Because it is impossible to prove definitively when the Art of War was completed before this date , the differing theories concerning the work 's author or authors and date of completion are unlikely to be completely resolved . Some modern scholars believe that it contains not only the thoughts of its original author but also commentary and clarifications from later military theorists , such as Li Quan and Du Mu . 
 Of the military texts written before the unification of China and Shi Huangdi 's subsequent book burning in the second century BC , six major works have survived . During the much later Song dynasty , these six works were combined with a Tang text into a collection called the Seven Military Classics . As a central part of that compilation , The Art of War formed the foundations of orthodox military theory in early modern China . Illustrating this point , the book was required reading to pass the tests for imperial appointment to military positions . 
 Sun Tzu 's Art of War uses language that may be unusual in a Western text on warfare and strategy . For example , the eleventh chapter states that a leader must be " serene and inscrutable " and capable of comprehending " unfathomable plans " . The text contains many similar remarks that have long confused Western readers lacking an awareness of the East Asian context . The meanings of such statements are clearer when interpreted in the context of Taoist thought and practice . Sun Tzu viewed the ideal general as an enlightened Taoist master , which has led to The Art of War being considered a prime example of Taoist strategy . 
 The book has also become popular among political leaders and those in business management . Despite its title , The Art of War addresses strategy in a broad fashion , touching upon public administration and planning . The text outlines theories of battle , but also advocates diplomacy and the cultivation of relationships with other nations as essential to the health of a state . 
 On April 10 , 1972 , the <unk> Han Tombs were accidentally unearthed by construction workers in Shandong . Scholars uncovered a collection of ancient texts written on unusually well @-@ preserved bamboo slips . Among them were The Art of War and Sun Bin 's Military Methods . Although Han dynasty bibliographies noted the latter publication as extant and written by a descendant of Sun , it had previously been lost . The rediscovery of Sun Bin 's work is regarded as extremely important by scholars , both because of Sun Bin 's relationship to Sun Tzu and because of the work 's addition to the body of military thought in Chinese late antiquity . The discovery as a whole significantly expanded the body of surviving Warring States military theory . Sun Bin 's treatise is the only known military text surviving from the Warring States period discovered in the twentieth century and bears the closest similarity to The Art of War of all surviving texts . 
 = = Historicity = = 
 It has been long debated whether or not Sun Tzu and the traditional dating of The Art of War existed . Skeptics cite possible historical inaccuracies and anachronisms in the text , and that the book was actually a compilation from different authors and military strategists . Attribution of the authorship of The Art of War varies among scholars and has included people and movements including Sun ; Chu scholar Wu Zixu ; an anonymous author ; a school of theorists in Qi or Wu ; Sun Bin ; and others . Traditionalists attribute the authorship of The Art of War to the historical figure Sun Wu who is chronicled in the Records of the Grand Historian and the Spring and Autumn Annals . However , his place of origin varies from the two books ; in the former he was from the Kingdom of Wu , while the latter stated that he was from the State of Qi . The name " Sun Wu " ( <unk> ) does not appear in any text prior to the Records of the Grand Historian , and has been suspected to be a made @-@ up descriptive cognomen meaning " the fugitive warrior " : the surname " Sun " is glossed as the related term " fugitive " ( <unk> <unk> ) , while " Wu " is the ancient Chinese virtue of " martial , valiant " ( wǔ <unk> ) , which corresponds to <unk> 's role as the hero 's doppelgänger in the story of Wu Zixu . Historically , Sun Tzu name is not mentioned in the Commentary of Master Tso and the Zuo <unk> , which are the primary record of events from the 4th century BC . The name Sun Wu does appear in other sources such as Shih chi and the Wu Yueh ch 'un @-@ <unk> . The only historical battle attributed to Sun Tzu , the Battle of Boju , had no records of him fighting in that battle . The scholar Eno writes , “ The Spring and Autumn Annals … is brief , not very informative , and inconsistent in its choice of events to note . " 
 The appearance of features from The Art of War in other historical texts is considered to be proof of his historicity and authorship . Certain strategic concepts , such as terrain classification , are attributed to Sun Tzu . Their use in other works such as The Methods of the Sima is considered proof of Sun Tzu 's historical priority . According to Ralph Sawyer , it is very likely Sun Tzu did exist and not only served as a general but also wrote the core of the book that bears his name . It is argued that there is a disparity between the large @-@ scale wars and sophisticated techniques detailed in the text and the more primitive small @-@ scale battles that many believe predominated in China during the 6th century BC . Against this , Sawyer argues that the teachings of Sun Wu were probably taught to succeeding generations in his family or a small school of disciples , which eventually included Sun Bin . These descendants or students may have revised or expanded upon certain points in the original text . 
 Skeptics who identify issues with the traditionalist view point to possible anachronisms in The Art of War including terms , technology ( such as anachronistic crossbows and the unmentioned cavalry ) , philosophical ideas , events , and military techniques that should not have been available to Sun Wu . Additionally , there are no records of professional generals during the Spring and Autumn period ; these are only extant from the Warring States period , so there is doubt as to Sun Tzu 's rank and generalship . This caused much confusion as to when The Art of War was actually written . The first traditional view is that it was written in 512 BC by the historical Sun Wu , active in the last years of the Spring and Autumn period ( c . 722 @-@ 481 BC ) . A second view , held by scholars such as Samuel Griffith , places The Art of War during the middle to late Warring States period ( c . 481 @-@ 221 BC ) . Finally , a third school claims that the slips were published in the last half of the 5th century BC ; this is based on how its adherents interpret the bamboo slips discovered at Yin @-@ ch ’ <unk> @-@ shan in 1972 AD . These varying theories are evidence that the Art of War was a compilation by other military strategists in later years , instead of being written by the historical Sun Wu . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Sun Tzu 's Art of War has influenced many notable figures . Sima Qian recounted that China 's first historical emperor , Qin 's Shi Huangdi , considered the book invaluable in ending the time of the Warring States . In the 20th century , the Chinese Communist leader Mao Zedong partially credited his 1949 victory over Chiang Kai @-@ shek and the Kuomintang to The Art of War . The work strongly influenced Mao 's writings about guerrilla warfare , which further influenced communist insurgencies around the world . 
 The Art of War was introduced into Japan c . AD 760 and the book quickly became popular among Japanese generals . Through its later influence on Oda Nobunaga , Toyotomi Hideyoshi , and Tokugawa Ieyasu , it significantly affected the unification of Japan in the early modern era . Prior to the Meiji Restoration , mastery of its teachings was honored among the samurai and its teachings were both exhorted and exemplified by influential daimyo and shoguns . Subsequently , it remained popular among the Imperial Japanese armed forces . The Admiral of the Fleet Tōgō Heihachirō , who led Japan 's forces to victory in the Russo @-@ Japanese War , was an avid reader of Sun Tzu . 
 Ho Chi Minh translated the work for his Vietnamese officers to study . His general Vo Nguyen Giap , the strategist behind victories over French and American forces in Vietnam , was likewise an avid student and practitioner of Sun Tzu 's ideas . 
 America 's Asian conflicts against Japan , North Korea , and North Vietnam brought Sun Tzu to the attention of American military leaders . The Department of the Army in the United States , through its Command and General Staff College , has directed all units to maintain libraries within their respective headquarters for the continuing education of personnel in the art of war . The Art of War is mentioned as an example of works to be maintained at each facility , and staff duty officers are obliged to prepare short papers for presentation to other officers on their readings . Similarly , Sun Tzu 's Art of War is listed on the Marine Corps Professional Reading Program . During the Gulf War in the 1990s , both Generals Norman Schwarzkopf Jr. and Colin Powell employed principles from Sun Tzu related to deception , speed , and striking one 's enemy 's weak points . However , the United States and other Western countries have been criticised for not truly understanding Sun Tzu 's work and not appreciating The Art of War within the wider context of Chinese society . 
 Daoist rhetoric is a component incorporated in the Art of War . According to Steven C. Combs in " Sun @-@ zi and the Art of War : The Rhetoric of <unk> , " warfare is " used as a metaphor for rhetoric , and that both are philosophically based arts . " Combs writes “ Warfare is analogous to persuasion , as a battle for hearts and minds . " The application of The Art of War strategies throughout history is attributed to its philosophical rhetoric . Daoism is the central principle in the Art of War . Combs compares ancient Daoist Chinese to traditional Aristotelian rhetoric , notably for the differences in persuasion . Daoist rhetoric in the art of war warfare strategies is described as " peaceful and passive , favoring silence over speech . " This form of communication is parsimonious . <unk> behavior , which is highly emphasized in The Art of War as avoiding confrontation and being spiritual in nature , shapes basic principles in Daoism . 
 Mark McNeilly writes in Sun Tzu and the Art of Modern Warfare that a modern interpretation of Sun and his importance throughout Chinese history is critical in understanding China 's push to becoming a superpower in the twenty @-@ first century . Modern Chinese scholars explicitly rely on historical strategic lessons and The Art of War in developing their theories , seeing a direct relationship between their modern struggles and those of China in Sun Tzu 's time . There is a great perceived value in Sun Tzu 's teachings and other traditional Chinese writers , which are used regularly in developing the strategies of the Chinese state and its leaders . 
 In 2008 , producer Zhang <unk> adapted Sun Tzu 's life story into a 40 @-@ episode historical drama television series entitled Bing Sheng , starring Zhu <unk> as Sun Tzu . 
 = Wittelsbach @-@ class battleship = 
 The Wittelsbach @-@ class battleships were a group of five pre @-@ dreadnought battleships of the Imperial German Navy . They were the first battleships produced under the Navy Law of 1898 . The class was composed of the lead ship , Wettin , Zähringen , Schwaben , and Mecklenburg . All five ships were laid down between 1899 and 1900 , and finished by 1904 . The ships of the Wittelsbach class were similar in appearance to their predecessors of the Kaiser Friedrich III class , however , they had a flush main deck , as opposed to the lower quarterdeck of the Kaiser Friedrich class , and had a more extensive armor belt . Their armament was almost identical , though more efficiently arranged . 
 The ships were commissioned into the German fleet between 1902 and 1904 , where they joined the I Squadron of the battle fleet . They were rapidly made obsolete by the launch of HMS Dreadnought in 1906 . By the outbreak of World War I in 1914 , they were no longer fit for front @-@ line service , though they saw some limited duty in the Baltic Sea against the Russian Navy . In 1916 the five ships were disarmed and employed in secondary roles . Wittelsbach , Wettin , and Schwaben became training ships , Mecklenburg was used as a prison ship and later as a floating barracks , and Zähringen became a target ship . All of the ships save Zähringen were broken up in 1921 – 22 . Zähringen was rebuilt as a radio @-@ controlled target ship in the mid @-@ 1920s . During World War II , she was badly damaged in a bombing raid in 1944 and scuttled in the final days of the war . She was eventually broken up in situ in 1949 – 50 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The ships of the Wittelsbach class were the first battleships built under the first Naval Law of 1898 . The ships represented an incremental improvement over the preceding Kaiser Friedrich III class . They were equipped with the same armament of 24 cm guns , but were given an additional torpedo tube . They also had improved defensive capabilities , as they were protected by a more extensive armored belt . They also differed from the preceding ships in their main deck , the entire length of which was flush ; in the Kaiser Friedrich III @-@ class ships , the quarterdeck was cut down . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The ships of the <unk> class were 125 @.@ 2 meters ( 410 ft 9 in ) long at the waterline and 126 @.@ 8 m ( 416 ft 0 in ) overall . They had a beam of 22 @.@ 8 m ( 74 ft 10 in ) and a draft of 7 @.@ 95 m ( 26 ft 1 in ) forward . The Wittelsbachs were designed to displace 11 @,@ 774 metric tons ( 11 @,@ 588 long tons ) with a standard load , and displaced up to 12 @,@ 798 metric tons ( 12 @,@ 596 long tons ) at full combat weight . The Wittelsbach @-@ class ships ' hulls were built with transverse and longitudinal steel frames . Steel hull plates were riveted to the structure created by the frames . The hull was split into 14 watertight compartments and included a double bottom that ran for 70 percent of the length of the ship . 
 The ships were regarded in the German Navy as excellent sea boats with an easy roll ; the ships rolled up to 30 ° with a period of 10 seconds . They maneuvered easily ; at hard rudder the ships lost up to 60 percent speed and heeled over 9 ° . However , they suffered from severe vibration , particularly at the stern , at high speeds . They also had very wet bows , even in moderate seas . The ships had a crew of 33 officers and 650 enlisted men . However , when serving as a squadron flagship , the crew was augmented by an additional 13 officers and 66 enlisted men . While acting as a second command ship , 9 officers and 44 enlisted men were added to the standard crew . Wittelsbach and her sisters carried a number of smaller vessels , including two picket boats , two launches , one pinnace , two cutters , two yawls , and two dinghies . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The five ships of the Wittelsbach class each had three three @-@ cylinder triple expansion steam engines . The outer engines drove a three @-@ bladed screw that was 4 @.@ 8 m ( 15 ft 9 in ) in diameter ; the central shaft drove a four @-@ bladed screw that was slightly smaller , at 4 @.@ 5 m ( 14 ft 9 in ) in diameter . To produce steam to power the engines , each ship had six marine @-@ type boilers , with the exception of Wettin and Mecklenburg , which had six Thornycroft boilers , along with six transverse cylindrical boilers . Steering was controlled by a single large rudder . 
 The propulsion system was rated at 14 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 13 @,@ 808 ihp ; 10 @,@ 297 kW ) , which produced a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . On trials , however , the five ships had significantly varied performances . Schwaben , the slowest ship , reached 13 @,@ 253 metric horsepower ( 13 @,@ 072 ihp ; 9 @,@ 748 kW ) for a top speed of only 16 @.@ 9 knots ( 31 @.@ 3 km / h ; 19 @.@ 4 mph ) . Wettin , the fastest , managed 15 @,@ 530 PS ( 15 @,@ 318 ihp ; 11 @,@ 422 kW ) and a top speed of 18 @.@ 1 knots ( 33 @.@ 5 km / h ; 20 @.@ 8 mph ) . They carried 650 metric tons ( 640 long tons ) in their holds , but fuel capacity could be nearly tripled to 1 @,@ 800 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 772 long tons ) with the usage of additional spaces in the ships . This provided a maximum range of 5 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 9 @,@ 260 km ; 5 @,@ 754 mi ) at a cruising speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Electrical power was supplied by four generators that each produced 230 kilowatts ( 310 hp ) at 74 volts , although in Wittelsbach the generators were rated at 248 kilowatts ( 333 hp ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The ships ' armament was nearly identical to the preceding Kaiser Friedrich III class . The primary armament consisted of a battery of four 24 cm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) SK L / 40 guns in twin gun turrets , one fore and one aft of the central superstructure . The guns were mounted in Drh.L. C / 98 turrets , which allowed elevation to 30 ° and depression to − 5 ° . At maximum elevation , the guns could hit targets out to 16 @,@ 900 meters ( 18 @,@ 500 yd ) . The guns fired 140 @-@ kilogram ( 310 lb ) shells at a muzzle velocity of 690 m / s ( 2 @,@ 263 ft / s ) . They had a rate of fire of three to four shots per minute . Each gun was supplied with 85 shells , for a total of 340 . 
 Secondary armament included eighteen 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 inch ) SK L / 40 guns ; four were emplaced in single turrets amidships and the rest were mounted in MPL casemates . These guns had a fired armor @-@ piercing shells at a rate of 4 – 5 per minute . The ships carried 120 shells per gun , for a total of 2 @,@ 160 rounds total . The guns could depress to − 7 degrees and elevate to 20 degrees , for a maximum range of 13 @,@ 700 m ( 14 @,@ 990 yd ) . They were manually elevated and trained . 
 The ships also carried twelve 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 45 in ) SK L / 30 quick @-@ firing guns , also mounted in casemates and pivot mounts . These guns were supplied with between 170 and 250 shells per gun . These guns fired 13 @.@ 8 kg ( 30 @.@ 4 lb ) at a muzzle velocity of 590 mps ( 1 @,@ 936 fps ) . Their rate of fire was approximately 15 shells per minute ; the guns could engage targets out to 10 @,@ 500 m ( 11 @,@ 480 yd ) . The gun mounts were manually operated . The ships ' gun armament was rounded out by twelve machine cannons . 
 The ships were also armed with six 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes , all in above @-@ water swivel mounts . Four tubes were mounted on the sides of the ship , another in the bow , and the last in the stern . These weapons were 5 @.@ 1 m ( 201 in ) long and carried an 87 @.@ 5 kg ( 193 lb ) TNT warhead . They could be set at two speeds for different ranges . At 26 knots ( 48 km / h ; 30 mph ) , the torpedoes had a range of 800 m ( 870 yd ) . At an increased speed of 32 knots ( 59 km / h ; 37 mph ) , the range was reduced to 500 m ( 550 <unk> ) . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The five Wittelsbach class battleships were armored with Krupp steel . Their armored decks were 50 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick , with sloped sides that ranged in thickness from 75 to 120 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 to 4 @.@ 7 in ) . The sloped section of the deck connected it to the main armored belt , which was 225 mm ( 8 @.@ 9 in ) in the central citadel , where the ship 's vitals were . This included ammunition magazines and the propulsion system . The belt was reduced to 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) on either end of the central citadel ; the bow and stern were not protected with any armor . The entire length of belt was backed by 100 mm of teak planking . 
 Directly above the main belt , the 15 cm casemate guns were protected with 140 mm ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) thick steel plating . The 15 cm guns in turrets were more exposed and therefore slightly better protected : their side armor was increased to 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) , with 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) thick gun shields . The 24 cm gun turrets had the heaviest armor aboard ship : 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) thick sides and 50 mm thick roofs . The forward conning tower also had 250 mm thick sides , though its roof was only 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick . The rear conning tower was much less protected . Its sides were only 140 mm thick ; the roof was 30 mm thick . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Wittelsbach was ordered for the German fleet under the contract designation " C. " She was laid down at the Kaiserliche Werft Wilhelmshaven in 1899 , under construction number 25 . She was launched on 3 July 1900 ; once she left the stocks fitting out work commenced . This included the installation of the ship 's armament , completion of the interior compartments , and the finishing of the superstructure . By late 1902 work on the ship was finished . Wittelsbach was commissioned into the fleet on 15 October of that year . Wettin was ordered as " D " and laid down at the Schichau @-@ Werke in Danzig in 1899 . Although she was launched on 6 June 1901 — nearly a full year after Wittelsbach — she was commissioned on 1 October 1902 , two weeks earlier than her sister ship . 
 Zähringen was laid down at the Germaniawerft dockyard in Kiel under the provisional name " E " in 1899 . She was launched on 12 June 1901 and commissioned into the fleet on 25 October 1902 . In 1900 , Schwaben followed Wittelsbach at the Kaiserliche Werft Wilhelmshaven , under the provisional name " G. " She was launched on 19 August 1901 and commissioned on 13 April 1904 , the last ship of the five to join the fleet . Mecklenburg was ordered from the AG Vulcan shipyard in Stettin under the contract name " F. " Her keel was laid there in 1900 . Launched on 9 November 1901 , Mecklenburg was completed by May 1903 and commissioned on the 25th . 
 = = Service history = = 
 In the early 1900s , the German fleet was organized as the Home Fleet ( German : Heimatflotte ) . After joining the fleet , the Wittelsbach @-@ class ships were assigned to the I Battle Squadron , where they replaced the older Brandenburg @-@ class battleships . By 1907 , the Braunschweig and Deutschland classes had come into service . With two full battle squadrons , the fleet was reorganized as the High Seas Fleet . 
 Like the Kaiser Friedrich III @-@ class ships , the Wittelsbachs were withdrawn from active service after the advent of the dreadnoughts . The five ships were recalled to active service at the outbreak of war in 1914 . They were assigned to the IV Battle Squadron and deployed to the Baltic . The ships were based in Kiel and placed under the command of Vice Admiral Ehrhard Schmidt . In early September 1914 , the ships conducted a result @-@ less sweep into the Baltic against the Russian navy operating there . In May 1915 , four of the Wittelsbachs sailed into the Baltic and bombarded Libau , which was subsequently captured by the German army . The five ships of the class were moved to Libau during the Battle of the Gulf of Riga in August 1915 , though they did not see any combat during the operation . 
 British submarines were becoming increasingly active in the Baltic by late 1915 ; several cruisers had been sunk and the elderly Wittelsbach @-@ class ships could no longer be risked there . Therefore , due to their age and vulnerability , they were withdrawn from active service and disarmed by 1916 . They were used as training ships , with the exception of Mecklenburg , which was used as a prison ship . In 1919 , Wittelsbach and Schwaben were converted into depot ships for minesweepers . The entire class , with the exception of Zähringen , were struck from the navy list after the end of World War I. Mecklenburg was struck on 27 January 1920 , Wettin followed on 11 March 1920 , and Wittelsbach and Schwaben were struck on 8 March 1921 . The four ships were broken up between 1921 – 22 . Zähringen was converted into a radio @-@ controlled target ship in 1926 – 27 . Royal Air Force bombers sank the ship in Gotenhafen in 1944 ; the wreck was broken up in 1949 – 50 . 
 = Under the Bridge = 
 " Under the Bridge " is a song by American rock band Red Hot Chili Peppers , released on September 24 , 1991 as the second single from the group 's fifth studio album , Blood Sugar Sex Magik . Vocalist Anthony Kiedis wrote the lyrics to express feelings of loneliness and despondency , and to reflect on narcotics and their impact on his life . Kiedis initially did not feel " Under the Bridge " would fit into the Chili Peppers ' repertoire and was reluctant to show it to his band mates until producer Rick Rubin implored him to do so . The rest of the band was receptive to the lyrics and wrote the music . 
 The song became a critical and commercial success , peaking at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 and later certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . The single 's success was widened with the release of its accompanying video , which was frequently played on music television channels . It won the " Viewer 's Choice Award " and " Breakthrough Video " at the 1992 MTV Video Music Awards . 
 " Under the Bridge " allowed the Red Hot Chili Peppers to enter the mainstream . David Fricke of Rolling Stone said the song " unexpectedly drop @-@ kicked the band into the Top 10 " , while Philip Booth of The Tampa Tribune commented that it was a " pretty , undulating , [ and ] by @-@ now omnipresent single . " Its success led in part to the departure of guitarist John Frusciante , who preferred the band to remain underground . The song has become an inspiration to other artists , and remains a seminal component of the alternative rock movement of the early and mid @-@ 1990s . 
 " Under the Bridge " follows " Give It Away " as the band 's second most performed live song , having been performed over 600 times . 
 = = Origins and recording = = 
 During the production of the Red Hot Chili Peppers ' 1991 album Blood Sugar Sex Magik , producer Rick Rubin regularly visited singer Anthony Kiedis to review Kiedis 's new material . He found a poem titled " Under the Bridge " while flipping through Kiedis ' notebook and instantly took an interest in the poignant lyrics . Rubin suggested Kiedis show it to the rest of the band : " I thought it was beautiful . I said ' We 've got to do this . ' " Kiedis was reluctant as he felt the poem was too emotional and did not fit the Chili Peppers ' style . After singing the poem to guitarist John Frusciante and bassist Flea , Kiedis recalls that they " got up and walked over to their instruments and started finding the beat and guitar chords to match it " . Frusciante chose the chords he played in the introduction to balance out the depressing nature of the lyrics , saying " my brain interpreted it as being a really sad song so I thought if the lyrics are really sad like that I should write some chords that are happier " . 
 For several days Frusciante and Kiedis worked on the song , and it became one of the few tracks written and completed prior to the band moving into The Mansion where they recorded the album . After the song was recorded , Rubin felt the grand and epic outro would benefit from a large group of singers . Frusciante invited his mother , Gail , and her friends , all of whom sang in a choir , to perform . 
 = = Lyrics and meaning = = 
 Kiedis wrote much of the song 's lyrics during a period when he felt distraught and emotionally drained . He had maintained sobriety for roughly three years and felt that this had distanced him from his bandmates . While the group worked on Blood Sugar Sex Magik , Frusciante and Flea often smoked marijuana together , ignoring Kiedis , who felt that Frusciante was " no longer in [ his ] world . " Driving home after rehearsal in April 1991 , Kiedis thought of his heroin and cocaine addiction during his relationship with former girlfriend Ione Skye : " the loneliness that I was feeling triggered memories of my time with Ione and how I 'd had this beautiful angel of a girl who was willing to give me all of her love , and instead of embracing that , I was downtown with fucking gangsters shooting <unk> under a bridge . " 
 Kiedis ' feelings of alienation from his bandmates led him to feel that the city of Los Angeles was his only companion : " I felt an unspoken bond between me and my city . I 'd spent so much time wandering through the streets of L.A. and hiking through the Hollywood Hills that I sensed there was a nonhuman entity , maybe the spirit of the hills and the city , who had me in her sights and was looking after me . " The lines " Sometimes I feel like / My only friend / Is the city I live in / The City of Angels / Lonely as I am / Together we cry " show a direct link to Kiedis ' isolation and sense of susceptibility . Despite these emotions , Kiedis believed his life was better without drugs , telling Rolling Stone that " no matter how sad or lonely I got , things were a million percent better than they were two years earlier when I was using drugs all the time . There was no comparison . " The optimistic ideology gave birth to the chorus of the song : " I don 't ever want to feel / Like I did that day / Take me to the place I love " , the place he loves being his band mates , friends , and family . 
 One of the most notable verses in the song discusses the harsh effects of drugs , their role in destroying many of Kiedis 's relationships , and impact on his happiness . Based on one of Kiedis 's experiences , the verse of " Under the Bridge " illustrates his efforts to enter gang territory under a bridge to purchase drugs . Kiedis pretended that a sister of one of the gang members was his fiancée to be permitted inside . Although he successfully acquired the drugs , Kiedis considers this moment to be one of the worst of his life as it demonstrated the level to which he was willing to sink in order to feed his addiction . Kiedis refuses to acknowledge the location of the bridge , though he notes that it is in downtown Los Angeles . Using clues provided by Kiedis in previous interviews and in his autobiography Scar Tissue , writer Mark Haskell Smith concluded that the bridge that inspired the song was located in the city 's MacArthur Park . Other possible cited locations have included the Belmont Tunnel about half a mile from MacArthur Park , and more recently , the overpass where Interstate Highway 10 ( the Santa Monica Freeway ) crosses over Hoover Street close to downtown LA . 
 = = Music and composition = = 
 " Under the Bridge " is performed in 4 / 4 time in the key of A major , shifting from the key of E major after the first verse . The song marks an important shift in style for Kiedis , who had spent most of his career singing rapidly due to his limited ability to reach high notes . The song begins with Frusciante playing a moderately slow intro that the guitarist said drew heavily on the 1967 Jimi Hendrix song " Little Wing " . As Kiedis begins to sing , the guitar playing becomes more rapid until it reaches an E major seventh chord that halts the song ; the silence is broken by Chad Smith 's closed hi @-@ hat and wood block struck at a moderately fast tempo . Frusciante borrowed the E major seventh chord technique from British guitarist Marc Bolan of the glam rock band T. Rex , who initially wrote it in the song " Rip Off " from the group 's 1971 album Electric Warrior ; Frusciante lightheartedly noted that " I ripped off a song called ' Rip Off ' . I thought that was interesting . " 
 The song continues with another verse and subsequent chorus , when the bass finally enters . After the next verse an E major seven chord again marks a break before the start of the chorus . The second chorus transitions into a different verse , where Chad Smith begins to play the drums , and Kiedis sings " Take me all the way / Yeah / Yeah @-@ e @-@ yeah / Oh no , no . " After Kiedis cues " One time , " a choir , whose presence was added to make the ending sound more epic , sings " Under the bridge downtown , " in which Kiedis sings " Is where I drew some blood / I could not get enough / Forgot about my love / I gave my life away " in between . As the choir , Kiedis and drums stop , Frusciante and Flea play the outro until the song ends . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The first single off Blood Sugar Sex Magik was " Give It Away " , which reached number one on the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart in late 1991 . The band did not foresee " Under the Bridge " being as successful , but understood the potential commercial viability . Warner Bros. Records sent representatives to a Chili Peppers concert to determine which song should be the next single . When Frusciante began playing " Under the Bridge " , Kiedis missed his cue and the entire audience began singing the song instead . Kiedis was initially " mortified that I had fucked up in front of Warner 's people [ ... ] I apologized for fucking up but they said ' Fucking up ? Are you kidding me ? When every single kid at the show sings a song , that 's our next single ' . " " Under the Bridge " became the album 's second single in October 1991 ; upon release , journalist Jeff Apter noted that it " was the bona fide , across @-@ all @-@ formats radio hit that the band had been working towards for seven years . " It spent twenty @-@ six cumulative weeks on the United States Billboard Hot 100 chart , peaking at number two , being one of the several songs stuck behind Kris Kross ' 8 @-@ week reign of " Jump " . The single has been certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . 
 Tom Moon of Rolling Stone felt the song " revealed new dimensions . The rhythm section displays a growing curiosity about studio texture and nuance " . David Fricke of Rolling Stone said " Under the Bridge " is a " stark and uncommonly pensive ballad " , commenting that the song " drop @-@ kicked the band into the Top 10 " . Philip Booth of The Tampa Tribune believed the single was " undulating [ and ] omnipresent " not only in the alternative rock genre , but pop music as a whole . Ben DiPietro of the Richmond Times @-@ Dispatch praised the record as a whole , but was most impressed by Chili Peppers ' shift from exclusive hard rock to adding more moderately paced tracks : " there 's still plenty of sonic funk to bang heads to , but the best tracks are the slower ones such as ' Under the Bridge ' " . Nick Griffiths ( Select ) described the song as " all mellow strumming and thoughtfully shallow vocals , though it 's almost exonerated by a shrill unexpectedly choral middle eight . " Amy Hanson of Allmusic noted that the song has " become an integral part of the 1990s alterna @-@ landscape , and remains one of the purest diamonds that sparkle amongst the rough @-@ hewn and rich funk chasms that dominate the Peppers ' own oeuvre " . She went on to praise " Under the Bridge " for being a " poignant sentiment that is self evident among the simple guitar which cradles the introductory verse , and the sense of fragility that is only doubled by the still down @-@ tempo choral crescendo " . 
 " Under the Bridge " has been included in many publications ' " Best of ... " lists . In 2002 , Kerrang ! placed the song at number six on their list of the " 100 Greatest Singles of All Time " . Q ranked the song number 180 on their compilation of the " 1001 Best Songs , Ever " . Life included " Under the Bridge " in the compilation " 40 Years of Rock & Roll , 5 Songs Per Year 1952 – 1991 " , with the year being 1991 . Pause and Play included the song in their unordered list of the " 10 Songs of the 90 's " ; and the song ranked fifteenth in VH1 's " 100 Greatest Songs of the 90s " . Rolling Stone and MTV compiled a list of the " 100 Greatest Pop Songs Since The Beatles " in 2000 , with " Under the Bridge " coming in fifty @-@ fourth . " Under the Bridge " was also ranked # 98 in the list of Rolling Stone " 100 Greatest Guitar Songs of All Time " . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Under the Bridge " was directed by Gus Van Sant , who photographed the band during their stay at The Mansion and provided the art direction for Blood Sugar Sex Magik . Van Sant knew Flea due to the bassist 's role in his 1991 film My Own Private Idaho . The members of the band respected Van Sant both as a person and an artist and were elated when he agreed to direct the video for " Under the Bridge " . Flea credits the video as " the thing that really made us break through the mainstream of American and worldwide pop culture " . 
 The video was shot on the streets of Los Angeles and in a studio soundstage . It begins with Frusciante standing alone on a pedestal wearing a red @-@ and @-@ white @-@ striped collared shirt , brown khaki pants , brown shoes , and a purple , green and multicolored <unk> , with white stitched wolves in the middle . He plays a 1966 Ocean Turquoise Fender Jaguar behind the backdrop of a desert and an inverted cloudy sky . His shadow is projected on the left and right of where he stands . Frusciante 's girlfriend of the time , Toni Oswald , selected his clothes that day . Frusciante remembers Van Sant 's surprised , though favorable , reaction : " when I got [ to the studio ] Gus Van Sant was just looking at me and going ' God I 'm so glad you wore that hat . I 'm so glad you wore that shirt . Oh ! Those pants are so great I 'm so glad you wore those ' " . The video marks a significant shift in Frusciante 's on @-@ camera behavior ; he no longer wished to jump around fervently as he had done in the band 's prior music videos . 
 As Kiedis begins to sing he appears on camera bathed in purple light with blue fluorescent stars as a backdrop , surrounded by clouds . As the camera pans closer , an image of the skyline of Van Sant 's home city , Portland , is superimposed from his chin downwards . Flea and drummer Chad Smith are then placed into the image while playing their instruments . Van Sant wanted superimposing to be a notable component in the overall theme of the video ; the idea came from a project he worked on with novelist William S. Burroughs . The scenes in the studio are coupled with scenes of Kiedis walking the streets of LA , wearing a white T @-@ shirt with " To Hell And Back " printed on the front ; as he walks , the camera focuses on various people . He can , at various points in the video , be seen standing in front of Belmont Tunnel before its closure . This , according to Kiedis , was vital ; he felt the studio portion alone would not convey enough emotion : " the first time we shot [ the video ] it was all in a studio and that didn 't seem to capture everything we needed to capture . It needed more ; it needed to be combined with an outdoor , streets @-@ of @-@ Los @-@ Angeles thing " . Towards the end , Kiedis is seen running down the Los Angeles River in slow motion ; the background is a shot of an atomic bomb exploding . The video ends with various superimposed images of the band , followed by Frusciante playing alone on a pedestal — this time with an inverted shot of the ocean as the sky . 
 MTV placed the " Under the Bridge " video on heavy rotation . At the 1992 MTV Video Music Awards the Red Hot Chili Peppers led the nominations , which included the categories of " Best Video " , " Best Group " , and " Best Direction " . " Under the Bridge " won the group " Breakthrough Video " and " Viewers Choice Best Video " ; the band 's video for " Give It Away " won " Best Art Direction " . The video ranked eighth best in a poll dictated by the readers of the Chicago Tribune called " The Best and Worst of ' 92 " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The song 's widespread success has made it indispensable to the band 's live set @-@ lists . Unlike several of the Chili Peppers ' other songs , " Under the Bridge " is not interpreted in a different manner than what is on the record — aside from being played acoustically the track is performed the same as it appears on Blood Sugar Sex Magik . Kiedis is , however , notorious for being incapable of achieving several high notes in live performances ; the vocalist has noted that he sometimes forgets or rearranges song lyrics in the verses . Therefore , the song has sometimes suffered from his limitations as a singer . After being released as a single in March 1992 , the song would be included in virtually all concerts ; Frusciante , however , began to resent the song 's popularity and would play convoluted intros , purposefully throwing Kiedis off . An example of this was during a televised performance on the highly rated program Saturday Night Live on February 22 , 1992 . Kiedis said it " felt like I was getting stabbed in the back and hung out to dry in front of all of America while [ Frusciante ] was off in a corner in the shadow , playing some dissonant out @-@ of @-@ tune experiment . " The guitarist used a distortion pedal for the ending verse and screamed incomprehensibly into the microphone when providing backup vocals , neither of which were originally planned or typical of live performances . Nevertheless , sales of Blood Sugar Sex Magik skyrocketed following the show . 
 At times Kiedis has also resented singing the song , especially during instances when he felt distanced from the song 's lyrics . In the past few years , however , Kiedis has experienced a revival in interest : " Although there have been times when I was over [ ' Under the Bridge ' ] , I 've rediscovered it and now I feel close to it and it still has power , and life , and purpose as a song . " Frusciante believed the flexibility of " Under the Bridge " has contributed to its success : " A lot of the time that is one of the ingredients of a hit ; you can hear it over and over and it will still always mean new things , but you do go through cycles . " Flea believes the reason " Under the Bridge " had a recent revival in relevancy was due to Frusciante 's return to the band from 1998 – 2009 after quitting in 1992 . Flea believed it was vital to have the four members who wrote the track together . 
 " Under the Bridge " was played at the 1999 Woodstock Festival , which the Red Hot Chili Peppers headlined . They were the final act to perform . Attempts at distributing candles that were to be lit during the song backfired . The crowd , which was already disorderly , instead created a bonfire . <unk> foul @-@ play escalated into violence when several women who had been crowd surfing and moshing were raped and nearby property was looted and destroyed . Other notable performances were at Slane Castle in August 2003 to 80 @,@ 000 attendees ; and in 2004 at London 's Hyde Park , in which , over the course of three days , an estimated 250 @,@ 000 people were in attendance . Released as the band 's first live album , the event became the highest grossing concert at a single venue in history , with a total revenue of $ 17 @.@ 1 million . " Under the Bridge " is also performed on the Chili Peppers ' concert video Off the Map released in 2001 , and on an exclusive performance for iTunes in 2006 . 
 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = All Saints version = = 
 " Under the Bridge " was the third single released from the All Saints debut album , All Saints . It became their second number @-@ one single on the UK Singles Chart . A total of 424 @,@ 799 singles have been sold in the United Kingdom . The song was cover of Red Hot Chili Peppers and releases as a double A @-@ side with " Lady Marmalade " , also a cover , by LaBelle . In Europe , a " Lady Marmalade " only single was also released . The proceeds from the single went to breast cancer charities . 
 = = = Background = = = 
 " Under the Bridge " was slightly altered since it contained personal lyrics by Anthony Kiedis and the All Saints covered it because they liked the overall sound and feeling of the recording . The All Saints version contains samples of the original recording , the most important one being the distinctive guitar playing in the beginning . The original Japanese edition of the album version features a different , more R & B version of the song . Anthony Kiedis said of All Saints ' version " It was kind of funny , they looked so pretty and clean , it looked like they didn 't know what they were singing about " . The Red Hot Chili Peppers ' original is said to deal lyrically with Kiedis 's drug addiction , and the final section which contains the line " Under the bridge downtown / is where I drew some blood " was omitted in the All Saints version . The guitar on " Under the Bridge " was played by Richard Hawley . 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 Both videos were shot as a set and cost £ 500 @,@ 000 to make . The videos took four months of production before release . The girls chose to perform their own stunts in the video , and at one point Natalie Appleton was knocked over by an explosion , although she remained unhurt . 
 The videos are in a futuristic big city . In the " Lady Marmalade " video , there is a party which causes several floors of a tall building to cave in . The " Under the Bridge " video appears to be set immediately after as there is already a hole in the floor of the room which appears to be a bottomless pit . In reality there was a hole which was indeed one floor deep . The 3D dimensional effect was computer generated and made by the team who also made the film Batman & Robin . Both videos were shown together as " The Bridge " at cinemas before the showing of the Quentin Tarantino film , Jackie Brown . 
 = = = Track listings and formats = = = 
 These are the formats and track listings of major single releases of " Under the Bridge / Lady Marmalade " . 
 = = = Personnel = = = 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = = Other cover versions = = 
 " Under the Bridge " has been covered several times since its release in 1992 . The song was first transcribed in 1994 by the a cappella group The Flying Pickets from their album The Original Flying Pickets : Volume 1 . Notable jazz musician Frank Bennett covered the song by fusing elements of big bands and bebop in his 1996 album Five O 'Clock Shadow . Hip hop artist Mos Def included the beginning verse of " Under the Bridge " in the song " Brooklyn , " from his 1999 record Black on Both Sides . He , however , changed the line " the city I live in , the City of Angels " , which refers to Los Angeles , to " the city I live in is beautiful Brooklyn , " to match his song 's premise . Tony Hadley covered the song on his 1995 album Obsession . Britain 's Royal Philharmonic Orchestra has modified " Under the Bridge " at several concerts — they perform various rock pieces combined into a single orchestral ensemble , often including the Chili Peppers ' hit . Taylor Dayne covered the song for her 2008 studio album Satisfied . 
 Alternative hip hop band Gym Class Heroes performed " Under the Bridge " on the 2006 assemblage Punk Goes ' 90s , an album that compiled popular rock songs from the 1990s being covered by contemporary artists . Gym Class Heroes continued to play " Under the Bridge " during their tour ; lead singer Travis McCoy has said it is " a timeless song . It 's one of those songs you hear and are like ' Damn did this shit just come out ? ' " The most successful cover version of " Under the Bridge " was released in 1998 by the British / Canadian pop band All Saints and reached number one in the United Kingdom . The cover removed the final verse of the song that discusses drug use . Red Hot Chili Peppers were , however , displeased with this version ; Kiedis felt the cover was poorly recreated and , with the omission of the final verse , it lost all personal significance . The 1993 " Weird Al " Yankovic song " Bedrock Anthem " is part parody of " Under the Bridge " and " Give It Away . " Yankovic 's satire includes an intro similar to that of " Under the Bridge " . In 2009 , the Stanley Clarke Trio covered the song on the album Jazz in the Garden . John Craigie covers the song on his album Leave the Fire Behind . Santana covered the song on their 2010 cover album Guitar Heaven : The Greatest Guitar Classics of All Time as a bonus track on the Deluxe Edition . 
 = God of War : Betrayal = 
 God of War : Betrayal is a two @-@ dimensional ( 2D ) side @-@ scrolling action @-@ adventure mobile game developed by Javaground and Sony Online Entertainment 's ( SOE ) Los Angeles division , and published by Sony Pictures Digital . Released for mobile phones supporting the Java Platform , Micro Edition ( Java ME ) on June 20 , 2007 , it is the third installment in the God of War series , and the fifth chronologically . Loosely based on Greek mythology , Betrayal is set in ancient Greece with vengeance as its central motif . The player controls the protagonist Kratos , who became the new God of War after killing the former , Ares . Kratos is framed for the murder of Argos and pursues the true assassin across Greece , resulting in a confrontation with Olympian messenger Ceryx . 
 Betrayal is the only installment in the series to be released on a non @-@ PlayStation platform and presented as a 2D side @-@ scrolling game . Despite the limitations of the mobile platform , in comparison to its home console counterparts , it retains the action @-@ oriented approach of its predecessors , with the same combination of combo @-@ based combat , platforming , and puzzle game elements . Although God of War is primarily a home console series , Betrayal was praised for its fidelity to the series in terms of gameplay , art style , and graphics : " the real deal third game in the killer franchise " . It received awards for " Wireless Game of the Month " ( June 2007 ) and " Best Platform Game " ( wireless ) of 2007 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Although presented in two @-@ dimensional side @-@ scrolling format , the game retains the action @-@ oriented approach of its predecessors , with the player controlling the character Kratos in the same combination of combat , platforming , and puzzle game elements . Platforming elements include jumping across chasms , climbing ladders , and swinging on ropes . Some puzzles require Kratos to move a box on top of a switch ( thus activating it ) , or moving a box to use it as a jumping @-@ off point to reach a pathway unreachable with normal jumping . Game length is approximately two to four hours , and it consists of ten levels . 
 Kratos retains his main weapon of the previous installments , the Blades of Athena : a pair of blades attached to chains that are wrapped around the character 's wrists and forearms . In gameplay , the blades can be swung offensively in various maneuvers . Kratos utilizes the magical abilities Medusa 's Gaze and Army of Hades acquired in the original God of War , as well as the secondary weapon , the Blade of Artemis , with each offering alternative combat options , giving him a variety of ways to attack and kill enemies ( e.g. , Medusa 's Gaze briefly turns enemies to stone ) . Foes encountered in Betrayal primarily stem from Greek mythology , including Gorgons , minotaurs , and cerberuses , as well as those created for the game , such as the humanoid minions of the god Hades , including dead riders and undead legionnaires . In addition to the main gameplay , Betrayal includes a bonus " Arena Mode " where players must kill a certain number of enemies without dying before gaining access to the Arena 's upper levels . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 As with the previous games in the God of War franchise , God of War : Betrayal is set in an alternate version of ancient Greece , populated by the Olympian Gods and other beings of Greek mythology . Events are set between those of the games Ghost of Sparta ( 2010 ) and God of War II ( 2007 ) . The protagonist is Kratos , a former Captain of Sparta 's army who became the new God of War after killing his predecessor , Ares , the previous God of War . Other characters include Argos , the giant pet of the goddess Hera ; an unknown assassin ; and the Olympian messenger Ceryx , the son of Hermes and main antagonist . Zeus , the King of the Gods , is an unseen character . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Kratos is leading the Spartan army in a rampage across Greece . During the campaign , he is attacked by a number of beasts led by Argos , who was sent by the gods to stop Kratos . After a series of skirmishes , Argos is killed by an unknown assassin , who frames Kratos in an attempt to turn the gods against him . The Spartan pursues his foe across Greece to discover the identity of the assassin , but is slowed by constant attacks from the minions of Hades , the God of the Underworld . Zeus sends Ceryx to deliver a message to Kratos : stop the relentless pursuit and take heed of the destruction already caused . Kratos , however , battles and kills Ceryx , which inadvertently allows the assassin to escape . Kratos then realizes his actions have further alienated the gods , and Zeus will soon act in response to his defiance . 
 = = Development = = 
 God of War : Betrayal was announced by Sony Online Entertainment at a press conference in Los Angeles in May 2007 . The game utilizes a total of 110 different animations and features a 2D rendition of the series ' three dimensional ( 3D ) graphics . The character art and animation were done by WayForward Technologies . The only audio components are an orchestral score in the main menu and background sounds ( e.g. , clashing weapons ) . In August 2007 , Phil Cohen , producer , designer , and game director for Betrayal , spoke of the difficulties in developing a God of War game for a mobile device . Cohen said that although enjoyable , the greatest challenge was creating a single tileset and palette swapping scheme that was diverse enough to portray multiple environments with only several hundred kilobytes , and that met series creator Santa Monica Studio 's high standards . He wrote the initial design document between September and October 2005 , and revisited it in August 2006 , the month development started . The versions for high @-@ end handsets were completed in April 2007 , with final versions for low @-@ end handsets completed by June 2007 . The porting team adapted the game to over 200 handsets in a matter of weeks . 
 Cohen stated that one challenge was capturing the feel of God of War 's visual look and gameplay design , given the limited processing power and memory on most handsets — complicating puzzle design , traps , environment interaction , and enemy behavior . He noted that both David Jaffe and Cory Barlog ( game directors of God of War and God of War II respectively ) ensured the Betrayal development team captured the feel of the combat and visual style , and were " helpful with feedback and positive support " . The team also worked closely with Eric Williams , the console game 's lead combat designer . In keeping the " look and feel " true to the franchise , the development team played God of War extensively to study the pacing and tricks in the console releases . The development team also worked closely with Marianne Krawczyk , the writer of the God of War console games . Krawczyk used Betrayal to bridge the events between God of War and God of War II , include additional backstory , and to explain why the relationship between the gods and Kratos had changed . 
