 = = Reception = = 
 Betrayal received mixed @-@ to @-@ positive reception , including praise for its fidelity to the series in terms of gameplay , art style , and graphics . Levi Buchanan of IGN called it " the real deal third game in the killer franchise " . Similarly , Matt Paprocki of Blogcritics wrote , " Betrayal is a full @-@ fledged extension of the God of War franchise , and it earns its title " . He said it is " one of the best mobile games you ’ ll ever play , and has truly made the format a relevant part of the current video game scene . " In regards to violence , Chris Antista of GamesRadar stated that it is " quite possibly the goriest thing your mobile 's ever seen " . Although not a " revolutionary experience " , Pocket Gamer 's Will Freeman said " it is a thoroughly impressive , utterly solid release that mobile platform fans will relish . " <unk> 's Justin Davis said that while Betrayal is compelling enough to play all the way to the end , " [ it did not ] feel like I was having fun . " 
 The context @-@ sensitive attacks received praise and criticism . Antista said , " [ the thing ] fans will be thankful for is the triumphant return of the contextual attacks " , but added that the control limitations were the " only real problem " , as the sensitivity of the cursor button can result in a failed combo , " And the jump button sends you forward in the direction you 're facing automatically . " Buchanan noted that the contextual attacks " can prove frustratingly tricky as you have a brief amount of time to input the commands , but the controls on most handsets are quite small " . 
 Commenting on the combat , Paprocki said that despite the simplified combo system , the developers have " managed to infuse the sheer brutality and force God of War is known for within the confines of the [ mobile ] platform . " Because of the simplified system , situations which call for Kratos ' magical abilities are rare . However , if players do choose to use these abilities , selecting them is a " burden in the haste of a battle " , requiring players to cycle through their entire inventory . Paprocki also criticized the lack of an autosave feature , as the game does not save the player 's position when receiving a phone call , which " can lead to unbearable frustration . " Freeman said that the combination of the weapons and <unk> make the combat " a convincing interpretation of the action in the original console games " . Davis said that although there are puzzle and platforming elements , the focus is " clearly on the combat " and felt that the combat system was " a little shallow " . He said it seems as if the abundance of enemies " exist solely to act as punching ( or slicing , as it were ) bags for Kratos " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 IGN named Betrayal " Wireless Game of the Month " for June 2007 . In their Best of 2007 – Wireless Awards , they named it the " Best Platform Game " . 
 = Myles Standish = 
 Myles Standish ( c . 1584 – October 3 , 1656 ) was an English military officer hired by the Pilgrims as military adviser for Plymouth Colony . He accompanied the Pilgrims on their journey on the Mayflower and subsequently Standish played a leading role in the administration and defense of Plymouth Colony from its inception . On February 17 , 1621 , the Plymouth Colony militia elected him as its first commander and continued to re @-@ elect him to that position for the remainder of his life . Standish served as an agent of Plymouth Colony in England , as assistant governor , and as treasurer of Plymouth Colony . He was also one of the first settlers and founders of the town of Duxbury , Massachusetts . 
 A defining characteristic of Standish 's military leadership was his proclivity for preemptive action which resulted in at least two attacks ( or small skirmishes ) on different groups of Native Americans — the Nemasket raid and the conflict at Wessagusset Colony . During these actions , Standish exhibited considerable courage and skill as a soldier , but also demonstrated a brutality that angered Native Americans and disturbed more moderate members of the Colony . 
 One of Standish 's last military actions on behalf of Plymouth Colony was the botched Penobscot expedition in 1635 . By the 1640s , Standish relinquished his role as an active soldier and settled into a quieter life on his Duxbury farm . He was still nominally the commander of the Pilgrim military forces in the growing Plymouth Colony , although he seems to have preferred to act in an advisory capacity . He died in his home in Duxbury in 1656 at age 72 . He supported and defended the Pilgrims ' colony for much of his life , though there is no evidence to suggest that Standish ever joined their church . 
 Several towns and military installations have been named for Standish , and monuments have been built in his memory . One of the best known depictions of Standish in popular culture was the 1858 poem The Courtship of Miles Standish by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow . The highly fictionalized story presents Standish as a timid romantic . It was extremely popular in the 19th century and played a significant role in cementing the Pilgrim story in US culture . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Birthplace and early military service = = = 
 Little is definitively known of Myles Standish 's origins and early life . His place of birth has been subject to debate among historians for more than 150 years . At the center of the debate is language in Myles Standish 's will , drafted in Plymouth Colony in 1656 , regarding his rights of inheritance . Standish wrote : 
 I give unto my son & heire apparent Alexander Standish all my lands as heire apparent by <unk> decent in <unk> ( Ormskirk ) <unk> ( Burscough ) Wrightington Maudsley ( <unk> ) <unk> ( Newburgh ) <unk> ( Croston ) and in the Isle of man [ sic ] ( to the west of Croston ) and given to mee as Right heire by <unk> decent but <unk> detained from mee My great Grandfather being a <unk> or younger brother from the house of Standish of Standish . 
 The places named by Standish are all in Lancashire , England , with the exception of the Isle of Man , leading some to conclude that he was born in Lancashire — possibly in the vicinity of Chorley where a branch of the Standish family owned a manor known as Duxbury Hall . However , efforts to link Standish to the <unk> of Duxbury Hall have been inconclusive . A competing theory focuses on Standish 's mention of the Isle of Man and argues that he belonged to a Manx branch of the Standish family . No definitive documentation exists in either location to provide clear evidence of Standish 's birthplace . 
 Possibly the best source , however brief , on Standish 's origins and early life is a short passage recorded by Nathaniel Morton , secretary of Plymouth Colony , who wrote in his New England 's Memorial , published in 1669 , that Standish : 
 ... was a gentleman , born in Lancashire , and was heir apparent unto a great estate of lands and livings , surreptitiously detained from him ; his great grandfather being a second or younger brother from the house of Standish . In his younger time he went over into the low countries , and was a soldier there , and came acquainted with the church at Leyden , and came over into New England , with such of them as at the first set out for the planting of the plantation of New Plymouth , and bare a deep share of their first difficulties , and was always very faithful to their interest . 
 The circumstances are vague at best concerning Standish 's early military career in Holland ( the " low countries " to which Morton referred ) . At the time , the Dutch Republic was embroiled in the Eighty Years ' War with Spain . Queen Elizabeth I of England chose to support the Protestant Dutch Republic and sent troops to fight the Spanish in Holland . Historians are divided on his role in the English military . Nathaniel Philbrick refers to Standish as a " mercenary " , suggesting that he was a hired soldier of fortune seeking opportunity in Holland , but Justin Winsor claims that Standish received a lieutenant 's commission in the English army and was subsequently promoted to captain in Holland . Jeremy Bangs , a leading scholar of Pilgrim history , noted that Standish likely served under Sir Horatio Vere , an English general who had recruited soldiers in both Lancashire and the Isle of Man , among other places , and who led the English troops in Holland at the time Standish was there . 
 Whether commissioned officer , mercenary , or both , Standish apparently came to Holland around 1603 and , according to historian Tudor Jenks , may have seen service during the siege of Sluis in 1604 , in which Vere 's English troops were involved . The subsequent Twelve Years ' Truce ( 1609 – 1621 ) between Spain and the Dutch Republic might have ended Standish 's service . 
 Standish was certainly still in Holland in 1620 and living in Leiden when he was hired by a group of refugee dissenters from England — Puritans — to act as their adviser on military matters . At that time , he was using the title of " Captain . " When considering candidates for this important position , the Puritans had at first hoped to engage Captain John Smith . As one of the founders of the English colony at Jamestown , Virginia , Smith had explored and mapped the North American coast . When they approached him to return to the New World , Smith expressed interest . His experience made him an attractive candidate , but the Pilgrims ultimately decided against him ; his price was too high and they feared that his fame and bold character might lead him to become a dictator . Standish lived in Leiden with his wife Rose and was apparently already known to them . 
 = = = Voyage to New Plymouth = = = 
 On July 22 , 1620 ( Old Style date ) , the initial group of English Dissenters living in Leiden boarded the Speedwell , which was meant to accompany another ship to be hired in England . This initial group included the mostly <unk> congregation . Myles and Rose Standish were aboard , along with the <unk> , <unk> , Carvers , and others . The small , 60 @-@ ton pinnace sailed to Southampton with about 30 passengers , to be provisioned there and join a much larger vessel for the voyage to the New World . Another 90 passengers would board the 180 ton Mayflower . The Speedwell had some significant leaks while in port that caused delays , but both vessels departed Southampton August 5 . 
 The leaders of the colony decided to leave the smaller Speedwell behind after numerous delays caused by leaking , which had caused them to return to port twice . They sold some valuable supplies such as butter to pay the mounting port fees , and finally departed Plymouth , England on September 6 , 1620 on board the Mayflower , bound for the northern part of the Virginia Colony . The Speedwell , now with only a few passengers , went on to London to be resold ; she subsequently made numerous successful journeys as a cargo vessel for her new owners , but never sailed to the New World . The <unk> and most of the Speedwell passengers crowded into the Mayflower . 
 The passage of the Mayflower across the North Atlantic lasted more than two months , with 102 passengers crowded onto the cargo ship 's gun deck and about 30 crew members . The seas were not severe during the first month of the voyage but , by the second month , the ship was being hit by strong autumn gales , causing it to be badly shaken with water leaks from structural damage . There were two deaths , but this was just a precursor to what happened after their Cape Cod arrival , when almost half the company died in the first winter . 
 On November 9 , 1620 , lookouts spotted land , but it was quickly appreciated that their location was about 200 miles east @-@ northeast of their planned destination of northern Virginia — near what is now called Cape Cod . They tried briefly to sail south , but strong seas forced them to retreat to Cape Cod to harbor near the " hook " – present @-@ day Provincetown Harbor . It became apparent that the weather would not permit the passage south , so they decided to settle near Cape Cod . Shortage of supplies ( including wood and beer ) and the roaring Atlantic made it too dangerous to press on for a Virginia landing . They anchored at the hook on November 11 , but not before signing a significant document . The leaders of the colony wrote the Mayflower Compact to ensure a degree of law and order in this place where they had not been granted a patent to settle . Myles Standish was one of the 41 men who signed the document . 
 = = = Establishment of Plymouth Colony = = = 
 When the Mayflower was anchored off Cape Cod , Standish urged the colony 's leaders to allow him to take a party ashore to find a suitable place for settlement . On November 15 , 1620 , he led 16 men in a foot exploration of the northern portion of the Cape . On December 11 , a group of 18 settlers , including Standish , made an extended exploration of the shore of Cape Cod by boat , spending their nights ashore surrounded by makeshift barricades of tree branches . The settlers were attacked one night by a group of about 30 Native Americans . At first , the Englishmen panicked , but Standish calmed them , urging the settlers not to fire their matchlock muskets unnecessarily . The incident took place in present @-@ day Eastham , Massachusetts and came to be known as the First Encounter . 
 After further exploration , the Pilgrims chose a location in present @-@ day Plymouth Bay in late December 1620 as the site for their settlement . Standish provided important counsel on the placement of a small fort in which cannon were mounted , and on the layout of the first houses for maximum defensibility . Only one house ( consisting of a single room ) had been built when illness struck the settlers . Of the roughly 100 who first arrived , only 50 survived the first winter . Standish 's wife Rose died in January . 
 Standish himself was one of the very few who did not fall ill and William Bradford ( soon to be governor of Plymouth Colony ) credited Standish with comforting many and being a source of strength to those who suffered . Standish tended to Bradford during his illness , and this was the beginning of a decades @-@ long friendship . Bradford held the position of governor for most of his life and , by necessity , worked closely with Standish . In terms of character , the two men were opposites — Bradford was patient and slow to judgment , while Standish was well known for his fiery temper . Despite their differences , the two worked well together in managing the colony and responding to dangers as they arose . 
 = = Defense of Plymouth Colony = = 
 By February 1621 , the colonists had sighted Native Americans several times , but there had been no communication . The men of the colony were anxious to prepare themselves in case of hostilities , so they formed a militia on February 17 , 1621 consisting of all able @-@ bodied men , electing Standish as their commander . The leaders of Plymouth Colony had already hired him for that role , but this vote ratified the decision by democratic process . The men of Plymouth Colony continued to re @-@ elect Standish to that position for the remainder of his life . As captain of the militia , Standish regularly drilled his men in the use of pikes and muskets . 
 Contact with the Native Americans came in March 1621 through Samoset , an English @-@ speaking Abenaki who arranged for the Pilgrims to meet with Massasoit , the sachem of the nearby Pokanoket tribe . On March 22 , the first governor of Plymouth Colony John Carver signed a treaty with Massasoit , declaring an alliance between the Pokanoket and the Englishmen and requiring the two parties to defend each other in times of need . Governor Carver died the same year and the responsibility of upholding the treaty fell to his successor William Bradford . Bradford and Standish were frequently preoccupied with the complex task of reacting to threats against both the Pilgrims and the <unk> from tribes such as the Massachusetts and the Narragansetts . As threats arose , Standish typically advocated intimidation to deter their rivals . Such behavior at times made Bradford uncomfortable , but he found it an expedient means of maintaining the treaty with the Pokanoket . 
 = = = Nemasket raid = = = 
 The first challenge to the treaty came in August 1621 when a sachem named Corbitant began to undermine Massasoit 's leadership . Corbitant worked to turn the people of Nemasket against Massasoit in the Pokanoket village of Nemasket , now the site of Middleborough , Massachusetts , about 14 miles ( 23 km ) west of Plymouth . Bradford sent two trusted interpreters to determine what was happening in Nemasket : Tisquantum ( known to the English as Squanto ) and Hobbamock . Tisquantum had been pivotal in providing counsel and aid to the Pilgrims , ensuring the survival of the colony . Hobbamock , another influential ally , was a <unk> — a high @-@ ranking advisor to Massasoit — and a warrior who commanded particular respect and fear among Native Americans . When Tisquantum and Hobbamock arrived in Nemasket , Corbitant took Tisquantum captive and threatened to kill him . Hobbamock escaped to warn Plymouth . 
 Bradford and Standish agreed that this represented a dangerous threat to the English @-@ Pokanoket alliance and decided to act quickly . On August 14 , 1621 , Standish led a group of 10 men to Nemasket , determined to kill Corbitant . They were guided by Hobbamock who quickly befriended Standish . The two men were close for the remainder of their lives . In his old age , Hobbamock became part of Standish 's household in Duxbury . 
 Reaching Nemasket , Standish planned a night attack on the wigwam in which Corbitant was believed to be sleeping . That night , Standish and Hobbamock burst into the shelter , shouting for Corbitant . As frightened <unk> attempted to escape , Englishmen outside the wigwam fired their muskets , wounding a Pokanoket man and woman who were later taken to Plymouth to be treated . Standish soon learned that Corbitant had already fled the village and Tisquantum was unharmed . 
 Standish had failed to capture Corbitant , but the raid had the desired effect . On September 13 , 1621 , nine sachems came to Plymouth , including Corbitant , to sign a treaty of loyalty to King James . 
 = = = Palisade = = = 
 In November 1621 , a Narragansett messenger arrived in Plymouth and delivered a bundle of arrows wrapped in a snakeskin . The Pilgrims were told by Tisquantum and Hobbamock that this was a threat and an insult from the Narragansett sachem Canonicus . The Narragansetts lived west of what is now known as Narragansett Bay in present @-@ day Rhode Island , and were one of the more powerful tribes in the region . Bradford sent back the snakeskin filled with gunpowder and shot in an effort to show that they were not intimidated . 
 Taking the threat seriously , Standish urged that the colonists encircle their small village with a palisade made of tall , upright logs . The proposal would require a wall more than half a mile ( or 0 @.@ 8 km ) long . In addition , Standish recommended the construction of strong gates and platforms for shooting over the wall . The colony had recently been reinforced by the arrival of new colonists from the ship Fortune , but there were still only 50 men to work on the task . Despite the challenges , the settlers constructed the palisade per Standish 's recommendations in just three months , finishing in March 1622 . Standish divided the militia into four companies , one to man each wall , and drilled them in defending the village in the event of attack . 
 = = = Wessagusset = = = 
 A more serious threat came from the Massachusett tribe to the north and was precipitated by the arrival of a new group of English colonists . In April 1622 , the vanguard of a new colony arrived in Plymouth . They had been sent by merchant Thomas Weston to establish a new settlement somewhere near Plymouth . The men chose a site on the shore of what is now the Fore River in present @-@ day Weymouth , Massachusetts , about 25 miles ( 40 km ) north of Plymouth . They called their colony Wessagusset . The settlers of the poorly managed colony infuriated the Massachusett tribe through theft and recklessness . By March 1623 , Massasoit had learned that a group of influential Massachusett warriors intended to destroy both the Wessagusset and the Plymouth colonies . Massasoit warned the Pilgrims to strike first . One of the colonists of Wessagusset named Phineas Pratt verified that his settlement was in danger . Pratt managed to escape to Plymouth and reported that the English in Wessagusset had been repeatedly threatened by the Massachusett , the settlement was in a state of constant watchfulness , and that men were dying at their posts from starvation . 
 Bradford called a public meeting at which the Pilgrims decided to send Standish and a small group of eight , including Hobbamock , to Wessagusset to kill the leaders of the alleged plot to wipe out the English settlements . The mission had a personal aspect for Standish . One of the warriors threatening Wessagusset was Wituwamat , a Neponset who had earlier insulted and threatened Standish . 
 Arriving at Wessagusset , Standish found that many of the Englishmen had gone to live with the Massachusett . Standish ordered them to be called back to Wessagusset . The day after Standish 's arrival , Pecksuot , a Massachusett warrior and leader of the group threatening Wessagusset , came to the settlement with Wituwamat and other warriors . Standish claimed simply to be in Wessagusset on a trading mission , but Pecksuot said to Hobbamock , " Let him begin when he dare ... he shall not take us unawares . " Later in the day , Pecksuot approached Standish , looking down on him , and said , " You are a great captain , yet you are but a little man . Though I be no sachem , yet I am of great strength and courage . " 
 The next day , Standish arranged to meet with Pecksuot over a meal in one of Wessagusset 's one @-@ room houses . Pecksuot brought with him Wituwamat , a third warrior , an adolescent boy ( Wituwamat 's brother ) , and several women . Standish had three men of Plymouth and Hobbamock with him in the house . On an arranged signal , the English shut the door of the house and Standish attacked Pecksuot , stabbing him repeatedly with the man 's own knife . Wituwamat and the third warrior were also killed . Leaving the house , Standish ordered two more Massachusett warriors to be put to death . Gathering his men , Standish went outside the walls of Wessagusset in search of Obtakiest , a sachem of the Massachusett tribe . The Englishmen soon encountered Obtakiest with a group of warriors and a skirmish ensued , during which Obtakiest escaped . 
 Having accomplished his mission , Standish returned to Plymouth with Wituwamat 's head . The leaders of the alleged plot to destroy the English settlements had been killed and the threat removed , but the action had unexpected consequences . The settlement of Wessagusset was all but abandoned after the incident , which Standish had been trying to protect . Most of the settlers departed for an English fishing post on <unk> Island . The attack also caused widespread panic among Native Americans throughout the region . Villages were abandoned and the Pilgrims had difficulty reviving trade for some time . 
 Pastor John Robinson was still in Leiden , but he criticized Standish for his brutality . Bradford , too , was uncomfortable with Standish 's methods , but defended him in a letter : " As for <unk> Standish , we leave him to answer for him selfe , but this we must say , he is as <unk> an instrument as any we have , and as <unk> of the generall good . " 
 = = = Dispersal of Merrymount settlers = = = 
 In 1625 , another group of English settlers established an outpost not far from the site of Wessagusset , located in what is now Quincy , Massachusetts , about 27 miles ( 43 km ) north of Plymouth . The settlement was officially known as Mount Wollaston , but soon earned the nickname " Merrymount . " Thomas Morton , leader of the small group of Englishmen , encouraged behavior that the Pilgrims found objectionable and dangerous . The men of Merrymount built a maypole , drank liberally , refused to observe the Sabbath , and sold weapons to Native Americans . Bradford found the weapons sales particularly disturbing and ordered Standish to lead an expedition to arrest Morton in 1628 . 
 Standish arrived with a group of men to find that the small band at Merrymount had barricaded themselves within a small building . Morton eventually decided to attack the men from Plymouth , but the Merrymount group was allegedly too drunk to handle their weapons . Morton aimed a weapon at Standish , which the captain purportedly ripped from Morton 's hands . Standish and his men took Morton to Plymouth and eventually sent him back to England . Later , Morton wrote the book New English Canaan , in which he referred to Myles Standish as " Captain Shrimp , " and wrote , " I have found the Massachusetts Indians more full of humanity than the Christians . " 
 = = = Penobscot expedition = = = 
 Having defended Plymouth from Native Americans and other Englishmen , Standish 's last significant expedition was against the French . The French established a trading post in 1613 on the Penobscot River , in what is now Castine , Maine . English forces captured the settlement in 1628 and turned it over to Plymouth Colony . It was a valuable source of furs and timber for the Pilgrims for seven years . However , in 1635 , the French mounted a small expedition and easily reclaimed the settlement . William Bradford ordered Captain Standish to take action , determined that the post be reclaimed in Plymouth Colony 's name . This was a significantly larger proposition than the small expeditions which Standish had previously led . To accomplish the task , Standish chartered the ship Good Hope , captained by a man named Girling . Standish 's plan appears to have been to bring the Good Hope within cannon range of the trading post and to bombard the French into surrender . Unfortunately , Girling ordered the bombardment before the ship was within range and quickly spent all the gunpowder on board . Standish gave up the effort . 
 By this time , the neighboring and more populous Massachusetts Bay Colony had been established . Bradford appealed to leaders of the colony in Boston for help in reclaiming the trading post . The Bay Colony refused . The incident was indicative of the rivalry which persisted between Plymouth and Massachusetts Bay colonies . In 1691 , the two colonies merged to become the royal Province of Massachusetts Bay . 
 = = = Settlement in Duxbury = = = 
 In 1625 , Plymouth Colony leaders appointed Standish to travel to London to negotiate new terms with the Merchant Adventurers . If a settlement could be reached and the Pilgrims could pay off their debt to the Adventurers , then the colonists would have new rights to allot land and settle where they pleased . Standish was not successful in his negotiations and returned to Plymouth in April 1626 . Another effort was successful later in 1626 , this time negotiated by Isaac Allerton , and several leading men of Plymouth , including Standish , paid off the colony 's debt to the Adventurers . 
 Now free of the directives of the Merchant Adventurers , the leaders of Plymouth Colony exerted their new @-@ found autonomy by organizing a land division in 1627 . Large farm lots were parceled out to each family in the colony along the shore of the present @-@ day towns of Plymouth , Kingston , Duxbury , and Marshfield , Massachusetts . Standish received a farm of 120 acres ( 49 ha ) in what became Duxbury . He built a house and settled there around 1628 . 
 There are indications that Standish began to seek a quieter life by 1635 ( after the Penobscot expedition ) , maintaining the livestock and fields of his Duxbury farm . Standish was about 51 years old at that time , and he began to relinquish the responsibility of defending the colony to a younger generation . A note in the colony records of 1635 indicates that Lieutenant William Holmes , Standish 's immediate subordinate , was appointed to train the militia . When the Pequot War loomed in 1637 , Standish was appointed to a committee to raise a company of 30 men , but it was Holmes who led the company in the field . 
 The families living in what had come to be referred to as Duxbury ( sometimes " <unk> " ) requested to be set off from Plymouth as a separate town with their own church and minister . This request was granted in 1637 . Some , including historian Justin Winsor , have insisted that the name of the town of Duxbury was given by Standish in honor of Duxbury Hall , near Chorley in Lancashire , which was owned by a branch of the Standish family . The coincidence would suggest that Standish had something to do with the naming of Duxbury , Massachusetts , though no records exist to indicate how the town was named . 
 = = = Last years = = = 
 During the 1640s , Standish took on an increasingly administrative role . He served as a surveyor of highways , as Treasurer of the Colony from 1644 to 1649 , and on various committees to lay out boundaries of new towns and inspect waterways . His old friend Hobbamock had been part of his household , but he died in 1642 and was buried on Standish 's farm in Duxbury . 
 Standish died on October 3 , 1656 of " <unk> " or strangury , a condition often associated with kidney stones or bladder cancer . He was buried in Duxbury 's Old Burying Ground , now known as the Myles Standish Cemetery . 
 = = Marriages and family = = 
 Myles Standish married : 
 Rose Handley ( 1601 – 1621 ) by about 1618 . She died on January 29 , 1621 . She was buried in an unmarked grave at Coles Hill Burial Ground in Plymouth , as were many others who died the first winter . She is named on the Pilgrim Memorial Tomb on Cole 's Hill as " Rose , first wife of Myles Standish " . 
 Barbara Mullins by about 1624 . Per Banks , she had come to Plymouth in 1623 on either the ' Anne ' or ' Little James ' , and they were married the following spring . In the past , historians have suggested that she may have been a sister of Standish 's first wife , Rose , and that he specifically sent for her . They had seven children . She died after October 6 , 1659 and her burial place is unknown . 
 Children of Myles and Barbara Standish : 
 Charles ( 1 ) was born in 1624 . He died between May 22 , 1627 and 1635 . 
 Alexander was born about 1626 and died July 6 , 1702 . He was buried in Myles Standish Burying Ground in Duxbury , Massachusetts . Alexander married first : Sarah Alden by about 1660 and had eight children . She died before June 13 , 1688 . Her father was Mayflower passenger John Alden . Second , he married Desire ( Doty ) ( Sherman ) Holmes by 1689 and had three children . She died in Marshfield on January 22 , 1731 . Her father was Mayflower passenger Edward Doty . 
 John was born about 1627 . No further record . 
 Myles was born about 1629 and died at sea after March 20 , 1661 . His body was lost at sea . Myles married Sarah Winslow in Boston on July 19 , 1660 , but there is no record of children . 
 <unk> ( Lora ) was born about 1631 and died by March 7 , 1655 / 6 . Unmarried . 
 Josiah was born about 1633 and died in Preston , Connecticut , on March 19 , 1690 . He was historically known as Capt. Josiah Standish . His burial place is unknown . Josiah married first : Mary Dingley in Marshfield on December 19 , 1654 and died in Duxbury on July 1 , 1655 . Second , Sarah Allen after 1655 and had eight children . She died after September 16 , 1690 . 
 Charles ( 2 ) was born by about 1635 . He was still living on March 7 , 1655 / 6 . No further record . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Standish 's true @-@ life role in defending Plymouth Colony and the sometimes brutal tactics that he employed were largely obscured by the fictionalized character created by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow in his narrative poem The Courtship of Miles Standish . Historian Tudor Jenks wrote that Longfellow 's book had " no claim to be considered other than a pleasant little <unk> , and as an entirely misleading sketch of men and matters in old Plymouth . " However , the book elevated Standish to the level of folk hero in Victorian America . In late 19th century Duxbury , the book generated a movement to build monuments in Standish 's honor , a beneficial by @-@ product of which was increased tourism to the town . 
 The first of these monuments was the largest . The cornerstone was laid for the Myles Standish Monument in Duxbury in 1872 , with a crowd of ten thousand people attending the ceremonies . It was finished in 1898 , the third tallest monument to an individual in the United States . It is surpassed only by the first dedicated Washington Monument ( 178 feet ) in Baltimore , Maryland ( finished in 1829 ) and the Washington Monument ( 555 feet ) in Washington , D.C. ( dedicated in 1885 ) . The top of the monument is 116 feet ( 35 m ) overall , and at the top stands a 14 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) statue of Standish . 
 A second , smaller monument was placed over the alleged site of Myles Standish 's grave in 1893 . Two exhumations of Standish 's remains were undertaken in 1889 and 1891 to determine the location of the Captain 's resting place . A third exhumation took place in 1930 to place Standish 's remains in a hermetically sealed chamber beneath the grave @-@ site monument . 
 The site of Myles Standish 's house reveals only a slight depression in the ground where the cellar hole was , but it is now a small park owned and maintained by the town of Duxbury . 
 Standish , Maine is named for the Captain , as well as the neighborhood of Standish , Minneapolis . At least two forts were named after Standish : an earthen fort on Plymouth 's Saquish Neck built during the American Civil War , and a larger cement fort built on <unk> Island in Boston Harbor in 1895 . Both forts are now abandoned . Camp Myles Standish in nearby Taunton was also named for Standish . 
 Standish is buried in Myles Standish Burial Ground , obviously named after him . 
 Myles Standish State Forest is located in the towns of Plymouth and Carver in southeastern Massachusetts , approximately 45 miles ( 70 km ) south of Boston . It is the largest publicly owned recreation area in this part of Massachusetts , and is managed by the Department of Conservation and Recreation ( DCR ) . 
 = Weymouth and Portland National Sailing Academy = 
 Weymouth and Portland National Sailing Academy is a centre for the sport of sailing on the Isle of Portland , Dorset , on the south coast of England . The academy building is located in Osprey Quay on the northern tip of the island , and the waters of Portland Harbour and Weymouth Bay , adjacent to the site , are the main areas used for sailing . Local , national and international sailing events have been held at the site since it was opened in 2000 , and in 2005 WPNSA was selected to host the sailing events at the 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games . 
 = = History = = 
 The academy was formed as a not @-@ for @-@ profit company in 1999 and officially opened on 1 April 2000 . It occupied converted naval premises until a clubhouse was built , which was opened in June 2005 by the Princess Royal . £ 7 @.@ 85 million of funding for the project was donated by charities , individuals and local councils ; the National Lottery donated £ 3 million in 2003 , and the South West Regional Development Agency added £ 3 @.@ 34 million . The academy 's aims are to promote the sport of sailing at all levels of competence and ability , through courses , training and events , and to contribute to the economic regeneration of the area . Since opening it has created a demand in service and marine industries worth around £ 10 million . WPNSA continues to promote sailing to local schools , offering benefits such as free boat hoist and storage . Use of the facilities and access to training is open to anyone in return for an annual membership fee . On 6 July 2005 , London was chosen to host the 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games , and the WPNSA was chosen to host the sailing events . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Portland Harbour and Weymouth Bay are the main areas used for sailing . The harbour covers an area of 8 @.@ 6 square kilometres ( 2 @,@ 125 acres ) , and is ideal for sailing as it is exposed to reliable winds from most directions , but is sheltered from large waves and currents by Chesil Beach and the breakwaters . The clubhouse houses facilities on two floors , including a gymnasium , seven lecture and meeting rooms for 260 people , an event hall with kitchens and a bar , VIP meeting rooms and offices , a lounge bar and cafeteria seating 350 people , and two balconies . The outside of the academy complex has a 40 @-@ metre ( 131 ft ) slipway and two deep water slipways , 30 pontoons with disabled access , <unk> and boat hoists , boat storage and parking areas . WPNSA also operates Boscawen House , formerly an admiral 's residence , which offers accommodation for a maximum of 47 people . The clubhouse generates 15 – 20 % of its electricity from solar cells , and rainwater is collected from the roof to wash boats . 
 = = = Osprey Quay = = = 
 In November 2007 , the South West Regional Development Agency signed a deal with Sutton Harbour Group to construct a 3 @-@ hectare ( 7 @-@ acre ) year @-@ round tourist and leisure complex in Osprey Quay , between Portland Castle and the academy . The £ 30 million scheme , called Castle Court , includes a hotel , apartments , public areas , a restaurant , shops and other employment space , and is expected to create 300 jobs . A permanent base for the Royal Yachting Association 's senior , youth , junior and paralympic national sailing squads is to be provided . 
 = = Events = = 
 Since opening the academy has hosted national and international sailing events , including the J / 24 World Championships in 2005 , staging trials for the 2004 Athens Olympics , the ISAF World Championship 2006 , the BUCS Fleet Racing Championships , and the RYA Youth National Championships . Local events are also held at the academy ; nearby schools have extra @-@ curricular sailing lessons , and in October each year WPNSA hosts Weymouth Speed Week . The British Olympic Sailing Team train at WPNSA . 
 = = = 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games = = = 
 In 2005 , the Weymouth and Portland National Sailing Academy ( WPNSA ) was chosen as the venue for the sailing competition at the London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic games . WPNSA was chosen to host these events due to its existing World class facilities . The Olympic Delivery Authority has built upon these facilities providing a new <unk> slipway accessible at all states of tide and wind , an additional 70 marina berths and an extended dinghy park with capacity for 600 boats . In addition , the Academy provides direct access to Portland Harbour and Weymouth Bay which have been credited as some of the best sailing waters in the World . Olympic sailing events took place between 28 July and 11 August 2012 , and Paralympic events between 31 August and 5 September . One course was in Portland Harbour and four in Weymouth Bay . Sailors from all over the world competed for 30 medals in the Olympic Games and 18 medals in the Paralympic Games . A cruise liner berthed at Portland Port was used as accommodation . 
 The academy is around 190 kilometres ( 120 mi ) from the Olympic Zone in central London . There was concern about the logistics of transporting athletes from London to the academy , as there is no motorway in Dorset , and transport links are already often congested in summer . Weymouth and Portland Borough Council lobbied the Department for Transport to lay dual railway track and increase services from Weymouth railway station to London and Bristol , and to introduce new direct services to Exeter . Services to London Waterloo began running every 30 minutes from December 2007 , but services through Bristol to Cardiff were stopped . On 5 April 2007 , Dorset County Council granted planning permission for a relief road scheme to alleviate congestion between Weymouth and Dorchester , which includes a single carriageway running 7 kilometres ( 4 mi ) north of Weymouth , and a 1000 @-@ space park @-@ and @-@ ride scheme , costing £ 84 @.@ 5 million . Work on the road commenced in 2008 , and as anticipated it was completed in three years , in time for the 2012 Olympic sailing events . 
 The academy also hosted the Moth World Championships in 2008 . 
 = = = 2016 Vintage Yachting Games = = = 
 The Vintage Yachting Games ( Vintage ) are the International Post @-@ Olympic Yachting / Sailing event for former Olympic classes . The Vintage is held every four years . 
 During the closing ceremony of the 2012 Vintage Yachting Games at Lake Como Italy , the Weymouth and Portland National Sailing Academy ( WPNSA ) was formally announced as the venue for the 2016 Vintage Yachting Games . 
 = Shannon Rutherford = 
 Shannon Rutherford was a fictional character played by Maggie Grace on the ABC drama television series Lost , which chronicled the lives of the survivors of a plane crash in the South Pacific . Shannon was introduced in the pilot episode as the stepsister of fellow crash survivor Boone Carlyle ( Ian Somerhalder ) . She was a series regular until her funeral in " What Kate Did " . For most of her time on the Island , she was unhelpful and spent much of her time sunbathing . She formed a relationship with another survivor from the plane crash , Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) . Shannon was accidentally shot by Ana Lucia Cortez who mistakes her for an Other . 
 During the casting process , she was compared to Paris Hilton . Naveen Andrews , who played the character Sayid on the show , had the idea of encouraging the writers to write a romantic relationship between his character and Shannon into the story . Critics found her to be a largely unsympathetic character until only shortly before her death . Nonetheless , Grace received a Teen Choice Award nomination for her role as Shannon . 
 = = Arc = = 
 = = = Prior to the crash = = = 
 When Shannon is eight , her father marries Sabrina Carlyle ( Lindsay Frost ) , and she spends much of her adolescence with her stepbrother Boone . She studies ballet and , as she gets older , teaches dance classes to young girls . When she is eighteen , Shannon 's father dies in a car crash . He did not have a will prepared , so all of his money and property goes to his wife . Sabrina refuses to help Shannon financially , despite Shannon winning a prestigious yet non @-@ paying internship to the Martha Graham Dance Company in New York . Unable to come up with the money herself , Shannon moves to France for a short time to work as an au pair . Shannon later forms a plan to con her stepbrother , Boone Carlyle , into giving her some of the inheritance she rightly deserved . Playing on her knowledge of Boone 's love for her , she makes it appear her boyfriend Brian abuses her . Boone pays Brian to leave her , and Shannon plans to secretly take half the money . During one con in Sydney , her " abusive boyfriend " ruins Shannon 's ruse after Boone cuts him a check . Boone storms off to his hotel room and plans to return to the States . When Shannon 's boyfriend takes off with all of the money , Shannon goes to Boone 's hotel room in Sydney , drunk , and Boone allows her to seduce him . After they have sex , Shannon tells Boone things will go back to the way they had been before . He expresses anger because , as always , they both know she is in control of their situation / relationship . The following morning at the Sydney airport , Sayid Jarrah approaches Shannon , asking her to watch his bag for him . She deftly obliges , but soon leaves it unattended . Before the doomed Flight 815 takes off , Shannon rummages through her hand @-@ luggage for her asthma inhaler , which Boone casually hands to her . She smiles , the platonic love she has for Boone briefly relieving her of her misery . Six hours into the flight , only moments before the crash , Shannon and Boone are momentarily seen as Charlie Pace stumbles through their row . 
 = = = After the crash = = = 
 Upon landing on the Island , she decides to join Sayid on a hike to transmit a distress signal , after she and Boone have an argument about her selfishness . When they discover a French looped signal already being transmitted , Shannon 's knowledge of the language is used to translate it . Later , Shannon has an asthma attack , but her inhalers are nowhere to be found . Sun ( Yunjin Kim ) cures her , by using eucalyptus plants to help her breathing . Because of her selfish and manipulative behavior , Boone brands Shannon useless . Sayid enlists her to help translate the maps belonging to the French woman who made the radio transmission , Danielle Rousseau ( Mira Furlan ) . Shannon and Sayid soon form a romantic relationship . After returning from a romantic night along the beach with Sayid , she learns Boone has died after falling from a great height . At his funeral , Shannon does not speak , but allows Sayid to talk instead . Shannon holds Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) responsible for Boone 's death , and asks Sayid to take action . When he refuses , she steals the key to the gun case from Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) and holds Locke at gunpoint in the jungle . When Rousseau arrives on the beach one morning to warn the camp of the Others ' imminent arrival , Shannon prepares to migrate to the caves with the rest of the group . Before leaving on the raft the survivors have built , Walt Lloyd ( Malcolm David Kelley ) gives Shannon guardianship of his dog , Vincent , as a means to help her recover from her loss . 
 At the start of season two , Shannon loses Vincent in the jungle . While searching for him , she is shocked to find Walt standing before her , dripping wet . However , when Sayid finds her , Walt disappears . Over the next few days , Sayid builds Shannon a shelter on the beach . He brings her to it and they soon decide to sleep together for the first time . Sayid leaves to get a bottle of water for Shannon and in his absence , Shannon again sees a vision of Walt , standing in the shelter with her . Sayid brushes off her experience as a dream . She uses Vincent to try to find Walt , only for him to lead her to Boone 's grave . After a while , she takes Vincent into the jungle again , with Sayid in pursuit . As it starts to rain , Sayid and Shannon admit their feelings for each other before both seeing Walt . Shannon runs after him , only to be accidentally shot by Ana Lucia ( Michelle Rodriguez ) , who mistakes her for an Other . She dies moments later in Sayid 's arms . Shannon 's death not only left Sayid heartbroken , but also caused a rift between the survivors and the <unk> . Throughout the rest of the season , Ana Lucia is shown to be guilt @-@ ridden over killing Shannon . 
 During season six the afterlife experienced by the survivors is shown as an alternate timeline where the plane never crashed . Boone is seen on the plane traveling alone and explains he went to save Shannon from a bad relationship , but she did not want to come with him . In the series finale " The End " Boone is being attacked by someone outside a local bar , with Hurley and Sayid watching from afar . Shannon tries to defend him but is overpowered . Sayid gets out of the car and knocks the attacker unconscious . He gets down to help Shannon , and they remember their lives on the island and realize they are in the afterlife . Later that night she is reunited with the other passengers of Oceanic 815 and they all " move on " together . 
 = = Personality = = 
 During the casting process , Shannon was compared to Paris Hilton , and Lost producer Damon Lindelof described her as a " bitch . She is like a typical spoiled daddy 's girl who gets whatever she wants and is not responsible to the slightest bit . " Eirik Knutzen of The Repository found Shannon to be " a self @-@ centered twit , " and she was also called a " spoiled daddy 's girl . " Boone describes her as a " self @-@ centered little bitch . " On her first night on the Island , Shannon is confident they will be rescued , refusing to help the others organize the luggage . She does not care Rose ( L. Scott Caldwell ) has lost her husband , and spends much of her time sunbathing . She manipulates Charlie ( Dominic Monaghan ) into catching a fish for her , after which Boone apologizes on behalf of Shannon for " using this poor guy like [ she ] use [ s ] everyone else . " In " Whatever the Case May Be , " Boone says to Shannon , " Don 't you see the way they look at us around here ? They don 't take us seriously . We 're a joke . I 'm trying to contribute something . You 're just – you 're useless . " This motivates her to help Sayid translate maps he obtained from Rousseau . 
 = = Development = = 
 The producers were looking for someone who had a " Paris Hilton quality " to play Shannon , but she could not just be shallow , as the storyline would require more than that . A lot of women auditioned before the producers finally settled on Maggie Grace . She was written to be a bitch in the first season as the producers needed a character they could use to create opposition and conflict . The producers thought it would be interesting for there to be more to Shannon and Boone 's relationship than just Boone 's possessive brotherly interest . They came up with the idea for them to be unrelated <unk> , who have a romantic encounter , which became the twist for their backstory . When Boone is killed at the end of season one , it forces Shannon into a more adult existence on the Island . Grace noted Boone is " the only person that ever really knew and loved Shannon , in spite of herself . Of course , losing him , especially with so much left unsaid and unresolved , will change her irrevocably . " This freed her up to develop her relationship with Sayid . Naveen Andrews , who plays Sayid , came up with the idea for Shannon and Sayid relationship . He thought , " What would really shock Middle @-@ America ? What if Sayid was to have a relationship with a woman that looked like Miss America ? The most unlikely pairing … to come completely from left field . " This pairing made Shannon " less flighty ... more of a person to be reckoned with . " According to Lost producer Carlton Cuse , " The relationships [ the audience ] expect on the show are not necessarily the ones that we [ the producers ] necessarily are going to give you , but we want to try to find ways in which characters that you don 't expect to kind of connect to one another to connect in ways that are kind of surprising . " 
 Shannon 's flashbacks in " Abandoned " were used to allow the audience to get to a " really emotional level with the character , [ to ] finally understand ... why she was the way she was . " Her death was planned before the start of season two , as the producers wanted the survivors in the tail section of the plane and the survivors of the fuselage to be forced to come together under difficult circumstances . Her death was also used to " spin Sayid off in another direction . " Damon Lindelof commented " It 's sort of understood on Lost that that 's what you sign up for . There 's going to be constant character turnover , because the stakes on the Island are life @-@ or @-@ death . " Lindelof felt an " intense , emotional sense of loss " when watching her death . In her post @-@ death appearance in " Collision , " Maggie Grace was credited as " special guest star . " She received the same billing when she returned in season three , appearing in Nikki and Paulo 's flashbacks . Carlton Cuse noted " it was really fun for us to actually have Boone and Shannon reemerge in the stories . " Shannon was originally in " LA X " , the season premiere for the sixth and final season , but had to be written out as Grace was unavailable . The producers eventually arranged for Grace to appear in " The End " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Chris Carabott from IGN was critical of both Shannon and her relationship with Boone before the plane crash , commenting " Shannon 's ability to ' sort @-@ of ' understand French and Boone 's lifeguard training have had little impact and as characters they bring very little to the table . There are also too many more intriguing storylines and characters around them that deserve attention . " On their relationship he added , " except for the final act , when they finally succumb to their lust for one another ... There 's nothing exciting here or anything that will ultimately be built upon in the Lost universe . " In a later review , for the episode following Boone 's death , he commented " [ Boone and Shannon ] were both left with very little to do this season . Especially Shannon , whose high point of usefulness was deciphering Rousseau 's documents for Sayid . Well , Maggie Grace is given an opportunity to shine and she does an acceptable job as the distraught sibling who is now looking for someone to blame for Boone 's death . We finally get to see some real depth to Shannon 's character and her quest for vengeance is believable . " According to Melanie McFarland of the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer , Shannon is " the least deserving of sympathy of all the previously known survivors . " 
 C. K. Sample , III , from AOL 's TV Squad , joked , " Boone 's mother is the devil . How else to make us sympathize with Shannon right before killing her off of the show . " Virginia Rohan of The Seattle Times thought the " death of troubled Shannon , just as she was becoming more likable and had found love with Sayid , was sadder than the first @-@ season death of her stepbrother , Boone . Still , it would grieve me far more to lose Jack , Kate , Sawyer , Locke , Sun or Jin . " Maureen Ryan of the Chicago Tribune felt fans echoed this view , describing their reaction as " muted , " as they were more angry at Ana Lucia for shooting Shannon . Maggie Grace co @-@ won the 2005 Screen Actors Guild Award for " Best Ensemble - Drama Series . She was also nominated for the Teen Choice Award for " Choice TV Breakout Performance - Female , " but lost out to Desperate Housewives ' Eva Longoria . 
 = Russian battleship Tsesarevich = 
 Tsesarevich ( Russian : <unk> ) was a pre @-@ dreadnought battleship of the Imperial Russian Navy , built in France at the end of the 19th century . The ship 's design formed the basis of the Russian @-@ built Borodino @-@ class battleships . She was based at Port Arthur , Manchuria after entering service and fought in the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 05 . Tsesarevich was the flagship of Admiral Wilgelm Vitgeft in the Battle of the Yellow Sea and was interned in Tsingtau after the battle . 
 After the end of the war , the ship was transferred to the Baltic Fleet and helped to suppress the Sveaborg Rebellion in mid @-@ 1906 . While on a Mediterranean cruise , she helped survivors of the 1908 Messina earthquake . Tsesarevich was not very active during the early part of World War I and her bored sailors joined the general mutiny of the Baltic Fleet in early 1917 . Now named Grazhdanin , the ship participated in the Battle of Moon Sound in 1917 , during which she was lightly damaged . The ship seized by the Bolsheviks during the Russian Revolution in late 1917 and decommissioned the following year . Grazhdanin was scrapped in 1924 – 1925 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The ship was ordered as part of the " Programme for the Needs of the Far East " , authorised by Tsar Nicholas II in 1898 to defend Russia 's newly acquired ice @-@ free port of Port Arthur in Manchuria . Russian shipyards were already at full capacity so the Naval Ministry decided to order ships from abroad . Specifications were issued on 14 June 1898 and a few days later the chief designer of the French shipyard Forges et Chantiers de la Méditerranée proposed a design based on that of the French battleship Jauréguiberry . The Naval Technical Committee approved the design with a few changes to which the French readily agreed . The General Admiral , Grand Duke Alexei Alexandrovich selected the French design over a competing proposal from the Baltic Works . A contract was signed on 20 July 1898 at a cost of 30 @.@ 28 million francs ( 11 @.@ 355 million rubles ) for delivery in 42 months . 
 Tsesarevich 's most obvious design feature was her tumblehome hull . This had several advantages because it allowed greater freeboard since the narrow upper decks reduced the structural weight of the vessel 's hull , it increased the field of fire of guns mounted on the sides , and it reduced the ship 's roll in heavy seas . Its great disadvantage was that it reduced buoyancy and stability which contributed to excessive heel during turns . During the Battle of the Yellow Sea in August 1904 , Imperial Japanese Navy observers thought the Tsesarevich was going to capsize when she suddenly turned out of the battleline . 
 Tsesarevich was 118 @.@ 5 metres ( 388 ft 9 in ) long overall , had a beam of 23 @.@ 2 metres ( 76 ft 1 in ) and a draught of 7 @.@ 92 metres ( 26 ft 0 in ) . The ship displaced 13 @,@ 105 tonnes ( 12 @,@ 898 long tons ) . Her crew consisted of 28 – 29 officers and 750 enlisted men . 
 The ship was powered by two vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines using steam generated by 20 Belleville boilers at a working pressure of 19 kg / cm2 ( 1 @,@ 863 kPa ; 270 psi ) . The boilers were fitted with economizers that preheated their feed water . The engines were rated at 16 @,@ 300 indicated horsepower ( 12 @,@ 200 kW ) and designed to reach a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . Tsesarevich handily exceeded her design speed and reached 18 @.@ 77 knots ( 34 @.@ 76 km / h ; 21 @.@ 60 mph ) from 15 @,@ 254 indicated horsepower ( 11 @,@ 375 kW ) during her official machinery trials in July – August 1903 . She normally carried 800 long tons ( 810 t ) of coal , but could carry a maximum of 1 @,@ 350 long tons ( 1 @,@ 370 t ) . This allowed the ship to steam for 5 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 200 km ; 6 @,@ 300 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Tsesarevich was fitted with six steam @-@ driven generators with a total capacity of 550 kilowatts ( 740 hp ) . 
 = = = Armament and fire control = = = 
 Tsesarevich 's main armament consisted of two pairs of 40 @-@ calibre 12 @-@ inch guns mounted in center @-@ pivot , electrically powered , twin @-@ gun turrets fore and aft . The guns and their mountings were Russian @-@ built , but the turrets themselves were made in France . The guns could be loaded at all angles of elevation and the turrets could traverse 270 ° . Trials revealed that the ammunition hoists tended to jam when the ship was rolling ; the shipyard shipped new hoists to Port Arthur because the Russians wanted the ship in the Far East as soon as possible and they were installed in January 1904 . 70 rounds per gun were carried . The guns fired one shell every 90 – 132 seconds . They fired a 731 @.@ 3 @-@ pound ( 331 @.@ 7 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 598 ft / s ( 792 m / s ) to a range of 16 @,@ 010 yards ( 14 @,@ 640 m ) at an elevation of 15 ° . 
 The secondary armament of the ships consisted of a dozen 45 @-@ caliber Canet Model 1892 6 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) ( QF ) guns mounted in six electrically powered twin @-@ gun turrets on the upper deck . The corner turrets had an 150 ° arc of fire and the center turrets could cover 180 ° . Each six @-@ inch gun was provided with 200 rounds . Their rate of fire was 2 – 4 rounds per minute . They fired shells that weighed 91 lb ( 41 @.@ 4 kg ) with a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 600 ft / s ( 792 @.@ 5 m / s ) . They had a maximum range of approximately 12 @,@ 600 yards ( 11 @,@ 500 m ) . 
 A number of smaller guns were carried for defense against torpedo boats . These included twenty 50 @-@ calibre Canet QF 75 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) guns ; 14 in hull embrasures and the remaining six mounted on the superstructure . The ship carried 300 shells for each gun . They fired a 11 @-@ pound ( 4 @.@ 9 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 700 ft / s ( 820 m / s ) to a maximum range of 7 @,@ 005 yards ( 6 @,@ 405 m ) at an elevation of 13 ° . Tsesarevich also mounted twenty 47 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Hotchkiss guns in the superstructure . They fired a 2 @.@ 2 @-@ pound ( 1 @.@ 00 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 400 ft / s ( 430 m / s ) at a rate of around 15 rounds per minute . Eight smaller 37 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Hotchkiss guns were also fitted , but their locations are unknown . 
 The ship carried four 381 @-@ millimetre ( 15 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes ; two of these were mounted above water in the bow and stern , and the two broadside underwater tubes were located near the forward 12 @-@ inch magazine . Tsesarevich carried a total of 14 torpedoes . The ship also carried 45 mines to be laid to protect her anchorage in remote areas . 
 The ship was fitted with two Barr and Stroud coincidence rangefinders that used two images that had to be superimposed to derive the range . The gunnery officer then calculated the proper elevation and deflection required to hit the target and transmitted his commands via a Geisler electro @-@ mechanical fire @-@ control transmission system to each turret . 
 = = = Protection = = = 
 Tsesarevich used the latest Krupp armor in a version of the French cellular armor scheme . This consisted of a full @-@ length waterline armoured belt with armored decks above and below . Behind the belt were well @-@ subdivided compartments mostly used to store coal . This was intended to keep the ship afloat regardless of the damage inflicted above the upper armoured deck . The waterline armor belt was 2 metres ( 6 ft 7 in ) high , with 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 ft 11 in ) below the waterline at normal load . It had a maximum thickness of 250 millimetres ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) for a length of 60 metres ( 196 ft 10 in ) amidships which gradually reduced to a thickness of 180 millimetres ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) at the bow and 170 millimetres ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) at the stern . The belt tapered to a thickness of 170 millimetres at its bottom edge amidships and presumably tapered proportionally along its length . Above the waterline belt was an upper strake of armour that was 1 @.@ 67 metres ( 5 ft 6 in ) high and had a maximum thickness of 200 millimetres ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) . It was slightly shorter than the waterline belt and similarly reduced in thickness towards the ends of the ship . Forward it consisted of 120 @-@ millimetre ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) armour plates and 130 millimetres ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) aft . 
 The armor of the main gun turrets and their supporting tubes was 250 millimetres thick with roofs 63 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 5 in ) thick . Below the upper armour deck the armour of the support tubes decreased to 100 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) . The turrets of the secondary armament had 150 @-@ millimetre ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) sides with 30 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) roofs . The sides of the conning tower were 254 millimetres ( 10 @.@ 0 in ) thick and it had a 63 @-@ millimetre roof . It had a communications tube that extended down to the upper armoured deck that was protected by 100 @-@ millimetre armour . The funnel uptakes were protected by 19 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 7 in ) of armour for the height of one deck above the upper armoured deck . 
 Above the upper armour belt there was a deck that ran the full length of the ship that consisted of a 50 @-@ millimetre ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) armour plate laid on 10 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) deck plating . At the top of the waterline belt was two layers of 20 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) armour . It also extended the full length of the ship , but not the full width ; it curved downward behind the belt and was connected to the lower edge of the belt by a 20 @-@ millimetre plate . It continued downward to the ship 's inner bottom plates and formed a sort of torpedo bulkhead . This bulkhead was 2 metres ( 6 ft 7 in ) from the side of the ship and extended for a length of 84 metres ( 275 ft 7 in ) . It was backed with coal bunkers . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Construction began on Tsesarevich , named after the title of the heir to the Russian throne , on 18 May 1899 at the Forges et Chantiers de la Méditerranée shipyard in La Seyne @-@ sur @-@ Mer , France . The ship was laid down on 8 July 1899 and launched on 23 February 1901 . Construction was supervised by Captain Ivan Grigorovich , who became the ship 's first captain . Tsesarevich entered service in August 1903 and was assigned to the Far East . She arrived in Port Arthur on 2 December 1903 . Upon completion , the Tsesarevich was the Russian Navy 's best battleship at the beginning of the Russo @-@ Japanese War . 
 = = = Russo @-@ Japanese War = = = 
 She was one of three ships to be struck by Japanese torpedoes during the surprise attack on Port Arthur during the night of 8 / 9 February 1904 . Tsesarevich was hit abaft the portside torpedo bulkhead and the ship took on an 18 ° list that was partially corrected by counterflooding compartments on the starboard side . She got underway , but ran aground at the narrow harbor entrance . She was refloated and moved into the harbour for repairs that lasted until 7 June . Some of the ship 's guns were removed during the summer to reinforce the defenses of the port . Tsesarevich lost a total of four 75 @-@ millimeter , two 47 @-@ millimeter and two 37 @-@ millimeter guns . The ship was hit twice on 7 August by Japanese 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) shells fired at long range ; a fragment from one of them lightly wounded Vitgeft . 
 On the morning of 10 August 1904 , the First Pacific Squadron sortied from Port Arthur in an attempt to break through the Japanese fleet blockading the port and reach Vladivostok . The Russian squadron consisted of six battleships , Tsesarevich , Retvizan , Pobeda , Peresvet , Sevastopol and Poltava , along with four protected cruisers and eight destroyers . The Japanese fleet , commanded by Admiral Togo , was comprised four battleships , Mikasa , Asahi , Fuji , Shikishima , two armoured cruisers <unk> and Kasuga , as well as seven protected cruisers . 
 Tsesarevich and Pobeda both suffered mechanical problems within an hour of departure that forced the fleet to slow down to a speed of 13 knots ( 24 km / h ; 15 mph ) . Togo failed in his attempt to cross the Russian 's T after spotting them around 12 : 25 and a general engagement began around 13 : 25 with the Japanese ships concentrating their fire on Tsesarevich and Retvizan , but the effective Russian fire forced Togo to disengage around 15 : 20 . He closed with the Russians about two hours later and opened fire at 17 : 35 . Neither side was able to mortally damage any ships while the Russians were still in the lead with about a half @-@ hour of daylight left when two 12 @-@ inch shells fired by Asahi struck near Tsesarevich 's conning tower at 18 : 40 . Shell fragments bounced off the conning tower 's overhanging roof into the conning tower , killing Vitgeft , two staff officers and the helmsman . The ship turned to port with the steering wheel jammed and was followed by several other battleships . Tsesarevich became the focus of attention from every Japanese ship so the captain of Retvizan decided to charge the Japanese battleline to buy time for Tsesarevich to fix her steering problem . He succeeded in doing so and the squadron 's second @-@ in @-@ command , Rear Admiral Prince Pavel Ukhtomsky gradually asserted command over the scattered Russian ships and ordered them back to Port Arthur in the darkness . Tsesarevich attempted to head north to Vladivostok in the dark , but her damaged funnels greatly increased her coal consumption and reduced her speed to only 6 knots ( 11 km / h ; 6 @.@ 9 mph ) so that she was forced to head for the German treaty port of Tsingtau instead with three destroyers for escort . Upon arrival the following day , Tsesarevich and her companions were interned and disarmed . The ship had been hit by thirteen 12 @-@ inch and two 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) shells that killed 12 and wounded 47 members of her crew . 
 = = = Post Russo @-@ Japanese War and WWI = = = 
 At the end of the Russo @-@ Japanese war , the ship was transferred to the Baltic in early 1906 and helped to suppress the Sveaborg Rebellion later that year . Around 1906 , her fighting top was removed and her superstructure was cut down . The 75 mm guns in the superstructure were apparently removed as well . Tsesarevich made regular winter cruises to the Mediterranean before World War I and aided survivors of the Messina earthquake in December 1908 . In 1909 – 10 the ship 's machinery was overhauled and her amidships casemated 75 mm guns were removed and plated over four years later . Tsesarevich was not very active during the early part of World War I and she reportedly received two 37 mm anti @-@ aircraft guns during the war . Because of her inactivity her bored sailors joined the general mutiny of the Baltic Fleet in early 1917 . She was renamed Grazhdanin ( Russian : <unk> ( meaning Citizen ) ) on 13 April 1917 after the February Revolution . The ship took part in the Battle of Moon Sound in October 1917 . During the climatic part of the battle , Grazhdanin engaged the German minesweepers on 17 October with little effect while Slava engaged the German dreadnoughts König and Kronprinz . The latter fired at Grazhdanin and hit her twice , killing one and wounding four crewmen , although neither hit caused significant damage . The German dreadnoughts outranged Grazhdanin , and she was forced to retreat and abandon Moon Sound in the face of German pressure . 
 By December the ship was in Kronstadt , where she came under the control of the Bolsheviks , and she was hulked there in May 1918 . Grazhdanin was scrapped beginning in 1924 , although she was not officially stricken from the Navy List until 21 November 1925 . 
 = Bob Feller = 
 Robert William Andrew Feller ( November 3 , 1918 – December 15 , 2010 ) , nicknamed " The Heater from Van Meter " , " Bullet Bob " , and " Rapid Robert " , was an American baseball pitcher who played 18 seasons in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) for the Cleveland Indians . Feller pitched from 1936 to 1941 and from 1945 to 1956 , interrupted only by a four @-@ year sojourn in the Navy . In a career spanning 570 games , Feller pitched 3 @,@ 827 innings and posted a win – loss record of 266 – 162 , with 279 complete games , 44 shutouts , and a 3 @.@ 25 earned run average ( ERA ) . 
 A prodigy who bypassed the minor leagues , Feller first played for the Indians at the age of 17 . His career was interrupted by four years of military service in World War II , during which time he served as Chief Petty Officer aboard the USS Alabama . Feller became the first pitcher to win 24 games in a season before the age of 21 . During his career , he threw no @-@ hitters in 1940 , 1946 , and 1951 . Feller also recorded 12 one @-@ hitters ( his no @-@ hitters and one @-@ hitters were records at the time of his retirement ) . He helped the Indians win a World Series title in 1948 and an American League @-@ record 111 wins and the pennant in 1954 . Feller led the American League in wins six times and in strikeouts seven times . In 1946 , he recorded 348 strikeouts , a total not exceeded for 19 years . An eight @-@ time All @-@ Star , Feller was ranked 36th on Sporting News 's list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players and was named the publication 's " greatest pitcher of his time " . He was a finalist for the Major League Baseball All @-@ Century Team in 1999 . 
 Baseball Hall of Fame member Ted Williams called Feller " the fastest and best pitcher I ever saw during my career . " Hall of Famer Stan Musial believed he was " probably the greatest pitcher of our era . " He was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1962 on his first ballot appearance ; at the time only three players ever had a higher percentage of ballot votes . He was elected the inaugural President of the Major League Baseball Players ' Association and participated in exhibition games which featured players from both the Major and Negro Leagues . Feller died at the age of 92 in 2010 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Feller was born and raised with his sister , <unk> , in Van Meter , Iowa . His father , William , ran the 360 @-@ acre ( 150 ha ) family farm , and his mother , Lena ( <unk> ) , was a teacher and registered nurse . Feller played catch daily with his father . He had learned to throw a curveball by the time he was eight years old , and could throw a ball 270 feet ( 82 m ) when he was nine . To assist his son , Feller senior started growing wheat on his farm , a less labor @-@ intensive crop than corn , to allow his son more time to play baseball . Originally the Fellers were Roman Catholics but converted to Methodism after Feller 's father was reprimanded by their parish priest for letting him play on Sundays . Feller later suggested that his arm strength and ball speed during his major league career came from his childhood work milking cows , picking corn , and baling hay . He recalled his childhood fondly : " What kid wouldn 't enjoy the life I led in Iowa ? Baseball and farming , and I had the best of both worlds . " The family 's farm is on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 Feller began to play American Legion Baseball in the nearby town of Adel at the age of 10 ; the following year , his father built a baseball diamond on the farm . The diamond was named Oak View Park and included a pitching mound , scoreboard and concessions area . Feller and other players formed a team , the <unk> , consisting of semi @-@ pro and high school ballplayers . Feller played primarily as a shortstop or outfielder , and emulated Rogers Hornsby 's batting stance . From the age of 15 , he began to pitch for the <unk> after a starting pitcher was injured ; while doing so , Feller continued to play American Legion baseball . His catcher during this period was Nile <unk> , who later became a member of the College Football Hall of Fame . 
 A student at Van Meter High School , Feller was a starting pitcher for the school 's baseball team . During this time he continued to play on the Farmers Union team in the American Amateur Baseball Congress , and had 19 wins and four losses for Farmers Union one season . He also was the starting center for the high school basketball team . By the age of 16 , Feller possessed what critics judged a high quality fastball ; major league scouts traveled to Dayton , Ohio to watch him in the annual national baseball tournament . After the game , several big league clubs offered signing bonuses with their contract offers , but he had already been signed to a professional contract with the Cleveland Indians . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Teenage phenomenon ( 1936 – 41 ) = = = 
 In 1936 , Feller was signed by Cy Slapnicka , a scout for the Indians , for one dollar and an autographed baseball . While scouting Feller , Slapnicka said , " This was a kid pitcher I had to get . I knew he was something special . His fastball was fast and fuzzy ; it didn 't go in a straight line ; it would wiggle and shoot around . I didn 't know then that he was smart and had the heart of a lion , but I knew that I was looking at an arm the likes of which you see only once in a lifetime . " Feller was assigned to the Fargo @-@ Moorhead Twins and was to report there after finishing the high school semester . Slapnicka was later named general manager of the Indians and transferred Feller 's contract from Fargo @-@ Moorhead to the New Orleans Pelicans . He was planning to add Feller , along with outfielder Tommy Henrich , to the major league roster after a few exhibition and semi @-@ pro games without visiting either farm club . By doing so , the Indians would be in violation of Major League Baseball 's rule stating that , at the time , only minor league teams could sign amateur baseball players to contracts . After a three @-@ month investigation , concluding in December 1936 , about whether the Indians broke any Major League Baseball rules by signing Feller , Commissioner Kenesaw Mountain Landis disagreed with the argument presented by Slapnicka and Indians president Alva Bradley , but awarded both Feller and Henrich free agency and required the club to pay a $ 7 @,@ 500 fine . Landis made the decision partly due to the testimony of Feller and his father , who wanted his son to play for Cleveland and who had also told Landis he would take the issue to court . Feller elected to remain with the Indians but Henrich joined the New York Yankees . Sports columnist Joe Williams wrote , " For $ 7500 the Cleveland Indians received $ 500 @,@ 000 worth of publicity . ... I feel pretty sure Mr. Alva Bradley , president of the Indians , will admit this is the cheapest investment he ever made in publicity . " 
 Feller joined the Indians and made his Major League debut on July 19 , 1936 in a relief appearance against the Washington Senators . A month later on August 23 , Feller made his first career start against the St. Louis Browns . Indians manager Steve O 'Neill had Denny Galehouse warmed up in the bullpen in case the 17 @-@ year @-@ old Feller had early troubles , but he struck out all three batters he faced in the first inning , and recorded 15 strikeouts in earning his first career win . His strikeout total was the highest for a ( starting ) pitching debut . Two weeks later , he struck out 17 batters , tying a single @-@ game strikeout record previously set by Dizzy Dean , in a win over the Philadelphia Athletics . He finished the season with a 5 – 3 record , having appeared in 14 games ; he had 47 walks and 76 strikeouts in 62 innings . Feller 's fame reached such a level that when he returned to Van Meter for his senior year of high school , the governor of Iowa greeted him . His record @-@ setting rookie year made him , according to baseball writer Richard Goldstein , " the best @-@ known young person in America , with the possible exception of Shirley Temple . " Feller 's entrance to the big leagues was later described : 
 It is difficult to imagine now what a marvel Feller was when he burst upon the scene in 1936 , a callow youth of 17 . Many athletes are great . Bob Feller was seminal . In the long @-@ ago time , unlike nowadays , it was unheard of for teenagers to succeed in the big top of athletics . Children politely waited their turn in the sunshine . Perhaps in all the world only Sonja Henie had previously excelled at so young an age in any sport that mattered , and , after all , she was but a little girl wearing tights and fur trim , performing dainty figure eights . Feller dressed in the uniform of the major league Cleveland Indians , striking out – fanning ! – American demigods ... in the only professional team sport that mattered then in the United States . 
 As the 1937 season began , Feller appeared on the cover of the April 19 , 1937 issue of Time magazine . In his first appearance of the season on April 24 , Feller suffered an injury to his elbow while throwing a curveball . He spent April and May healing the arm , and in May graduated from high school ; the ceremony aired nationally on NBC Radio . In mid @-@ May , the Indians considered ending Feller 's season early . " We 're not taking any chances on that arm and we 're not going to allow him to pitch again until the last trace of soreness has disappeared " , said Slapnicka . On May 18 Feller appeared in his first game since April 24 but did not record an out . He did not pitch again until June 22 , when he recorded two innings , then returned to normal pitching duties on July 4 . 
 On October 2 , 1938 , Feller was the starting pitcher against the Detroit Tigers . Detroit 's Hank Greenberg was two home runs short of Babe Ruth 's then @-@ single @-@ season record of 60 home runs . By the ninth inning , Feller had recorded 16 strikeouts , one fewer than the MLB record in a nine @-@ inning game . He tied the record when he struck out Detroit 's Pete Fox and passed it , to set a modern major league record of 18 strikeouts , when he struck out Chet <unk> for the fifth time that day . Greenberg said , " Feller 's curve was jumping wickedly and with that and his fast ball , he was murder . " Feller did not earn a win , however , as the Indians lost , 4 – 1 . " It was one of those days when everything feels perfect , your arm , your coordination , your concentration , everything . There was drama in the air because of Greenberg 's attempt to break Ruth 's record , and the excitement grew even greater when my strikeouts started to add up " , Feller said . For the 1938 season , Feller led all pitchers with 208 walks and 240 strikeouts . In 1939 , Feller received his first career Opening Day start against the Tigers after a match against the Browns was rained out . He won the game 5 – 1 , after allowing three hits . On Mother 's Day , Feller pitched against the Chicago White Sox with his family in attendance . One pitch was fouled off by Marv Owen into the seats and into the face of Feller 's mother ; he went on to win the game . Feller finished the 1939 season having led the AL in wins ( 24 ) , complete games ( 24 ) and innings pitched ( 296 @.@ 2 ) and led the majors for a second consecutive year in both walks ( 142 ) and strikeouts ( 246 ) . 
 Opening Day of the 1940 season featured a no @-@ hitter from Feller against the Chicago White Sox . Feller was assisted by Indians second baseman Ray Mack when he made a diving play to record the final out . This is the only no @-@ hitter to be thrown on Opening Day in major league history . He followed his no @-@ hitter with a six @-@ run , three @-@ inning performance in his next start , however , in a game against the Detroit Tigers . By the end of the season he had a 27 – 11 record , his win total the best in the majors that season and a career @-@ high for Feller . He accomplished a pitching triple crown for the 1940 season as he led the AL in ERA ( 2 @.@ 61 ) , wins ( 27 ) and strikeouts ( 261 ) ( the latter two led the entire majors ) . Feller also led the majors with 31 complete games and 320 @.@ 1 innings pitched , and won the Sporting News Player of the Year Award . Feller later assessed his first few years in the majors : " I relied on the catcher too much . It 's swell to have a good catcher calling ' em for you , but the pitcher should take responsibility on his own shoulders . " 
 Due to Feller 's pitching speed , Lew Fonseca was commissioned by the Office of the Commissioner to pit Feller 's fastball against a Harley @-@ Davidson motorcycle in a speed trial . The test was conducted in Chicago 's Lincoln Park and required Feller to hit a target 12 inches ( 300 mm ) in diameter , 60 feet 6 inches ( 18 @.@ 44 m ) away . The motorcycle passed Feller going 86 miles per hour ( 138 km / h ) and with a 10 foot ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) head start but the ball beat the bike to the target by three feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) . Feller 's throw was calculated at the time to have reached 98 @.@ 6 mph ( 158 @.@ 7 km / h ) , and later 104 mph ( 167 km / h ) using updated measuring methods . 
 Feller again led the majors in wins ( 25 ) , strikeouts ( 260 ) , innings pitched ( 343 ) , and walks ( 194 ) for the 1941 season . His six shutouts were an AL @-@ best on the season . That year , Joe DiMaggio talked about Feller 's pitching ability , stating " I don 't think anyone is ever going to throw a ball faster than he does . And his curveball isn 't human . " Feller appeared in the May 12 , 1941 , edition of Life , which said : " ... he is unquestionably the idol of several generations of Americans , ranging in age from 7 to 70 . They represent of city , town , and village in the land , speak of him familiarly as ' Bob ' , and talk about him by the hour , with enthusiasm . " 
 = = = Military service ( 1941 – 45 ) = = = 
 The United States entered World War II with the attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7 , 1941 . Feller heard about the bombing while returning from a visit to his terminally ill father at Des Moines to Chicago where he was to sign a new Indians contract . Two days later , he volunteered for the United States Navy , becoming the first American professional athlete to enlist . Originally he tried to enlist as a fighter pilot but failed hearing tests . Feller attended basic training at Norfolk Naval Base and served as a physical fitness instructor there . He also pitched in baseball games hosted by the military . Although he had received a military exemption owing to his father 's failing health , he wanted to serve in combat missions . Feller said , " I told them I wanted to ... get into combat ; wanted to do something besides standing around handing out balls and bats and making ball fields out of coral reefs . " Feller was assigned to the USS Alabama ; he had hoped to serve on the USS Iowa , but nearly all servicemen from Iowa had requested a place on that ship , and Feller was not selected . 
 Shortly before Feller left for combat , his father died of brain cancer in early January 1943 . Five days later he married Virginia Winther whom he met while in Florida for spring training ; she was a student at Rollins College . After the marriage , Feller returned to service as Gun Captain aboard the Alabama and kept his pitching arm in shape by throwing near a gun turret . Feller and the Alabama crew spent most of 1943 in the British Isles along with USS South Dakota , but in August were reassigned to the Pacific Theater of Operations . Feller 's first taste of direct combat was at Operation Galvanic in November 1943 . The Alabama also served during Operation Flintlock while primarily being used as an escort battleship in 1944 . Feller participated in the Battle of the Philippine Sea before his combat duty ended in January 1945 ; he spent the rest of the war at the Great Lakes Naval Training Station as an instructor . 
 When the war ended , Feller was discharged as a Chief Petty Officer on August 22 , 1945 . Feller was decorated with six campaign ribbons and eight battle stars while serving on missions in both the Pacific and North Atlantic , and he was made an honorary member of the Green Berets later in life . 
 = = = Return to Cleveland ( 1945 – 48 ) = = = 
 Upon arrival in Cleveland after his discharge , Feller was honored with a civic luncheon on August 24 , 1945 , with more than 1 @,@ 000 people in attendance at the Carter Hotel . Feller said to the crowd : " The real heroes didn 't come home . " Later that day , the city held a parade and Feller was the starting pitcher in the Indians ' game against the Detroit Tigers . Feller allowed four hits in the game and earned a win in the Indians ' 4 – 2 victory . " I was so tired from all the receptions I didn 't know if I could finish the game " , Feller said . For the 1945 season , he appeared in nine games and notched a 5 – 3 record with 59 strikeouts and 2 @.@ 50 ERA . 
 Before the 1946 season , Feller signed a $ 50 @,@ 000 contract for the year , including a bonus for attendance , as the Indians felt many were attending baseball games primarily to see him ; he was offered $ 100 @,@ 000 by Jorge <unk> to play in the Mexican League , but declined to leave the States again . Feller recorded his second career no @-@ hitter on April 30 , 1946 , against the New York Yankees . He allowed five walks and struck out 11 Yankees . Feller said of the game , " The no @-@ hitter on opening day in Chicago is the one that gets all the attention . But my no @-@ hitter at Yankee Stadium was against a much better team than the White Sox . There was no comparison . I had to pitch to Tommy Henrich , Charlie Keller and Joe DiMaggio in the ninth inning to get the Yankees out . " At one point during the season ( as Feller thought he might be nearing Rube Waddell 's AL record for strikeouts ) , Feller confirmed Waddell 's record of 344 strikeouts with the AL office as opposed to 349 . In his last appearance of the season on September 29 , Feller threw five strikeouts against the Detroit Tigers to set the then @-@ AL single @-@ season strikeout record . During the 1946 season , he registered career @-@ highs in strikeouts ( 348 ) , games started ( 42 ) and games pitched ( 48 ) , shutouts ( 10 ) , complete games ( 36 ) and innings pitched ( 377 @.@ 1 ) — all major league bests that season . Feller finished 26 – 15 with an ERA of 2 @.@ 18 , the latter a career @-@ low . Nearly 20 years later , Feller recalled , " For the 1946 season , though , the Indians were so thin in pitching that Boudreau decided I was to pitch every fourth day , regardless of <unk> , open dates , or anything else . " 
 Feller began 1947 by setting up a barnstorming tour , pitting his own selected team against a Negro league baseball team led by Satchel Paige . Feller 's team included Stan Musial and Phil Rizzuto while Paige 's included Buck O 'Neil and Hilton Smith . They played in 22 games across the United States , and at the conclusion of the tour , each player had made nearly as much money as the St. Louis Cardinals made as a team for their 1946 World Series win . Against the St. Louis Browns in Feller 's second start of the season , he extended his major league record for one @-@ hitters when he recorded his ninth one @-@ hit game in a shutout win on April 22 . In a June 13 game against the Philadelphia Athletics , having already amassed 10 strikeouts through four innings , Feller fell from the mound , which rain had made slippery , and injured his back . " My fastball was never the same after that " , Feller said . He ended the season as the AL leader in wins ( 20 ) and shutouts ( 5 ) , and led the majors in strikeouts ( 196 ) and innings pitched ( 299 ) . 
 = = = World Series champion ( 1948 ) = = = 
 In 1948 , the Indians had one of their finest seasons , though Feller experienced a season that had more ups and downs . Feller was selected to represent the AL All @-@ Stars for the seventh time in his career in the 1948 All @-@ Star Game but declined to play , feeling that his performance did not warrant selection as an All @-@ Star . At one point he was winless for a month , and by July 22 , his record was 9 – 12 . Lou Boudreau , the Indians ' player @-@ manager , declared " we sink or swim with Feller " , and continued to pick him . Feller proceeded to go 10 – 3 for the remainder of his appearances to finish the season with a record of 19 – 15 , a league @-@ leading 164 strikeouts , and a 3 @.@ 56 ERA . The Indians won a one @-@ game playoff against the Boston Red Sox to determine the team to represent the AL in the World Series ; it was the first time the team had won the pennant since the 1920 season . 
 Feller started Game One of the 1948 World Series against the NL @-@ champion Boston Braves . In the eighth inning , Feller and Boudreau appeared to have picked off the Braves ' Phil Masi as he attempted to steal a base , but umpire Bill Stewart ruled he was safe . Masi scored the only run of the game on a Braves single . Despite surrendering just two hits on 85 pitches for the game , Feller and the Indians lost 1 – 0 . Later , photographs showed that Boudreau had tagged Masi out by two feet . Feller said , " Stewart was the only guy in the park who thought he was safe . " Feller was again named the starter in Game Five , which set an attendance record ; the 86 @,@ 288 fans in Cleveland was the then @-@ largest attendance at a baseball game . The Braves put up three runs in the top of the first inning . The Indians came back to tie the game , but by the seventh inning the Braves regained the lead for good and Feller was removed from the game . He finished having allowed eight hits and seven earned runs . Lemon won Game Six and gave the Indians their second World Series championship . After the Indians returned to Cleveland and were given a victory parade , Feller said , " This is as good as being President . " 
 = = = Later years ( 1949 – 56 ) = = = 
 After taking a pay cut to start the 1949 season , Feller pitched on Opening Day against the St. Louis Browns . During the game , he injured his shoulder and missed the rest of April . His performances were mixed in the rest of the season and he finished the year with a 15 @-@ 14 record and a 3 @.@ 75 ERA . Before the 1950 season , Feller suggested to Indians management he take a pay cut , and did so . Indians general manager Hank Greenberg said , " He himself made the suggestion . In fact , he offered to take more than the 25 per cent maximum pay cut allowed . There was absolutely nothing to it . We all agreed quickly on the figure after Bob showed up yesterday . " In a win over the Detroit Tigers in the second game of a doubleheader , Feller became the 53rd pitcher to win 200 games . Throughout the year , players noted that his velocity had returned , and , winning games with finesse rather than power , he was again effective . He finished the year with 16 wins and a 3 @.@ 43 ERA . 
 On July 1 , 1951 , Feller recorded his third career no @-@ hitter against the Detroit Tigers . " I was depending on my slider and I didn 't begin to think of a no @-@ hitter until about the seventh inning . I tried to keep it in the back of my mind , bearing down and concentrating on one hitter at a time " , Feller said . Feller was the third pitcher , after Larry Corcoran and Cy Young , to record three career no @-@ hitters . He became the first pitcher of the 1951 season to reach 20 wins after he pitched a shutout against the Washington Senators on August 21 . Along with Early Wynn and Mike Garcia , Feller reached the 20 @-@ win mark during the season ; they were the first trio of pitchers on the same staff to earn 20 wins since 1931 . Feller was named the Sporting News Pitcher of the Year . 
 Feller started the 1952 season with three wins in his first five starts ; one of the losses was an April 23 one @-@ hitter against Bob Cain , who also allowed only one hit . Feller struggled for the rest of the season , and after an argument with an umpire over a strike call in late August , manager Al López shut Feller down for the season . He finished the season with a 9 – 13 record , a 4 @.@ 74 ERA , and a rating of − 3 @.@ 1 in wins above replacement , worst in the major leagues . He improved the following year , winning 10 games and losing 7 in 25 starts after Lopez gave him extra days of rest between appearances . The Indians won 111 regular season games during 1954 , beating an AL record previously held by the 1927 New York Yankees . The 35 @-@ year @-@ old Feller finished 13 – 3 on the year , earning his 250th pitching victory in a May 23 win and his 2,500th career strikeout in a win on June 12 . 
 The Indians played against the New York Giants in the 1954 World Series , but unlike the 1948 Series , Feller did not make an appearance . The Indians were swept in four games by the Giants . Indians manager Al López said of not starting Feller , " I know Feller wanted to start one of the games in the 1954 World Series ( when the Indians were swept by the New York Giants ) , though we never really talked about it ... If we had won the first or second game in New York , I was going to start Feller in Cleveland in the fourth game . But when we didn 't ( win either game in New York ) , why in the hell was I going to pitch Feller ? He was the fifth starter on the club at that time , and wasn 't the Feller he 'd been ( earlier in his career ) . " In 1955 , Feller spent part of the season as a starter , then was moved to the bullpen later in the season . He won and lost four games each in 25 appearances . During the offseason , he became chairman of the Ohio March of Dimes and served as player representative for the American League . He worked with National League representative Robin Roberts throughout the offseason , discussing the possibility of player arbitration and pensions with baseball owners ; he then became president of the Baseball Players ' Association . 
 In the 1956 season , Feller started four games and appeared in 15 others , and finished with an 0 – 4 record and career @-@ worst 4 @.@ 97 ERA . The Indians held " Bob Feller Night " on September 9 , and he appeared in his last major league game on September 30 . After the season , speculation mounted regarding whether Feller would retire as a player . In December 1956 , Feller told The Plain Dealer : " I will return to Cleveland later this week and plan to confer with Hank Greenberg before Christmas . I hope to reach a decision at that time . " Greenberg had also offered Feller his release or a job with the Indians in their front office . Greenberg said , " We sincerely want Feller to remain with us . As far as I 'm concerned , there will always be a job waiting for Bob in the Cleveland organization . " On December 28 Feller officially retired from the Indians as a player to continue his work selling insurance . Announcing his retirement , Feller said , " I could have gone with a couple other ball clubs , but anything I might have done with them would have taken the edge off the success I have had with the Cleveland club the last 20 years . " He continued , " What if I did pitch another year , so what ? I would have to come to the decision I am making now , some time . " 
 He spent his entire career of 18 seasons with the Indians , being one of " The Big Four " in the Indians ' pitching rotation in the 1950s , along with Bob Lemon , Early Wynn and Mike Garcia . Feller shares the Major League record of 12 one @-@ hitters with Nolan Ryan , and was the first pitcher to win 20 or more games before the age of 21 . He ended his career with 266 wins , 2 @,@ 581 strikeouts and 279 complete games . Over the course of his career , he led the AL in strikeouts seven times and walks four times . Upon his retirement , Feller held the major league record for most walks in a career ( 1 @,@ 764 ) , and holds the 20th @-@ century record for most walks in a season ( 208 in 1938 ) . The Indians retired his jersey number , 19 , in 1957 . 
 In 1962 , Feller was elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum along with Jackie Robinson . Both were the first to be elected on their first ballot appearance since the original induction class of 1936 . At the time of his induction only Ty Cobb ( 98 @.@ 2 % ) , Babe Ruth ( 95 @.@ 1 % ) , and Honus Wagner ( 95 @.@ 1 % ) had a higher percentage of ballot votes . In 2010 , after Feller had been admitted to hospice , a reporter released a story recalling a 2007 interview with an aged Feller where he brought up Feller and Robinson 's occasional dislike for each other . " They overhyped Jackie Robinson . He was a good baserunner . He was a fair hitter . He was an average second baseman . He was not as good a ballplayer as Larry Doby . There were a lot of better black ballplayers than Jackie Robinson " , said Feller . 
 = = Dispute with Commissioner Chandler = = 
 Throughout his career , Feller played exhibition games during the off @-@ season , playing in towns unaccustomed to seeing major league ballplayers . His exhibition tours often featured other big leaguers and Negro League players , like Satchel Paige , who was also a teammate of Feller 's with the Indians . Other players included Stan Musial , Mickey Vernon , and Jeff Heath . During a barnstorming tour in 1945 , Feller pitched against Jackie Robinson after he had been signed by the Brooklyn Dodgers . He told a reporter in Los Angeles he believed Robinson was too muscle @-@ bound to succeed against pitching in the major leagues although Robinson recorded two hits off Feller . Players had to notify the Commissioner of Baseball , A.B. " Happy " Chandler , before participating in exhibitions games and were not allowed to begin games before the conclusion of the major @-@ league season . Feller wrote to Chandler , challenging the league 's limit on the number of games that were allowed to be played and proposing an increase ; the Commissioner agreed to Feller 's proposal . To minimize travel time , Feller employed airplanes , such as two DC @-@ 3s in 1947 , to transport players from town to town . Feller 's involvement , as well as that of other major league players , was the subject of meetings between the Commissioner and AL and NL presidents . 
 In 1947 , Feller announced that he would pitch in the Cuban winter league during the off @-@ season , but Commissioner Chandler ruled no major leaguer could play in Cuba . Feller said he would donate his profits from playing in the Cuban winter league to the American Major League players ' pension fund : " I want to prove I 'm not going to Cuba for any selfish interest but because there is a principle involved and that is the right of any ball player to work at his chosen profession " . Feller also believed it was " grossly unfair " that major leaguers who were U.S. citizens could not play in winter leagues but Latin Americans were permitted . Indians owner and president Bill Veeck said , " I have no comment on Bob 's outside activities . I don 't know whether they 've hurt him or not . But I do know this . The great majority of the people of Cleveland think they 've hurt him . " Feller 's barnstorming business savvy and endorsement details made him one of the wealthiest players of his time but he claimed his off @-@ season exhibitions and barnstorming were necessary to pay for increased medical expenses for his family . His first wife developed anemia after giving birth to their second child when she was given the wrong type of blood during transfusions ; she subsequently became addicted to the prescribed medication for her condition . Feller was trying to make up lost earnings as a result , since he missed out on over $ 200 @,@ 000 in salary when he served in the Navy ; he missed more than three major league seasons . Feller 's biographer John Sickels suggested : " They were trying to make money , but part of it was also , he felt that the black players weren 't necessarily getting a fair chance and that he wanted to sort of showcase it . And seeing those , I think , those exhibition games helped people realize that the Negro League players were just as good as the Major League players . " 
 = = Records = = 
 Feller estimated that military service cost him at least 100 career wins . Based on his exceptional 1941 and 1946 seasons , it is likely that Feller would have finished his career with more than 300 wins and perhaps 3 @,@ 800 strikeouts . Feller said " I know in my heart I would have ended up a lot closer to 400 than 300 if I hadn 't spent four seasons in the Navy . But don 't take that as a complaint . I 'm happy I got home in one piece . " 
 There is footage of a Feller fastball being clocked by Army ordnance equipment ( used to measure artillery shell velocity ) and registering at 98 @.@ 6 mph ( 158 @.@ 7 km / h ) . However , this took place in the later years of his career and the speed of the ball was measured as it crossed the plate ( whereas later methods measure the speed as it leaves the pitcher 's hand ) . With primitive equipment Feller was at one point measured at 105 mph ( 169 km / h ) . Feller once mentioned that he was clocked at 104 mph ( 167 km / h ) at Lincoln Park in Chicago . He also threw the second fastest pitch ever officially recorded , at 107 @.@ 6 mph ( 173 @.@ 2 km / h ) , in a game in 1946 at Griffith Stadium . Feller said a 1974 test involving Nolan Ryan would be evaluated when he threw the ball rather than when it reached home plate , and as columnist Milton Richman wrote , Feller said " Sandy Koufax had the best live fast ball he ever saw . " Ted Williams said , " Three days before he pitched I would start thinking about Robert Feller , Bob Feller . I 'd sit in my room thinking about him all the time . God I loved it ... Allie Reynolds of the Yankees was tough , and I might think about him for 24 hours before a game , but Robert Feller : I 'd think about him for three days . " Feller was ranked 36th on Sporting News 's list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players and also the publication 's " greatest pitcher of his time " as well as a finalist for the Major League Baseball All @-@ Century Team in 1999 . Each year , American Legion Baseball presents the " Bob Feller Pitching Award " to the pitcher " with the most strikeouts in regional and national competition . " 
 = = Later life = = 
 Feller was elected the inaugural president of the Major League Baseball Players ' Association in 1956 . As president , he appeared before Congress to speak about baseball 's reserve clause . Feller was the first player to get a franchise to agree to a share of game receipts when he was the starting pitcher for Indians ' games . He was also the earliest player to incorporate himself ( as Ro @-@ Fel , Inc . ) . He was also one of the first players to work for the right of a player to enter free agency . 
 Feller and his wife , Virginia Winther , had three sons , Steve , Martin , and Bruce . The couple divorced in 1971 ; from the divorce settlement , Virginia received the house she and Feller had built . Virginia died on May 6 , 1981 in her home in Shaker Heights , Ohio . In retirement , Feller lived with his second wife , Anne Feller , in Gates Mills , a suburb of Cleveland . 
 Feller is credited with being the first baseball star to sign autographs at baseball memorabilia conventions , and was such a frequent guest at such events that one ESPN writer speculated that he may have signed more autographs than any other person . 
 In June 2009 , at the age of 90 , Feller was one of the starting pitchers at the inaugural Baseball Hall of Fame Classic , which replaced the Hall of Fame Game at Cooperstown , New York . Feller was treated for leukemia in August 2010 . By October , Feller was fitted with a pacemaker and was diagnosed with pneumonia and thrush , an infection of the mucous membrane lining the mouth and throat . He was transferred on December 8 from the Cleveland Clinic to hospice care . On December 15 , Feller died of complications from leukemia at 92 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Of Feller 's death , Mike Hegan , Indians broadcaster and son of former Feller teammate and battery mate Jim Hegan , stated , " The Indians of the 40s and 50s were the face of the city of Cleveland and Bob was the face of the Indians . But , Bob transcended more than that era . In this day of free agency and switching teams , Bob Feller remained loyal to the city and the team for over 70 years . You will likely not see that kind of mutual loyalty and admiration ever again . " In 2010 , the " Cleveland Indians Man of the Year Award " was renamed the " Bob Feller Man of the Year Award " . 
 On Opening Day of the 2011 season , the Indians invited Feller 's widow , Anne , to present a silent first pitch . During pregame introductions , Cleveland players wore a No. 19 jersey in honor of Feller . For the entire 2011 season the players ' uniforms were outfitted with an outline of Feller 's pitching motion . The organization also made a permanent memorial of the press @-@ box seat that Feller used in later life . 
 The Bob Feller Museum opened in Van Meter , Iowa , on June 10 , 1995 . Designed by Feller 's son Stephen , on land donated by Brenton Banks , the museum has two rooms that contain Feller memorabilia and items from his own collection . The Feller bat used by Babe Ruth when he made his last public appearance at Yankee Stadium is at the museum . Feller said a teammate had stolen the bat and eventually it was purchased by the sports card company Upper Deck for $ 107 @,@ 000 . Feller later offered the company $ 95 @,@ 000 in return for the bat . 
 = M @-@ 201 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 201 is a state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan that serves as a spur route for the village of Northport near the northern tip of Leelanau County . The trunkline zig @-@ zags through to provide a path through the village , connecting with the county road that provides access to Leelanau State Park . The highway was first shown on state maps in the late 1940s , and remains unchanged since . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 201 starts on the south side of the Northport at M @-@ 22 and runs north on <unk> Street . The highway turns east onto Main Street for one block ; the area in town is predominantly residential . At the intersection with <unk> Street , the trunkline turns north until it meets <unk> Street where it runs west for a block before turning north onto Mill Street , passing near the marina . Heading out of the village , the highway crosses Northport Creek and passes some small farms . The designation ends at the village limits just south of the three @-@ way intersection of Mill Street , County Road 640 ( CR 640 ) , and East Peterson Park Road . CR 640 continues northward to Leelanau State Park at the tip of the Leelanau Peninsula 
 Like other state highways in Michigan , M @-@ 201 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) . In 2011 , the department 's traffic surveys showed that on average , 2 @,@ 245 vehicles used the highway daily . No section of M @-@ 201 is listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 The entire routing was transferred to state control at an earlier date , but it would first appear on the state highway map published on April 1 , 1949 . The highway remains unchanged since designation . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Leelanau County . 
 = Battle of Dover Strait ( 1916 ) = 
 The Battle of Dover Strait that occurred on 26 – 27 October 1916 was a naval battle of the First World War between Great Britain and the German Empire . Two and a half flotillas of German torpedo boats from the Flanders Flotilla launched a raid into the Dover Strait in an attempt to disrupt the Dover Barrage and destroy whatever Allied shipping could be found in the strait . 
 Upon approaching the barrage , the German torpedo boats were challenged by the British destroyer HMS Flirt and an engagement broke out . The Germans were able to destroy Flirt and successfully assault the barrage ′ s drifters , but were once more engaged when a flotilla of British destroyers was sent to repel them . The Germans were able to fight off the additional British units before successfully withdrawing . By the end of the night , the British had lost one destroyer , a transport , and several drifters while the Germans themselves suffered only minor damage to a single torpedo boat . 
 = = Background = = 
 In October 1916 , the Flanders Flotilla was finally reinforced by the German Admiralty with two full torpedo boat flotillas . The transfer of the 3rd and 9th Torpedo Boat Flotillas to Flanders had immediate consequences to the balance of power in the Dover Strait . Whereas before , the Flanders Flotilla had only been equipped with three large torpedo boats and several of the smaller inferior A @-@ class torpedo boats , they now possessed 23 large torpedo boats capable of meeting the British Dover Patrol in combat . Due to the lack of large torpedo boats , the Flanders Flotilla had not sortied against the Dover Patrol in several months and as a result British defences were quite lax in the area . 
 With his newly acquired flotillas , the Flanders Flotilla ′ s commander — Ludwig von Schroeder — decided to launch a raid in the Dover Strait against the Dover Barrage as well as any Allied shipping that could be found in the Channel . Although the British had prohibited transports from being in the Channel at night in anticipation of a German raid , the Dover Barrage was not prepared to meet such an attack . Facing Schroeder ′ s 23 boats , the Dover Barrage was only guarded by the old destroyer HMS Flirt , the yacht Ombra , and the naval trawler H. E. <unk> . The four divisions of drifters manning the barrage ′ s anti @-@ submarine nets were only armed with a single rifle each for defence . In addition to the forces guarding the Barrage , there were six Tribal @-@ class destroyers at Dover that could be called upon in the event of a raid as well as several units of Harwich Force dispersed at the Downs . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The German torpedo boats split into five groups , with each attacking a different section of the shipping in the channel . The German 5th Half @-@ Flotilla sailed into the Dover Barrage and soon came into contact with five drifters of the 10th Drifter Division tending the anti @-@ submarine nets and attacked . After hearing gunfire , Flirt — the drifters ′ escort — approached the unidentified vessels and challenged them . The boats responded to the British signal with a similar signal . Confused , Flirt 's commander decided that the approaching vessels were Allied destroyers and that drifters had been attacked by a submarine . An open boat was also launched from Flirt to rescue survivors from the sinking drifters . The German boats attacked the destroyer , surprising the crew and outnumbered , Flirt tried to ram one of the German boats ; after a brief engagement it was sunk by gunfire and torpedoes . After sinking Flirt , the Germans continued the attack on the barrage , sinking two drifters each from the 8th and 16th Drifter Divisions . Six drifters were sunk and three others damaged , as well as the trawler H. E. <unk> , before the Fifth Half @-@ Flotilla withdrew . 
 When Bacon heard about the raid , he sent six Tribal @-@ class destroyers — HMS Amazon , Mohawk , Viking , Tartar , Cossack and Nubian — to engage the Germans . Due to a misinterpretation of his orders , the British commander of the destroyer division — Commander Henry Oliphant of the Viking — deployed his destroyers in two loose groups , one consisting of Viking , Mohawk , and Tartar and the other Nubian , Amazon and Cossack . Nubian soon steamed far ahead of her group and was the first vessel to reach the scene of Flirt 's sinking . Another half @-@ flotilla of German boats had caught the empty British transport Queen off Goodwin Sands as it returned from the French coast , boarded it and removed her crew before sinking her . 
 Upon Nubian 's contact with the German 17th Half Flotilla , she made the same error as Flirt and mistook the German boats for Allied vessels . Surprised with a hail of gunfire , Nubian attempted to ram the last boat in the German line of battle but was struck by a torpedo that blew off her bow and reduced her to a drifting hulk . Amazon and Cossack soon arrived to aid Nubian and engaged the German boats . The Germans scored several hits on Amazon , knocking out two of her boilers before withdrawing . Viking 's division of boats also clashed with Kaiserliche Marine torpedo boats . The German 18th Half Flotilla was heading back to Zeebrugge when it sailed into Oliphant ′ s group of destroyers , engaging them as they passed . Although Viking escaped unscathed , Mohawk suffered several hits , before the Germans were able to break away to the safety of the coast . Near the end of the action , Reginald Bacon — the commander of the Dover Patrol — dispatched the Dunkirk Division to intercept the German torpedo boats before they could return to Flanders but the Germans were able to successfully withdraw before being caught by these further reinforcements . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The British had failed to stop the raiders from destroying the drifters and 45 men were killed , four wounded and 10 taken prisoner . Six ships were sunk in addition to Flirt , the transport Queen and three destroyers , three drifters and a naval trawler were damaged . Of the German torpedo boats , only SMS <unk> suffered any damage and no German vessel suffered any casualties . The success of the raid encouraged the Germans to plan more sorties into the English Channel and the raids continued until the 3rd and 9th Torpedo Boat Flotillas were redeployed to the High Seas Fleet in November 1916 . 
 = Hurricane Brenda ( 1973 ) = 
 Hurricane Brenda of August 1973 was the first tropical cyclone on record to make landfall in the Mexican Province of Campeche . The tropical wave that spawned Brenda moved off the west coast of Africa on August 9 , and uneventfully traversed the Atlantic . By August 18 , an associated area of low pressure developed sufficient convective activity to be declared a tropical depression . Later that day , the system intensified into a tropical storm before moving inland over the Yucatan Peninsula . Brenda had moved back over water by August 21 and began to quickly intensify , with an eye forming later that day . The storm peaked as an upper @-@ end Category 1 hurricane with winds of 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) before making landfall in Campeche . The hurricane rapidly weakened after moving over land and dissipated the following day . 
 Brenda made two landfalls in Mexico : first in the Yucatan and later in Campeche . Little damage resulted from the storm throughout the Yucatan Peninsula . However , severe damage took place in areas near Brenda 's second landfall . A total of 10 people were killed by the hurricane and over 2 @,@ 000 more were left homeless . Flooding caused by Brenda was considered to be the worst in over 25 years in some places . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Brenda originated from a tropical wave that moved off the western coast of Africa on August 9 ; however , the initial wave quickly weakened upon entering the Atlantic Ocean . By August 13 , the wave began to regenerate as it passed through the Lesser Antilles , producing scattered shower and thunderstorm activity . Several days later , convection associated with the system consolidated into a central , organized mass and on August 18 , the system had become sufficiently organized to be declared a tropical depression . Early the next day , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Brenda following reports of gale @-@ force winds from ships in the vicinity of the storm . Prior to its first landfall , Brenda suddenly intensified , with the central barometric pressure decreasing to 992 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 29 inHg ) and winds reached 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . The storm moved inland roughly 30 mi ( 48 km ) north of Cozumel at the northern edge of the Yucatan Peninsula on August 19 . 
 Roughly 24 hours after landfall , the center of Brenda passed directly over the city of Mérida , Yucatán . By this time , a strong ridge over southern Texas and northern Mexico caused the storm to take an unusual southwest turn . Later on August 20 , the center of Brenda moved into the Gulf of Mexico , specifically the Bay of Campeche . Once back over water , Brenda began to quickly intensify , attaining hurricane status later that day . The next day , a well @-@ defined eye had developed and the storm attained its peak intensity as a high @-@ end Category 1 hurricane with winds of 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 977 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 85 inHg ) . Around this time , the tropical storm force winds extended out 150 mi ( 240 km ) to the north and 75 mi ( 121 km ) to the south . The storm made landfall later that day near Ciudad del Carmen , Mexico at this intensity , becoming the first hurricane to strike the region on record . After moving inland , Brenda rapidly weakened to a depression by the morning of August 22 and dissipated later that day . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 The tropical wave that spawned Brenda produced significant amounts of rainfall in the Cayman Islands as it became better organized . Upwards of 4 in ( 100 mm ) was recorded on Grand Cayman on August 17 . Following its first landfall in the northern Yucatan , Brenda produced heavy rainfall and high winds , gusting near 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . Along the cost , waves were recorded up to 20 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) . Offshore , a freighter with 25 crewman became trapped in the storm after its engines failed . The United States Coast Guard responded to the distress call sent out by the ship once Brenda had moved into the Gulf of Mexico on August 21 . 
 Already suffering from severe flooding that killed at least 18 people and left 200 @,@ 000 homeless , Hurricane Brenda worsened the situation with torrential rainfall and additional flooding . Following the damage wrought by Brenda , a large earthquake struck the region , hampering relief efforts and collapsing numerous structures . Winds on land gusted up to 112 mph ( 180 km / h ) , leading to severe wind damage . Brenda caused a total of 10 deaths . Two of the fatalities occurred in Campeche after 80 % of the city was flooded . Two more of these deaths occurred in the coastal city of Veracruz . This was considered to be the worst flooding in the city in over 25 years . According to officials , 452 homes and the local docks were destroyed in the region . An estimated 2 @,@ 000 people were left homeless as a direct result of Brenda throughout Mexico . 
 = Holborn tube station = 
 Holborn ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ bə ( r ) n ) is a London Underground station in Holborn , central London . It is served by the Central and Piccadilly lines . On the Central line the station is between Tottenham Court Road and Chancery Lane stations ; on the Piccadilly line it is between Covent Garden and Russell Square . The station is located at the junction of High Holborn and Kingsway and is in Travelcard Zone 1 . Close by are the British Museum , Lincoln 's Inn Fields , Red Lion Square , Bloomsbury Square and Sir John Soane 's Museum . 
 Located at the junction of two earlier tube railway schemes , the station was opened in 1906 by the Great Northern , Piccadilly and Brompton Railway ( GNP & BR ) . The station entrances and below ground circulation were largely reconstructed for the introduction of escalators and the opening of Central line platforms in 1933 , making the station the only interchange between the lines . Before 1994 , Holborn was the northern terminus of the short and little @-@ frequented Piccadilly line branch to Aldwych and two platforms originally used for this service are disused . One of the disused platforms has been used for location filming when a London Underground station platform is needed . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 The station was planned by the Great Northern and Strand Railway ( GN & SR ) , which had received parliamentary approval for a route from Wood Green station ( now Alexandra Palace ) to Strand in 1899 . After the GN & SR was taken over by the Brompton and Piccadilly Circus Railway ( B & PCR ) in September 1901 , the two companies came under the control of Charles Yerkes ' Metropolitan District Electric Traction Company before being transferred to his new holding company , the Underground Electric Railways Company of London ( UERL ) in June 1902 . To connect the two companies ' planned routes , the UERL obtained permission for new tunnels between Piccadilly Circus and Holborn . The companies were formally merged as the Great Northern , Piccadilly and Brompton Railway following parliamentary approval in November 1902 . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The linking of the GN & SR and B & PCR routes at Holborn meant that the section of the GN & SR south of Holborn became a branch from the main route . The UERL began constructing the main route in July 1902 . Progress was rapid , so that it was largely complete by the Autumn of 1906 . Construction of the branch was delayed while the London County Council carried out slum clearances to construct its new road Kingsway and the tramway subway running beneath it and while the UERL decided how the junction between the main route and the branch would be arranged at Holborn . 
 When originally planned by the GN & SR , Holborn station was to have just two platforms . The first GNP & BR plan for the station would have seen the two platforms shared by trains on the main route and by the shuttle service on the branch with the junctions between the tunnels south of the station . The interference that shuttle trains would have caused to services on the main route led to a redesign so that two northbound platforms were provided , one for the main line and one for the branch line , with a single southbound platform . The junctions between the two northbound tunnels would have been 75 metres ( 246 ft ) north of the platforms . When powers were sought to build the junction in 1905 , the layout was changed again so that four platforms were to be provided . The southbound tunnel of the main route no longer connected to the branch , which was to be provided with an additional platform in a dead @-@ end tunnel accessed from a crossover from the northbound branch tunnel . As built , for ease of passenger access , the branch 's northbound tunnel ended in a dead @-@ end platform adjacent to the northbound main line platform with the branch 's southbound tunnel connected to the northbound main line tunnel . To enable the southbound tunnel of the main route to avoid the branch tunnels , it was constructed at a lower level than the other tunnels and platforms . The tunnel towards Covent Garden ( at this point heading south @-@ west ) passes under the branch tunnels . 
 As with most of the other GNP & BR stations , the station building was designed by Leslie Green , though at Holborn the station frontage was , uniquely , constructed in stone rather than the standard red glazed terracotta . This was due to planning regulations imposed by the London County Council which required the use of stone for façades in Kingsway . The station entrance and exit sections of the street façade were constructed in granite with the other parts of the ground and first floors in the same style , but using Portland stone . The rest of the building above first floor level was constructed contemporaneously with the station . Access to the platform levels of the station was provided by trapezium @-@ shaped electric lifts manufactured by Otis in America . These operated in pairs in shared circular shafts , with an escape stair in a separate , smaller shaft . 
 Although the station was constructed where the GNP & BR 's tunnels crossed those of the Central London Railway ( CLR , now the Central line ) running under High Holborn , no interchange between the two lines was made as the CLR 's nearest station , British Museum , was 250 metres ( 820 ft ) to the west . Passengers wishing to interchange between the two stations had to do so at street level . 
 The station opened on 15 December 1906 , although the opening of the branch was delayed until 30 November 1907 . 
 = = = Station modernised = = = 
 The street level interchange between the GNP & BR and CLR involving two sets of lifts was considered a weakness in the network . A below ground subway connection was considered in 1907 . A proposal to enlarge the CLR 's tunnels to create new platforms at Holborn station and to abandon British Museum station was included in a private bill submitted to parliament by the CLR in November 1913 , although the First World War prevented any works taking place . 
 Like many other central London Underground stations , Holborn was modernised in the early 1930s to replace the lifts with escalators . The station frontages on Kingsway and High Holborn were partially reconstructed to modernist designs by Charles Holden with the granite elements replaced with plain Portland stone façades perforated with glazed screens . The lifts were removed and a spacious new ticket hall was provided giving access to a bank of four escalators down to an intermediate concourse for the Central line platforms . A second bank of three escalators continues down to the Piccadilly line platforms . 
 The new Central line platforms came into use on 25 September 1933 replacing those of British Museum , which had closed the day before . As part of the modernisation the station was renamed Holborn ( Kingsway ) on 22 May 1933 , but the suffix gradually dropped out of use and no longer appears on station signage or tube maps . The new platforms at Holborn led to the number of passengers switching between the lines increasing tenfold by 1938 . 
 = = = Branch operations = = = 
 Initially , shuttle train services on the branch operated from the through platform at Holborn . At peak times , an additional train operated alternately in the branch 's western tunnel from the bay platform at Holborn . During the first year of operation , a train for theatregoers operated late on Monday to Saturday evenings from Strand through Holborn and northbound to Finsbury Park ; this was discontinued in October 1908 . 
 In March 1908 , the off @-@ peak shuttle service began to use the western tunnel on the branch , crossing between the two branch tunnels south of Holborn . Low usage led to the withdrawal of the second peak @-@ hour shuttle and the eastern tunnel was taken out of use in 1914 . Sunday services ended in April 1917 and , in August of the same year , the eastern tunnel and the bay platform at Holborn were formally closed . Passenger numbers on the branch remained low : when the branch was considered for closure in 1929 , its annual usage was 1 @,@ 069 @,@ 650 and takings were £ 4 @,@ 500 . The branch was again considered for closure in 1933 , but remained open . 
 Wartime efficiency measures led to the branch being closed temporarily on 22 September 1940 , shortly after the start of The Blitz , and it was partly fitted out by the City of Westminster as an air @-@ raid shelter . The tunnels were used to store items from the British Museum , including the Elgin Marbles . The branch reopened on 1 July 1946 , but patronage did not increase . In 1958 , London Transport announced it would be closed . Again it survived , but the service was reduced in June 1958 to run only during Monday to Friday peak hours and Saturday morning and early afternoons . The Saturday service was withdrawn in June 1962 . 
 After operating only during peak hours for more than 30 years , the closure announcement came on 4 January 1993 . The original 1907 lifts at Aldwych required replacement at a cost of £ 3 million . This was not justifiable as only 450 passengers used the station each day and it was losing London Regional Transport £ 150 @,@ 000 per year . The Secretary of State for Transport granted permission on 1 September 1994 to close the station and the branch closed on 30 September . 
 After its closure in 1917 , the bay platform was converted into rooms for use , at various times , as offices , air @-@ raid shelters , store rooms , an electrical sub @-@ station and a war @-@ time hostel . Since 1994 , the branch 's remaining platform at Holborn has been used to test mock @-@ up designs for new platform signage and advertising systems . 
 = = Incidents and accidents = = 
 The Holborn rail crash occurred on the Central line at Holborn on 9 July 1980 , at about 13 : 28 and involved two 1962 stock trains . The 13 : 17 train from Liverpool Street to White City , standing at the westbound platform , was run into by the 12 : 49 Hainault to Ealing Broadway train . The rear train was slowing after its brakes had been applied by the emergency train stop system because it had passed two signals at danger , but it failed to stop in time to avoid collision . The driver of the rear train and 20 passengers were injured . An inquiry concluded that the accident was caused by the driver failing to control his train . Disruption of services occurred until the following morning . 
 On 21 October 1997 , a 9 @-@ year @-@ old boy , Ajit Singh , was dragged to his death when a toggle on his <unk> was trapped in the closing doors of a Piccadilly line train . 
 = = Use in media = = 
 The disused branch line platform and other parts of the station have been used in the filming of music videos for Howard Jones ' " New Song " , Leftfield 's " Release the Pressure " , Suede 's " Saturday Night " and Aqua 's " Turn Back Time " . 
 The pre @-@ war operation of the station and the branch line features in a pivotal scene in Geoffrey Household 's novel Rogue Male , when the pursuit of the protagonist by enemy agents sees them repeatedly using the station 's escalators , passageways and the shuttle service . 
 = = Services = = 
 The station is in London fare zone 1 . On the Central line the station is between Tottenham Court Road and Chancery Lane , and on the Piccadilly line , it is between Covent Garden and Russell Square . Holborn is the only interchange between these lines . Train frequencies vary throughout the day , but generally Central line trains operate every 2 – 6 minutes from approximately 05 : 53 to 00 : 30 westbound and 05 : 51 to 00 : 33 eastbound . Piccadilly line trains operate every 2 – 6 minutes from approximately 05 : 42 to 00 : 28 westbound and 05 : 54 to 00 : 38 northbound . 
 On the Central line 1992 Stock is used . On the Piccadilly line 1973 Stock is used . 
 = = Connections = = 
 = = = Historical tram connections = = = 
 Before the closure of the original London tram network in 1952 , Holborn provided an interchange between trams and tubes , via the underground Holborn tramway station located a little distance south of the underground railway station . This was the only part of London with an underground tram system , and Holborn tramway station ( named Great Queen Street when first opened ) is still extant beneath ground , though with no public access . 
 = = = Current bus connections = = = 
 London Buses routes 1 , 8 , 19 , 25 , 38 , 55 , 59 , 68 , 91 , 168 , 171 , 188 , 242 , 243 , 341 , 521 and <unk> and night routes N1 , N8 , N19 , <unk> , N38 , <unk> , N55 , N68 , N91 , N98 , <unk> and N207 serve the station . 
 = Kony 2012 = 
 Kony 2012 is a short documentary film produced by Invisible Children , Inc . ( authors of Invisible Children ) . It was released on March 5 , 2012 . The film 's purpose was to promote the charity 's " Stop Kony " movement to make Ugandan cult and militia leader , indicted war criminal and the International Criminal Court fugitive Joseph Kony globally known in order to have him arrested by the end of 2012 , when the campaign expired . The film spread virally . As of April 1 , 2016 , the film has received over 101 million views and nearly 1 @.@ 4 million " likes " on the video @-@ sharing website YouTube , and over 18 @.@ 6 million views and over 21 @.@ 5 thousand " likes " on Vimeo , with other views on a central " Kony 2012 " website operated by Invisible Children . The intense exposure of the video caused the " Kony 2012 " website to crash shortly after it began gaining widespread popularity . A poll suggested that more than half of young adult Americans heard about Kony 2012 in the days following the video 's release . It was included among the top international events of 2012 by PBS and called the most viral video ever by TIME . 
 The campaign resulted in a resolution by the United States Senate and contributed to the decision to send troops by the African Union . The film also called for an April 20 world wide canvassing campaign , called " Cover the Night " . On April 5 , 2012 , Invisible Children released a follow @-@ up video , titled Kony 2012 : Part II – Beyond Famous , which failed to repeat the success of the original . 
 = = <unk> 2012 = = 
 The film documents the Invisible Children 's plans and efforts to capture Joseph Kony . It describes Kony 's actions with his rebel militia group Lord 's Resistance Army ( LRA ) , including forced recruitment of child soldiers , and the regions ( northern Uganda , the Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan ) in which they have been active . One of the main people featured in the film is a young Ugandan named Jacob <unk> , whose brother was killed by the LRA . In response , director and founder of Invisible Children , Jason Russell , promises Jacob that he will help " stop Kony " . 
 The film advocates the restoration of social order and curtailing compelled and coerced youth military service . The video also has clips of Jason Russell 's young son reacting to the information about Kony . Near the end of the film , a 2011 announcement from U.S. President Barack Obama is shown authorizing the deployment of 100 Special Forces military advisers to provide " information , advice , and assistance to partner nation forces " of Central African countries to " remove Joseph Kony from the battlefield " . The video concludes by urging viewers to join its publicity campaign by putting up posters and helping out in their communities . 
 = = Invisible Children = = 
 The Invisible Children charity has focused on obtaining the support of a select group of individuals in order to " help bring awareness to the abuse and killing of children in the East and Central African countries at the hands of Kony and his leadership . " This list included 20 " celebrity culture makers " , such as George Clooney , Angelina Jolie , Oprah Winfrey ( who significantly helped to spread the video ) , Taylor Swift and Ryan Seacrest . The list also featured 12 " policy makers " that have " the power to keep U.S. government officials in Africa " in order to work toward the capture of Kony . This list includes former U.S. President George W. Bush and his Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice , and current Secretary of State John Kerry . 
 A number of celebrities endorsed the awareness campaign against Kony , including Justin Bieber , Bill Gates , Christina Milian , Nicki Minaj , Kim Kardashian , Rihanna and Ellen Page . 
 = = = Cover the Night = = = 
 As part of the campaign , American supporters were asked to put up posters in their hometowns in an action named " Cover the Night " , which took place on April 20 , 2012 . Invisible Children website offers posters and T @-@ shirts in an attempt to gain wider recognition . They also created action kits to help spread awareness that include campaign buttons , posters , bracelets and stickers . 
 The " Cover the Night " event took place worldwide on April 20 , 2012 and was to be conducted by supporters who were encouraged to perform some sort of charity work that morning in their local community . Then , that evening , they were to post flyers and posters throughout their city for the Kony 2012 campaign . The turnout for the event worldwide was much smaller than initially expected , with no organized spots officially announced and much fewer people attending than had pledged to attend . A tweet from Invisible Children stated , " There is no official meet @-@ up as we are asking people to act locally with friends + family [ sic ] in their neighborhoods . " One gathering in Vancouver had only 17 people ; another in Brisbane had fewer than 50 attendees . In Kelowna , British Columbia several signs and posters were put up , including two large banners that were " placed on both sides of the pedestrian overpass " . In Canberra , several Facebook groups resulted in a few gatherings of two or three people each ; Pierre Johannessen , a " law firm partner who runs a charity for disadvantaged children " , distributed around 3 @,@ 000 posters to the groups to be put up throughout the city . In Phoenix , 200 posters were put up by " college students and other people in their teens and 20s " , along with a number of chalk and stencil messages . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The film sparked a heated controversy regarding its merits , with very differing opinions being expressed by various NGO workers , government and international officials , journalists , and other groups and individuals . 
 = = = Positive = = = 
 Luis Moreno Ocampo , who was featured in the film and was , at the time , the chief Prosecutor at the International Criminal Court ( ICC ) , voiced his support of the film and the campaign that had " mobilised the world " , and said that the criticism was " stupid " . The Special Representative and head of the newly created United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa ( <unk> ) , Abou Moussa , said that international interest in Kony was " useful , very important " . The White House released a statement of support through Press Secretary Jay Carney , who stated in a news conference , " We congratulate the hundreds of thousands of Americans who have mobilized to this unique crisis of conscience " and said that the raised awareness from the video is " consistent with the bipartisan legislation passed by our congress in 2010 . " Cameron Hudson , policy director at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum and former Africa director in the National Security Council , also praised Invisible Children for reaching " tens of millions of people who probably never previously heard of Joseph Kony . " Anthony Lake , the executive director of UNICEF , was cited as saying that a similar viral video would have made a difference during the Rwandan Genocide in 1994 , also suggesting that " this kind of public attention would also have helped save more lives in Darfur and in Congo ’ s warring east . " 
 Human Rights Watch ( HRW ) ' s Africa division senior researcher Anneke Van <unk> wrote in a statement : " We ’ ve spent years investigating the horrors perpetrated by the LRA in central Africa — Uganda , Democratic Republic of Congo , Central African Republic ( CAR ) , and South Sudan . We gathered evidence at massacre sites — wooden clubs covered in dried blood , rubber strips from bicycle tires used to tie up the victims , and freshly dug graves — and spoke to hundreds of boys and girls forced to fight for his army or held captive as sex slaves . And we ’ re elated that # <unk> is a trending topic on Twitter — if anyone deserves global notoriety it ’ s Kony . " She added : " Arresting Kony and other senior LRA leaders would reaffirm that those who commit mass atrocities will face justice . It will also help end the scourge of one of the most brutal rebel groups in Africa . " HRW 's LRA researcher Ida Sawyer reaffirmed , " we definitely support the message of the film and we think it 's great that they 're bringing so much attention to the film with Kony 's crimes and the phenomena of the LRA . " Amnesty International , which had documented what it described as the LRA 's " horrific impact on the lives of thousands of civilians in Central African Republic , Democratic Republic of Congo , South Sudan and Uganda " and for years had been calling for the LRA leaders to be arrested , welcomed the massive public response to the Kony 2012 campaign . Erwin van der <unk> , the organization 's Africa director , wrote in a statement : " Joseph Kony and other LRA leaders have evaded arrest for far too long and this campaign is a salient reminder of the continuing crimes by LRA members and the need to arrest and surrender their leaders to the ICC so they can face trial , " but added : " Anyone joining the Kony 2012 campaign should insist that efforts to arrest Joseph Kony must respect human rights " , especially because " many of LRA members were themselves victims of human rights violations including forcible recruitment " , and ensure the protection of civilians . 
 Opinions on the film were mixed in Gulu , one of former centers of rebel activities in northern Uganda , during a showing of the film , with several of the leaders expressing support and criticism . One of the attendees , State Minister for Foreign Affairs Henry <unk> Okello , said that the criticisms directed at the film and Invisible Children were " unfounded " , going on to state , " Invisible Children has done visible things in Acholi [ land ] , for example offering scholarships to thousands of children and anyone against them is our enemy . " Betty <unk> , a Ugandan cabinet minister and former peace negotiator , said , " I do not know whether it makes any difference as far as taking [ Kony ] out is concerned . However , what is important is bringing this to the attention of policymakers . I hope that something innovative will come out of it . " Norbert Mao , Ugandan politician and president of the opposition Democratic Party , stated his support for the film , explaining that while it does have some problems , such as implying Ugandans did not try to fight back against the LRA and not explaining how many of the issues in the film were also exacerbated by the Ugandan government itself , the film is still a " positive development " for the issue , adding that while Invisible Children may not be " the foremost analysts of the complicated political , historical and security dynamics " in the situation , " they have the most beautiful trait on earth -- compassion . " 
 Journalist Nicholas D. Kristof thanked Invisible Children for making the film and addressed its criticism , stating that rather than being " white man 's burden " , when " a warlord continues to kill and torture across a swath of Congo and Central African Republic ... it 's a human burden . " He also said that complexity had long been " a leading excuse for inaction during atrocities " and that Kony remains a threat in Uganda 's neighbour countries , so the simplicity of the film " has left the American public more informed " than it would be otherwise , and that if he " were a Congolese villager " , he would " welcome these uncertain efforts over the sneering scorn of do @-@ nothing armchair cynics . " Foreign correspondent Roger Cohen called it " simplifying grossly and distorting adeptly to make a valid point : that no effort should be spared to arrest Kony . " British film critic Peter Bradshaw wrote that Kony 2012 , despite its flaws , " lands an almighty punch . This is a principled campaign ad , and a very , very effective one . " Former war correspondent Gotham Chopra said that he understands " the instinctive backlash ( really it ’ s irritation ) " towards the film and the campaign , but " there is enormous value in the fact that millions of people are talking today about genocide in Africa that were mostly unaware of it yesterday . " Jane <unk> , author of a 2009 book about Kony and the President of Uganda Yoweri Museveni , compared the campaign favorably to the " culture of charity @-@ as @-@ industry " as " at least <unk> linked suffering to perpetrators , and urged the young American audience it 's aimed at to contact a politician . " Matthew Green , author of a 2008 book about Kony and the LRA conflict , The Wizard of the Nile , wrote that IC had " achieved more with their 30 @-@ minute video than battalions of diplomats , NGO workers and journalists have since the conflict began 26 years ago . " 
 Jacob <unk> , the former child soldier featured in the film , supported the video and defended its makers . In response to Ugandans saying that the film was out @-@ of @-@ date , Jacob stated that , " It is not too late , because all this fighting and suffering is still going on elsewhere . Until now , the war that was going on has been a silent war . People did not really know about it . Now what was happening in Gulu is still going on elsewhere in the Central African Republic and in Congo . What about the people who are suffering over there ? They are going through what we were going through . " It was noted by Los Angeles Times journalists Lindsay <unk> and Jocelyn Kelly that a number of people living in the areas where the LRA is currently active have previously called for attention and advocacy to be directed at the issue . Julien Marneffe , a worker for Catholic Relief Services in Goma said " it 's been an undeniable success -- and one all humanitarian organizations working in this area can be happy about , " but added to " be careful not to <unk> the issue " and worried that the interest might be short lived when " another crisis or another video will be the next online trend , and I fear that most people will forget about the problems of the LRA . " 
 = = = Negative = = = 
 Since the video 's release , Invisible Children has come under criticism for oversimplification of events in the region and has been accused of engaging in " <unk> " , in which one donates or takes actions that have little to no effect beyond making one feel like one contributed . While the campaign promotes global activism , it has been criticized for providing a black @-@ and @-@ white picture rather than encouraging the viewers to learn about the situation . Mikaela Luttrell @-@ Rowland from Clark University 's <unk> Center for Holocaust and Genocide Studies stated that it was " irresponsible to prize feel good , simplistic messages over complex history and to treat consumerist @-@ consciousness raising as interchangeable with education . " Africa researcher Alex de Waal accused the film of " peddling dangerous and patronizing falsehoods , " criticized the campaign as " naive " for " elevating Kony to a global celebrity , the embodiment of evil , " that might only help him as a terrorist and cult leader , and called for instead " demystifying Kony — reducing him to a common criminal and a failed provincial politician . " 
 One point of criticism is that the film gives a misleading impression of the whereabouts and magnitude of Kony 's remaining LRA forces . As of early 2012 , Kony 's followers were thought to number only in the hundreds , and Kony himself was believed to be in the Central African Republic rather than Uganda — a fact that receives only a passing mention in the video . This problem raised questions about the plausibility of Ugandan army intervention , which the video advocates . Since Kony and most of the LRA forces are currently not in Uganda , the Ugandan army would need to coordinate with the governments and militaries of the other countries where the LRA is active . 
 <unk> <unk> , an Ethiopian American writer and Africa researcher , wrote that the real world Kony is " not a click away " , and a simple solution of raising popular awareness , " a beautiful equation that can only work so long as we believe that nothing in the world happens unless we know about it ... only works in the myopic reality of the film , a reality that deliberately eschews depth and complexity . " Amanda <unk> of the charity War Child said that " just getting rid of one person does not solve the problem " and the film 's focus should have been rather on helping ex @-@ child soldiers . Anne Goddard , president and CEO of ChildFund International , wrote that " by narrowing the focus on Kony , by defining success so singularly , it gives people a greater sense that the issue [ of globally widespread conscription of young children ] can be resolved . And that hope feeds on itself in a way that becomes infectious . " United Nations Under @-@ Secretary @-@ General Radhika Coomaraswamy called for the <unk> campaign to divert its donation funds from supporting military action to capture Kony to rehabilitation and reintegration programmes for former child soldiers . Victor <unk> , founder and director of Ugandan rehabilitation NGO <unk> , said that campaign " to promote [ Kony ] or make him famous " is " offensive " , in part because of the Cover the Night event 's date ( an anniversary of the <unk> massacre by the LRA in Uganda in 2005 and the date of birth of Adolf Hitler ) , adding " How do you think Americans would have reacted if people in another country wore Osama bin Laden T @-@ shirts ? " 
 After the film 's release , there was criticism in Uganda of its failure to state more clearly that Kony and his forces fled northern Uganda in 2006 and were dispersed across the jungles of three neighbouring countries . Fred <unk> , spokesman for the Ugandan government , said , " It is totally misleading to suggest that the war is still in Uganda . " Arthur <unk> , ActionAid 's director in Uganda , said , " It doesn 't sound like a fair representation of Uganda . We have challenges within the country , but certainly the perception of a country at war is not accurate at all . " Dr Beatrice <unk> , director of a community health organization in Gulu , commented , " There has not been a single soul from the LRA here since 2006 . Now we have peace , people are back in their homes , they are planting their fields , they are starting their businesses . That is what people should help us with . " Prime Minister of Uganda <unk> <unk> launched an online response on YouTube , in which he seeks to correct the " false impression " that Uganda is still at war , and invites everyone to visit the country , assuring that people would find it " a very different place to that portrayed by Invisible Children " . Meanwhile , dozens of members of Ugandan diaspora in United States protested outside the Invisible Children offices in San Diego , also criticizing the video but saying Kony represents " only three percent of all the problems " in their home country and lambasting the Ugandan government for its inadequate response to Kony 's terror and other issues . 
 A March 2012 mass showing of the film in Lira , the site of one of Kony 's worst atrocities in Uganda , was met with jeering and thrown objects at the screen and at the group African Youth Initiative Network , which screened the film and provided translations . The screening prompted angry calls to local radio stations by Ugandans upset that the film was so focused on the filmmakers and Kony while neglecting the conflict 's victims , prompting complaints that the film was " more about whites than Ugandans . " Others objected to being reminded of the horrors Kony brought to Uganda . Despite the negative response , the organization still planned on showing the film in other towns , hoping to avoid this response by providing context for the film . Some Ugandan commentators have also criticized the video for its aim of making Kony " famous " , even believing it means to " celebrate " him , and for its advocacy of foreign military intervention to stop him . 
 Mahmood <unk> , director of the Institute of Social Research at Makerere University , Kampala , argued that the LRA is " a Ugandan problem calling for a Ugandan political solution " and against " mobilisation of millions [ to ] be subverted into yet another weapon in the hands of those who want to further <unk> the region . " Ugandan journalist <unk> <unk> said that " the war is much more complex than one man called Joseph Kony . " A more recent showing of Kony 2012 at <unk> War Memorial Stadium in Gulu , Uganda sparked a riot in which dozens of people were injured . The archbishop of Gulu , Rt Rev. John Baptist <unk> , was reported as saying that the video " has ill motives and geared towards igniting anger in the population to cause violence . " Margaret <unk> , whose picture appears in the video showing her face mutilated by the LRA , said she " became sad " after seeing it being " used to profit . " 
 Father Ernest <unk> , national coordinator of the Congolese non @-@ governmental organization <unk> in <unk> , DRC , claimed that the few people there " who have succeeded in watching [ Kony 2012 ] are very critical on the film , " as is he himself . Charlie Beckett , a media communications expert at the London School of Economics ( LSE ) , said Invisible Children , " haven 't got the capacity for is to take that beyond another action . What are they going to do with all this energy and interest ? It 's going to dissipate . ... I think this will crash and die , I don 't think they will catch Kony . People will say they bought the bracelet and stuck posters on lamppost but that could have negative effects when it doesn 't actually lead anywhere . " 
 = = = Lord 's Resistance Army 's response = = = 
 A statement purported to be released by Kony 's Lord 's Resistance Army rebels and signed by the group 's spokesman and negotiator Justine <unk> ( " The Leader , LRA Peace Team " ) condemned the film as " a cheap and banal panic act of mass trickery to make the unsuspecting peoples of the world complicit in the US rogue and murderous activities in Central Africa . " The statement was obtained by Ugandan journalist Frank <unk> , received from Nairobi , Kenya @-@ based LRA representatives . It was also reported that the LRA abduction rate sharply increased in the weeks since the film was released , although it was impossible to confirm the link between the rise in LRA attacks and Kony 's global notoriety . 
 = = = Invisible Children 's response = = = 
 On March 8 , 2012 , Invisible Children released an official response addressing the criticisms directed at Kony 2012 . As an explanation for the simplicity of the movie , they stated that " in [ their ] quest to garner wide public support of nuanced policy , [ they ] sought to explain the conflict in an easily understandable format . " <unk> Jenkins , the director of idea development for Invisible Children , responded to the new criticisms by saying that they were " myopic " and that the video itself was a " tipping point " that " got young people to care about an issue on the other side of the planet that doesn ’ t affect them . " In response to concerns about working with the Ugandan government , Invisible Children explained that they " do not defend any of the human rights abuses perpetrated by the Ugandan government or the Ugandan army " . They added that the reason why they are working with the Ugandan army even though Kony is no longer in Uganda is that the army is " more organized and better equipped than that of any of the other affected countries ( DRC , South Sudan , CAR ) to track down Joseph Kony " and that they want all of the governments in the region to work together to arrest Kony . Jenkins stated , " There is a huge problem with political corruption in Africa . If we had the purity to say we will not partner with anyone corrupt , we couldn ’ t partner with anyone . " 
 A video titled Thank you , <unk> 2012 Supporters was released on March 12 , 2012 to address the criticisms directed at the film and to be " fully transparent " , according to Invisible Children CEO Ben Keesey . The film begins with Keesey discussing the three things that the charity focuses on , which are to " create films with compelling narratives , promote international advocacy and run on @-@ the @-@ ground initiatives . " He also points out that " overhead and travel costs are essential to those efforts " , as a part of the group 's management expenses , along with going toward " thousands of free screenings of the group ’ s films worldwide , as well as toward bringing survivors of the Lord ’ s Resistance Army ... to speak at these events . " Keesey explains the way the charity 's annual expenditures are made , with " 80 @.@ 5 percent to 85 @.@ 7 percent of total annual spending from fiscal 2007 to 2011 " going toward " ' program expenses ' — money that directly benefits their cause " , and finished by urging interested parties to make inquires to the group via Twitter , using the account @ invisible and hashtag # <unk> . Two further short videos featured LRA survivors expressing support for the film and the organization . 
 The website Kickstriker , a parody of Kickstarter , contains a fake appeal to crowdsource the " hiring private military contractors from <unk> ( formerly Blackwater ) , who will be immediately deployed to central Africa " with a mission to capture or kill Kony . In response , Invisible Children sent the Kickstriker team a cease and desist warning to take down the parody page , accusing them of " causing public confusion through your use of Invisible Children ’ s copyrighted and trademarked property " and threatening a legal action . According to Wired.com , the legal threats " [ had ] Kickstriker ’ s founders rolling their eyes . " 
 = = Kony 2012 Part II = = 
 Kony 2012 : Part II – Beyond Famous is a 20 @-@ minute video follow @-@ up to Kony 2012 . The film was announced early on April 2 , 2012 , to be released within the week . It was initially announced to be released on April 3 , but was delayed for two days due to editing problems . 
 Beyond Famous aims to address criticisms of the original film and to present more information about Kony 's LRA rebellion , including its impact on the countries other than Uganda , as well as about Invisible Children 's work and the Kony 2012 campaign . Executive Director and CEO of Invisible Children , Inc . Ben Keesey , who narrates the film , said the sequel was made in two weeks . In a statement announcing the video , Keesey said that Invisible Children wants people " to dig deeper into this conflict and actively engage in the solutions . " Jason Russell , who was hospitalized on March 15 due to " a temporary psychotic breakdown believed to have been brought on by the pressure of the success — and criticism — of the first film " , is not featured in Part II . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 In a pre @-@ release comment , popular culture expert Robert Thompson said : " The fact is , the story has developed in so many odd ways with all the controversy , and the sequel can 't really promise the bang of that first video — which is informing people of something they did not know before . Now we 're getting into the details , which is never that thrilling . " The LRA researcher Craig <unk> of the LSE 's department of International Development said that the second video " overwhelmingly " failed to answer criticisms raised by the first film . On the other hand , Mike Pflanz , East Africa correspondent for The Daily Telegraph , said that the sequel was " a more solid , moving and , finally , accurate presentation of the ongoing battle to capture Joseph Kony " and that , in comparison to the original video , the " new video is couched in nuance and deploys dialogue more commonly heard in a United Nations workshop – displacement , rehabilitation , post @-@ conflict — than in a YouTube smash . " 
 According to The Guardian , the sequel " does not seem to have captured the public 's imagination in quite the same way as Invisible Children 's earlier video did , failing to significantly trend on social media websites . " By April 16 , 2012 , it had received 1 @.@ 7 million views in 11 days , less than 2 % of what the first video had in its first five days . Matt Fiorentino , director of marketing at video measurement firm Visible Measures , considered the first campaign a never @-@ seen @-@ before anomaly , and despite being dwarfed by its predecessor , the number of views Beyond Famous received was " pretty good " when compared to a regular social campaign . The Guardian nevertheless described Beyond Famous as " one of the top 25 non @-@ profit campaigns ever . " 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = United States = = = 
 On March 21 , 2012 , a resolution " condemning Joseph Kony and his ruthless guerrilla group for a 26 @-@ year campaign of terror " was put forward by Senators Jim Inhofe and Chris Coons . The resolution stated that it would back " the effort of Uganda , the Democratic Republic of Congo , the Central African Republic and the newest country , South Sudan , to stop Kony and his Lord 's Resistance Army " , along with an official statement of support " for the U.S. effort to help regional forces pursue commanders of the militia group . " Overall , the resolution received support from 34 senators , both Republicans and Democrats . 
 Support among senators for the resolution came about after the release of the Kony 2012 video and its subsequent popularity . One of the resolution leaders , Senator Chris Coons , became aware of the situation after his daughters asked him what he was doing to stop Kony and Senator Roy Blunt was informed " at a Missouri caucus in St. Louis when a constituent quizzed him about Kony " . One of the co @-@ sponsors of the resolution , Senator Lindsey Graham , stated that , " When you get 100 million Americans looking at something , you will get our attention . This YouTube sensation is gonna help the Congress be more aggressive and will do more to lead to his demise than all other action combined . " 
 = = = Africa = = = 
 On March 23 , 2012 , the African Union ( AU ) announced its intentions to send an international brigade of 5 @,@ 000 military troops " from Uganda , South Sudan , Central African Republic and Congo , countries where Kony ’ s reign of terror has been felt over the years ... to join the hunt for rebel leader Joseph Kony " and to " neutralize " him . According to the statement , the mission commenced on March 24 , 2012 and the search " will last until Kony is caught " , after which the task force will be disbanded . The effort is Ugandan @-@ led and backed by the U.S. with the 100 advisers already there , who are offering advice , intelligence and training , along with equipment . The brigade has established its headquarters in <unk> in South Sudan , close to the border with the DRC , and is commanded by a Ugandan officer ; a Congolese officer has oversight of intelligence operations . 
 The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ( UNHCR ) spokeswoman Melissa Fleming said the agency welcomed the " unprecedented " initiative to " end the atrocities in the region " and urged all involved to respect human rights and minimize risk to civilians . AU counter @-@ terrorism envoy Francisco Madeira said , " We need to stop Kony . " The ICC chief prosecutor Luis Moreno Ocampo voiced confidence that the video will " produce the arrest of Joseph Kony this year , " adding : " That is the impact of the campaign . " However , Patrick Wegner , an academic at the Max Planck Research School on Successful Dispute Resolution in International Law , claimed it was " plain wrong " to suggest the AU action was prompted solely by Kony 2012 , saying that " the idea is a lot older than the Kony 2012 video " as the plans for forming an anti @-@ LRA regional military force have been first reported in international news media in 2010 . 
 = Banksia prionotes = 
 Banksia prionotes , commonly known as acorn banksia or orange banksia , is a species of shrub or tree of the genus Banksia in the family Proteaceae . It is native to the southwest of Western Australia and can reach up to 10 m ( 33 ft ) in height . It can be much smaller in more exposed areas or in the north of its range . This species has serrated , dull green leaves and large , bright flower spikes , initially white before opening to a bright orange . Its common name arises from the partly opened inflorescence , which is shaped like an acorn . The tree is a popular garden plant and also of importance to the cut flower industry . 
 Banksia prionotes was first described in 1840 by English botanist John Lindley , probably from material collected by James Drummond the previous year . There are no recognised varieties , although it has been known to hybridise with Banksia hookeriana . Widely distributed in south @-@ west Western Australia , B. prionotes is found from Shark Bay ( 25 ° S ) in the north , south as far as Kojonup ( 33 ° 50 ′ S ) . It grows exclusively in sandy soils , and is usually the dominant plant in scrubland or low woodland . Pollinated by birds , it provides food for a wide array of vertebrate and invertebrate animals in the autumn and winter months . It is an important source of food for honeyeaters ( Meliphagidae ) , and is critical to their survival in the Avon Wheatbelt region , where it is the only nectar @-@ producing plant in flower at some times of the year . 
 = = Description = = 
 Banksia prionotes grows as a tree up to 10 m ( 30 ft ) high in southern parts of its distribution , but in northern parts it is usually a shorter tree or spreading shrub , reaching about 4 m ( 13 ft ) in height ; it diminishes in size as the climate becomes warmer and dryer further north . It has thin , mottled grey , smooth or grooved bark , and tomentose young stems . The alternate dull green leaves are 15 – 27 cm ( 6 – 11 in ) long , and 1 – 2 centimetres ( 1 ⁄ 3 – 2 ⁄ 3 in ) wide , with toothed leaf margins made up of triangular lobes , and often a wavy surface . 
 Flowers occur in a typical Banksia flower spike , an inflorescence made up of hundreds of small individual flowers , or florets , densely packed around a cylindrical axis . B. prionotes has cream @-@ coloured flowers with a bright orange limb that is not revealed until the flower fully opens . Known as anthesis , this process sweeps through the inflorescence from bottom to top over a period of days , creating the effect of a cream inflorescence that progressively turns bright orange . The old flower parts fall away after flowering finishes , revealing the axis , which may bear up to 60 embedded follicles . Oval or oblong in shape and initially covered in fine hairs , these follicles are from 14 to 20 mm ( 1 ⁄ 2 to 3 ⁄ 4 in ) long and 6 – 11 mm ( 1 ⁄ 4 – 3 ⁄ 8 in ) wide , and protrude 3 – 6 mm ( 1 ⁄ 8 – 1 ⁄ 4 in ) from the cone . Inside , they bear two seeds separated by a brownish woody seed separator . The matte blackish seeds are wedge @-@ shaped ( cuneate ) and measure 8 – 10 mm ( 3 ⁄ 8 – 3 ⁄ 8 in ) long by 5 – 6 mm ( 1 ⁄ 4 – 1 ⁄ 4 in ) wide with a membranous ' wing ' . 
 The root system consists of a main sinker root , and up to ten lateral roots extending from a non @-@ lignotuberous root crown . The main sinker root grows straight down to the water table ; it may be up to 15 m ( 49 ft ) long if the water table is that deep . Typically from 3 to 5 cm ( 1 1 ⁄ 4 to 2 in ) in diameter immediately below the root crown , roots become gradually finer with depth , and may be less than half a centimetre ( 0 @.@ 2 in ) wide just above the water table . Upon reaching the water table , the sinker branches out into a network of very fine roots . The laterals radiate out horizontally from the base of the plant , at a depth of 3 – 10 cm ( 1 1 ⁄ 4 – 4 in ) . They may extend over 5 m ( 16 ft ) from the plant , and may bear secondary laterals ; larger laterals often bear auxiliary sinker roots . Lateral roots seasonally form secondary rootlets from which grow dense surface mats of proteoid roots , which function throughout the wetter months before dying off with the onset of summer . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Banksia prionotes was first published by English botanist John Lindley in the January 1840 issue of his A Sketch of the Vegetation of the Swan River Colony ; hence the species ' standard author citation is Banksia prionotes <unk> . He did not specify the type material upon which he based the species , but A Sketch of the Vegetation of the Swan River Colony is based primarily upon the collections of early settler and botanist James Drummond . A sheet of mounted specimens at the University of Cambridge Herbarium ( <unk> ) , labelled " Swan River , Drummond , 1839 " and annotated " Banksia prionotes m " in Lindley 's hand , has since been designated the lectotype . Lindley also made no mention of the etymology of the specific epithet , " prionotes " , but it is assumed to be derived from the Ancient Greek prion ( " saw " ) and <unk> ( " quality " ) , referring to the serrated leaf margins . 
 The most commonly reported common names of B. prionotes are acorn banksia , derived from the resemblance of partly opened inflorescences to acorns ; and orange banksia . Other reported common names include saw @-@ toothed banksia and golden banksia <unk> is a generic Noongar name for Banksia in the Avon River catchment , where B. prionotes is one of several species occurring . 
 No further subspecies or varieties of B. prionotes have been described , and it has no taxonomic synonyms . Its only nomenclatural synonym is Sirmuellera prionotes ( <unk> . ) Kuntze , which arose from Otto Kuntze 's unsuccessful 1891 attempt to transfer Banksia into the new name Sirmuellera . When Carl Meissner published his infrageneric arrangement of Banksia in 1856 , he placed B. prionotes in section Eubanksia because its inflorescence is a spike rather than a domed head , and in series Salicinae , a large series that is now considered quite heterogeneous . This series was discarded in the 1870 arrangement of George Bentham ; instead , B. prionotes was placed in section Orthostylis , which Bentham defined as consisting of those Banksia species with flat leaves with serrated margins , and rigid , erect styles that " give the cones after the flowers have opened a different aspect " . In 1981 , Alex George published a revised arrangement that placed B. prionotes in the subgenus Banksia because of its flower spike , section Banksia because its styles are straight rather than hooked , and the series Crocinae , a new series of four closely related species , all with bright orange perianths and pistils . 
 George 's arrangement remained current until 1996 , when Kevin Thiele and Pauline Ladiges published an arrangement informed by a cladistic analysis of morphological characteristics . Their arrangement maintained B. prionotes in B. subg . Banksia , but discarded George 's sections and his series Crocinae . Instead , B. prionotes was placed at the end of series Banksia , in subseries Cratistylis . Questioning the emphasis on cladistics in Thiele and Ladiges ' arrangement , George published a slightly modified version of his 1981 arrangement in his 1999 treatment of Banksia for the Flora of Australia series of monographs . To date , this remains the most recent comprehensive arrangement . The placement of B. prionotes in George 's 1999 arrangement may be summarised as follows : 
 Banksia 
 B. subg . Banksia 
 B. sect . Banksia 
 B. ser . Salicinae ( 11 species , 7 subspecies ) 
 B. ser . Grandes ( 2 species ) 
 B. ser . Banksia ( 8 species ) 
 B. ser . Crocinae 
 B. prionotes 
 B. <unk> 
 B. hookeriana 
 B. victoriae 
 B. ser . Prostratae ( 6 species , 3 varieties ) 
 B. ser . Cyrtostylis ( 13 species ) 
 B. ser . Tetragonae ( 3 species ) 
 B. ser . Bauerinae ( 1 species ) 
 B. ser . Quercinae ( 2 species ) 
 B. sect . Coccinea ( 1 species ) 
 B. sect . Oncostylis ( 4 series , 22 species , 4 subspecies , 11 varieties ) 
 B. subg . Isostylis ( 3 species ) 
 Since 1998 , American botanist Austin Mast has been publishing results of ongoing cladistic analyses of DNA sequence data for the subtribe Banksiinae , which includes Banksia . With respect to B. prionotes , Mast 's results are fairly consistent with those of both George and Thiele and Ladiges . Series Crocinae appears to be monophyletic , and B. hookeriana is confirmed as B. prionotes ' closest relative . Overall , however , the inferred phylogeny is very different from George 's arrangement . Early in 2007 , Mast and Thiele initiated a rearrangement of Banksiinae by publishing several new names , including subgenus Spathulatae for the species of Banksia that have spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons ; in this way they also redefined the autonym B. subgenus Banksia . They have not yet published a full arrangement , but if their nomenclatural changes are taken as an interim arrangement , then B. prionotes is placed in subgenus Banksia . 
 = = = Hybrids = = = 
 = = = = With Banksia hookeriana = = = = 
 Banksia prionotes readily hybridises with Banksia hookeriana ( Hooker 's banksia ) under experimental conditions , indicating that these species have highly compatible pollen . The cultivar B. ' Waite Orange ' is believed to be such a hybrid , having arisen by open pollination during a breeding experiment conducted at the Waite Agricultural Research Institute of the University of Adelaide in 1988 . 
 Banksia prionotes × hookeriana has also been verified as occurring in the wild , but only in disturbed locations . The two parent species have overlapping ranges and are pollinated by the same honeyeater species ; and though preferring different soils , they often occur near enough to each other for pollinators to move between them . It therefore appears that the only barrier to hybridisation in undisturbed areas is the different flowering seasons : B. prionotes has usually finished flowering by the end of May , whereas flowering of B. hookeriana usually does not begin until June . In disturbed areas , however , the increased runoff and reduced competition mean extra nutrients are available , and this results in larger plants with more flowers and a longer flowering season . Thus the flowering seasons overlap , and the sole barrier to interbreeding is removed . The resultant F1 hybrids are fully fertile , with seed production rates similar to that of the parent species . There is no barrier to <unk> of hybrids with parent species , and in some populations this has resulted in hybrid swarms . This raises the possibility of the parent species gradually losing their genetic integrity , especially if the intermediate characteristics of the hybrid offer it a competitive advantage over the parent species , such as a wider habitat tolerance . Moreover , speciation might occur if the hybrid 's intermediate characteristics allow it to occupy a habitat unsuited to both parents , such as an intermediate soil type . 
 Banksia prionotes × hookeriana hybrids have characteristics intermediate between the two parents . For example , the first putative hybrids studied had a habit " like that of gigantic B. <unk> [ sic ] " , having inherited the size of B. prionotes , together with B. hookeriana 's tendency to branch from near the base of the trunk . Similarly , the infructescences were like B. prionotes in size , but had persistent flowers like B. hookeriana . Inflorescences and leaves were intermediate in size and shape , and bark was like that of B. prionotes . 
 = = = = Other putative hybrids = = = = 
 During data collection for The Banksia Atlas project , a single presumed natural hybrid between B. prionotes and B. lindleyana ( porcupine banksia ) , with fruit like B. lindleyana but leaves intermediate between the two parents , was found north of Kalbarri National Park . At the time this was considered an important discovery , as the parent species were thought not to be closely related . Mast 's analyses , however , place them both in a clade of eight species , though B. lindleyana remains less closely related to B. prionotes than B. hookeriana . Hybrids of B. prionotes with B. menziesii ( firewood banksia ) have also been produced by artificial means , and presumed natural hybrids have been recorded . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Banksia prionotes occurs throughout much of the Southwest Botanical Province , occurring both along the west coast and well inland , and ranging from Shark Bay ( 25 ° 30 ′ S ) in the north , to Kojonup ( 33 ° 50'S ) and Jerramungup ( 34 ° <unk> 118 ° <unk> ) in the south and south @-@ east respectively . It grows among tall shrubland or low woodland , mostly in the swales and lower slopes of dunes , and shows a very strong preference for deep white or yellow sand . 
 It is most common amongst the kwongan heath of the Geraldton Sandplains north of Jurien ; it has a fairly continuous distribution there , often as the dominant species , and extends inland to around the 350 mm isohyet . On the Swan Coastal Plain to the south , its distribution is discontinuous , being largely confined to patches of suitable sand in the narrow transition zone where tuart forest gives way to jarrah forest . With the exception of a population at Point Walter ( 32 ° 00 ′ S ) , it does not occur on the sandplain south of the Swan River . 
 The soils east of the Darling Scarp are generally too heavy for this species , with the exception of some isolated pockets of deep alluvial or aeolian yellow sand . B. prionotes thus has a very patchy distribution east of the scarp . This area nonetheless accounts for around half of its geographic range , with the species extending well to the south and south @-@ east of the scarp . In total , the species occurs over a north – south distance of about 815 km ( 500 mi ) , and an east – west distance of about 125 km ( 80 mi ) . 
 The species is almost totally restricted to the swales and lower slopes of dunes . Various reasons for this have been proposed ; on the one hand , it has been argued that its dependence on ground water necessitates that it grow only where ground water is relatively near the surface ; on the other hand , it has been suggested that it cannot survive in higher parts of the landscape because fires are too frequent there . The latter hypothesis is supported by the recent expansion of B. prionotes along road verges of the Brand Highway , where fires are relatively rare . Despite B. prionotes ' occurrence in lower parts of the landscape , it does not occur in areas prone to flooding , because of its intolerance of heavy soils , and because extended periods of flooding kill seedlings . However , recent falls of the water table on the Swan Coastal Plain have seen B. prionotes replace the more water @-@ loving Banksia littoralis in some areas that were previously flood @-@ prone . 
 = = Ecology and physiology = = 
 = = = Growth = = = 
 The structure of the root system , comprising a vertical tap root and multiple horizontal laterals , develops in the seedling 's first year . Thereafter , the sinker and laterals continue to lengthen , and new laterals appear . There are only three to five laterals at first , but this number typically increases to eight to ten within ten years . During the first winter , there is a great deal of root system development , especially elongation of the sinker root , but almost no shoot growth . By summer , the sinker root has generally almost reached the water table , and shoot growth increases substantially . Around February , the shoot forms a resting bud , and growth then ceases until October . On resumption of shoot growth , the shoots grow rapidly for a short time , while the plant is under little water stress ; then , with the onset of water stress , the plants settles into a long period of slower shoot growth . This pattern of summer @-@ only shoot growth is maintained throughout the life of the plant , except that in mature plants , seasonal shoot growth may cease with the formation of a terminal inflorescence rather than a resting bud . Inflorescence development continues after shoot growth ceases , and flowering commences in February or March . March and April are the peak months for flowering , which ends in July or August . 
 Annual growth increases exponentially for the first eight years or so , but then slows down as resources are diverted into reproduction and the greater density of foliage results in reduced photosynthetic efficiency . 
 = = = Nutrition and metabolism = = = 
 The root structure of B. prionotes exhibits two common environmental adaptations . Firstly , this species is <unk> , that is , its long taproot extends down to the water table , securing it a continuous water supply through the dry summer months , when surface water is generally unavailable . This not only helps ensure survival over summer , but allows plants to grow then . Though the supply of water is the taproot 's primary function , the ground water obtained typically contains ionic concentrations of chloride , sodium , magnesium , calcium and potassium that are adequate for the plant 's nutritional needs . 
 The other common adaptation is the possession of cluster roots , which allow it to extract enough nutrients to survive in the oligotrophic soils in which it grows . With the onset of autumn rains , the lateral roots form dense surface mats of cluster roots in the top 20 cm ( 8 in ) of soil , just below the leaf litter , where most minerals are concentrated . These roots exude chemicals that enhance mineral solubility , greatly increasing the availability and uptake of nutrients in impoverished soils such as the phosphorus @-@ deficient native soils of Australia . For as long as surface water is available , they take in water and a range of minerals . In B. prionotes they are principally responsible for the uptake of malate , phosphate , chloride , sodium and potassium . When soils are high in nitrates , they may also perform some nitrate reductase activities , primarily the conversion of ammonium into amino acids such as asparagine and glutamine . 
 The uptake of nutrient and water by the cluster roots peaks through winter and spring , but ceases when the upper layer of soil dries out in summer . The cluster roots are then allowed to die , but the laterals are protected from desiccation by a continuous supply of water from the sinker root . The water supplied to the laterals by the sinker root is continually lost to the soil ; thus this plant facilitates the movement of ground water from the water table into surface soil , a process known as hydraulic redistribution . Cluster roots have been estimated as comprising about 30 % of total root biomass in this species ; the seasonal production of so much biomass , only for it to be lost at the end of the growing season , represents a substantial investment by the plant , but one that is critical in the competition for nutrients . 
 During winter , asparagine is metabolised immediately , but other nutrients , especially phosphates and glutamine , are removed from the xylem sap and stored in mature stem , bark and leaf tissues for release back into the xylem just before shoot growth begins in mid summer . This is also the time when the oldest leaves <unk> and die , returning nutrients to the plant at the time when they are needed most . When glutamine eventually reaches the leaves , it is broken down and used to synthesise protein and non @-@ amide amino acids such as aspartate , threonine , serine , glutamate , glycine , alanine and cystine . Together with sucrose and other solutes , these are then circulated in the phloem . The phloem sap of B. prionotes is unusual in having an extremely low ratio of potassium to sodium cations , and very low concentrations of phosphate and amino acids compared to chloride and sulfate anions . The low levels of potassium and phosphate reflect the extremely low availability of these minerals in the soil . The unusually high levels of sodium and chloride — at concentrations usually only seen under saline conditions — may be due to the necessity of maintaining turgor pressure ; that is , with so little potassium and phosphate available , and that needed in the building of new tissue , B. prionotes is forced to circulate whatever other ions are available in order to maintain turgor . 
 = = = Breeding system = = = 
 Flowering begins in February and is usually finished by the end of June . The species has an unusually low rate of flowering : even at the peak of its flowering season , it averages less than seven inflorescences per plant flowering at any one time . Individual flowers open sequentially from bottom to top within each inflorescence , the rate varying with the time of day : more flowers open during the day than at night , with a peak rate of around two to three florets per hour during the first few hours of daylight , when honeyeater foraging is also at its peak . 
 The flowers are fed at by a range of nectarivorous birds : mainly honeyeaters , including the New Holland honeyeater ( Phylidonyris novaehollandiae ) , white @-@ cheeked honeyeater ( P. nigra ) , brown honeyeater ( Lichmera indistincta ) , singing honeyeater ( Lichenostomus virescens ) , tawny @-@ crowned honeyeater ( Gliciphila melanops ) and red wattlebird ( Anthochaera carunculata ) . <unk> have also been observed feeding at the flowers , as have insects , including ants , bees , and aphids . Of these , evidence suggests that only birds are effective pollinators . Insects apparently play no role in pollination , since inflorescences do not form follicles when birds are excluded in pollinator exclusion experiments ; and pollination by mammals has never been recorded in this species . 
 Honeyeaters prefer to forage at individual flowers which have only just opened , as these offer the most nectar . As they probe for nectar , honeyeaters end up with large quantities of pollen on their beaks , foreheads and throats , some of which they subsequently transfer to other flowers . This transfer is quite efficient : flowers typically lose nearly all their pollen within four hours of opening , and pollen is deposited on the majority of stigmata . Around 15 % of these stigmata end up with pollen lodged in the stigmatic groove , a prerequisite to fertilisation . 
 The structure of the Banksia flower , with the style end functioning as a pollen presenter , suggests that autogamous self @-@ fertilisation must be common . In many Banksia species , the risk of this occurring is reduced by protandry : a delay in a flower 's receptivity to pollen until after its own pollen has lost its viability . There is dispute , however , over whether this occurs in B. prionotes : one study claimed to have confirmed " protandrous development " , yet recorded high levels of stigmatic receptivity immediately after anthesis , and long pollen viability , observations that are not consistent with protandry . 
 If it does occur , protandry does nothing to prevent <unk> self @-@ pollination : that is , pollination with pollen from another flower on the same plant . In fact , when birds forage at B. prionotes , only about a quarter of all movements from inflorescence to inflorescence involve a change of plant . <unk> self @-@ pollination must therefore occur more often in this species than cross @-@ pollination . This does not imply high rates of self @-@ fertilisation , however , as the species appears highly self @-@ incompatible : although pollen grains will germinate on flowers of the self plant , they apparently fail to produce pollen tubes that penetrate the style . Even where cross @-@ pollination does occur , fertilisation rate is fairly low . It is speculated that this is related to " a variety of chemical reactions at the pollen @-@ stigma interface " . 
 Cone production varies a great deal from year to year , but , as a result of its low flowering rate , is generally very low . However , there are typically a very high number of follicles per cone , leading to relatively high seed counts . There is some seed predation , primarily from the <unk> weevil <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Response to fire = = = 
 Like many plants in south @-@ west Western Australia , B. prionotes is adapted to an environment in which bushfire events are relatively frequent . Most Banksia species can be placed in one of two broad groups according to their response to fire : reseeders are killed by fire , but fire also triggers the release of their canopy seed bank , thus promoting recruitment of the next generation ; resprouters survive fire , resprouting from a lignotuber or , more rarely , epicormic buds protected by thick bark . B. prionotes is unusual in that it does not fit neatly into either of these groups . It lacks a lignotuber or thick bark , and so cannot be considered a <unk> ; yet it may survive or escape some fires because of its height , the sparseness of its foliage , and because it occurs in dune swales where fire are cooler and patchier . On the other hand , it is not a typical reseeder either , because of its relatively low fire mortality rates , and because it is only weakly serotinous : although fire promotes seed release , seed release still occurs in the absence of fire . 
 The actual degree of serotiny and fire mortality in B. prionotes varies with latitude , or , more likely , climate . Observations suggest that it is always killed by fire in the north of its range , which is relatively hot and dry , and where individual plants are usually smaller , but may survive fire in the cooler , moister , south . Moreover , it is essentially non @-@ serotinous in the south , since all seed is released by the end of the second year , but seed retention increases steadily to the north , and at the northern end of its range , it typically takes around four years for a plant to release half of its seed in the absence of bushfire , with some seed retained for up to 12 years . 
 A number of other characteristics of B. prionotes can be understood as secondary responses to weak serotiny . For example , winter flowering ensures that seed is ripe by the beginning of the bushfire season ; this is very important for weakly serotinous species , which rely heavily upon the current year 's seed crop . Another example is the deciduous florets of B. prionotes . In strongly serotinous species , the old florets are retained on the cones , where they function as fire fuel , helping to ensure that follicles reach temperatures sufficient to trigger seed release . In B. prionotes , however , seed release is triggered at relatively low temperatures : in one study , 50 % of follicles opened at 265 ° C ( 509 ° F ) , and 90 % opened at 330 ° C ( 626 ° F ) ; in contrast , the closely related but strongly serotinous B. hookeriana required 340 and 500 ° C ( 644 and 932 ° F ) respectively . <unk> retention would therefore be to no advantage , and might even prevent seed from escaping spontaneously opened follicles . 
 Seed release in B. prionotes is promoted by repeated wetting of the cones . The seed separator that holds the seeds in place is hygroscopic ; its two wings pull together then wet , then spread and curl inwards as it dries out again . In doing so , it functions as a lever , gradually prying seeds out of a follicle over the course of a wet @-@ dry cycle . This adaptation ensures that seed release following fire is delayed until the onset of rain , when germination and seedling survival rates are higher . 
 Because of its higher susceptibility and lower reliance on fire for reproduction , the optimal fire interval for B. prionotes is higher than for other Banksia species with which it occurs . One simulation suggested an interval of 18 years was optimal for B. prionotes , compared to 15 years for B. hookeriana and 11 years for B. attenuata . The same model suggested that B. prionotes is quite susceptible to reductions in fire intervals . On the other hand , it shows little susceptibility to increases in fire interval : although senescence and death are often observed in plants older than about 30 years , healthy stands have been observed that have escaped fire for 50 years . These stands have a multi @-@ aged structure , demonstrating the occurrence of successful inter @-@ fire recruitment . 
 Fire response may also furnish an explanation for the evolution of this species . The differences in fire regime between dune crests and swales would have created different evolutionary pressures , with plants on crests adapting to frequent hot fires by becoming strongly serotinous , and plants in swales adapting to patchier , cooler fires with weaker serotiny . Speciation would be made possible by the much reduced genetic exchange between crest plants and <unk> plants , although evidence suggests that there was some introgression at first . Eventually , however , the need for weakly serotinous plants to produce ripe seed by the bushfire season would have brought forward its flowering season until the flowering seasons no longer overlapped ; thus a phenological barrier to exchange was erected , allowing the two populations to drift independently of each other . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Banksia prionotes is susceptible to a number of threatening processes . It is highly susceptible to Phytophthora cinnamomi dieback ; wild populations are harvested commercially by the cut flower industry ; and some of its range is subject to land clearing for urban or agricultural purposes . An assessment of the potential impact of climate change on this species found that severe change is likely to lead to a reduction in its range of around 50 % by 2080 ; and even mild change is projected to cause a reduction of 30 % ; but under mid @-@ severity scenarios the distribution may actually grow , depending on how effectively it can migrate into newly habitable areas . However , this study does not address the potential of climate change to alter fire regimes ; these have already been impacted by the arrival of humans , and this change is thought to have led to a decline in the abundance and range of B. prionotes . 
 The species as a whole is not considered particularly vulnerable to these factors , however , as it is so widely distributed and common . Western Australia 's Department of Environment and Conservation does not consider it to be rare , and has not included it on their Declared Rare and Priority Flora List . It nonetheless has high conservation importance in at least one context : it is a keystone mutualist in the Avon Wheatbelt , where it is the only source of nectar during a critical period of the year when no other nectar @-@ producing plant is in flower . The loss of B. prionotes from the region would therefore mean the loss of all the honeyeaters as well , and this would affect the many other species of plants that rely on honeyeaters for pollination . The primary vegetation community in which Banksia prionotes occurs in the Avon Wheatbelt is considered a priority ecological community , and is proposed for formal gazetting as a threatened ecological community under the name " Banksia prionotes and <unk> angustifolium low woodlands on transported yellow sand " . Although currently in near @-@ pristine and static condition , it is considered at risk due to a large number of threatening processes , including land clearing , landscape fragmentation , rising soil salinity , grazing pressure , competition with weeds , changes to the fire regime , rubbish dumping , and P. cinnamomi dieback . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Described as " an outstanding ornamental species " , its brightly coloured , conspicuous flower spikes make B. prionotes a popular garden plant . It is good for attracting honeyeaters to the garden , and sometimes flowers twice a year . A low growing dwarf form which reaches 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) high is available in Western Australia , sold as " Little Kalbarri Candles " . 
 It is fairly easy to grow in areas with a Mediterranean climate , but does not do well in areas with high summer humidity . It requires a sunny position in well @-@ drained soil , and tolerates at least moderate frost . It should be pruned lightly , not below the green foliage , as it tends to become straggly with age otherwise . Seeds do not require any treatment prior to sowing , and take 21 to 35 days to germinate . 
 The species is also considered ideal for cut flower production , as its flowers fulfill the commercial criteria of terminal blooms and a long stem length . As such it is one of the most popular banksias for cut flower production , with commercial crops grown in Israel , Victoria , South Australia and Hawaii . 
 = Tropical Storm Norman ( 2012 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Norman brought minor flooding to western Mexico and record rainfall to areas of Texas in September 2012 . The fourteenth tropical cyclone and fourteenth named storm of the 2012 Pacific hurricane season , Norman developed near the southern tip of Baja California early on September 28 . Upon developing into a tropical cyclone on September 28 , Norman attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . Heading northward into the Gulf of California , the storm began to weaken later that day due to southwesterly wind shear and land interaction . Norman curved northwestward and weakened to a tropical depression early on September 29 . Around that time , it briefly moved inland near Topolobampo , Sinaloa , before re @-@ emerging into the Gulf of California . Later on September 29 , Norman degenerated into a remnant low pressure area . 
 In anticipation of the storm , a tropical storm warning was issued for a portion of the Pacific coast of Mexico . Additionally , orange , yellow , green , and blue alerts were posted for several states . About 553 shelters were opened , though only 65 people sought refuge in them . Heavy rainfall from Norman was reported in Colima , Jalisco , Nayarit , Sinaloa , Baja California Sur , Durango , and Zacatecas . In Baja California Sur , mudslides and flooding left roads impassable , mainly in the La Paz area . Flooding in <unk> left streets inundated and about 150 families fled their homes . About 24 cars in the area were swept away . The remnants of Norman brought record rainfall totals to some areas of Texas . Local flooding occurred , with a few roads inundated in Wimberley . A woman died after her vehicle was swept off the road . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa on September 12 . The wave moved westward across the Atlantic basin with minimal deep convection . By September 23 , it reached the eastern Pacific Ocean and began increasing in shower and thunderstorm activity over the next few days . While located near Acapulco another burst in convection occurred on September 25 , likely due to interaction with the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) . Around that time , the National Hurricane Center began Tropical Weather Outlooks ( TWOs ) on the system , which is information issued every six hours on significant areas of disturbed weather and their potential for development out to 48 hours . The tropical wave split on September 26 , with the northern portion moving northwestward near the southwestern coast of Mexico . By September 27 , the system had organized deep convection and was producing tropical storm force winds , but data from <unk> indicated that it lacked a closed circulation . Although TWOs issued on September 27 predicted a high probability for development , the chances for tropical cyclogenesis was decreased later that day , due to the system 's close proximity to land . 
 On September 28 , satellite data and ships ' observations indicated a closed circulation . Thus , Tropical Storm Norman developed at 0600 UTC , while located about 115 mi ( 185 km ) southeast of Cabo San Lucas . Initially , the storm was expected to intensify slightly before making landfall on September 29 and then dissipate on the following day . However , upon developing into a tropical cyclone at 1200 UTC on September 28 , Norman attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . Thereafter , Norman began heading northward between a mid @-@ to upper @-@ level low to its west and a mid @-@ level ridge over the Gulf of Mexico . Later on September 28 , the storm entered the Gulf of California and began weakening due to a significant increase in wind shear and interaction with land . Around that time , the cloud pattern became less organized and convection was being displaced from the circulation . Early on September 29 , the storm curved northwestward and was downgraded to a tropical depression due to difficulty in locating the center of circulation and significant disorganization . Norman made landfall near Topolobampo with winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) at 0500 UTC on September 29 . Shortly thereafter , the storm re @-@ curved west @-@ northwestward and re @-@ emerged into the Gulf of California . Norman degenerated into a remnant low pressure area at 1200 UTC on September 29 . The remnant low moved slowly west @-@ southwestward , before dissipating over Baja California Sur near Loreto on September 30 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 The Government of Mexico issued a tropical storm warning along the Pacific coast of Mexico from La Cruz , Sinaloa to Huatabampo at 1500 UTC on September 28 . Early on the following day , the tropical storm warning was discontinued . An orange alert " ( high risk ) was issued for parts of the state of Sinaloa , and a yellow alert was in effect for Baja California Sur , and green alert was declared for southern Sonora . A " blue alert " , minimum risk , was issued for north @-@ central Sonora , Durango , Chihuahua and Zacatecas . Officials deployed 400 soldiers in the cities of La Paz and Los Cabos . According to the state director of Civil Protection , Carlos Enriquez Rincon , 500 schools were available to operate as temporary shelters . The shelters have a capacity of around 30 @,@ 000 people , though only 65 people spent the first night of the storm in shelters . Furthermore , a total of 5 @,@ 000 food packages were sent to residents . In the mainland , authorities in the municipality of Culiacán opened 53 shelters , with a total capacity of over 7 @,@ 000 . In addition , classes were suspended in 5 states . 
 Tropical Storm Norman brought extremely heavy rains to Colima , Jalisco , Nayarit , Sinaloa , Baja California Sur , Durango , and Zacatecas . The ports of Cabo San Lucas and San Jose del Cabo were closed for boats and water activities . In the former , 15 – 20 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 – 6 @.@ 1 m ) waves were recorded . Due to mudslides and wash flooding over 24 cars were swept away in La Paz . In Sinaloa , the rains caused by Norman did not represent an important contribution to the 11 dams in the state , with mean water levels rising from 42 @.@ 5 % to 42 @.@ 6 % . Eight fisherman were rescued near the port of Mazatlan when their boat tipped over . Five fisherman were initially reported missing ; however , following the passage of the storm , the missing people were later found alive . Street flooding was also reported . A total of 150 families were evacuated in two fishing villages along the mainland . Following the storm , a state of emergency was declared for the municipalities of Los Cabos , Angostura , and Navolato . 
 The remnants of Norman brought record rains to Texas . A peak rainfall total of 8 @.@ 4 in ( 210 mm ) fell on La Pryor . At Camp Mabry in Austin , 1 @.@ 38 inches ( 35 mm ) of rain fell in a 24 ‑ hour period , breaking a daily precipitation record set in 1985 . However , across the central portion of the state , rainfall from the system was less than expected . A few roads in Wimberley were temporarily closed due to flooding . One women was killed in Nacogdoches County after her car was swept off a roadway . A tornado warning was also issued in the Corpus Christi area . 
 = John Kourkouas = 
 John Kourkouas ( Greek : Ἰωάννης <unk> , fl. circa 915 – 946 ) , also transliterated as <unk> or <unk> , was one of the most important generals of the Byzantine Empire . His success in battles against the Muslim states in the East definitively reversed the course of the centuries @-@ long Byzantine – Arab Wars and began Byzantium 's 10th century " Age of Conquest " . 
 Kourkouas belonged to a family of Armenian descent that produced several notable Byzantine generals . As commander of an imperial bodyguard regiment , Kourkouas was among the chief supporters of Emperor Romanos I Lekapenos ( reigned 920 – 944 ) and facilitated the latter 's rise to the throne . In 923 , Kourkouas was appointed commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Byzantine armies along the eastern frontier , facing the Abbasid Caliphate and the semi @-@ autonomous Muslim border emirates . He kept this post for more than twenty years , overseeing decisive Byzantine military successes that altered the strategic balance in the region . 
 During the 9th century , Byzantium had gradually recovered its strength and internal stability while the Caliphate had become increasingly impotent and fractured . Under Kourkouas 's leadership , the Byzantine armies advanced deep into Muslim territory for the first time in almost 200 years , expanding the imperial border . The emirates of Melitene and Qaliqala were conquered , extending Byzantine control to the upper Euphrates and over western Armenia . The remaining Iberian and Armenian princes became Byzantine vassals . Kourkouas also played a role in the defeat of a major Rus ' raid in 941 and recovered the Mandylion of Edessa , an important and holy relic believed to depict the face of Jesus Christ . He was dismissed in 944 as a result of the machinations of Romanos Lekapenos 's sons but restored to favour by Emperor Constantine VII ( r . 913 – 959 ) , serving as imperial ambassador in 946 . His subsequent fate is unknown . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and career = = = 
 John was a scion of the Armenian Kourkouas family — a Hellenized form of their original surname , Gurgen ( Armenian : <unk> ) — which had risen to prominence in Byzantine service in the 9th century and established itself as one of the great families of the Anatolian land @-@ holding military aristocracy ( the so @-@ called " <unk> " ) . John 's namesake grandfather had been a commander of the elite <unk> regiment ( tagma ) under Emperor Basil I ( reigned 867 – 886 ) ; John 's brother Theophilos became a senior general , as did John 's own son , Romanos , and his great @-@ nephew , John Tzimiskes . 
 Little is known about John 's early life . His father was a wealthy official in the imperial palace . John himself was born at <unk> ( now Tokat ) , in the region of <unk> in the Armeniac Theme , and was educated by one of his relatives , the bishop of Gangra Christopher . In the late regency of Empress Zoe Karbonopsina ( 914 – 919 ) for her infant son Constantine VII ( r . 913 – 959 ) , Kourkouas was appointed as the commander of the Vigla palace guard regiment , probably through the machinations of the fellow Armenian , admiral Romanos Lekapenos , as part of his drive for the throne . In this capacity , he arrested several high officials who opposed Lekapenos 's rise to power , opening the road to the appointment of Lekapenos as regent in place of Zoe in 919 . Lekapenos gradually assumed more powers until he was crowned senior emperor in December 920 . As a reward for his support , in ca . 923 , Romanos Lekapenos promoted Kourkouas to the post of Domestic of the Schools , in effect commander @-@ in @-@ chief of all the imperial armies in Anatolia . According to the chronicle of Theophanes Continuatus , Kourkouas held this post for an unparalleled continuous term of 22 years and seven months . 
 At this time , and following the disastrous Battle of Acheloos in 917 , the Byzantines were mostly occupied in the Balkans against Bulgaria . Hence , Kourkouas 's first task as Domestic of the East was the suppression of the revolt of Bardas Boilas , the governor ( strategos ) of Chaldia , a strategically important area on the Empire 's northeastern Anatolian frontier . This was quickly achieved and his brother , Theophilos Kourkouas , replaced Boilas as governor of Chaldia . As commander of this northernmost sector of the eastern frontier , Theophilos proved a competent soldier and gave valuable assistance to his brother 's campaigns . 
 = = = First submission of Melitene , campaigns into Armenia = = = 
 Following the Muslim conquests of the 7th century , the Arab – Byzantine conflict had featured constant raids and counter @-@ raids along a relatively static border roughly defined by the line of the Taurus and Anti @-@ Taurus Mountains . Until the 860s , superior Muslim armies had placed the Byzantines on the defensive . Only after 863 , with the victory in the Battle of Lalakaon , did the Byzantines gradually regain some lost ground against the Muslims , launching ever @-@ deeper raids into Syria and Upper Mesopotamia and annexing the Paulician state around Tephrike ( now <unk> ) . Furthermore , according to historian Mark Whittow , " by 912 the Arabs had been pinned back behind the Taurus and Anti @-@ Taurus " , encouraging the Armenians to switch their allegiance from the Abbasid Caliphate to the Empire , in whose service they entered in increasing numbers . The revival of Byzantine power was further facilitated by the progressive decline of the Abbasid Caliphate itself , particularly under al @-@ Muqtadir ( r . 908 – 932 ) , when the central government faced several revolts . In the periphery of the Caliphate , the weakening of central control allowed the emergence of semi @-@ autonomous local dynasties . In addition , after the death of the Bulgarian Tsar Simeon in 927 , a peace treaty with the Bulgarians allowed the Empire to shift attention and resources to the East . 
 By 925 , Romanos Lekapenos felt himself strong enough to demand the payment of tribute from the Muslim cities on the western side of the Euphrates . When they refused , in 926 , Kourkouas led the army across the border . Aided by his brother Theophilos and an Armenian contingent under the strategos of Lykandos , <unk> ( Melias in Greek sources ) , Kourkouas targeted Melitene ( modern Malatya ) , the center of an emirate which had long been a thorn in Byzantium 's side . The Byzantine army successfully stormed the lower city , and although the citadel held out , Kourkouas concluded a treaty by which the emir accepted tributary status . 
 In 927 – 928 , Kourkouas launched a large raid into Arab @-@ controlled Armenia . After taking Samosata ( modern <unk> ) , an important stronghold on the Euphrates , the Byzantines advanced as far as the Armenian capital of Dvin . An Arab counter @-@ offensive forced them out of Samosata after only a few days , and Dvin , which was defended by the Sajid general Nasr al @-@ <unk> , successfully withstood the Byzantine siege , until the mounting losses forced the Byzantines to abandon it . At the same time , Thamal , the emir of Tarsus , conducted successful raids into southern Anatolia and neutralized Ibn al @-@ Dahhak , a local Kurdish leader who supported the Byzantines . The Byzantines then turned toward the Kaysite emirate in the region of Lake Van in southern Armenia . Kourkouas 's troops and plundered the region and took the towns of Khliat and Bitlis , where they are said to have replaced the mosque 's minbar with a cross . The local Arabs appealed to the Caliph for aid in vain , prompting an exodus of Muslims from the region . This incursion , more than 500 kilometres ( 310 mi ) from the nearest imperial territory , was a far cry from the defensive @-@ minded strategy Byzantium had followed during the previous centuries and highlighted the new capabilities of the imperial army . Nevertheless , famine in Anatolia and the exigencies of parallel campaigns in southern Italy weakened Kourkouas 's forces . His army was defeated and driven back by Muflih , a former Sajid ghulam and governor of Adharbayjan . 
 In 930 , Melias 's attack on Samosata was heavily defeated ; among other prominent officers , one of his sons was captured and sent to Baghdad . Later in the same year , John and his brother Theophilos besieged Theodosiopolis ( modern Erzurum ) , the capital of the emirate of Qaliqala . The campaign was complicated by the machinations of their ostensible allies , the Iberian rulers of Tao @-@ Klarjeti . Resenting the extension of direct Byzantine control adjacent to their own borders , the Iberians had already provided supplies to the besieged city . Once the city was invested , they vociferously demanded that the Byzantines hand over several captured towns , but when one of them , the fort of <unk> , was surrendered , the Iberians promptly returned it to the Arabs . As Kourkouas needed to keep the Iberians placated and was aware that his conduct was being carefully observed by the Armenian princes , he did not react to this affront . After seven months of siege , Theodosiopolis fell in spring 931 and was transformed into a tributary vassal , while , according to Constantine VII 's De Administrando Imperio , all territory north of the river Araxes was given to the Iberian king David II . As in Melitene , the maintenance of Byzantine control over Theodosiopolis proved difficult and the population remained restive . In 939 , it revolted and drove out the Byzantines , and Theophilos Kourkouas could not finally subdue the city until 949 . It was then fully incorporated into the Empire and its Muslim population was expelled and replaced by Greek and Armenian settlers . 
 = = = Final capture of Melitene = = = 
 Following the death of Emir Abu Hafs , Melitene renounced its Byzantine allegiance . After attempts to take the city by storm or subterfuge failed , the Byzantines established a ring of fortresses on the hills around the plain of Melitene , and methodically ravaged the area . By early 931 , the inhabitants of Melitene were forced to come to terms : they agreed to tributary status and even undertook to provide a military contingent to campaign alongside the Byzantines . 
 The other Muslim states were not idle , however : in March , the Byzantines were hit by three successive raids in Anatolia , organized by the Abbasid commander Mu 'nis al @-@ Muzaffar , while in August , a large raid led by Thamal of Tarsus penetrated as far as Ancyra and Amorium and returned with prisoners worth 136 @,@ 000 gold dinars . During this time , the Byzantines were engaged in southern Armenia , aiding the ruler of Vaspurakan , Gagik I , who had rallied the local Armenian princes and allied himself with the Byzantines against the emir of Adharbayjan . There they raided the Kaysite emirate and razed Khliat and <unk> to the ground , before marching into Mesopotamia and capturing Samosata again . Gagik was unable to take advantage of this and capture Kaysite territory , however , as Muflih immediately raided his domains in retaliation . At this point , the <unk> called upon the Hamdanid rulers of Mosul for help . In response , the Hamdanid prince Sa 'id ibn Hamdan attacked the Byzantines and drove them back : Samosata was abandoned , and in November 931 , the Byzantine garrison withdrew from Melitene as well . Sa 'id was , however , unable to remain in the area or to leave a sufficient garrison ; once he left for Mosul , the Byzantines returned and resumed both the blockade of Melitene and their scorched @-@ earth tactics . 
 The sources record no major Byzantine external campaigns for 932 , as the Empire was preoccupied with two revolts in the Opsician Theme . In 933 , Kourkouas renewed the attack against Melitene . Mu 'nis al @-@ Muzaffar sent forces to assist the beleaguered city , but in the resulting skirmishes , the Byzantines prevailed and took many prisoners and the Arab army returned home without relieving the city . In early 934 , at the head of 50 @,@ 000 men , Kourkouas again crossed the frontier and marched toward Melitene . The other Muslim states offered no help , preoccupied as they were with the turmoil following Caliph al @-@ Qahir 's deposition . Kourkouas again took Samosata and besieged Melitene . Many of the city 's inhabitants had abandoned it at the news of Kourkouas 's approach and hunger eventually compelled the rest to surrender on 19 May 934 . Wary of the city 's previous rebellions , Kourkouas only allowed those inhabitants to remain who were Christians or agreed to convert to Christianity . Most did so , and he ordered the remainder expelled . Melitene was fully incorporated into the empire , and most of its fertile land was transformed into an imperial estate ( <unk> ) . This was an unusual move , implemented by Romanos I to prevent the powerful Anatolian landed aristocracy from taking control of the province . It also served to increase direct imperial presence and control on the crucial new borderlands . 
 = = = Rise of the Hamdanids = = = 
 The fall of Melitene profoundly shocked the Muslim world : for the first time , a major Muslim city had fallen and been incorporated into the Byzantine Empire . Kourkouas followed this success by subduing parts of the district of Samosata in 936 and razing the city to the ground . Until 938 , the East remained relatively calm . Historians suggest that the Byzantines were likely preoccupied with the full pacification of Melitene , and the Arab emirates , deprived of any potential support from the Caliphate , were reluctant to provoke them . 
 With the decline of the Caliphate and its obvious inability to defend its border provinces , a new local dynasty , the Hamdanids , emerged as the principal antagonists of Byzantium in northern Mesopotamia and Syria . They were led by al @-@ Hasan , called Nasir al @-@ Dawla ( " Defender of the State " ) , and by his younger brother Ali , best known by his epithet , Sayf al @-@ Dawla ( " Sword of the State " ) . In ca . 935 , the Arab tribe of Banu Habib , defeated by the rising Hamdanids , defected in its entirety to the Byzantines , converted to Christianity , and placed its 12 @,@ 000 horsemen at the disposal of the Empire . They were settled along the western bank of the Euphrates and assigned to guard five new themes created there : Melitene , <unk> , <unk> ( Arsamosata ) , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 The first Byzantine encounter with Sayf al @-@ Dawla took place in 936 , when he tried to relieve Samosata , but a revolt at home forced him to turn back . In another invasion in 938 , however , he captured the fort of <unk> and defeated Kourkouas 's advance guard , seizing a great amount of booty and forcing Kourkouas to withdraw . In the same year , a peace agreement was signed between Constantinople and the Caliphate . The negotiations were facilitated by the rising power of the Hamdanids , which caused anxiety to both sides . Despite the official peace with the Caliphate , ad hoc warfare continued between the Byzantines and the local Muslim rulers , now aided by the Hamdanids . The Byzantines attempted to besiege Theodosiopolis in 939 , but the siege was abandoned at the news of the approach of Sayf al @-@ Dawla 's relief army . 
 By that time , the Byzantines had captured Arsamosata and additional strategically important locations in the mountains of southwest Armenia , posing a direct threat to the Muslim emirates around Lake Van . To reverse the situation , in 940 Sayf al @-@ Dawla initiated a remarkable campaign : starting from <unk> ( Byzantine Martyropolis ) , he crossed the Bitlis pass into Armenia , where he seized several fortresses and accepted the submission of the local lords , both Muslim and Christian . He ravaged the Byzantine holdings around Theodosiopolis and raided as far as Koloneia , which he besieged until Kourkouas arrived with a relief army and forced him to withdraw . Sayf al @-@ Dawla was not able to follow up on this effort : until 945 , the Hamdanids were preoccupied with internal developments in the Caliphate and with fighting against their rivals in southern Iraq and the Ikhshidids in Syria . 
 = = = Rus ' raid of 941 = = = 
 The distraction by the Hamdanids proved fortunate for Byzantium . In early summer 941 , as Kourkouas prepared to resume campaigning in the East , his attention was diverted by an unexpected event : the appearance of a Rus ' fleet that raided the area around Constantinople itself . The Byzantine army and navy were absent from the capital , and the appearance of the Rus ' fleet caused panic among the populace of Constantinople . While the navy and Kourkouas 's army were recalled , a hastily assembled squadron of old ships armed with Greek Fire and placed under the protovestiarios Theophanes defeated the Rus ' fleet on June 11 , forcing it to abandon its course toward the city . The surviving Rus ' landed on the shores of Bithynia and ravaged the defenseless countryside . The patrikios Bardas Phokas hastened to the area with whatever troops he could gather , contained the raiders , and awaited the arrival of Kourkouas 's army . Finally , Kourkouas and his army appeared and fell upon the Rus ' , who had dispersed to plunder the countryside , killing many of them . The survivors retreated to their ships and tried to cross to Thrace under the cover of night . During the crossing , the entire Byzantine navy attacked and annihilated the Rus ' . 
 = = = Campaigns in Mesopotamia and recovery of the Mandylion = = = 
 Following this distraction , in January 942 Kourkouas launched a new campaign in the East , which lasted for three years . The first assault fell on the territory of Aleppo , which was thoroughly plundered : at the fall of the town of <unk> , near Aleppo , even Arab sources record the capture of 10 – 15 @,@ 000 prisoners by the Byzantines . Despite a minor counter @-@ raid by Thamal or one of his retainers ( ghilman ) from Tarsus in the summer , in autumn Kourkouas launched another major invasion . At the head of an exceptionally large army , some 80 @,@ 000 men according to Arab sources , he crossed from allied Taron into northern Mesopotamia . <unk> , Amida , Nisibis , Dara — places where no Byzantine army had trod since the days of Heraclius 300 years earlier — were stormed and ravaged . The real aim of these campaigns , however , was Edessa , the repository of the " Holy Mandylion " . This was a cloth believed to have been used by Christ to wipe his face , leaving an imprint of his features , and subsequently given to King Abgar V of Edessa . To the Byzantines , especially after the end of the Iconoclasm period and the restoration of image veneration , it was a relic of profound religious significance . As a result , its capture would provide the Lekapenos regime with an enormous boost in popularity and legitimacy . 
 Kourkouas assailed Edessa every year from 942 onward and devastated its countryside , as he had done at Melitene . Finally , its emir agreed to a peace , swearing not to raise arms against Byzantium and to hand over the Mandylion in exchange for the return of 200 prisoners . The Mandylion was conveyed to Constantinople , where it arrived on August 15 , 944 , on the feast of the Dormition of the Theotokos . A triumphal entry was staged for the venerated relic , which was then deposited in the Theotokos of the Pharos church , the palatine chapel of the Great Palace . As for Kourkouas , he concluded his campaign by sacking <unk> ( modern Birecik ) and Germanikeia ( modern Kahramanmaraş ) . 
 = = = Dismissal and rehabilitation = = = 
 Despite this triumph , the downfall of Kourkouas , as well as of his friend and protector , Emperor Romanos I Lekapenos , was imminent . The two eldest surviving sons of Romanos I , co @-@ emperors Stephen and Constantine , were jealous of Kourkouas and had in the past tried to undermine him , albeit without success . Following the success of Kourkouas in the East , Romanos I considered marrying his trusted general into the imperial family . Kourkouas 's daughter Euphrosyne was to be wedded with the emperor 's grandson , the future Romanos II ( r . 959 – 963 ) , the son of his son @-@ in @-@ law and junior emperor Constantine VII . Although such a union would effectively cement the loyalty of the army , it would also strengthen the position of the legitimate Macedonian line , represented by Constantine VII , over the imperial claims of Romanos 's own sons . Predictably , Stephen and Constantine opposed this decision and prevailed upon their father , who was by this time old and ill , to dismiss Kourkouas in the autumn of 944 . 
 Kourkouas was replaced by a certain <unk> , who was almost immediately defeated by Sayf al @-@ Dawla in December while raiding near Aleppo . On 16 December , Romanos I himself was deposed by Stephen and Constantine and banished to a monastery on the island of Prote . A few weeks later , on 26 January , another coup removed the two young Lekapenoi from power and restored the sole imperial authority to Constantine VII . Kourkouas himself appears to have soon returned to imperial favour : Constantine provided the money for the repair of Kourkouas 's palace after it was damaged by an earthquake , and in early 946 , he is recorded as having been sent with the magistros Kosmas to negotiate a prisoner exchange with the Arabs of Tarsus . Nothing further is known about him . 
 The fall of the Lekapenoi signalled the end of an era in terms of personalities , but Kourkouas 's expansionist policy continued : he was succeeded as Domestic of the Schools by Bardas Phokas the Elder , followed by Nikephoros Phokas , who reigned as emperor in 963 – 969 , and finally , by Kourkouas 's own great @-@ nephew , John Tzimiskes , who reigned as emperor in 969 – 976 . All of them expanded the Byzantine frontier in the East , recovering Cilicia and northern Syria with Antioch , and converting the Hamdanid emirate of Aleppo into a Byzantine protectorate . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 Kourkouas ranks among the greatest military leaders Byzantium produced , a fact recognized by the Byzantines themselves : later Byzantine chroniclers hailed him as the general who restored the imperial frontier to the Euphrates , and in a contemporary eight @-@ book history , written by a protospatharios Michael and now lost save for a short summary in Theophanes Continuatus , he is acclaimed as " a second Trajan or Belisarius " . 
 The ground work for his successes had certainly been laid by others : Michael III , who broke the power of Melitene at Lalakaon ; Basil I , who destroyed the Paulicians ; Leo VI the Wise , who founded the vital theme of Mesopotamia ; and Empress Zoe , who extended Byzantine influence again into Armenia and founded the theme of Lykandos . It was Kourkouas and his campaigns , however , that incontrovertibly changed the balance of power in the northern Middle East , securing the frontier provinces against Arab raids and turning Byzantium into an expansionist power . In the words of historian Steven Runciman , " a lesser general might [ ... ] have cleared the Empire of the Saracens and successfully defended its borders ; but [ Kourkouas ] did more . He infused a new spirit into the imperial armies , and led them victoriously deep into the country of the infidels . The actual area of his conquests was not so very large ; but they sufficed to reverse the age @-@ old roles of Byzantium and the Arabs . Byzantium now was the aggressor ... [ John Kourkouas ] was the first of a line of great conquerors and as the first is worthy of high praise . " 
 = Grrrrrrrrrrr ! ! = 
 Grrrrrrrrrrr ! ! is a 1965 oil and Magna on canvas painting by Roy Lichtenstein . Measuring 68 in × 56 @.@ 125 in ( 172 @.@ 7 cm × 142 @.@ 6 cm ) , it was bequeathed to the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum collection from Lichtenstein 's estate . It depicts a head @-@ on representation of an angry dog growling with the onomatopoeic expression " Grrrrrrrrrrr ! ! " . The work was derived from Our Fighting Forces , which also served as the source for other military dog paintwork by Lichtenstein . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Lichtenstein foundation notes that the inspiration for this painting is a frame of Our Fighting Forces # 66 ( February 1962 ) , which was published by National Periodical Publications ( now DC Comics ) . In that frame only a portion of the dog 's head is visible and the speech balloon says " <unk> ! " In addition to the painting itself , Lichtenstein produced a small 5 @.@ 75 in × 4 @.@ 5 in ( 14 @.@ 6 cm × 11 @.@ 4 cm ) graphite on paper study . 
 The painting was bestowed to the Guggenheim Museum after Lichtenstein 's 1997 death , following a promise made in 1992 . The museum used Grrrrrrrrrrr ! ! in the promotional posters for the 1993 exhibition " Roy Lichtenstein : A Retrospective " , which ran from October 7 , 1993 – January 16 , 1994 . Other notable exhibitions where this work was shown include " Rendezvous : Masterpieces from the Centre Georges Pompidou and the Guggenheim Museums " which ran from October 16 , 1998 – January 24 , 1999 at the Guggenheim Museum in New York , as well as " Art in America : 300 Years of Innovation " which traveled to several museums in China between 2007 and 2008 . 
 The work appeared on the cover of the November 1993 issue of ARTnews . 
 = = Details = = 
 Although Grrrrrrrrrrr ! ! is derived from what Guggenheim Senior Curator Susan Davidson calls a " low @-@ grade comic strip " that is a typical Lichtenstein source , it is representative of Lichtenstein 's fascination with " the atomic language of Ben @-@ Day dots , black outlines and the three primary colors as the elementary vocabulary of low @-@ budget commercial imagery . " 
 According to Jennifer Blessing of the Guggenheim , " There is also an element of humor in creating fine art out of what has customarily been considered ' low , ' a playfulness that is equally evident in the onomatopoeic caption and bellicose expression of the dog in Grrrrrrrrrrr ! ! " 
 = = Related works = = 
 In 1962 , Lichtenstein created <unk> ! , an oil and graphite pencil on canvas painting depicting a dog from a subsequent issue of Our Fighting Forces , the series that was the source of Grrrrrrrrrrr ! ! That source depicts the dog by the name of " Pooch " in profile with a text bubble reading " <unk> ! " above his head . The inspiration for this painting came from Our Fighting Forces # 69 ( July 1962 ) . <unk> ! was sold at Christie 's in 1996 for $ 420 @,@ 500 to an undisclosed buyer . 
 = Baltimore City College = 
 Baltimore City College , known colloquially as City ( also known as City College or BCC ) , is a public magnet high school in Baltimore City , Maryland , United States . Established in March 1839 , City is the third oldest active public high school in the US . A citywide college preparatory school with a liberal arts focus , City has selective admissions criteria based on entrance exams . 
 It is located on a 38 acres ( 0 @.@ 15 km2 ) hill @-@ top campus in Northeast Baltimore bordered by 33rd Street , the Alameda , and Loch Raven Boulevard . The school 's main building is a National Historic Landmark . According to the Maryland Historical Society , " The gothic structure , aptly nicknamed ' the Castle on the Hill , ' sits atop the highest point within the city limits . With a singular tower that stands over 200 feet high , the building and campus hold scenic views of the surrounding region . " 
 = = History = = 
 The creation of a high school " in which the higher branches of English and classical literature should be taught exclusively " was unanimously authorized by the Baltimore City Council on March 7 , 1839 . Accordingly , the Board of School Commissioners rented a townhouse structure on a small narrow by @-@ way of what was then called Courtland Street ( now on the east side of Saint Paul Street / Place . The High School , as it was first called , opened its doors on October 20 , 1839 , with 46 students and one teacher / professor , Nathan C. Brooks ( 1809 – 1898 ) , who also served as first principal . 
 The school moved several times and was housed in three different locations in its first three years before returning again to the original townhouse building on Courtland Street . Finally , in 1843 , the City Council allocated $ 23 @,@ 000 to acquire the vacant old landmark Assembly Rooms structure at the northeastern corner of East Fayette and Holliday Streets for the school . The famous Assembly Rooms also served as the intellectual and educational center of town , with the upper floors holding rooms where the new Library Company of Baltimore and the later Mercantile Library were located for several years . In 1850 , the City Council granted the Board of School Commissioners the right to confer graduates of the decade old high school with certificates of graduation , and the following year the school held its first commencement ceremony . 
 In 1865 , in accordance with a recommendation from the Board of Commissioners of the Baltimore City Public Schools , the school began offering a five @-@ year track , as part of a process aimed at elevating the school to the status of a college so that it could grant its graduates baccalaureate degrees . The following year , on October 9 , 1866 , the school was renamed " The Baltimore City College " ( BCC ) by the City Council . The Council failed to take any further action , and although the school changed nominally , it was never granted the power to confer Bachelor of Arts degrees . 
 The building on Fayette and Holliday Streets had been in a state of decline for two decades . It was not until 1873 , when a fire spread from the Holliday Street Theater to the " Assembly Rooms " , that the City Council dedicated the resources to erect a new building for City College . A lot was acquired on North Howard Street opposite West Centre Street and the Council allocated $ 150 @,@ 000 for the construction of the new building designed by Baltimore architect Edmund G. Lind . The new English Gothic revival @-@ styled building faced east on Howard Street and was dedicated on February 1 , 1875 . The school moved in the following week . 
 The Tudor Gothic building which housed the school was undermined , in 1892 , by the construction of the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad tunnel from Camden Street Station to Mount Royal Station and collapsed . In 1895 , a new larger structure , designed in the Romanesque Revival style by the noted local architects Baldwin & Pennington , was erected on the same site , only facing the Centre Street northern side . This new building quickly became overcrowded and an annex was established on 26th Street . The addition did not help with the increase in school @-@ aged youth beginning to attend City College by World War I. During the 1920s , alumni began a campaign to provide the school with a more suitable building , and , in 1926 , ground was broken for a massive Collegiate Gothic stone castle on Collegian Hill at 33rd Street and The Alameda . This new structure cost almost $ 3 million and officially opened April 10 , 1928 . 
 The school began admitting African American students following the landmark ruling Brown v. Board of Education . In September 1954 , 10 African @-@ American students enrolled at City College . The school board also sent two African American men , Eugene Parker and Pierre H. Davis , to teach at the school in 1956 . Parker taught at City College for 30 years . Davis taught for one year , but returned as the school 's first black principal in 1971 . In 1978 , at the urging of concerned alumni , City College underwent its first major capital renovations . When the campus reopened , the high school welcomed women for the first time . The all @-@ male tradition did not end easily ; alumni had argued for the uniqueness of a single @-@ sex educational system and convinced the task force studying the issue to vote 11 – 6 in favor of keeping the all @-@ male tradition . The Board of School Commissioners , in a reversal , voted to admit women citing constitutional concerns . 
 = = Campus = = 
 Baltimore City College stands on an expansive , tree @-@ shaded 38 @-@ acre ( 153 @,@ 781 m2 ) hill @-@ top campus in northeast Baltimore at the intersection of 33rd Street and the Alameda . The campus , which includes an enormous grassy front lawn with large ancient trees , consists of two buildings : the Gothic @-@ style edifice known locally as the " Castle on the Hill " which sits in the center of the campus , and the power plant building east of the castle . In addition to providing the building 's utilities , the power plant originally housed five workshops : an electrical shop , a mechanical shop , a metal shop , a printing shop , and a wood shop . It currently houses the Coldstream @-@ Homestead @-@ Montebello community corporation headquarters . Both buildings were designed by the architecture firm of Buckler and Fenhagen . 
 The castle features an iconic 150 @-@ foot @-@ tall central tower that is visible from many locations throughout the city , courtyards , stained glass , and gargoyles modeled on the faces of the architects . Just south of the main building is Alumni Field , the school 's stadium , which serves as home to the school 's football , boys and girls lacrosse , and track teams . During a major building renovation in 1978 , a modern gymnasium was added to the southwest corner of the main building . Other athletic facilities include fields for baseball , softball , soccer , and lacrosse , and tennis courts . 
 The castle sits on Collegian Hill , the former site of Canton Iron Works industrialist , Horace Abbott with its Victorian @-@ styled twin mansions known as " <unk> " and " Woodlands " built in the 1870s and later known as the " Gilman @-@ Cate Estate " in the early 20th Century when it passed to his children . Nearby also was the historic " Montebello " estate of the 1790s of General Samuel Smith , ( 1752 @-@ 1839 ) , a noted American Revolutionary War hero and officer in the War of 1812 in the Battle of Baltimore , commanding the Maryland state militia forces against the British Army and Royal Navy attack . Smith also served as a local merchant , elected U.S. Representative , and Senator , and near the end of his remarkable eight @-@ decades life , served as the Mayor of Baltimore . 
 On June 30 , 2003 , the current building was placed on the National Register of Historic Places . The listing of the building coincided with the structure 's 75th anniversary . The immediate past location of the school , on Howard Street in downtown Baltimore , is also listed on the National Register of Historic Places . On April 24 , 2007 , the building was designated a Baltimore City landmark , which means that the building 's exterior cannot be altered without approval of the city Commission for Historical and Architectural Preservation . On June 21 , 2007 , the school 's Alumni Association received a historic preservation award from Baltimore Heritage for its leadership role in preserving the building as an historic Baltimore landmark . 
 = = = City College library = = = 
 In 2015 , City launched a campaign to build a new library called the Torch Burning Bright campaign . Co @-@ chaired by Kurt Schmoke , BCC ' 67 , former Baltimore Mayor and current President of the University of Baltimore , and Bob Embry , BCC ' 55 , President of the Abell Foundation , the Torch Burning Bright campaign is working in partnership with the State of Maryland , Baltimore City Public Schools , alumni , parents , students , faculty , and other community partners , including private foundations and individual donors , to " modernize the school 's academic resources to help maintain and expand [ its ] legacy as an educational leader . " 
 The $ 2 million project , which includes a complete overhaul and <unk> of the current library space , will add new spaces for resource stacks , new areas for studying and reading , including a casual reading room in the great hall under the tower , new classroom and seminar spaces and conference rooms , a new location for library archives , a listening and viewing room , and office space . Additionally , the new City College library will feature new computers and access to online databases . Construction of the new library commenced in January 2016 . 
 = = Academics = = 
 = = = Mission = = = 
 When it was founded in March 1839 as the flagship school of what later became the Baltimore City Public Schools , Baltimore City College was charged with providing a unique <unk> and liberal arts @-@ based course of study and with holding all members of its school community to the highest standards of academic achievement and personal development . The school 's mission is to prepare its students to succeed in the best colleges In the United States . The faculty and staff of the school strive to engage every student in a rigorous university preparatory study of liberal arts , provide strong extended academic and social support services , and to develop students who enjoy studying and learning . The school 's ultimate goal is to produce competitive graduates who have an appreciation for scholarship , perform well on meaningful assessments , make meaningful contributions to society , behave with civility and respect , and perform as reasonable leaders . 
 = = = 19th Century Curriculum : The Five @-@ Year Course era = = = 
 The creation of a male high school " in which the higher branches of English and classical literature should be taught exclusively " was authorized unanimously by the Baltimore City Council on March 7 , 1839 . The school opened its doors October 20 , 1839 with 46 students . Those enrolled were offered two academic tracks , a classical literature track and an English literature track . The sole instructor for both tracks was the educator and poet , Nathan C. Brooks , who also served as principal . To accommodate the two tracks , Brooks split the school day into two sections : one in the morning from 9 am to 12 am , and another in the afternoon from 2 pm to 5 pm . During the morning session , students studied either classics or English ; however , the afternoon was devoted to English . In 1849 , after a decade of service , Prof. Brooks resigned as principal of the school , which had now grown to include 232 students and 7 teachers , excluding Brooks . 
 Rev. Dr. Francis G. Waters , who had been the president of the Washington College , on the Eastern Shore of Maryland in Chestertown , succeeded Brooks . The following year the city council renamed the school " The Central High School of Baltimore " and granted the commissioners of the public schools the right to confer certificates to the high school 's graduates , a practice still in place today . By 1850 , growing enrollment necessitated a reorganization of the school . Under the direction of Waters , the school day was divided into eight periods lasting forty @-@ five minutes : four sessions were held in the morning and four in the afternoon . In addition to reorganizing the schedule , he divided the courses into seven different departments : Belles @-@ letters and history , mathematics , natural sciences , moral , mental , and political science , ancient languages , modern languages and music . Each of the seven instructors was assigned to a distinct department and received the title of " professor " . 
 In 1850 , the Baltimore City Council granted the school the authority to present its graduates with certificates of completion . An effort to expand that academic power and allow the then @-@ named " Central High School of Baltimore " to confer Bachelor of Arts degrees began in 1865 , and continued the following year with the renaming of the institution as " The Baltimore City College " the retitling of its chief academic officer from " principal " to " president " , along with an increase in the number of years of its course of study and the expansion of its courses . However , despite this early elevation effort , it ended unsuccessfully in 1869 , although Baltimore City College continued for a number of years as a hybrid public high school and early form of junior college ( later known as community college ) which did not fully appear in America until the beginning of the 20th Century . As the importance of college education increased toward the end of the 19th century , the school 's priorities shifted to preparing students for college . 
 = = = 20th Century Curriculum : The A / B Course era = = = 
 In 1901 , the course of study at Baltimore City College went through a series of further changes . The most significant was the reduction of the five @-@ year course of study to four years ; though students who entered prior to 1900 were allowed to complete the five @-@ year course . The new course , like the course it replaced , allowed graduates to be admitted to Johns Hopkins University without examination , and provided students with greater flexibility . Instead of requiring students to complete the same set of courses , it allowed students to choose their courses , as long as they completed 150 credits . From 1927 to the early 1990s , the college preparatory curriculum at Baltimore City College was divided into two tracks : the " A " course and the " B " course . Though both tracks were intended to provide students with the skills necessary for college , the " A " course was intended to be more rigorous , enabling students to complete sufficient college @-@ level courses to enter directly into the second year of college . In the early @-@ 1990s , then @-@ Principal Joseph Antenson removed the two @-@ tier system because he believed it to be racially discriminatory . 
 = = = = The 1960s and 1970s = = = = 
 Population decline in the city of Baltimore due to the migration of middle @-@ class white populations to the suburbs during the 1950s and 1960s , coupled with the failure of Baltimore City Public Schools officials to address infrastructure improvements needed in the school 's deteriorating , then @-@ thirty @-@ seven @-@ year @-@ old main academic building lead to a gradually declining public perception of the school 's academic reputation . In response , school administrators and faculty developed the " City Forever " strategic plan in 1965 @-@ 66 . The performance improvement plan also served as a call to action for the school community , resulting in formal recommendations from the Alumni Association , a series of student @-@ led demonstrations , newspaper articles and television news segments produced by alumni working as media professionals , letters @-@ to @-@ the @-@ editors of local newspapers submitted by parents and teachers , and routine public comments in support of City College at School Board meetings . The public outcry stunned city leadership , which resulted in the district announcing a <unk> to Baltimore City College and its unique role as the selective flagship high school of Baltimore . 
 Over the next decade , the local school district failed to delivery on its pledge to adequately fund the revitalized Baltimore City College curriculum and enforce higher admissions standards . In 1975 , City students , faculty , and influential alumni like then @-@ Mayor of Baltimore William Donald Schaefer ' 39 and then @-@ City Comptroller Hyman A. Pressman ' 33 again engaged in a series of coordinated campaigns , urging political leaders and members of the School Board to provide the resources and enforce the high standards the school needs to succeed . As a result , the City of Baltimore announced its plan to advance funds to complete a $ 9 million renovation of the school 's main building and earmarked funding for a comprehensive , two @-@ year study ( 1977 – 79 ) . Subject matter experts in education and pedagogy , school faculty , parents , alumni , and other members of the school community formed the " New City College Task Force " . The task force , which combed through two decades of previous improvement plans , academic proposals , and experimental curricula , recommended to the School Board a plan that included stricter admissions and retention standards , a revitalized <unk> and liberal arts @-@ based curriculum , and the autonomy to selectively recruit new , highly qualified faculty and administrators . 
 The Baltimore City Board of School Commissioners ultimately accepted all but one of the task force 's recommendations in 1979 . The group recommended maintaining the school 's then @-@ 141 @-@ year @-@ old tradition of all @-@ male education . Citing concerns over conflicting federal and district court decisions which had not yet been resolved by the U.S. Supreme Court , the school board voted to make City a coeducational school . The board 's action followed trends at the time at all @-@ male colleges and universities like Harvard University , Yale University , and nearby Johns Hopkins University , which admitted women during the 1970s . 
 = = = = The 1990s = = = = 
 By 1990 , enrollment was declining and the academic program at Baltimore City College had once again become subpar compared to its historically high standards . The Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools , the organization that had accredited the school for years , began raising questions about the institution 's ability to offer students an academically rigorous course of study . During this period of decline , the " A " Course was discontinued by newly appointed Principal Joseph Antenson , who contended that the program was racially discriminatory and opted for a standardized curriculum . Antenson was dismissed in 1992 after two tumultuous years as head of school and for the first time ever a private contractor was hired to operate Baltimore City College . 
 In 1994 , Joseph M. Wilson , a lawyer by trade with degrees from Amherst College ( B.A. ) , the University of Pennsylvania ( M.A. ) , the University of Southern California ( J.D. ) , and Harvard University ( M.A. ) , was appointed principal and with the support of alumni and parents , was able to secure more funding and additional autonomy from the Baltimore City Public Schools . Wilson introduced the IB Diploma Program in 1998 . The turnaround Wilson orchestrated led to a quick resurgence and restoration of the school 's academic reputation . Enrollment , student performance , and the quality of the colleges and universities to which graduates matriculated improved , which attracted critical acclaim from education professionals and international media attention . In 2000 , City College was recognized as a National Blue Ribbon School , the highest academic honor bestowed by the U.S. Department of Education . In 2001 , the Toronto National Post reported on its search for the perfect high school in Great Britain , the United States , and Canada . One subject of the prominent feature article was Baltimore City College and its turnaround . 
 = = = 21st Century Curriculum = = = 
 International Baccalaureate ( IB ) is a rigorous , internationally accepted academic program required of all 21st century Baltimore City College students . The IB Middle Years Program is intended to teach freshman and sophomore students to understand how core subjects are interrelated , how to master critical thinking processes , and to increase intercultural awareness . As juniors and seniors , students engage in the rigorous two @-@ year IB Diploma curriculum that requires a comprehensive study of world topics , literature , languages , science , and math . City College 's IB certificate and diploma programs provide upperclassmen access to thirty advanced studies courses , which often translate into credit hours at colleges and universities world @-@ wide . 
 Controversy surrounded the program briefly in 2007 when the Board of Directors of the Baltimore City College Alumni Association , an influential group that performs several tasks in perpetuation of the school , including managing a nearly $ 2 million scholarship endowment and coordinating fundraising efforts for capital projects and other initiatives , argued to school officials that the IB Program diverts a significant percentage of the school 's resources to benefit a fraction of the student population . Approximately 30 students were enrolled in the full IB Diploma Program at that time . The Association also argued that the rigidity of the program did not give students enough coursework scheduling flexibility . Citing these concerns , the board of directors of the BCC Alumni Association formally voted to recommend that the school replace the IB Program with the " A course " , which was discontinued in the 1990s , and expand the number of Advanced Placement courses offered to students . The recommendation , though non @-@ binding , was intended to persuade the school to replace the curriculum with what its members believed to be more equitable and flexible . Despite the recommendation , school administrators proceeded with plans to expand the City College IB Program by incorporating the IB Middle Years Program into the 9th and 10th grade curricula . In addition to the IB courses , the school 's academic program offers a small selection of Advanced Placement courses . 
 = = = = International Baccalaureate course offerings = = = = 
 As of the 2015 @-@ 2016 school year , the International Baccalaureate courses below are offered at the school . Some courses are offered at the higher level ( HL ) and standard level ( SL ) . 
 Biology 
 Business and Management 
 Chemistry 
 English A Literature 
 Environment and Society 
 Film 
 French B 
 French AB 
 German B 
 History 
 Latin 
 Literature and Performance 
 Math Studies 
 Mathematics 
 Music 
 Physics 
 Psychology 
 Social and Cultural Anthropology 
 Spanish B 
 Spanish AB 
 Theater 
 Theory of Knowledge 
 Visual Arts 
 = = = Graduation requirements = = = 
 Students who successfully complete the school 's required curriculum earn the Baltimore City College diploma upon graduation , which has been granted since 1851 . The requirements are more stringent than those designated by the State of Maryland . 
 Requirements for the Baltimore City College Diploma : 
 Successful completion of a minimum of one IB <unk> or Certificate @-@ level course , or AP course 
 Successful completion of the IB Personal Project 
 Physics or an advanced @-@ level IB / AP science 
 Two Fine Arts courses ( requirement waived for IB Diploma candidates ) 
 Successful completion of the College Writing seminar ( requirement waived for IB Diploma candidates and students enrolled in IB English IV ) 
 Minimum cumulative GPA of 70 % 
 Submit admission applications to a minimum of four colleges ( including <unk> submission ) 
 Take the SAT or ACT at least two times 
 75 hours of documented Service Learning activity 
 = = Admissions = = 
 Admission to Baltimore City College is selective but is open to residents of Baltimore City and the surrounding counties in the metropolitan area , though non @-@ Baltimore City residents must pay tuition . Applicants must meet all requirements for promotion to ninth grade , as determined by the Maryland State Department of Education . Additionally , applicants must earn a minimum composite score of 610 , calculated by Baltimore City Public Schools . Generally , candidates for <unk> must have a 3 @.@ 0 overall numeric grade average ( B letter grade ; 80 or better percentage grade ) , have at least a 3 @.@ 0 average in both Mathematics and English , rank in the 65th percentile or better among all Maryland students in Math and English on the Maryland School Assessment ( MSA ) , and have 90 % or better attendance rate . Due to the highly competitive nature of the City College admissions process , successful applicants typically exceed the aforementioned minimums . J.D. Merrill , BCC ' 09 , is the school 's current Director of Admissions and Institutional Advancement . 
 = = Enrollment = = 
 There were 1 @,@ 309 students enrolled at Baltimore City College in 2015 . Of those students , 43 percent were male and 57 percent were female . 85 percent of the total student body identifies as African @-@ American . 10 percent of students at the school identify as Caucasian . Roughly two percent of City College students identifies as Hispanic . One percent of the total student population identifies as Asian . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 Interscholastic athletics at Baltimore City College date back over 120 years . Though varsity sports were not formally organized until 1895 , interscholastic athletics became a fixture at the school earlier in the 19th century . In the late @-@ 1890s , City competed in the Maryland Intercollegiate Football Association ( <unk> ) , a 9 @-@ member league consisting of colleges in Washington , D.C. and Maryland . City College was the lone secondary school among <unk> membership . The 1895 football schedule included St. John 's College , Swarthmore College , the United States Naval Academy , University of Maryland , and Washington College . Between 1894 and 1920 , City College regularly faced off against the Johns Hopkins Blue Jays and the Navy Midshipmen in lacrosse . 
 Baltimore City College began competing against other secondary schools in 1919 when it was invited to join the Maryland Scholastic Association ( MSA ) as a founding member . After 75 years of governing Baltimore @-@ metro area boys high school athletics , the Maryland Scholastic Association dissolved in 1993 when its 15 public school members , including City College , withdrew from the league to join the Maryland Public Secondary Schools Athletic Association ( MPSSAA ) . The Knights currently compete with other public secondary schools in the MPSSAA ( Class 3A , North Region , District 9 ) , more commonly referred to as the Baltimore City League ( Division 1 ) , but routinely schedule contests against area private schools in various sports . 
 The current City College varsity athletic program consists of 18 sports : six for boys , seven for girls , and five coeducational teams . The boys sports includes baseball , basketball , football , lacrosse , soccer , and wrestling . The girls sports are badminton , basketball , lacrosse , soccer , softball , and volleyball . The five co @-@ ed sports are cross country , indoor track and field , swimming , outdoor track and field , and tennis . Girls sports were added to City 's athletic department in the Fall of 1978 when the school became coeducational for the first time in its then @-@ 139 @-@ year @-@ old history . 
 The school 's football , track and field , and girls basketball teams are currently outfitted by Under Armour , while the boys basketball team and others are outfitted by Nike . 
 = = = Championships = = = 
 Baltimore City College 's championship pedigree predates World War I. Since winning its first championships ( baseball and ice hockey ) in 1903 , the Knights ' athletic success has spanned every sport offered by the school . Though it no longer sponsors bowling , fencing , golf , and ice hockey , City has won titles in 20 different sports in its history . 
 The list below includes championships won in single @-@ sport leagues before the school joined an athletic association in all sports in 1919 , championships earned between 1919 and 1993 as members of the Maryland Scholastic Association ( now Maryland Interscholastic Athletic Association ) , and Maryland Public Secondary Schools Athletic Association ( MPSSAA ) district , regional , and state championships won by the Knights since joining the MPSSAA in 1993 . 
 Badminton ( 17 championships ) 
 Pre @-@ MPSSAA Championships — 1990 – 92 
 MPSSAA District Championships — 1993 , 1995 – 97 , 2004 – 09 , 2011 – 14 
 Baseball ( 12 ) 
 Pre @-@ MSA Championships — 1903 , 1915 
 MSA Championships — 1926 , 1934 – 38 , 1940 , 1942 , 1962 
 MPSSAA District Championships — 1994 
 Boys Basketball ( 24 ) 
 Pre @-@ MSA Championships — 1916 
 MSA Championships — 1922 – 23 , 1934 – 35 , 1938 – 40 , 1961 , 1963 , 1965 – 67 , 1969 
 MPSSAA State Championships — 2009 , 2010 , 2014 
 MPSSAA Regional Championships — 1997 – 99 , 2009 – 10 , 2014 
 MPSSAA District Championships — 2014 
 Girls Basketball ( 4 ) 
 MPSSAA State Championships — 2009 
 MPSSAA Regional Championships — 2004 , 2005 , 2009 
 Bocce ( 2 ) 
 MPSSAA District Championships — 2013 , 2014 
 Boys Bowling ( 7 ) 
 MSA Championships — 1938 , 1944 , 1945 , 1946 , 1948 , 1949 , 1954 
 Boys Cross Country ( 20 ) 
 MSA Championships — 1936 – 37 , 1939 , 1941 , 1943 , 1950 , 1955 , 1958 , 1960 – 69 , 1983 , 1989 
 Fencing ( 11 ) 
 MSA Championships — 1930 , 1932 , 1936 , 1938 , 1940 , 1947 , 1949 , 1951 , 1954 – 56 
 Football ( 25 ) 
 MSA Championships — 1937 – 42 , 1961 , 1964 – 68 , 1986 – 88 , 1991 – 92 
 MPSSAA Regional Championships — 1996 , 2005 , 2006 
 Boys Golf ( 10 ) 
 MSA Championships — 1935 , 1940 – 42 , 1944 , 1954 – 57 , 1960 
 Ice Hockey ( 2 ) 
 Pre @-@ MSA Championships — 1903 
 MSA Championships — 1941 
 Boys Lacrosse ( 18 ) 
 MSA Championships — 1933 – 35 , 1941 , 1955 , 1957 – 62 , 1984 , 1987 
 MPSSAA District Championships — 1993 , 2008 – 10 , 2015 
 Girls Lacrosse ( 6 ) 
 MPSSAA District Championships — 1998 , 1999 , 2000 , 2009 , 2011 , 2013 
 Boys Soccer ( 11 ) 
 MSA Championships — 1934 , 1935 , 1938 , 1939 , 1941 , 1963 , 1982 , 1985 , 1986 , 1987 
 MPSSAA District Championships — 1994 
 Girls Soccer ( 3 ) 
 MPSSAA District Championships — 2000 , 2012 , 2013 
 Softball ( 2 ) 
 MPSSAA District Championships — 1994 , 1996 
 Swimming ( 34 ) 
 MSA Championships — 1930 – 42 , 1943 – 44 , 1946 – 47 , 1949 – 53 , 1986 – 90 
 MPSSAA District Championships — 2007 – 08 , 2010 – 2013 
 Boys Tennis ( 14 ) 
 MSA Championships — 1923 , 1925 – 27 , 1929 , 1933 , 1935 , 1944 , 1946 , 1954 , 1958 , 1959 , 1961 , 1988 
 Co @-@ Ed Tennis ( 6 ) 
 MPSSAA District Championships — 1990 , 1991 , 1992 , 2007 – 09 , 2011 
 Boys Track and Field ( 22 ) 
 MSA Championships — 1903 , 1906 , 1936 , 1939 , 1941 , 1956 – 67 , 1969 , 1986 – 87 
 MPSSAA Regional Championships — 1997 
 Volleyball ( 4 ) 
 Pre @-@ MPSSAA Championships — 1980 , 1982 
 MPSSAA District Championships — 1996 , 2010 
 Wrestling ( 15 ) 
 MSA Championship — 1923 , 1938 , 1940 , 1942 , 1956 , 1963 – 64 , 1967 – 70 , 1973 , 1975 – 76 
 MPSSAA District Championships – 2008 
 = = = Boys basketball = = = 
 Basketball has been played at Baltimore City College for more than a century . One of the earliest recorded results in program history is a one @-@ point overtime road loss to the University of Maryland Terrapins ( then known as the Maryland Agricultural College Aggies ) on January 25 , 1913 . The most successful head coach in school history was George Howard " Jerry " Phipps , who led the Knights to a record of 133 – 27 , four Maryland Scholastic Association ( MSA ) championships , and a streak of forty straight games without a loss spanning two seasons between 1960 – 1968 . In all , the school won twelve MSA A @-@ Conference basketball championships ( 1922 , 1923 , 1934 , 1935 , 1938 , 1939 , 1940 , 1961 , 1963 , 1965 , 1966 , 1967 , 1969 ) . 
 Baltimore City College currently competes in District 9 ( Baltimore City League ) of the Maryland Public Secondary Schools Athletic Association ( MPSSAA ) . Since 2007 , City College has earned berths in every MPSSAA state tournament and has posted seven 20 + win seasons . The Knights have won three MPSSAA state championships ( 2009 , 2010 , and 2014 ) , one of just five schools in Maryland that have won three or more boys basketball state titles since 2000 . City has advanced to the MPSSAA state tournament semifinals six times ( 1997 , 1998 , 1999 , 2009 , 2010 , and 2014 ) , third most all @-@ time among Baltimore City League teams . The Knights won the Baltimore City League Division I championship in 2014 and also appeared in the district championship game in 2011 . 
 With a record of 27 – 0 in 2014 , City College posted the third undefeated season in school history ( 1966 , 1967 ) and became the first Baltimore City League team since 2008 – 2009 to finish the season without a loss . The Knights ended the 2014 season as the No. 18 @-@ ranked team in the country in the final USA Today Super 25 and Student Sports Fab 50 national boys basketball polls , the team 's highest national ranking since beginning the 2011 – 12 season as the No. 21 @-@ ranked team in the preseason USA Today national poll . Daryl Wade is the current City College head boys basketball coach . In addition to winning the 2014 MPSSAA state championship , Wade has guided the Knights to three additional MPSSAA state semifinal appearances and has a 133 – 42 win @-@ loss record in nine seasons at the school , including a 30 @-@ game win streak between December 2013 and December 2014 . Coach Wade was named Baltimore Sun All @-@ Metro Coach of the Year in 2014 , the school 's second Coach of the Year award winner since 2010 . 
 = = = Football = = = 
 The Baltimore City College football program began in the mid @-@ 1870s , and has won more than 20 Maryland Scholastic Association ( MSA ) A @-@ Conference and Maryland Public Secondary Schools Athletic Association ( MPSSAA ) championships in its history . The Knights primarily competed against are colleges and universities throughout the 1880s and 1890s because few secondary schools existed at the time . The program began competing against other high schools at the beginning of the 20th century , and has held since 1941 the record for the longest streak of games played without a loss in MSA and MPSSAA history . The Knights played 54 consecutive games without a loss between 1934 – 1941 . Harry Lawrence , who guided the Knights to a 38 @-@ game undefeated streak between 1936 and 1940 ( including 35 wins , three ties , and four MSA championships ) , remains City College 's most successful head football coach . 
 George Young became head football coach in 1959 and guided the Knights to six Maryland Scholastic Association A @-@ Conference championships . Young left the program after the 1967 season to join the National Football League as an offensive line coach for the Baltimore Colts and would later become the general manager of the New York Giants . One of his star players was quarterback Kurt Schmoke , who later became States ' Attorney for Baltimore City and served two terms as the Mayor of Baltimore , the first elected African @-@ American mayor in the history of Baltimore City . 
 George Petrides was named head football coach in 1975 and remained in the same position for 40 years . Petrides , a 1967 graduate of the school , retired in 2015 with a coaching record of 257 – 144 – 1 and as the second winningest active coach in Maryland high school football . During his tenure , City had a 29 @-@ game winning streak en route to two Maryland Scholastic Association A @-@ Conference championships in 1991 and 1992 . Coach Petrides guided City College to appearances in the semifinals of the MPSSAA state football playoffs in 1996 , 2001 , and 2005 . The Knights finished the 1987 and 1992 seasons ranked in the top @-@ 20 nationally in the USA Today high school football poll . In August 2015 , Daryl Wade was named the 27th head football coach in Baltimore City College history , the first African @-@ American head football coach in school history . 
 = = = = City – Poly rivalry ( 1889 – present ) = = = = 
 The City @-@ Poly football rivalry is the oldest American football rivalry in Maryland , and one of the oldest public school football rivalries in the United States . The rivalry began in 1889 , when City College met the Baltimore Polytechnic Institute ( Poly ) at Clifton Park for a football scrimmage in which City 's freshman team beat Poly . City remained undefeated in the series until 1908 . In the 1920s , the rivalry turned so fierce that riots erupted on the streets of downtown Baltimore on the day before " The Game " when opposing parades clashed resulting in the sons of both the Mayor of Baltimore and the Governor of Maryland were arrested in 1928 . By the 1930s a " Peace Pact " was sworn annually and signed by student government leaders of both schools before the cameras of the press in the Mayor 's Ceremonial Office in City Hall . Several student disturbances at games or on transit buses afterwards in the late @-@ 1960s and early @-@ 1970s threatened to put an end to the athletic tradition reflecting the tense tenor of the times , but goodwill eventually prevailed again by the quieter 1980s . By the 1950s , it had become a Baltimore tradition that after a morning of church services , parades and rallies , the two Catholic high school football powers of Loyola High School ( Loyola <unk> ) and Calvert Hall College would play on Thanksgiving Day morning at 10 a.m. , followed at 2 p.m. by City @-@ Poly as the two public school rivals at Memorial Stadium on 33rd Street . That evening 's TV news and sports casts led off with the scores and highlights of " The Game " and half @-@ time shows and parades . Next day 's The Sun and The News @-@ Post and American had special sections and stories covering all facets of the day before . 
 One of the most memorable City @-@ Poly games occurred on Thanksgiving Day 1965 , at Baltimore 's Memorial Stadium , with some 25 @,@ 000 fans in attendance . City beat Poly 52 – 6 , and completed a 10 – 0 season with the team finishing the season ranked eighth in the nation by a national sports poll . City 's 52 – 6 victory over Poly in that game is the largest margin of victory in the history of the series . Former Baltimore Mayor Kurt Schmoke was the quarterback and Maryland Delegate Curt Anderson was the captain . The game is no longer played on Thanksgiving or at Memorial Stadium , but is now located at the home of the Baltimore Ravens , M & T Bank Stadium , at Camden Yards in downtown Baltimore . City College won the 127th meeting in 2015 by routing Poly by a final score of 42 – 6 , the school 's fourth consecutive victory in the series . Poly now leads the series 62 – 59 – 6 . 
 = = Extracurricular activities = = 
 Baltimore City College offers more than 20 student clubs and organizations . These activities include chapters of national organizations such as the National Honor Society ( established at the school in 1927 ) and Quill and Scroll . Service clubs include the Red Cross Club and Campus Improvement Association . Other activities include the Drama Club , which produces an annual play , the Art Club , Model UN , Band , Dance , and One City One Book , an organization that invites the entire school community to read one book selected by faculty and invites the author of the book for a reading , discussion , and question and answer period . In 2007 , Pulitzer Prize winner , MacArthur Fellow , and novelist Edward P. Jones discussed his book Lost in the City . The school store is operated by students and managed by the Student Government Association . One of City College 's most notable academic teams is the It 's Academic team which participates on It 's Academic , a local television show . 
 = = = Speech and debate / literary and debating societies = = = 
 The Baltimore City College debate team has a long and storied tradition that dates back over 150 years . The speech and debate teams are formally referred to as the Bancroft and Carrollton @-@ Wight Literary Societies . The school 's first formal debate team within a literary society was established in 1876 as the " Bancroft Literary Association " . In 1878 , a second competing society , the " Carrollton Literary Society " , was formed , named for Maryland 's famous longest @-@ living signer of the Declaration of Independence , the only Roman Catholic member , Charles Carroll of Carrollton , ( 1737 @-@ 1832 ) . That society was later renamed the " Carrollton @-@ Wight Literary Society " , in honor of the program 's first advisor , Charles Wight , a celebrated faculty member during the 1870s . 
 Today , the speech and debate team competes in various speech events , Student Congress , Mock Trial , Lincoln @-@ Douglas debate , and Policy Debate against teams throughout Maryland and routinely travels around the United States to compete on the " national circuit " . The team currently participates in four competitive debate leagues : the " Baltimore Catholic Forensic League " , the Baltimore Urban Debate League , the Chesapeake region of the National Catholic Forensic League , and the National Forensic League . Several community partners , including the Abell Foundation and the Baltimore Community Foundation , which endowed the Gilbert Sandler Fund for Speech and Debate in 2008 , help provide financial support to the program . 
 In 2012 , City College won the Baltimore Urban Debate League championship . In the same year , the school hosted the 61st National Catholic Forensic League Grand National Tournament in Baltimore and earned a third place national finish in policy debate . In recent years , the team has advanced to final rounds at the Harvard Invitational Tournament and the National Forensic League National Tournament . Baltimore City College debate has sent multiple policy debate teams to the Tournament of Champions , the most elite high school debate competition in the United States . In 2013 , City 's Speech and Debate beat Chicago 's top @-@ ranked Whitney Young Magnet High School to win the prestigious National Association of Urban Debate Leagues ( <unk> ) policy debate national championship . BCC Debate again won the <unk> national championship in 2015 . 
 = = = Bands and Orchestra = = = 
 The marching band at Baltimore City College was created in the late 1940s . At the time , the instrumental music program consisted of the orchestra , concert band and marching band . The director who brought the band to prominence was Dr. Donald Norton . In 1954 , while on sabbatical , he was replaced by Professor Charles M. <unk> . The 65 member concert band doubled as a marching band in the fall . During halftime performances at home the band would form the shape of a heart or a car , but always ending the performance by forming the letters C @-@ I @-@ T @-@ Y. 
 In the 1980s , under James Russell Perkins , these groups grew in size and changed styles , adding " soulful " dance steps . Perkins 's groups toured and traveled the east coast . They received superior ratings at district and state festivals . Perkins is responsible for the creation of the City College Jazz Band , the " Knights of Jazz " . In 1994 , Alvin T. Wallace became Band Director . During his tenure , a wind ensemble was added and the marching band grew to include over 150 members . In 1999 , the band swept the top categories in the Disney World high school band competition . In 2006 , the wind ensemble received a grade of superior at the district adjudication festival and marched in the Baltimore Mayor 's Christmas Day Parade . 
 = = = Choirs = = = 
 The Baltimore City College choir was founded in 1950 by Professor Donald Regier . Originally a co @-@ curricular subject with only 18 members , by 1954 it had developed into a major subject of study with 74 students enrolled . Under the direction of Linda Hall , today 's choir consists of four groups : the Mixed Chorus , the Concert Choir , the Singin ' / Swingin ' Knights , and the Knights and Daze Show Choir . 
 The Mixed Choir is opened to all students at City College and currently has a membership of approximately 135 students . The Concert Choir is a more selective group consisting of about 50 students , who must audition for their places in the choir . The Singin ' / Swingin ' Knights is an even more selective group composed of 25 students . The Knights and Daze Show Choir is a group of students , who perform a choreographed dance routine while they sing . With the exception of the Knights and Daze Show Choir , which performs jazz and pop music , the choir 's repertoire consists of gospel music , spirituals , and Classical works by composers such as Handel and Michael Praetorius . 
 The choir has traveled to Europe on several occasions . Its first trip was in 1999 , after receiving an invitation to perform at the <unk> in Arezzo , Italy . In 2003 , the choir returned to Italy to perform at the annual Conference of the Parties of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change . The choir has also performed in France and Spain . On October 2 , 2007 , the Weill Institute of Music at Carnegie Hall announced that the City College choir was one of four high school choirs selected to participate in the National High School Choral Festival on March 10 , 2008 . The four choirs will perform Johannes Brahms ' A German Requiem under the direction of Craig Jessop , Mormon Tabernacle Choir Director . The choirs will also be led by their own directors in performing choral selections of their choosing . 
 = = Student publications = = 
 = = = The Green Bag = = = 
 The Green Bag is the senior class annual at the Baltimore City College . Published continuously since 1896 , The Green Bag is the oldest publication still in existence at the school and one of the oldest high school or college yearbooks in America . G. Warfield Hobbs Jr . ( later an Episcopal priest ) , president of the 1896 senior class and first editor @-@ in @-@ chief of The Green Bag , gave the publication its name in recognition of the role of City College graduates in political leadership . Historically , the famous green " carpet bag " in the 19th century containing the lists of political appointees ( also known as " patronage " ) of the Governor of Maryland to be approved by the General Assembly of Maryland has long been known as the " green bag " , though the derivation of the term is unknown . So the term became <unk> with " good news " and " glad tidings " , such as could be applied to the feelings that recent graduates felt when seeing and reading their new yearbooks published soon after their graduations . 
 The first yearbooks contained sketches of faculty and seniors , and included recollections , anecdotes , stories , and quotes significant to the student body . Underclassmen were included for the first time with individual portraits in the growing student body in 1948 . In 2007 , The Green Bag released its first full @-@ color edition , one of the most colorful since color printing of photographs was first introduced in The Bag in 1963 and again in 1967 . For many years the annual was printed by the local well @-@ known printer / publisher of H.G. Roebuck and Son , owned by a City alumnus up to 1970 The most controversial issue of The Green Bag was published in 1900 when members of the senior class used the annual to make fun of their professors . The Baltimore City Board of School Commissioners attempted to censor the edition by requiring The Green Bag to be reviewed by Principal Francis A. Soper . The yearbook had already been printed , and in defiance of the school board , the editors refused to have the edition censored and reprinted . The School Board responded by withholding the diplomas of six of the editors and the business manager and by preventing the school from holding a public commencement ceremony . One of the boys expelled , Clarence Keating Bowie , became a member of the School Board himself in 1926 . The infamous cartoon was later printed for the first time in a " Bag " in an opening segment on school history in 1972 . 
 = = = The Collegian = = = 
 The Collegian has been the school student newspaper of record at Baltimore City College since it was first published as a bi @-@ weekly newspaper in 1929 . There have been other similar publications , such as The Oriole , the student magazine which started printing in 1912 , however The Collegian is oldest , continuous student @-@ run publication . Originally , the newspaper was both managed and printed by students . During the 1930s , The Collegian won numerous awards including second place in the Columbia Scholastic Press Association 's annual contest for five years in a row . Since 2000 , printing of the publication has been scaled back . The Collegian is now published quarterly , often with a bonus issue around the time of the annual City @-@ Poly football game . Since 2014 , The Collegian also actively engages students and alumni through various social media platforms . 
 = = Alumni Association = = 
 The Baltimore City College Alumni Association Inc . ( BCCAA ) was established in 1866 as a support network for City College . The BCCAA holds an annual meeting at the school every November and its Board of Governors meets the first Monday of each month at the school . 
 The BCCAA publishes the class reunion guide , established and maintains a life membership endowment fund , presents Golden Apple Awards annually to faculty members , sponsors the Hall of Fame selection and induction , publishes a semi @-@ annual newsletter , maintains an alumni database , and assists with projects designed to enrich student life and improve the school 's facilities . 
 = = = Trustees of the Baltimore City College Scholarship Funds = = = 
 The Trustees of the Baltimore City College Scholarship Funds , Inc . , was established and incorporated in 1983 , and replaced a similar entity that was established in 1924 . The Trustees manage endowments , most of which provide annual scholarships to graduating seniors based on criteria stipulated by the donors . Combined endowment assets are currently valued at or around $ 1 @.@ 68 million ( adjusted for inflation ) covering thirty @-@ four annual scholarships . To recognize the custodianship provided by the Trustees , the BCCAA has placed a bronze plaque in the main hall of the school which carries an individually cast nameplate for each of the thirty @-@ four permanent endowments held by the Trustees . 
 = = = Baltimore City College Hall of Fame = = = 
 The Baltimore City College Hall of Fame induction ceremony is held annually in October . Alumni that have demonstrated extraordinary service to the school , city , state , country , or world are elected to the Hall of Fame , with former inductees , alumni , and students attending the two @-@ hour ceremony . Inductees included Vice @-@ President at Goldman Sachs Robert <unk> in 2007 , and Maryland State delegate Curt Anderson in 2013 . 
 = = Notable alumni = = 
 Many City College alumni have become civil servants , including three of the 10 individuals currently representing the state of Maryland in the U.S. Congress — Congressman Elijah Cummings , Congressman Dutch <unk> , ( also former County Executive of surrounding suburban Baltimore County ) , and Senator Ben Cardin . Among graduates with significant military service are two Commandants of the U.S. Coast Guard - Rear Admiral Frederick C. Billard and Admiral J. William Kime , as well as 2nd Lieutenant Jacob Beser of the U.S. Army Air Corps the only individual at the end of World War II to serve on both atomic bomb missions over Japan , on the B @-@ 29 bomber planes , the " Enola Gay " , when it dropped the device " Little Boy " on Hiroshima , and second plane " Bocks Car " when it dropped the " Fat Man " bomb on Nagasaki in August 1945 , and was one of the very few crewmen who had an inkling of atomic energy theory . In addition , three City College alumni are also recipients of the congressional Medal of Honor , the nation 's highest military award . 
 The list of BCC alumni includes prominent scientists , such as Dr. Hugh Dryden , associate administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) during the early U.S. space exploration program and missions to the Moon in the 1960s , theoretical physicist John Archibald Wheeler , who coined the term black hole and received the 1997 Wolf Prize in Physics , Martin <unk> , who received the 1994 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his discovery of G @-@ proteins , and Abel Wolman , the nationally famous " father " of chlorinated drinking water and a National Medal of Science recipient who brought the Baltimore metropolitan areas public water supply system to be among the best in the country , Alexander Ashley <unk> ( Class of 1913 ) , a pioneer pediatrician and scientist who treated the first patient in the U.S. with an antibiotic ( 1935 ) and was awarded the John Howland Medal ( 1977 ) . Notable writers such as Leon Uris , author of the novel Exodus , inspiring the motion picture , Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning poet Karl Shapiro , and Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning author , New York Times columnist , and host of the Masterpiece Theatre anthology programs on PBS , Russell Baker are also alumni . Businessmen , who have graduated from the school , include David M. Rubenstein , co @-@ founder of The Carlyle Group , and David T. Abercrombie , namesake and co @-@ founder of Abercrombie & Fitch . 
 = = Notable faculty members = = 
 Blanche F. <unk> , first female teacher ( 1935 – 1955 ) 
 Ed Burns , Edgar Award @-@ winning writer for The Corner and The Wire 
 McFadden Newell , first principal , Towson University 
 ZZ Packer , author , Guggenheim Fellow 
 Pierre Davis , first African @-@ American teacher ( 1956 ) , first African @-@ American principal ( 1971 ) 
 Eugene Parker , first African @-@ American coach ( 1956 – 1986 ) 
 George Petrides , longest serving faculty member ( 1972 – present ) 
 <unk> Morris , Dean , Peabody Institute of the Johns Hopkins University ( 2008 – present ) 
 George L. P. Radcliffe , U.S. Senator 
 Henry E. Shepherd , superintendent , Baltimore City Public Schools ; president , The College of Charleston ( 1882 – 1897 ) 
 Robert Herring Wright , first president , East Carolina University 
 George Young , NFL Executive , General Manager New York Giants 
 = = Principals = = 
 Nathan C. Brooks , ( 1839 – 1849 ) , first principal of " The High School " , then first established in rented townhouse on west side of Courtland Street ( now St. Paul Street / Place - " Preston Gardens " ) , by East Saratoga Street , later moved briefly several times . Noted classical scholar / educational leader of the era , later only President of the Baltimore Female College until the 1880s , one of earliest institutions of higher learning for women - predecessor to later Goucher College 
 Rev. Francis G. Waters , ( 1849 – 1853 ) , second principal of the then Central High School of Baltimore , when located in old " Assembly Rooms " former social hall at northeast corner of Holliday and East Fayette Streets . Later President of historic Washington College in Chestertown , Maryland on the Eastern Shore of the Chesapeake Bay 
 Francis A. Soper , ( 1890 – 1911 ) , longest serving tenured principal 
 Wilbur F. Smith , ( 1911 – 1926 ) , when BCC then in second structure at southwest corner of North Howard and West Centre Streets , just prior to construction of current " Castle on the Hill " . Later first Chancellor of the University of Baltimore , ( 1926 – 1933 ) 
 Pierre H. Davis , ( 1970 – 1974 ) , first African @-@ American faculty member in 1955 , later principal 
 Cynthia ( Cindy ) <unk> , ( 2010 – present ) , one of the first female graduates of the Baltimore City College , after its major physical renovation of 1977 – 79 , reorganization / stiffening of curriculum and admission standards , becoming co @-@ educational for the first time . Later to become its principal . 
 = St Kilda , Scotland = 
 St Kilda ( Scottish Gaelic : Hiort ) is an isolated archipelago 64 kilometres ( 40 mi ) west @-@ northwest of North Uist in the North Atlantic Ocean . It contains the westernmost islands of the Outer Hebrides of Scotland . The largest island is Hirta , whose sea cliffs are the highest in the United Kingdom ; three other islands ( Dùn , Soay and Boreray ) were also used for grazing and seabird hunting . The islands are administratively a part of the Comhairle nan Eilean Siar local authority area . 
 The origin of the name St Kilda is a matter of conjecture . The islands ' human heritage includes numerous unique architectural features from the historic and prehistoric periods , although the earliest written records of island life date from the Late Middle Ages . The medieval village on Hirta was rebuilt in the 19th century , but illnesses brought by increased external contacts through tourism , and the upheaval of the First World War contributed to the island 's evacuation in 1930 . The story of St Kilda has attracted artistic interpretations , including Michael Powell 's film The Edge of the World and an opera . 
 St Kilda may have been permanently inhabited for at least two millennia , the population probably never exceeding 180 ( and certainly no more than 100 after 1851 ) . The entire remaining population was evacuated from Hirta ( the only inhabited island ) in 1930 . Currently , the only year @-@ round residents are military personnel ; a variety of conservation workers , volunteers and scientists spend time there in the summer months . 
 The entire archipelago is owned by the National Trust for Scotland . It became one of Scotland 's six World Heritage Sites in 1986 and is one of the few in the world to hold joint status for its natural and cultural qualities . Parties of volunteers work on the islands in the summer to restore the many ruined buildings that the native St Kildans left behind . They share the island with a small military base established in 1957 . 
 Two different early sheep types have survived on these remote islands , the Soay , a Neolithic type , and the Boreray , an Iron Age type . The islands are a breeding ground for many important seabird species including northern gannets , Atlantic puffins , and northern fulmars . The St Kilda wren and St Kilda field mouse are endemic subspecies . 
 = = Origin of names = = 
 Various theories have been proposed for the word Kilda 's origin , which dates from the late 16th century . No saint is known by the name . Haswell @-@ Smith ( 2004 ) notes that the full name St Kilda first appears on a Dutch map dated 1666 , and that it may have been derived from Norse sunt <unk> ( " sweet <unk> " ) or from a mistaken Dutch assumption that the spring Tobar Childa was dedicated to a saint . ( Tobar Childa is a tautological placename , consisting of the Gaelic and Norse words for well , i.e. , " well well " ) . Martin Martin , who visited in 1697 , believed that the name " is taken from one <unk> , who lived here ; and from him the large well <unk> @-@ Kilda has also its name " . 
 Maclean ( 1972 ) similarly suggests it may come from a corruption of the Old Norse name for the spring on Hirta , Childa , and states that a 1588 map identifies the archipelago as Kilda . He also speculates that it may refer to the <unk> , <unk> who may have brought Christianity to the island , or be a corruption of the Gaelic name for the main island of the group , since the islanders tended to pronounce r as l , and thus habitually referred to the island as <unk> . Steel ( 1988 ) adds weight to the idea , noting that the islanders pronounced the H with a " somewhat guttural quality " , making the sound they used for Hirta " almost " <unk> . Similarly , St Kilda speakers interviewed by the School of Scottish Studies in the 1960s show individual speakers using t @-@ initial forms , <unk> to / h / , e.g. ann an t @-@ Hirte ( [ <unk> ̪ <unk> ̪ ˠ <unk> ̪ ʲə ] ) and gu Hirte ( [ kə <unk> ̪ ʲə ] ) . 
 Maclean ( 1972 ) further suggests that the Dutch may have simply made a cartographical error , and confused Hirta with <unk> , the old name for <unk> island much nearer the main Outer Hebrides archipelago . Quine ( 2000 ) hypothesises that the name is derived from a series of cartographical errors , starting with the use of the Old Icelandic <unk> ( " shields " ) and appearing as <unk> on a map by Nicholas de Nicolay ( 1583 ) . This , so the hypothesis goes , was transcribed in error by Lucas J. <unk> in his 1592 charts without the trailing r and with a period after the S , creating <unk> This was in turn assumed to stand for a saint by others , creating the form that has been used for several centuries , St Kilda . 
 The origin of Hirta , which long pre @-@ dates St Kilda , is similarly open to interpretation . Martin ( 1703 ) avers that " Hirta is taken from the Irish <unk> , which in that language signifies west " . Maclean offers several options , including an ( unspecified ) Celtic word meaning " gloom " or " death " , or the Scots Gaelic h @-@ Iar @-@ <unk> ( " <unk> " ) . Drawing on an Icelandic saga describing an early 13th @-@ century voyage to Ireland that mentions a visit to the islands of " Hirtir " , he speculates that the shape of Hirta resembles a stag , ( Hirtir meaning " stags " in Norse ) . Steel ( 1998 ) quotes the view of Reverend Neil Mackenzie , who lived there from 1829 to 1844 , that the name is derived from the Gaelic <unk> <unk> ( " high island " ) , and a further possibility that it is from the Norse Hirt ( " shepherd " ) . In a similar vein , Murray ( 1966 ) speculates that the Norse <unk> , pronounced ' <unk> ' ( " herd island " ) , may be the origin . All the names of and on the islands are fully discussed by Coates ( 1990 ) . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The islands are composed of Tertiary igneous formations of granites and gabbro , heavily weathered by the elements . The archipelago represents the remnants of a long @-@ extinct ring volcano rising from a seabed plateau approximately 40 metres ( 130 ft ) below sea level . 
 At 670 hectares ( 1 @,@ 700 acres ) in extent , Hirta is the largest island in the group and comprises more than 78 % of the land area of the archipelago . Next in size are Soay ( English : " sheep island " ) at 99 hectares ( 240 acres ) and Boreray ( ' the fortified isle ' ) , which measures 86 hectares ( 210 acres ) . Soay is 0 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 31 mi ) north @-@ west of Hirta , Boreray 6 kilometres ( 4 mi ) to the northeast . Smaller islets and stacks in the group include Stac an Armin ( ' warrior 's stack ' ) , Stac Lee ( ' grey stack ' ) and Stac <unk> ( ' stream ' or ' torrent ' ) . The island of Dùn ( ' fort ' ) , which protects Village Bay from the prevailing southwesterly winds , was at one time joined to Hirta by a natural arch . MacLean ( 1972 ) suggests that the arch was broken when struck by a galleon fleeing the defeat of the Spanish Armada , but other sources , such as Mitchell ( 1992 ) and Fleming ( 2005 ) , provide the more credible ( if less romantic ) explanation that the arch was simply swept away by one of the many fierce storms that batter the islands every winter . 
 The highest point in the archipelago , Conachair ( ' the beacon ' ) at 430 metres ( 1 @,@ 410 ft ) , is on Hirta , immediately north of the village . In the southeast is <unk> ( ' east fell ' ) , which reaches 290 metres ( 950 ft ) , and Mullach Mòr ( ' big hill summit ' ) 361 metres ( 1 @,@ 185 ft ) is due west of Conachair . Ruival ( ' red fell ' ) 137 metres ( 449 ft ) and Mullach Bi ( ' pillar summit ' ) 358 metres ( 1 @,@ 175 ft ) dominate the western cliffs . Boreray reaches 384 metres ( 1 @,@ 260 ft ) and Soay 378 metres ( 1 @,@ 240 ft ) . The extraordinary Stac an Armin reaches 196 metres ( 643 ft ) , and Stac Lee , 172 metres ( 564 ft ) , making them the highest sea stacks in Britain . 
 In modern times , St Kilda 's only settlement was at Village Bay ( Scottish Gaelic : <unk> a ' <unk> or Loch Hiort ) on Hirta . Gleann Mòr on the north coast of Hirta and Boreray also contain the remains of earlier habitations . The sea approach to Hirta into Village Bay suggests a small settlement flanked by high rolling hills in a semicircle behind it . This is misleading . The whole north face of Conachair is a vertical cliff up to 427 metres ( 1 @,@ 401 ft ) high , falling sheer into the sea and constituting the highest sea cliff in the UK . 
 The archipelago is the site of many of the most spectacular sea cliffs in the British Isles . Baxter and Crumley ( 1988 ) suggest that St Kilda : " ... is a mad , imperfect God 's hoard of all unnecessary lavish landscape luxuries he ever devised in his madness . These he has scattered at random in Atlantic isolation 100 miles from the corrupting influences of the mainland , 40 miles west of the westmost Western Isles . He has kept for himself only the best pieces and woven around them a plot as evidence of his madness . " 
 Although 64 kilometres ( 40 mi ) from the nearest land , St Kilda is visible from as far as the summit ridges of the Skye Cuillin , some 129 kilometres ( 80 mi ) distant . The climate is oceanic with high rainfall , 1 @,@ 400 millimetres ( 55 in ) , and high humidity . Temperatures are generally cool , averaging 5 @.@ 6 ° C ( 42 @.@ 1 ° F ) in January and 11 @.@ 8 ° C ( 53 @.@ 2 ° F ) in July . The prevailing winds , especially strong in winter , are southerly and southwesterly . Wind speeds average 13 kilometres per hour ( 8 @.@ 1 mph ) approximately 85 percent of the time and more than 24 kilometres per hour ( 15 mph ) more than 30 percent of the time . Gale force winds occur less than 2 percent of the time in any one year , but gusts of 185 kilometres per hour ( 115 mph ) and more occur regularly on the high tops , and speeds of 209 kilometres per hour ( 130 mph ) have occasionally been recorded near sea level . The tidal range is 2 @.@ 9 metres ( 9 @.@ 5 ft ) , and ocean swells of 5 metres ( 16 ft ) frequently occur , which can make landings difficult or impossible at any time of year . The oceanic location protects the islands from snow , which lies for only about a dozen days per year . 
 The archipelago 's remote location and oceanic climate are matched in the UK only by a few smaller outlying islands such as the Flannan Isles , North Rona , Sula Sgeir , and the Bishop 's Isles at the southern edge of the Outer Hebrides . Administratively , St Kilda was part of the parish of Harris in the traditional county of Inverness @-@ shire . Today it is incorporated in the Comhairle nan Eilean Siar ( Western Isles ) unitary authority . 
 = = Sheep = = 
 On the inaccessible island of Soay are sheep of a unique type , which lived as feral animals and belonged to the owner of the islands , not to the islanders . These Soay sheep are believed to be remnants of the earliest sheep kept in Europe in the Neolithic Era , and are small , short @-@ tailed , usually brown with white bellies , and have naturally moulting fleeces . About 200 Soay sheep remain on Soay itself , and soon after the evacuation a second feral population of them was established on Hirta , which at that time had no sheep ; these now number between 600 and 1 @,@ 700 . A few Soays have been exported to form breeding populations in other parts of the world , where they are valued for their hardiness , small size and unusual appearance . On Hirta and Soay , the sheep prefer the Plantago pastures , which grow well in locations exposed to sea spray and include red fescue ( Festuca rubra ) , sea plantain ( Plantago maritima ) and sea pink ( Armeria maritima ) . 
 The St Kildans kept up to 2 @,@ 000 of a different type of sheep on the islands of Hirta and Boreray . These were a Hebridean variety of the Scottish Dunface , a primitive sheep probably similar to those kept throughout Britain during the Iron Age . At the time of the evacuation all the islanders ' sheep were removed from Hirta , but those on Boreray were left to become feral , and these are now regarded as a breed in their own right , the Boreray . The Boreray is one of the rarest British sheep , and is one of the few remaining descendants of the Dunface ( although some Scottish Blackface blood was introduced in the nineteenth century ) . 
 = = Wildlife = = 
 St Kilda is a breeding ground for many important seabird species . One of the world 's largest colonies of northern gannets , totalling 30 @,@ 000 pairs , amount to 24 percent of the global population . There are 49 @,@ 000 breeding pairs of Leach 's petrels , up to 90 percent of the European population ; 136 @,@ 000 pairs of Atlantic puffins , about 30 percent of the UK total breeding population , and 67 @,@ 000 northern fulmar pairs , about 13 percent of the UK total . Dùn is home to the largest colony of fulmars in Britain . Prior to 1828 , St Kilda was their only UK breeding ground , but they have since spread and established colonies elsewhere , such as <unk> . The last great auk ( Pinguinus impennis ) seen in Britain was killed on Stac an Armin in July 1840 . Unusual behaviour by St Kilda 's bonxies was recorded in 2007 during research into recent falls in the Leach 's petrel population . Using night vision gear , ecologists observed the skuas hunting petrels at night , a remarkable strategy for a seabird . 
 Two wild animal taxa are unique to St Kilda : the St Kilda wren ( Troglodytes troglodytes hirtensis ) , which is a subspecies of the Eurasian wren , and a subspecies of wood mouse known as the St Kilda field mouse ( Apodemus sylvaticus hirtensis ) . A third taxon endemic to St Kilda , a subspecies of house mouse known as the St Kilda house mouse ( Mus musculus muralis ) , vanished completely after the departure of human inhabitants , as it was strictly associated with settlements and buildings . It had a number of traits in common with a sub @-@ species ( Mus musculus <unk> ) found on <unk> island in the Faroe Islands . The grey seal ( Halichoerus grypus ) now breeds on Hirta but did not do so before the 1930 evacuation . 
 The St Kilda Dandelion ( Taraxacum <unk> ) is an endemic species of dandelion , identified in 2012 . 
 The archipelago 's isolation has resulted in a lack of biodiversity . The most successful colonists with nearly two hundred species are the flies followed by beetles with approximately 140 species . There are no bees on the islands so the flies are probably important pollinators of plants . One beetle , the rare and endangered weevil , Ceutorhynchus insularis , is known from only Dùn and the <unk> Islands , an archipelago off the south @-@ west coast of Iceland . Less than one hundred species of butterfly and moth occur , compared to 367 recorded on the Western Isles . Red admiral ( Vanessa atalanta ) and painted lady ( Vanessa <unk> ) are two of only seven species of butterflies , both well known and common migrants . Common summer moths are the antler ( <unk> <unk> ) , dark arches ( Apamea <unk> ) and the migrant silver Y ( <unk> gamma ) . One unusual moth recorded is the least carpet ( <unk> <unk> ) , an occasional migrant , and in the UK , usually recorded in the south @-@ east of England . On 4 September 2014 a rare vagrant oleander hawk @-@ moth ( Daphnis <unk> ) was recorded . Oleander is not found in the UK every year , and the larva have never been recorded in the Britain . 
 Plant life is heavily influenced by the salt spray , strong winds and acidic peaty soils . No trees grow on the archipelago , although there are more than 130 different flowering plants , 162 species of fungi and 160 bryophytes . Several rarities exist amongst the 194 lichen species . Kelp thrives in the surrounding seas , which contain a diversity of unusual marine invertebrates . 
