 The beach at Village Bay is unusual in that its short stretch of summer sand recedes in winter , exposing the large boulders on which it rests . A survey of the beach in 1953 found only a single resident species , the crustacean isopod Eurydice pulchra . 
 = = Way of life = = 
 Most modern commentators feel that the predominant theme of life on St Kilda was isolation . When Martin Martin visited the islands in 1697 , the only means of making the journey was by open boat , which could take several days and nights of rowing and sailing across the ocean and was next to impossible in autumn and winter . In all seasons , waves up to 12 metres ( 39 ft ) high lash the beach of Village Bay , and even on calmer days landing on the slippery rocks can be hazardous . 
 Separated by distance and weather , the natives knew little of mainland and international politics . After the Battle of Culloden in 1746 , it was rumoured that Prince Charles Edward Stuart and some of his senior Jacobite aides had escaped to St Kilda . An expedition was launched , and in due course British soldiers were ferried ashore to Hirta . They found a deserted village , as the St Kildans , fearing pirates , had fled to caves to the west . When the St Kildans were persuaded to come down , the soldiers discovered that the isolated natives knew nothing of the prince and had never heard of King George II either . 
 Even in the late 19th century , the islanders could communicate with the rest of the world only by lighting a bonfire on the summit of Conachair and hoping a passing ship might see it , or by using the " St Kilda <unk> " . This was the invention of John Sands , who visited in 1877 . During his stay , a shipwreck left nine Austrian sailors marooned there , and by February supplies were running low . Sands attached a message to a <unk> salvaged from the Peti <unk> and threw it into the sea . Nine days later it was picked up in Birsay , Orkney , and a rescue was arranged . The St Kildans , building on this idea , would fashion a piece of wood into the shape of a boat , attach it to a bladder made of sheepskin , and place in it a small bottle or tin containing a message . Launched when the wind came from the north @-@ west , two @-@ thirds of the messages were later found on the west coast of Scotland or , less conveniently , in Norway . 
 Another significant feature of St Kildan life was the diet . The islanders kept sheep and a few cattle and were able to grow a limited amount of food crops such as barley and potatoes on the better @-@ drained land in Village Bay ; in many ways the islands can be seen as a large mixed farm . Samuel Johnson reported that in the 18th century sheep 's milk was made " into small cheeses " by the St Kildans . They generally eschewed fishing because of the heavy seas and unpredictable weather . The mainstay of their food supplies was the profusion of island birds , especially gannet and fulmar . These they harvested as eggs and young birds and ate both fresh and cured . Adult puffins were also caught by the use of fowling rods . This feature of island life came at a price . When Henry Brougham visited in 1799 he noted that " the air is infected by a stench almost insupportable – a compound of rotten fish , filth of all sorts and stinking <unk> " . An excavation of the Taigh an t @-@ <unk> ( the " house of the faeries " – see below ) in 1877 by Sands unearthed the remains of gannet , sheep , cattle and limpets amidst various stone tools . The building is between 1 @,@ 700 and 2 @,@ 500 years old , which suggests that the St Kildan diet had changed little over the millennia . Indeed , the tools were recognised by the St Kildans , who could put names to them as similar devices were still in use . 
 These fowling activities involved considerable skills in climbing , especially on the precipitous sea stacks . An important island tradition involved the ' Mistress Stone ' , a door @-@ shaped opening in the rocks north @-@ west of Ruival over @-@ hanging a gully . Young men of the island had to undertake a ritual there to prove themselves on the crags and worthy of taking a wife . Martin Martin wrote : 
 In the face of the rock , south from the town , is the famous stone , known by the name of the mistress @-@ stone ; it resembles a door exactly ; and is in the very front of this rock , which is twenty or thirty fathom [ 120 to 180 feet ( 37 to 55 m ) ] perpendicular in height , the figure of it being discernible about the distance of a mile ; upon the lintel of this door , every bachelor @-@ <unk> is by an ancient custom obliged in honour to give a specimen of his affection for the love of his mistress , and it is thus ; he is to stand on his left foot , having the one half of his sole over the rock , and then he draws the right foot further out to the left , and in this posture bowing , he puts both his fists further out to the right foot ; and then after he has performed this , he has acquired no small reputation , being always after it accounted worthy of the finest mistress in the world : they firmly believe that this achievement is always attended with the desired <unk> being the custom of the place , one of the inhabitants very gravely desired me to let him know the time limited by me for trying of this piece of gallantry before I design ’ d to leave the place , that he might attend me ; I told him this performance would have a quite contrary effect upon me , by robbing me both of my life and mistress at the same moment . 
 Another important aspect of St Kildan life was the daily ' Parliament ' . This was a meeting held in the street every morning after prayers and attended by all the adult males during the course of which they would decide upon the day 's activities . No one led the meeting , and all men had the right to speak . According to Steel ( 1988 ) , " Discussion frequently spread discord , but never in recorded history were feuds so bitter as to bring about a permanent division in the community " . This notion of a free society influenced Enric Miralles ' vision for the new Scottish Parliament Building , opened in October 2004 . 
 Whatever the privations , the St Kildans were fortunate in some respects , for their isolation spared them some of the evils of life elsewhere . Martin noted in 1697 that the citizens seemed " happier than the generality of mankind as being almost the only people in the world who feel the sweetness of true liberty " , and in the 19th century their health and well being was contrasted favourably with conditions elsewhere in the Hebrides . Theirs was not a utopian society ; the islanders had ingenious wooden locks for their property , and financial penalties were exacted for misdemeanours . Nonetheless , no resident St Kildan is known to have fought in a war , and in four centuries of history , no serious crime committed by an islander was recorded there . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Prehistory = = = 
 It has been known for some time that St Kilda was continuously inhabited for two millennia or more , from the Bronze Age to the 20th century . Recently , the first direct evidence of earlier Neolithic settlement emerged — shards of pottery of the Hebridean ware style , found to the east of the village . The subsequent discovery of a quarry for stone tools on Mullach <unk> above Village Bay led to finds of numerous stone hoe @-@ blades , grinders and Skaill knives in the Village Bay cleitean — unique stone storage buildings ( see below ) . These tools are also probably of Neolithic origin . 
 = = = 14th to 17th century = = = 
 The first written record of St Kilda may date from 1202 when an Icelandic cleric wrote of taking shelter on " the islands that are called Hirtir " . Early reports mentioned finds of brooches , an iron sword and Danish coins , and the enduring Norse place names indicate a sustained Viking presence on Hirta , but the visible evidence has been lost . The first English language reference is from the late 14th century , when John of Fordun mentioned ' the isle of <unk> , which is agreed to be under the <unk> and on the margins of the world ' . The islands were historically part of the domain of the MacLeods of Harris , whose steward was responsible for the collection of rents in kind and other duties . The first detailed report of a visit to the islands dates from 1549 , when Donald Munro suggested that : " The inhabitants thereof ar simple poor people , scarce <unk> in <unk> religion , but M ’ Cloyd of <unk> , his stewart , or he <unk> he <unk> in sic office , <unk> <unk> in the <unk> ther at midsummer , with some <unk> to baptize <unk> ther . " 
 Despite the chaplain 's best efforts , the islanders ' isolation and dependence on the bounty of the natural world meant their philosophy bore as much relationship to <unk> as it did to Christianity until the arrival of Rev. John MacDonald in 1822 . Macauley ( 1764 ) reported the existence of five <unk> altars , including a large circle of stones fixed perpendicularly in the ground near the <unk> House on Boreray . 
 Coll MacDonald of Colonsay raided Hirta in 1615 , removing 30 sheep and a quantity of barley . Thereafter , the islands developed a reputation for abundance . At the time of Martin 's visit in 1697 the population was 180 and the steward travelled with a " company " of up to 60 persons to which he " elected the most ' meagre ' among his friends in the neighbouring islands , to that number and took them periodically to St. Kilda to enjoy the nourishing and plentiful , if primitive , fare of the island , and so be restored to their <unk> health and strength . " 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Visiting ships in the 18th century brought cholera and smallpox . In 1727 , the loss of life was so high that too few residents remained to man the boats , and new families were brought in from Harris to replace them . By 1758 the population had risen to 88 and reached just under 100 by the end of the century . This figure remained fairly constant from the 18th century until 1851 , when 36 islanders emigrated to Australia on board the Priscilla , a loss from which the island never fully recovered . The emigration was in part a response to the laird 's closure of the church and manse for several years during the Disruption that created the Free Church of Scotland . 
 A missionary called Alexander Buchan went to St Kilda in 1705 , but despite his long stay , the idea of organised religion did not take hold . This changed when Rev. John MacDonald , the " Apostle of the North " , arrived in 1822 . He set about his mission with zeal , preaching 13 lengthy sermons during his first 11 days . He returned regularly and raised funds on behalf of the St Kildans , although privately he was appalled by their lack of religious knowledge . The islanders took to him with enthusiasm and wept when he left for the last time eight years later . His successor , who arrived on 3 July 1830 , was Rev. Neil Mackenzie , a resident Church of Scotland minister who greatly improved the conditions of the inhabitants . He reorganised island agriculture , was instrumental in the rebuilding of the village ( see below ) and supervised the building of a new church and manse . With help from the Gaelic School Society , MacKenzie and his wife introduced formal education to Hirta , beginning a daily school to teach reading , writing and arithmetic and a Sunday school for religious education . 
 Mackenzie left in 1844 , and although he had achieved a great deal , the weakness of the St Kildans ' dependence on external authority was exposed in 1865 with the arrival of Rev. John Mackay . Despite their fondness for Mackenzie , who stayed in the Church of Scotland , the St Kildans " came out " in favour of the new Free Church during the Disruption . Mackay , the new Free Church minister , placed an uncommon emphasis on religious observance . He introduced a routine of three two @-@ to @-@ three @-@ hour services on Sunday at which attendance was effectively compulsory . One visitor noted in 1875 that : " The Sabbath was a day of intolerable gloom . At the clink of the bell the whole flock hurry to Church with sorrowful looks and eyes bent upon the ground . It is considered sinful to look to the right or to the left . " 
 Time spent in religious gatherings interfered seriously with the practical routines of the island . Old ladies and children who made noise in church were lectured at length and warned of dire punishments in the afterworld . During a period of food shortages on the island , a relief vessel arrived on a Saturday , but the minister said that the islanders had to spend the day preparing for church on the Sabbath , and it was Monday before supplies were landed . Children were forbidden to play games and required to carry a Bible wherever they went . Mackay remained minister on St Kilda for 24 years . 
 = = = Tourism in the 19th century = = = 
 In 1898 and again in 1899 Norman Heathcote visited the islands and wrote a book about his experiences . During the 19th century , steamers had begun to visit Hirta , enabling the islanders to earn money from the sale of tweeds and birds ' eggs but at the expense of their self @-@ esteem as the tourists regarded them as curiosities . It is also clear that the St Kildans were not so naïve as they sometimes appeared . " For example , when they boarded a yacht they would pretend they thought all the polished brass was gold , and that the owner must be enormously wealthy " . The boats brought other previously unknown diseases , especially tetanus <unk> , which resulted in infant mortality rates as high as 80 percent during the late 19th century . The <unk> na gall or boat @-@ cough , an illness that struck after the arrival of a ship off Hirta , became a regular feature of life . 
 By the early 20th century , formal schooling had again become a feature of the islands , and in 1906 the church was extended to make a schoolhouse . The children all now learned English and their native Gaelic . Improved midwifery skills , denied to the island by John Mackay , reduced the problems of childhood tetanus . From the 1880s , trawlers fishing the north Atlantic made regular visits , bringing additional trade . Talk of an evacuation occurred in 1875 during MacKay 's time as minister , but despite occasional food shortages and a ' flu epidemic in 1913 , the population was stable at between 75 and 80 , and no obvious sign existed that within a few years the millennia @-@ old occupation of the island was to end . 
 = = = First World War = = = 
 Early in the First World War , the Royal Navy erected a signal station on Hirta , and daily communications with the mainland were established for the first time in the history of the islands . In a belated response , the German submarine SM U @-@ 90 arrived in Village Bay on the morning of 15 May 1918 and , after issuing a warning , started shelling the island . Seventy @-@ two shells were fired , and the wireless station was destroyed . The manse , church , and jetty storehouse were damaged , but there was no loss of life . One eyewitness recalled : " It wasn 't what you would call a bad submarine because it could have blowed every house down because they were all in a row there . He only wanted Admiralty property . One lamb was killed ... all the cattle ran from one side of the island to the other when they heard the shots . " 
 As a result of this attack , a 4 @-@ inch Mark III QF gun was erected on a promontory overlooking Village Bay , but it never saw action against the enemy . Of greater long @-@ term significance to the islanders were the introduction of regular contact with the outside world and the slow development of a money @-@ based economy . This made life easier for the St Kildans but also made them less self @-@ reliant . Both were factors in the evacuation of the island little more than a decade later . 
 = = = Evacuation = = = 
 Numerous factors led to the evacuation of St Kilda . The islands ' inhabitants had existed for centuries in relative isolation until tourism and the presence of the military during the First World War led the islanders to seek alternatives to privations they routinely suffered . The changes made to the island by visitors in the nineteenth century disconnected the islanders from the way of life that had allowed their forebears to survive in this unique environment . Despite construction of a small jetty in 1902 , the islands remained at the weather 's mercy . 
 After the War , most of the young men left the island , and the population fell from 73 in 1920 to 37 in 1928 . After the death of four men from influenza in 1926 , there was a succession of crop failures in the 1920s . Investigations by the University of Aberdeen into the soil where crops had been grown have shown that there had been contamination by lead and other pollutants , caused by the use of seabird carcasses and peat ash in the manure used on the fields . This occurred over a lengthy period of time , as manuring practices became more intensive , and may have been a factor in the evacuation . The last straw came with the death of a young woman , Mary Gillies , who fell ill with appendicitis in January 1930 and was taken to the mainland for treatment . She later died in hospital . For many years it was assumed that she had died of appendicitis , but her son Norman John Gillies discovered in 1991 that she had in fact died of pneumonia , having given birth to a daughter who also died . On 29 August 1930 , a ship called Harebell took the remaining 36 inhabitants to Morvern on the Scottish mainland , a decision they took collectively themselves . 
 The morning of the evacuation promised a perfect day . The sun rose out of a calm and sparkling sea and warmed the impassive cliffs of <unk> . The sky was hopelessly blue and the sight of Hirta , green and pleasant as the island of so many careless dreams , made parting all the more difficult . Observing tradition the islanders left an open Bible and a small pile of oats in each house , locked all the doors and at 7 am boarded the Harebell . Although exhausted by the strain and hard work of the last few days , they were reported to have stayed cheerful throughout the operation . But as the long antler of Dun fell back onto the horizon and the familiar outline of the island grew faint , the severing of an ancient tie became a reality and the St Kildans gave way to tears . 
 The last of the native St Kildans , Rachel Johnson , died in April 2016 at the age of 93 , having been evacuated at the age of 8 . 
 In 1931 the islands ' laird , Sir Reginald MacLeod , sold them to Lord Dumfries , who later became the 5th Marquess of Bute . For the next 26 years they saw few people , save for the occasional summer visit from tourists or a returning St Kildan family . 
 = = = Later military events = = = 
 The islands saw no military activity during the Second World War , remaining uninhabited , but three aircraft crash sites remain from that period . A Beaufighter <unk> based at Port Ellen on Islay crashed into Conachair within 100 metres ( 328 ft ) of the summit on the night of 3 – 4 June 1943 . A year later , just before midnight on 7 June 1944 , the day after D @-@ Day , a Sunderland flying boat <unk> was wrecked at the head of Gleann Mòr . A small plaque in the church is dedicated to those who died in this accident . A Wellington bomber crashed on the south coast of Soay in 1942 or 1943 . Not until 1978 was any formal attempt made to investigate the wreck , and its identity has not been absolutely determined . Amongst the wreckage , a Royal Canadian Air Force cap badge was discovered , which suggests it may have been <unk> of 7 OTU which went missing on a navigation exercise on 28 September 1942 . Alternatively , it has been suggested that the Wellington is <unk> of 303 FTU which was lost on 23 February 1943 . 
 In 1955 the British government decided to incorporate St Kilda into a missile tracking range based in Benbecula , where test firings and flights are carried out . Thus in 1957 St Kilda became permanently inhabited once again . A variety of military buildings and masts have since been erected , including a canteen ( which is not open to the public ) , the ' Puff Inn ' . The Ministry of Defence ( MOD ) leases St Kilda from the National Trust for Scotland for a nominal fee . The main island of Hirta is still occupied year @-@ round by a small number of civilians employed by defence contractor QinetiQ working in the military base on a monthly rotation . In 2009 the MoD announced that it was considering closing down its missile testing ranges in the Western Isles , potentially leaving the Hirta base unmanned . 
 = = Nature conservation = = 
 On his death on 14 August 1956 , the Marquess of Bute 's will bequeathed the archipelago to the National Trust for Scotland provided they accepted the offer within six months . After much soul @-@ searching , the Executive Committee agreed to do so in January 1957 . The slow renovation and conservation of the village began , much of it undertaken by summer volunteer work parties . In addition , scientific research began on the feral Soay sheep population and other aspects of the natural environment . In 1957 the area was designated a national nature reserve . 
 In 1986 the islands became the first place in Scotland to be inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site , for its terrestrial natural features . In 2004 , the WHS was extended to include a large amount of the surrounding marine features as well as the islands themselves . In 2005 St Kilda became one of only two dozen global locations to be awarded mixed World Heritage Status for both ' natural ' and ' cultural ' significance . The islands share this honour with internationally important sites such as Machu Picchu in Peru , Mount Athos in Greece and the <unk> / Drakensberg Park in South Africa . 
 The St Kilda World Heritage Site covers a total area of 24 @,@ 201 @.@ 4 hectares ( 59 @,@ 803 acres ) including the land and sea contained within a square with the coordinates 57 ° 54 ' 36 " N / 08 ° 42'W , 57 ° <unk> / 08 ° 42'W , 57 ° <unk> / 08 ° 25 ' 42 " W , 57 ° 54 ' 36 " N / 08 ° 25 ' 42'W . The land area is 854 @.@ 6 hectares ( 2 @,@ 112 acres ) . 
 St Kilda is a Scheduled Ancient Monument , a National Scenic Area , a Site of Special Scientific Interest , and a European Union Special Protection Area . Visiting yachts may find shelter in Village Bay , but those wishing to land are told to contact the National Trust for Scotland in advance . Concern exists about the introduction of non @-@ native animal and plant species into such a fragile environment . 
 St Kilda 's marine environment of underwater caves , arches and chasms offers a challenging but superlative diving experience . Such is the power of the North Atlantic swell that the effects of the waves can be detected 70 metres ( 230 ft ) below sea level . In 2008 the National Trust for Scotland received the support of Scotland ’ s Minister for Environment , Michael Russell for their plan to ensure no rats come ashore from the <unk> , a UK @-@ registered / Spanish @-@ owned fishing vessel grounded on Hirta . There was concern that bird life on the island could be seriously affected . Fortunately , potential contaminants from the vessel including fuel , oils , bait and stores were successfully removed by Dutch salvage company <unk> before the bird breeding season in early April . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Prehistoric buildings = = = 
 The oldest structures on St Kilda are the most enigmatic . Large <unk> lie inland from the existing village at An Lag <unk> 'n <unk> ( English : the hollow in the north ) and contain curious ' boat @-@ shaped ' stone rings , or ' settings ' . Soil samples suggest a date of 1850 BC , but they are unique to St Kilda , and their purpose is unknown . In Gleann Mòr , ( north @-@ west of Village Bay beyond Hirta 's central ridge ) , there are 20 ' horned structures ' , essentially ruined buildings with a main court measuring about 3 by 3 metres ( 10 by 10 ft ) , two or more smaller cells and a forecourt formed by two curved or horn @-@ shaped walls . Again , nothing like them exists anywhere else in Britain or Europe , and their original use is unknown . Also in Gleann Mòr is Taigh na <unk> , the ' Amazon 's House ' . As Martin ( 1703 ) reported , many St Kilda tales are told about this female warrior . 
 This Amazon is famous in their traditions : her house or dairy of stone is yet extant ; some of the inhabitants dwell in it all summer , though it be some hundred years old ; the whole is built of stone , without any wood , lime , earth , or mortar to cement it , and is built in form of a circle pyramid @-@ wise towards the top , having a vent in it , the fire being always in the centre of the floor ; the stones are long and thin , which supplies the defect of wood ; the body of this house contains not above nine persons sitting ; there are three beds or low vaults that go off the side of the wall , a pillar betwixt each bed , which contains five men apiece ; at the entry to one of these low vaults is a stone standing upon one end fix ’ d ; upon this they say she ordinarily laid her helmet ; there are two stones on the other side , upon which she is reported to have laid her sword : she is said to have been much addicted to hunting , and that in her time all the space betwixt this isle and that of Harries , was one continued tract of dry land . 
 Similar stories of a female warrior who hunted the now submerged land between the Outer Hebrides and St Kilda are reported from Harris . The structure 's forecourt is akin to the other ' horned structures ' in the immediate area , but like Martin 's " Amazon " its original purpose is the stuff of legend rather than archaeological fact . 
 Much more is known of the hundreds of unique cleitean that decorate the archipelago . These dome @-@ shaped structures are constructed of flat boulders with a cap of turf on the top . This enables the wind to pass through the cavities in the wall but keeps the rain out . They were used for storing peat , nets , grain , preserved flesh and eggs , manure , and hay , and as a shelter for lambs in winter . The date of origin of this St Kildan invention is unknown , but they were in continuous use from prehistoric times until the 1930 evacuation . More than 1 @,@ 200 ruined or intact cleitean remain on Hirta and a further 170 on the neighbouring islands . House no . 16 in the modern village has an early Christian stone cross built into the front wall , which may date from the 7th century . 
 = = = Medieval village = = = 
 A medieval village lay near Tobar Childa , about 350 metres ( 1 @,@ 150 ft ) from the shore , at the foot of the slopes of Conachair . The oldest building is an underground passage with two small annexes called Taigh an t @-@ <unk> ( house of the faeries ) which dates to between 500 BC and 300 AD . The St Kildans believed it was a house or hiding place , although a more recent theory suggests that it was an ice house . 
 Extensive ruins of field walls and cleitean and the remnants of a medieval ' house ' with a beehive @-@ shaped annexe remain . Nearby is the ' Bull 's House ' , a roofless rectangular structure in which the island 's bull was kept during winter . Tobar Childa itself is supplied by two springs that lie just outside the Head Wall that was constructed around the Village to prevent sheep and cattle gaining access to the cultivated areas within its boundary . There were 25 to 30 houses altogether . Most were blackhouses of typical Hebridean design , but some older buildings were made of corbelled stone and turfed rather than thatched . The turf was used to prevent ingress of wind and rain , and the older " beehive " buildings resembled green hillocks rather than dwellings . 
 = = = Recent structures = = = 
 The Head Wall was built in 1834 when the medieval village was abandoned and a new one planned between Tobar Childa and the sea some 700 feet ( 200 m ) down the slope . This came about as the result of a visit by Sir Thomas Dyke Ackland , the MP for Devon . Appalled by the primitive conditions , he made a donation that led to the construction of a completely new settlement of 30 new blackhouses . These houses were made of dry stone , had thick walls and were roofed with turf . Each typically had only one tiny window and a small aperture for letting out smoke from the peat fire that burnt in the middle of the room . As a result , the interiors were blackened by soot . The cattle occupied one end of the house in winter , and once a year the straw from the floor was stripped out and spread on the ground . Several of the new dwellings were damaged by a severe gale in October 1860 , and repairs were sufficient only to make them suitable for use as <unk> . According to Alasdair MacGregor 's analysis of the settlement , the sixteen modern , zinc @-@ roofed cottages amidst the black houses and new Factor 's house seen in most photographs of the natives were constructed around 1862 . 
 One of the more poignant ruins on Hirta is the site of ' Lady Grange 's House ' . Lady Grange had been married to the Jacobite sympathiser James Erskine of Grange for 25 years when he decided that she might have overheard too many of his treasonable <unk> . He had her kidnapped and secretly confined in Edinburgh for six months . From there she was sent to the Monach Isles , where she lived in isolation for two years . She was then taken to Hirta from 1734 to 1740 , which she described as " a vile <unk> , stinking poor isle " . After a failed rescue attempt , she was removed by Erskine to the Isle of Skye , where she died . The ' house ' is a large cleit in the Village meadows . 
 Boswell and Johnson discussed the subject during their 1773 tour of the Hebrides . Boswell wrote : " After dinner to @-@ day , we talked of the extraordinary fact of Lady Grange ’ s being sent to St Kilda , and confined there for several years , without any means of relief . Dr Johnson said , if M ’ Leod would let it be known that he had such a place for naughty ladies , he might make it a very profitable island . " 
 In the 1860s unsuccessful attempts were made to improve the landing area by blasting rocks . A small jetty was erected in 1877 , but it was washed away in a storm two years later . In 1883 representations to the Napier Commission suggested the building of a replacement , but it was 1901 before the Congested Districts Board provided an engineer to enable one to be completed the following year . Nearby on the shore line are some huge boulders which were known throughout the Highlands and Islands in the 19th century as <unk> Hirt , Hirta 's pebbles . 
 At one time , three churches stood on Hirta . Christ Church , in the site of the graveyard at the centre of the village , was in use in 1697 and was the largest , but this thatched @-@ roof structure was too small to hold the entire population , and most of the congregation had to gather in the churchyard during services . St Brendan 's Church lay over a kilometre away on the slopes of Ruival , and St Columba 's at the west end of the village street , but little is left of these buildings . A new kirk and manse were erected at the east end of the village in 1830 and a Factor 's house in 1860 . 
 = = = Buildings on other islands = = = 
 Dùn means " fort " , and there is but a single ruined wall of a structure said to have been built in the far @-@ distant past by the Fir <unk> . The only " habitation " is Sean Taigh ( old house ) , a natural cavern sometimes used as a shelter by the St Kildans when they were tending the sheep or catching birds . 
 Soay has a primitive hut known as Taigh Dugan ( Dugan 's house ) . This is little more than an excavated hole under a huge stone with two rude walls on the sides . The story of its creation relates to two sheep @-@ stealing brothers from Lewis who came to St Kilda only to cause further trouble . Dugan was exiled to Soay , where he died ; the other , called Fearchar Mòr , was sent to Stac an Armin , where he found life so intolerable he cast himself into the sea . 
 Boreray boasts the <unk> <unk> , a " cleit village " of three small bothies used on a regular basis during fowling expeditions . Here too are the ruins of Taigh <unk> ( the steward 's house ) , which was similar to the Amazon 's house in Gleann Mòr although somewhat larger , and which had six bed spaces . The local tradition was that it was built by the " Man of the Rocks " , who led a rebellion against the landlord 's steward . It may be an example of an Iron Age wheelhouse and the associated remains of an agricultural field system were discovered in 2011 . As a result of a smallpox outbreak on Hirta in 1724 , three men and eight boys were marooned on Boreray until the following May . No fewer than 78 storage cleitean exist on Stac an Armin and a small bothy . A small bothy exists on the precipitous Stac Lee too , also used by <unk> . 
 = = Media and the arts = = 
 The steamship company running a service between Glasgow and St Kilda commissioned a short ( 18 @-@ minute ) silent movie , St Kilda , Britain 's Loneliest Isle . Released in 1928 , it shows some scenes in the lives of the island ’ s inhabitants . In 1937 , after reading of the St Kilda evacuation , Michael Powell made the film The Edge of the World about the dangers of island depopulation . It was shot on Foula , one of the Shetland Islands . The writer Dorothy Dunnett wrote a short story , " The Proving Climb " , set on St Kilda ; it was published in 1973 in the anthology Scottish Short Stories . 
 In 1982 , the noted Scottish filmmaker and theatre director Bill Bryden made the Channel 4 @-@ funded film Ill Fares The Land about the last years of St Kilda . It is not currently on commercial release . 
 The fictional island of <unk> , which features in the 1962 novel Atlantic Fury by Hammond Innes , is closely based on Hirta . 
 The Scottish folk rock band Runrig recorded a song called " Edge of the World " on the album The Big Wheel , which dwells on the islanders ' isolated existence . The folk music singer / songwriter Brian McNeill wrote about one of St. Kilda 's prodigal sons , a restless fellow named Ewan Gillies , who left St. Kilda to seek his fortune by prospecting for gold first in Australia and later California . The song recounts fortunes won and lost , his return to the island , and concludes with his inability to stay . Entitled " Ewan and the Gold " , it was published on the album Back O ' The North Wind in 1991 and is the subject of McNeill 's audio @-@ visual presentation about the Scottish diaspora . 
 In a 2005 poll of Radio Times readers , St Kilda was named as the ninth greatest natural wonder in the British Isles . In 2007 an opera in Scots Gaelic called St Kilda : A European Opera about the story of the islands received funding from the Scottish Government . It was performed simultaneously at six venues in Austria , Belgium , France , Germany and Scotland over the summer solstice of 2007 . As part of its legacy , the production left a year @-@ long time lapse camera on Hirta . Britain 's Lost World , a three @-@ part BBC documentary series about St Kilda began broadcasting on 19 June 2008 . 
 Stamps were issued by the Post Office depicting St. Kilda in 1986 and 2004 . St Kilda was also commemorated on a new series of banknotes issued by the Clydesdale Bank in 2009 ; an image based on a historical photograph of residents appeared on the reverse of an issue of £ 5 notes . 
 In 2006 , the documentary film " On the Edge of the World " by director Sylvestre <unk> was released . The film depicts the history of the life on the isle and follows UNESCO volunteers , working on St Kilda . 
 In 2009 <unk> nan <unk> , the Gaelic Arts Agency , announced plans to commemorate the evacuation on 29 August , ( the 79th anniversary ) including an exhibition in Kelvingrove Art Gallery . Comhairle nan Eilean Siar are planning a feasibility study for a new visitor centre to tell the story of St Kilda , although they have specifically ruled out using Hirta as a location . 
 Hirta Songs , a song cycle about and inspired by the archipelago was released in 2013 on the label Stone Tape Recordings by musician Alasdair Roberts and poet Robin Robertson 
 = The Boat Race 1954 = 
 The 100th Boat Race took place on 3 April 1954 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . In a race umpired by former Cambridge rower Kenneth Payne , Oxford won by four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 20 minutes 23 seconds , taking the overall record in the competition to 54 – 45 in Cambridge 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1953 race by eight lengths , and led overall with 54 victories to Oxford 's 44 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Cambridge were coached by N. B. M. Clack ( who had rowed in the 1952 race ) , James Crowden ( who had represented Cambridge in the 1951 and 1952 races ) and R. H. H. Symonds ( who had rowed in the 1931 race ) . Oxford 's coaches were Hugh Edwards ( a Blue in 1926 and 1930 ) , W. J. Llewellyn @-@ Jones , J. H. Page and A. D. Rowe ( who had represented Oxford in the 1948 and 1949 races ) . The race was umpired for the fourth time by the former British Olympian Kenneth Payne , who had rowed for Cambridge in the 1932 and 1934 races . 
 During the build @-@ up to the race , the rowing correspondent for The Times had suggested that " until three weeks ago a Cambridge victory seemed almost certain " but practice rows had proved disappointing . The Oxford crew had been struck down by influenza in training , and had to reshuffle their order a month before the race . Although the new order " seemed weak " , they made better progress in training than Cambridge , yet the Light Blues , who were described as " well drilled " but with " erratic timekeeping " nevertheless remained " precarious favourites " . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 12 st 9 @.@ 5 lb ( 80 @.@ 3 kg ) , 5 pounds ( 2 @.@ 3 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . The Oxford crew saw two members return to the boat , including the cox W. R. Marsh and their boat club president H. M. C. Quick , who was making his third consecutive appearance . Cambridge 's crew contained a single participant with Boat Race experience in their stroke and boat club president J. A. N. Wallis . According to the rowing correspondent for The Times , " perhaps the crews have never been more closely matched " . Oxford 's crew contained four non @-@ British participants , all of them Australian , in E. V. Vine , J. A. Gobbo , J. G. McLeod and Edward Pain . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Cambridge . In a stiff south @-@ westerly wind , umpire Payne started the race at 12 : 45 p.m. Oxford made a quick start , and according to the rowing correspondent of The Times " literally leaped away , seemingly to row two strokes almost before Cambridge had begun " . By the end of the first minute , the Dark Blues were a few feet ahead but with the bend in the river favouring Cambridge , the crews were level by Craven Steps . Despite a push from Cambridge 's stroke M. J. Marshall , the Light Blues could not gain any advantage and both crews passed the Mile Post level . 
 Although rating slightly lower than their opposition , Oxford made the best of the bend in the river at Harrods Furniture Depository to lead by about a canvas @-@ length by the time they passed below Hammersmith Bridge . A strong headwind faced both crews as they rowed into Chiswick Reach and Cambridge struggled in the rough water in the middle of the river . Oxford , whose cox W. R. Marsh had steered towards the shelter of the Surrey shore , gained a length in half a minute , extending out to almost four lengths by Barnes Bridge . Oxford won by four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 20 minutes 23 seconds , for their second victory in eight years . 
 = Rumors ( Lindsay Lohan song ) = 
 " Rumors " is a song by American actress and singer @-@ songwriter Lindsay Lohan , taken from her debut studio album , Speak ( 2004 ) . Originally titled " Just What It Is " , the song was written and produced by Cory Rooney , while additional writing was done by Lohan , Taryll Jackson , and TJ Jackson . It was released as Lohan 's debut single and lead single from the " Speak " on September 21 , 2004 , through Casablanca Records . The song 's lyrics allude to the constant paparazzi and media backlash regarding Lohan . Music critics reviews were mixed ; with statements like " infectious " or " unnecessary " . 
 " Rumors " achieved moderate commercial success worldwide , reaching top thirty positions in Australia , Austria , Germany and Switzerland . In the United States , the song peaked at number six on Billboard 's Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles , but was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipping over 500 @,@ 000 units of the single . The music video directed by Jake Nava featured Lohan attending a club , playing around with the paparazzi . The video was nominated for Best Pop Video at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards and reached the top position on MTV 's Total Request Live . In 2014 Billboard ranked the song in its " Top 50 Forgotten Gems From the Now ! Series " , which list songs from the series that were underrated at the time of their release . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Rumors " was originally titled " Just What It Is " . The track was written by Lohan , Cory Rooney , Taryll Jackson , and TJ Jackson . It was also produced by Rooney , who provided keyboards and background vocals . Peter Wade Keusch assisted the production , and was responsible along with Chris Avedon for Lohan 's vocal recording , which occurred at the <unk> West and The Village Recorder in Los Angeles , California . Audio mixing was done by Keusch at Sony Music Studios in New York , New York . Christopher J. Warner provided the guitar present in the song 's composition . It was released as a single on September 21 , 2004 , through Casablanca Records . " Rumors " is in the style of contemporary R & B. Lyrically , the song was written as a response to the paparazzi and media 's backlash , both which are addressed in the chorus lines , where Lohan sings , " I 'm tired of rumors starting / I 'm sick of being followed / I 'm tired of people lying / Saying what they want about me / Why can 't they back off me ? / Why can 't they let me live ? I 'm going to do it my way / Take this for just what it is . " Spence D. of IGN noted that the singer 's vocals are " driven by snarls , breathy croons , and emotionally restrained angst , " while John Murphy of musicOMH considered it " a feisty dance anthem with intelligent lyrics attacking the paparazzi and press in general . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Rumors " received generally mixed reviews from music critics , however it has become one of Lohan 's most recognized songs and has now been labeled as " cult pop treasure " . Charles Merwin of Stylus Magazine thought that " Rumors " was not a good choice for a single , stating , " in fact , for a girl , that has been tagged as America ’ s next sweetheart by some media outlets , it might be the worst choice of subject matter for the opening statement from a girl that automatically has more to prove to audiences because of her stature as an actress . Unfortunately , ' Rumors ' is about as good as it gets . " Erik <unk> of ChartAttack thought that the song " presented potential for a semi @-@ palatable debut effort " , but further added that it is a " crap of a <unk> unspectacular level . " Entertainment Weekly contributor Nicholas Fonseca , however , considered " Rumors " a guilty pleasure , while Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic selected the song a Track Pick in the review of Speak . IGN 's Spence D. described it as " pervasively infectious , the kind of track that will no doubt keep the dance floors sweaty and steamy for a few months to come . " John Murphy of musicOMH praised " Rumors " as a departure from Speak 's soft rock genre . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " Rumors " achieved moderate commercial success worldwide . In the United States , the song peaked at number six on Billboard 's Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles , and reached number 23 on the Pop Songs component chart . However , it was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in February 2005 for shipping over 500 @,@ 000 copies of the single . In Australia , " Rumors " debuted at number 19 on the ARIA charts , peaking at number 10 six weeks later , while being certified Gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . The song also attained top thirty positions in Austria and Switzerland , and reached the top forty in Netherlands and Sweden . In Germany , the song debuted and peaked at number 14 . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 Casablanca Records commissioned a music video to be directed by Jake Nava , who previously worked in the same year with Britney Spears on her music video for " My Prerogative " ( 2004 ) . The music video for " Rumors " premiered on October 14 , 2004 and October 20 , 2004 through Disney Channel and MTV . In the beginning of the video , Lohan is followed by paparazzi as she is entering her car . It is revealed that this is a Lindsay @-@ look @-@ alike , and that the real Lohan is entering another car to go to a club . The car comes to a stop , and she then steps into an elevator and sings the first verse of the song , while she is filmed by a CCTV camera in the elevator . The next sequence shows her running through a hallway , dressed up , before getting into the club . There , she dances in the crowd , where she takes a picture of one of the paparazzi herself to get back at him . In the next sequence , she is walking slowly through the club where she finds the man who seems to be her boyfriend . She takes a seat next to her lover and they begin kissing and touching each other , all the while being constantly filmed by cameras in the club . While Lohan sings the second chorus , she is trapped in a cage in the middle of the club and the whole crowd is watching her . After this Lohan is shown dancing in the club with her friends . At the end of the music video Lohan and her friends enter the top of a high @-@ rise and perform a dance routine while helicopters are circling around them . Finally Lohan gets into a helicopter and escapes . In the end , she throws her camera away with all the pictures taken of her . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The music video for " Rumors " received very positive reviews from critics and viewers which eventually lead to the video reaching the top position on the countdown of Total Request Live in the week of October 27 , 2004 , and was nominated on the category Best Pop Video during the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards . 
 = = = Live performance = = = 
 Lohan performed " Rumors " on Good Morning America on December 2004 . According to a MTV News staff report , " Lohan missed the cue to mouth along , forcing cameras to cut away when her mouth remained closed as she was heard singing , thanks to a backing track . " A representative for Lohan , however , revealed that the singer actually sang it live , and noted that Lohan only used a background track " to help make the song sound like it does on her album . " 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at <unk> West and The Village Recorder at Los Angeles , California . 
 Mixed at Sony Music Studios in New York , New York . 
 Personnel 
 Songwriting : Cory Rooney , Lindsay Lohan , Taryll Jackson , Tito Jackson 
 Production : Cory Rooney , Peter Wade Keusch 
 Recording : Peter Wade Keusch , Chris Avedon 
 Mixing : Electric Pete 
 Keyboards : Cory Rooney 
 Guitar : Christopher J. Warner 
 Background vocals : Lindsay Lohan , Cory Rooney 
 Credits are taken from Speak liner notes . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Isidor Isaac Rabi = 
 Isidor Isaac Rabi ( / <unk> / ; born Israel Isaac Rabi , 29 July 1898 – 11 January 1988 ) was an American physicist and Nobel laureate , recognized in 1944 for his discovery of nuclear magnetic resonance , which is used in magnetic resonance imaging . He was also one of the first scientists in the US to work on the cavity magnetron , which is used in microwave radar and microwave ovens . 
 Born into a traditional Jewish family in Rymanów , Galicia , in what was then part of Austria @-@ Hungary , Rabi came to the United States as a baby and was raised in New York 's Lower East Side . He entered Cornell University as an electrical engineering student in 1916 , but soon switched to chemistry . Later , he became interested in physics . He continued his studies at Columbia University , where he was awarded his doctorate for a thesis on the magnetic susceptibility of certain crystals . In 1927 , he headed for Europe , where he met and worked with many of the finest physicists of the time . 
 In 1929 Rabi returned to the United States , where Columbia offered him a faculty position . In collaboration with Gregory Breit , he developed the Breit @-@ Rabi equation and predicted that the Stern – Gerlach experiment could be modified to confirm the properties of the atomic nucleus . His techniques for using nuclear magnetic resonance to discern the magnetic moment and nuclear spin of atoms earned him a Nobel Prize for Physics in 1944 . Nuclear magnetic resonance became an important tool for nuclear physics and chemistry . The subsequent development of magnetic resonance imaging from it has made it important to medicine as well . 
 During World War II he worked on radar at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Radiation Laboratory ( <unk> ) and on the Manhattan Project . After the war , he served on the General Advisory Committee ( GAC ) of the Atomic Energy Commission , and was chairman from 1952 to 1956 . He also served on the Science Advisory Committees ( SACs ) of the Office of Defense Mobilization and the Army 's Ballistic Research Laboratory , and was Science Advisor to President Dwight D. Eisenhower . He was involved with the establishment of the Brookhaven National Laboratory in 1946 , and later , as United States delegate to UNESCO , with the creation of CERN in 1952 . When Columbia created the rank of University Professor in 1964 , Rabi was the first to receive such a chair . A special chair was named after him in 1985 . He retired from teaching in 1967 but remained active in the department and held the title of University Professor Emeritus and Special Lecturer until his death . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Israel Isaac Rabi was born on 29 July 1898 into a Polish @-@ Jewish Orthodox family in Rymanów , Galicia , in what was then part of Austria @-@ Hungary but is now Poland . Soon after he was born , his father , David Rabi , emigrated to the United States . The younger Rabi and his mother , Sheindel , joined David there a few months later , and the family moved into a two @-@ room apartment on the Lower East Side of Manhattan . At home the family spoke Yiddish . When Rabi was enrolled in school , Sheindel said his name was Izzy , and a school official , thinking it was short for Isidor , put that down as his name . Henceforth , that became his official name . Later , in response to anti @-@ Semitism , he started writing his name as Isidor Isaac Rabi , and was known professionally as <unk> Rabi . To most of his friends and family , including his sister Gertrude , who was born in 1903 , he was known simply as " Rabi " , which was pronounced " Robby " . In 1907 , the family moved to Brownsville , Brooklyn , where they ran a grocery store . 
 As a boy , Rabi was interested in science . He read science books borrowed from the public library and built his own radio set . His first scientific paper , on the design of a radio condenser , was published in Modern Electrics when he was in elementary school . After reading about Copernican heliocentrism , he became an atheist . " It 's all very simple " , he told his parents , " who needs God ? " As a compromise with his parents , for his Bar Mitzvah , which was held at home , he gave a speech in Yiddish about how an electric light works . He attended the Manual Training High School in Brooklyn , from which he graduated in 1916 . Later that year , he entered Cornell University as an electrical engineering student , but soon switched to chemistry . After the American entry into World War I in 1917 , he joined the Students Army Training Corps at Cornell . For his senior thesis , he investigated the oxidation states of manganese . He was awarded his Bachelor of Science degree in June 1919 , but since at the time Jews were largely excluded from employment in the chemical industry and academia , he did not receive any job offers . He worked briefly at the Lederle Laboratories , and then as a bookkeeper . 
 = = Education = = 
 In 1922 Rabi returned to Cornell as a graduate chemistry student , and began studying physics . In 1923 he met , and began courting , Helen Newmark , a summer @-@ semester student at Hunter College . In order to be near her when she returned home , Rabi continued his studies at Columbia University , where his supervisor was Albert Wills . In June 1924 Rabi landed a job as a part @-@ time tutor at the City College of New York . Wills , whose specialty was magnetism , suggested that Rabi write his doctoral thesis on the magnetic susceptibility of sodium vapor . The topic did not appeal to Rabi , but after William Lawrence Bragg gave a seminar at Columbia about the electric susceptibility of certain crystals called Tutton 's salts , Rabi decided to research their magnetic susceptibility , and Wills agreed to be his supervisor . 
 Measuring the magnetic resonance of crystals first involved growing the crystals , a simple procedure often done by elementary school students . The crystals then had to be prepared by skillfully cutting them into sections with facets that had an orientation different from the internal structure of the crystal , and the response to a magnetic field had to be painstakingly measured . While his crystals were growing , Rabi read James Clerk Maxwell 's 1873 A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism , which inspired an easier method . He lowered a crystal on a glass fiber attached to a torsion balance into a solution whose magnetic susceptibility could be varied between two magnetic poles . When it matched that of the crystal , the magnet could be turned on and off without disturbing the crystal . The new method was not only much less work , it also produced a more accurate result . Rabi sent his thesis , entitled On the Principal Magnetic <unk> of Crystals , to Physical Review on 16 July 1926 . He married Helen the next day . The paper attracted little fanfare in academic circles , although it was read by <unk> Srinivasa Krishnan , who used the method in his own investigations of crystals . Rabi concluded that he needed to promote his work as well as publish it . 
 Like many other young physicists , Rabi was closely following momentous events in Europe . He was astounded by the Stern – Gerlach experiment , which convinced him of the validity of quantum mechanics . With Ralph Kronig , Francis Bitter , Mark <unk> and others , he set out to extend the Schrödinger equation to symmetric top molecules and find the energy states of such a mechanical system . The problem was that none of them could solve the resulting equation , a second @-@ order partial differential equation . Rabi found the answer in a book by the 19th century mathematician Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi . The equation had the form of a hypergeometric equation to which Jacobi had found a solution . Kronig and Rabi wrote up their result and sent it to Physical Review , which published it in 1927 . 
 = = Europe = = 
 In May 1927 , Rabi was appointed a Barnard Fellow . This came with a stipend of $ 1 @,@ 500 ( $ 20 @,@ 434 in 2016 dollars ) for the period from September 1927 to June 1928 . He immediately applied for a year 's leave of absence from the City College of New York so he could study in Europe . When this was refused , he resigned . On reaching Zürich , where he hoped to work for Erwin Schrödinger , he met two fellow Americans , Julius Adams Stratton and Linus Pauling . They found that Schrödinger was leaving , as he had been appointed head of the Theoretical Institute at Friedrich Wilhelm University in Berlin . Rabi therefore decided to seek a position with Arnold Sommerfeld at the University of Munich instead . In Munich , he found two more Americans , Howard Percy Robertson and Edward Condon . Sommerfeld accepted Rabi as a postdoctoral student . German physicists Rudolf Peierls and Hans Bethe were also working with Sommerfeld at the time , but the three Americans became especially close . 
 On Willis ' advice , Rabi traveled to Leeds for the 97th annual meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science , where he heard Werner Heisenberg present a paper on quantum mechanics . Afterwards , Rabi moved to Copenhagen , where he volunteered to work for Niels Bohr . Bohr was on vacation , but Rabi went straight to work on calculating the magnetic susceptibility of molecular hydrogen . After Bohr returned in October , he arranged for Rabi and Yoshio Nishina to continue their work with Wolfgang Pauli at the University of Hamburg . 
 Although he came to Hamburg to work with Pauli , Rabi found Otto Stern working there with two English @-@ speaking postdoctoral fellows , Ronald Fraser and John Bradshaw Taylor . Rabi soon made friends with them , and became interested in their molecular beam experiments , for which Stern would receive the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1943 . Their research involved non @-@ uniform magnetic fields , which were difficult to manipulate and hard to measure accurately . Rabi came up with the idea of using a uniform field instead , with the molecular beam at a glancing angle , so the atoms would be deflected like light through a prism . This would be easier to use , and produce more accurate results . Encouraged by Stern , and greatly assisted by Taylor , Rabi managed to get his idea to work . On Stern 's advice , Rabi wrote a letter about his results to Nature , which published it in February 1929 , followed by a paper entitled Zur Methode der <unk> von <unk> ( " On the method of deflection of molecular beams " ) to Zeitschrift für Physik , where it was published in April . 
 By this time the Barnard Fellowship had expired and Rabi and Helen were living off a $ 182 per month stipend from the Rockefeller Foundation . They left Hamburg for Leipzig , where he hoped to work with Heisenberg . In Leipzig , he found Robert Oppenheimer , a fellow New Yorker . It would be the start of a long friendship . However , Heisenberg departed for a tour of the United States in March 1929 , so Rabi and Oppenheimer decided to go to the ETH Zurich , where Pauli was now the professor of Physics . Rabi 's education in physics was enriched by the leaders in the field he met there , which included Paul Dirac , Walter Heitler , Fritz London , Francis Wheeler Loomis , John von Neumann , John Slater , Leó Szilárd and Eugene Wigner . 
 = = Molecular Beam Laboratory = = 
 On 26 March 1929 , Rabi received an offer of a lectureship from Columbia , with a good annual salary of $ 3 @,@ 000 . The Dean of Columbia 's Physics Department , George B. Pegram , was looking for a theoretical physicist to teach statistical mechanics and an advanced course in the new subject of quantum mechanics , and Heisenberg had recommended Rabi . Helen was now pregnant , so Rabi needed a regular job , and this job was in New York . He accepted , and returned to the United States in August on the SS President Roosevelt . Rabi became the only Jewish faculty member at Columbia at the time . 
 As a teacher , Rabi was underwhelming . Leon Lederman recalled that after a lecture , students would head to the library to try and figure out what Rabi had been talking about . Irving Kaplan rated Rabi and Harold Urey as " the worst teachers I ever had " . Norman Ramsey considered Rabi 's lectures " pretty dreadful " , while William Nierenberg felt that he was " simply an awful lecturer " . Despite his shortcomings as a lecturer , his influence was great . He inspired many of his students to pursue careers in physics , and some became famous . 
 Rabi 's first daughter , Helen Elizabeth , was born in September 1929 . A second girl , Margaret <unk> , followed in 1934 . Between his teaching duties and his family , he had little time for research , and published no papers in his first year at Columbia , but was nonetheless promoted to assistant professor at its conclusion . He subsequently became a professor in 1937 . 
 In 1931 Rabi returned to particle beam experiments . In collaboration with Gregory Breit , he developed the Breit @-@ Rabi equation , and predicted that the Stern – Gerlach experiment could be modified to confirm the properties of the atomic nucleus . The next step was to do so . With the help of Victor W. Cohen , Rabi built a molecular beam apparatus at Columbia . Their idea was to employ a weak magnetic field instead of a strong one , with which they hoped to detect the nuclear spin of sodium . When the experiment was conducted , four <unk> were found , from which they deduced a nuclear spin of 3 ⁄ 2 . 
 Rabi 's Molecular Beam Laboratory began to attract others , including Sidney Millman , a graduate student who studied lithium for his doctorate . Another was Jerrold Zacharias , who , believing that the sodium nucleus would be too difficult to understand , proposed studying the simplest of the elements , hydrogen . Its deuterium isotope had only recently been discovered at Columbia in 1931 by Urey , who received the 1934 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for this work . Urey was able to supply them with both heavy water and gaseous deuterium for their experiments . Despite its simplicity , Stern 's group in Hamburg had observed that hydrogen did not behave as predicted . Urey also helped in another way ; he gave Rabi half his prize money to fund the Molecular Beam Laboratory . Other scientists whose careers began at the Molecular Beam Laboratory included Norman Ramsey , Julian Schwinger , Jerome Kellogg and Polykarp Kusch . All were men ; Rabi did not believe that women could be physicists . He never had a woman as a doctoral or postdoctoral student , and generally opposed women as candidates for faculty positions . 
 At the suggestion of C. J. Gorter , the team attempted to use an oscillating field . This became the basis for the nuclear magnetic resonance method . In 1937 , Rabi , Kusch , Millman and Zacharias used it to measure the magnetic moment of several lithium compounds with molecular beams , including lithium chloride , lithium fluoride and dilithium . Applying the method to hydrogen , they found that the moment of a proton was 2 @.@ 785 ± 0 @.@ 02 nuclear magnetons , and not 1 as predicted by the then @-@ current theory , while that of a deuteron was 0 @.@ 855 ± 0 @.@ 006 nuclear magnetons . This provided more accurate measurements of what Stern 's team had found , and Rabi 's team had confirmed , in 1934 . Since a deuteron is composed of a proton and a neutron with aligned spins , the neutron 's magnetic moment could be inferred by subtracting the deuteron and proton magnetic moments . The resulting value was not zero , and had sign opposite to that of the proton . Based on curious artifacts of these more accurate measurements , Rabi suggested that the deuteron had an electric quadrupole moment . This discovery meant that the physical shape of the deuteron was not symmetric , which provided valuable insight into the nature of the nuclear force binding nucleons . For the creation of the molecular @-@ beam magnetic @-@ resonance detection method , Rabi was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1944 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In September 1940 , Rabi became a member of the Scientific Advisory Committee of the U.S. Army 's Ballistic Research Laboratory . That month , the British Tizard Mission brought a number of new technologies to the United States , including a cavity magnetron , a high @-@ powered device that generates microwaves using the interaction of a stream of electrons with a magnetic field . This device , which promised to revolutionize radar , demolished any thoughts the Americans had entertained about their technological leadership . Alfred Lee Loomis of the National Defense Research Committee decided to establish a new laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to develop this radar technology . The name Radiation Laboratory was chosen as both unremarkable and a tribute to the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory . Loomis recruited Lee DuBridge to run it . 
 Loomis and DuBridge recruited physicists for the new laboratory at an Applied Nuclear Physics conference at MIT in October 1940 . Among those who volunteered was Rabi . His assignment was to study the magnetron , which was so secret that it had to be kept in a safe . The Radiation Laboratory scientists set their sights on producing a microwave radar set by 6 January 1941 , and having a prototype installed in a Douglas A @-@ 20 Havoc by March . This was done ; the technological obstacles were gradually overcome , and a working microwave radar set was produced . The magnetron was developed to permit a reduction in wavelength from 150 cm to 10 cm , and then to 3 cm . The laboratory went on to develop air @-@ to @-@ surface radar to detect submarines , the SCR @-@ 584 radar for fire control , and LORAN , a long @-@ range radio navigation system . At Rabi 's instigation , a branch of the Radiation Laboratory was located at Columbia , with Rabi in charge . 
 In 1942 Oppenheimer attempted to recruit Rabi and Robert Bacher to work at the Los Alamos Laboratory on a new secret project . They convinced Oppenheimer that his plan for a military laboratory would not work , since a scientific effort would need to be a civilian affair . The plan was modified , and the new laboratory would be a civilian one , run by the University of California under contract from the War Department . In the end , Rabi still did not go west , but did agree to serve as a consultant to the Manhattan Project . Rabi attended the Trinity test in July 1945 . The scientists working on Trinity set up a betting pool on the yield of the test , with predictions ranging from total dud to 45 kilotons of TNT equivalent ( kt ) . Rabi arrived late and found the only entry left was for 18 kilotons , which he purchased . Wearing welding goggles , he waited for the result with Ramsey and Enrico Fermi . The blast was rated at 18 @.@ 6 kilotons , and Rabi won the pool . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In 1945 , Rabi delivered the Richtmyer Memorial Lecture , held by the American Association of Physics Teachers in honor of Floyd K. Richtmyer , wherein he proposed that the magnetic resonance of atoms might be used as the basis of a clock . William L. Laurence wrote it up for the New York Times , under the headline " ' Cosmic pendulum ' for clock planned " . Before long Zacharias and Ramsey had built such atomic clocks . Rabi actively pursued his research into magnetic resonance until about 1960 , but he continued to make appearances at conferences and seminars until his death . 
 Rabi chaired Columbia 's physics department from 1945 to 1949 , during which time it was home to two Nobel laureates ( Rabi and Enrico Fermi ) and eleven future laureates , including seven faculty ( Polykarp Kusch , Willis Lamb , Maria Goeppert @-@ Mayer , James Rainwater , Norman Ramsey , Charles Townes and Hideki Yukawa ) , a research scientist ( Aage Bohr ) , a visiting professor ( Hans Bethe ) , a doctoral student ( Leon Lederman ) and an undergraduate ( Leon Cooper ) . Martin L. Perl , a doctoral student of Rabi 's , won the Nobel Prize in 1995 . When Columbia created the rank of University Professor in 1964 , Rabi was the first to receive such a chair . This meant that he was free to research or teach whatever he chose . He retired from teaching in 1967 but remained active in the department and held the title of University Professor Emeritus until his death . A special chair was named after him in 1985 . 
 A legacy of the Manhattan Project was the network of national laboratories , but none was located on the East Coast . Rabi and Ramsey assembled a group of universities in the New York area to lobby for their own national laboratory . When Zacharias , who was now at MIT , heard about it , he set up a rival group at MIT and Harvard . Rabi had discussions with Major General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , the director of the Manhattan Project , who was willing to go along with a new national laboratory , but only one . Moreover , while the Manhattan Project still had funds , the wartime organization was expected to be phased out when a new authority came into existence . After some bargaining and lobbying by Rabi and others , the two groups came together in January 1946 . Eventually nine universities ( Columbia , Cornell , Harvard , Johns Hopkins , MIT , Princeton , Pennsylvania , Rochester and Yale ) came together , and on 31 January 1947 , a contract was signed with the Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) , which had replaced the Manhattan Project , that established the Brookhaven National Laboratory . 
 Rabi suggested to Edoardo Amaldi that Brookhaven might be a model that Europeans could emulate . Rabi saw science as a way of inspiring and uniting a Europe that was still recovering from the war . An opportunity came in 1950 when he was named the United States Delegate to the United Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organization ( UNESCO ) . At a UNESCO meeting at the Palazzo Vecchio in Florence in June 1950 , he called for the establishment of regional laboratories . These efforts bore fruit ; in 1952 , representatives of eleven countries came together to create the Conseil Européen pour la Recherche <unk> ( CERN ) . Rabi received a letter from Bohr , Heisenberg , Amaldi and others congratulating him on the success of his efforts . He had the letter framed and hung it on the wall of his home office . 
 The Atomic Energy Act of 1946 that created the Atomic Energy Commission provided for a nine @-@ man General Advisory Committee ( GAC ) to advise the Commission on scientific and technical matters . Rabi was one of those appointed in December 1946 . The GAC was enormously influential throughout the late 1940s , but in 1950 , the GAC unanimously opposed the development of the hydrogen bomb . Rabi went further than most of the other members , and joined Fermi in opposing the hydrogen bomb on moral as well as technical grounds . However , President Harry S. Truman overrode the GAC 's advice , and ordered development to proceed . Rabi later said : 
 I never forgave Truman for buckling under the pressure . He simply did not understand what it was about . As a matter of fact , after he stopped being President he still didn 't believe that the Russians had a bomb in 1949 . He said so . So for him to have alerted the world that we were going to make a hydrogen bomb at a time when we didn 't even know how to make one was one of the worst things he could have done . It shows the dangers of this sort of thing . 
 Oppenheimer was not reappointed to the GAC when his term expired in 1952 , and Rabi succeeded him as chairman , serving until 1956 . Rabi later testified on Oppenheimer 's behalf at the Atomic Energy Commission 's controversial security hearing in 1954 that led to Oppenheimer being stripped of his security clearance . Many witnesses supported Oppenheimer , but none more forcefully than Rabi : 
 So it didn 't seem to me the sort of thing that called for this kind of proceeding ... against a man who has accomplished what Dr. Oppenheimer has accomplished . There is a real positive record ... We have an A @-@ bomb and a whole series of it , and we have a whole series of super bombs , and what more do you want , mermaids ? 
 Rabi was appointed a member of the Science Advisory Committee ( SAC ) of the Office of Defense Mobilization in 1952 , serving as its chairman from 1956 to 1957 . This coincided with the Sputnik crisis . President Dwight Eisenhower met with the SAC on 15 October 1957 , to seek advice on possible US responses to the Russians ' satellite success . Rabi , who knew Eisenhower from the latter 's time as president of Columbia University , was the first to speak , and put forward a series of proposals , one of which was to strengthen the committee so it could provide the President with timely advice . This was done , and the SAC became the President 's Science Advisory Committee a few weeks later . He also became Eisenhower 's Science Advisor . In 1956 Rabi attended the Project Nobska anti @-@ submarine warfare conference , where discussion ranged from oceanography to nuclear weapons . He served as the US Representative to the NATO Science Committee at the time that the term " software engineering " was coined . While serving in that capacity , he bemoaned the fact that many large software projects were delayed . This prompted discussions that led to the formation of a study group that organized the first conference on software engineering . 
 In the course of his life , Rabi received many honors in addition to the Nobel Prize . These included the Elliott Cresson Medal from the Franklin Institute in 1942 , the Medal for Merit and the King 's Medal for Service in the Cause of Freedom from Great Britain in 1948 , the officer in the French Legion of Honor in 1956 , Columbia University 's Barnard Medal for Meritorious Service to Science in 1960 , the Niels Bohr International Gold Medal and the Atoms for Peace Award in 1967 , the Oersted Medal from the American Association of Physics Teachers in 1982 , the Four Freedoms Award from the Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt Institute and the Public Welfare Medal from the National Academy of Sciences 1985 , and the Vannevar Bush Award from the National Science Foundation in 1986 , He was a Fellow of the American Physical Society , serving as its President in 1950 , and a member of the National Academy of Sciences , the American Philosophical Society , and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences . He was internationally recognized with membership in the Japan Academy and the Brazilian Academy of Sciences , and in 1959 was appointed a member of the Board of Governors of the Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel . 
 Rabi died at his home on Riverside Drive , Manhattan , from cancer on 11 January 1988 . He was survived by his wife , Helen , who died at the age of 102 on 18 June 2005 . In his last days , he was reminded of his greatest achievement when his physicians examined him using magnetic resonance imaging , a technology that had been developed from his ground @-@ breaking research on magnetic resonance . The machine happened to have a reflective inner surface , and he remarked : " I saw myself in that machine ... I never thought my work would come to this . " 
 = = Books = = 
 Rabi , Isidor Isaac ( 1960 ) . My Life and Times as a Physicist . Claremont , California : Claremont College . OCLC <unk> . 
 Rabi , Isidor Isaac ( 1970 ) . Science : The Center of Culture . New York : World Publishing Co . OCLC <unk> . 
 Rabi , Isidor Isaac ; Serber , Robert ; Weisskopf , Victor F. ; Pais , Abraham ; Seaborg , Glenn T. ( 1969 ) . Oppenheimer : The Story of One of the Most Remarkable Personalities of the 20th Century . Scribner 's . OCLC <unk> . 
 = Cinematic style of Abbas Kiarostami = 
 The Iranian film director Abbas Kiarostami is known for uses of certain themes and cinematic techniques that are instantly recognizable in his work , from the use of child protagonists and stories that take place in rural villages , to conversations that unfold inside cars utilizing stationary mounted cameras . He often <unk> a documentary style of filmmaking within narrative works , and frequently employs contemporary Iranian poetry in dialogue , movie titles , and in the thematic elements of his pictures . 
 = = The <unk> style = = 
 Though Abbas Kiarostami has been compared to Satyajit Ray , Vittorio de Sica , Eric Rohmer , and Jacques Tati , his films exhibit a singular style , often employing techniques of his own invention ( the so @-@ called " <unk> style " ) . 
 During the filming of The Bread and Alley , his first film , Kiarostami disagreed with his experienced cinematographer about how to film the boy and the attacking dog . The cinematographer wanted separate shots of the boy approaching , a close up of his hand as he enters the house and closes the door , followed by a shot of the dog . Kiarostami believed that if the three scenes could be captured as a whole it would have a more profound impact , creating tension . That one shot took some forty days to complete . Kiarostami later commented that the breaking of scenes can disrupt the rhythm and content of the film 's structure , stating he prefers to let the scene flow as one . 
 Unlike other directors he showed no interest in developing his directorial muscles by staging extravagant combat scenes or complicated chase scenes in large @-@ scale productions . Instead , he attempted to use the medium of film in his own unique way . As he quoted in relation to his cinematographer 's perspective on filming : " I did not follow the conventions of film making that he had become accustomed to " . 
 Kiarostami appeared to have settled on his style when he made the Koker trilogy . Nevertheless , he continued experimenting with new modes of filming , using different directorial methods . Much of Ten , for example , was filmed in a moving automobile without Kiarostami present . He gave suggestions to the actors about what to do , and a camera placed on the dashboard then filmed them while they drove around Tehran . The camera was allowed to roll , capturing the faces of the people during their daily routine , using a series of extreme close @-@ up shots . 
 Kiarostami 's cinema offers a different definition of film . According to film professors such as <unk> Akrami , unlike many other contemporary filmmakers Kiarostami has consistently attempted to redefine film by forcing the audience 's increased involvement . In recent years he has also progressively trimmed down the size of his films , which Akrami believes reduces the film making experience from a collective endeavor to a purer , more basic form of artistic expression . 
 As Kiarostami quoted in relation to his individual style of minimalism : 
 My films have been progressing towards a certain kind of minimalism , even though it was never intended . Elements that can be eliminated have been eliminated . This was pointed out to me by somebody who referred to the paintings of Rembrandt and his use of light : some elements are highlighted while others are obscured or even pushed back into the dark . And it 's something that we do - we bring out elements that we want to emphasise . 
 Self @-@ referencing is a feature specific to Kiarostami 's cinema . Stephen Bransford contends that Kiarostami 's films do not contain references to the work of other directors , but do include a myriad of references to his own work . Bransford believes his films are often fashioned into an ongoing dialectic : one film reflecting on and partially demystifying an earlier film . 
 = = Fiction and non @-@ fiction = = 
 Kiarostami 's films contain a notable degree of ambiguity , an unusual mixture of simplicity and complexity , and often mix fiction and documentary elements . As Kiarostami has said , " We can never get close to the truth except through lying . " 
 Kiarostami has said of his film making : " An artist designs and creates a piece hoping to materialize some thoughts , concepts or feelings through his or her medium . The credibility of great Persian poets like Rumi and Hafez comes from the very fact that they are composed in such a way that they are fresh and meaningful regardless of the time , place and conditions in which you read them — and this means reading them while doing divination or simply as literature . " 
 The boundary between fiction and non @-@ fiction is significantly reduced in Kiarostami 's cinema . The French philosopher Jean @-@ Luc Nancy , writing about Kiarostami , and in particular Life , and Nothing More ... , has argued that his films are neither quite fiction nor quite documentary . Life and Nothing More ... , he argues , is neither representation nor reportage , but rather " evidence " : 
 [ I ] t all looks like reporting , but everything underscores ( <unk> à l <unk> ) that it is the fiction of a documentary ( in fact , Kiarostami shot the film several months after the 1990 earthquake ) , and that it is rather a document about " fiction " : not in the sense of imagining the unreal , but in the very specific and precise sense of the technique , of the art of constructing images . For the image by means of which , each time , each opens a world and precedes himself in it ( s 'y <unk> ) is not <unk> ( <unk> toute faite ) ( as are those of dreams , phantasms or bad films ) : it is to be invented , cut and edited . Thus it is evidence , insofar as , if one day I happen to look at my street on which I walk up and down ten times a day , I construct for an instant a new evidence of my street . > 
 Close @-@ Up , for example , contains scenes from the real @-@ life trial of a man charged with fraudulently impersonating a film director . To make the film , however , Kiarostami coaxed the antagonists to re @-@ stage scenes occurring between them , including the arrest . While such a technique clearly precludes labeling the film as a documentary , by re @-@ staging events between the deceiver and the deceived Kiarostami implicitly poses questions about the validity and significance of what the audience sees . Because these are the actual participants in a drama played out in criminal court , it dawns on the audience that these re @-@ stagings are also part of the real life of these people , especially since both the impersonator and the family he fooled were interested in working in cinema . If these re @-@ enactments constitute a kind of " evidence " , this is less because they show us what took place to cause the arrest than because the audience is witness to a scene in which the actors are in fact continuing the story of their confrontation and / or reconciliation . 
 For Jean @-@ Luc Nancy , this notion of cinema as " evidence , " rather than as documentary or imagination , is tied to the way Kiarostami deals with life and death : 
 Existence resists the indifference of life and death , it lives beyond mechanical " life , " it is always its own mourning , and its own joy . It becomes figure , image . It does not become alienated in images , but it is presented there : the images are the evidence of its existence , the objectivity of its assertion . This thought — which , for me , is the very thought of this film [ Life and Nothing More ... ] — is a difficult thought , perhaps the most difficult . It 's a slow thought , always under way , fraying a path so that the path itself becomes thought . It is that which frays images so that images become this thought , so that they become the evidence of this thought — and not in order to " represent " it . 
 Wanting to do more than just represent life and death as an opposition , and instead to show the way in which each is inevitably and profoundly involved with the other , Kiarostami has devised a cinema that does more than just present the viewer with the <unk> " facts , " but neither is it simply a matter of artifice . Because " existence " means more than simply life , it is projective , containing an irreducibly fictive element , but in this " being more than " life , it is therefore contaminated by mortality . Nancy is giving an interpretation of Kiarostami 's statement that lying is the only way to truth . 
 = = Themes of life and death = = 
 Themes of life and death and the concepts of change and continuity play a major role in Kiarostami 's works . In the Koker trilogy , for example , we see an ongoing life force in the face of death and destruction , and the power of human resilience to overcome and defy death . The film is set in the aftermath of the 1990 Tehran earthquake . Kiarostami expressed how important these themes are in his films , particularly in the film Life , and Nothing More ... , directed soon after the disaster : 
 It is a very important film , Life , and Nothing More ... , in that what was filmed was inspired by a journey I had made just three days after an earthquake . And I speak not only of the film itself but also of the experience of being in that place , where only three days before 50 @,@ 000 people had died . For the survivors , it was as if they were reborn , having experienced death around them . The earthquake had happened at four or five in the morning , so in a sense everybody could have been dead and it was almost accidental that they hadn 't died . So I didn 't just see myself as a film director here , but also as an observer of people who had been condemned to death . So this was a very big influence on me , and the issue of life and death from then on does recur in my films . . 
 The theme of suicide is also important in several of his earlier films . He shows how the desire to self @-@ harm is often counteracted by humanity and the need to help others in the face of death . This illustrates the ongoing life force and the power of life over death . 
 Taste of Cherry explores the fragility of life and rhetorically focuses on the preciousness of life . Badii , a middle aged apparently healthy and well off <unk> ( played by <unk> <unk> ) , cruises the city ’ s outskirts in his Range Rover trying to find a stranger who will help him commit suicide . Conversations with people on the way gradually convince him of the positivity and preciousness of life . From the young Kurdish soldier who is spooked by the shuddering request to a middle @-@ aged Afghani seminarian who is unable to dissuade Badii with religious sympathy to a Turkish taxidermist at a natural history museum who urges the glories of nature — the taste of cherries — as the prime reason not to kill oneself , Kiarostami evokes a high degree of emphasis on the different elements of life . 
 When the protagonist reaches his grave , a black screen evokes his symbolic death , but the finality of this ending is undermined by the video sequences that follow , which show the actor playing Mr. <unk> lighting a cigarette and the film crew resting . Again , life goes on , but in an off @-@ screen elsewhere . 
 Symbols of death proliferate throughout The Wind Will Carry Us with scenes set in a graveyard , the imminence of the old woman ’ s passing , and the ancestors that the character of Farzad mentions in an early scene . Such devices ask the viewer to consider the parameters of the afterlife and the concept of immaterial existence . In the film ’ s opening sequence , Behzad tells Farzad that like people , cars have ghosts . This becomes the theme of the work and the subject of the film — they are waiting for the old woman to give up the ghost . The viewer is asked to consider what constitutes the soul , and what happens to the soul after death . In discussing the film , Kiarostami stated that his function is that of one who raises questions , rather than answers them . Kiarostami affirms that the audience must decide for themselves . 
 Some film critics believe that the assemblage of light versus dark scenes in Kiarostami 's film grammar in Taste of Cherry and The Wind Will Carry Us suggests the mutual existence of life with its endless possibilities and death as a factual moment of anyone ’ s life . When the leading actor in The Wind Will Carry Us enters the dark he recites a poem by Forough Farrokhzad that represents his nostalgic yearning for light and life in a dark , dead moment : 
 Regarding Kiarostami 's ABC Africa made in Kampala in 2001 during the AIDS epidemic , Geoff Andrew stated that " like his previous four features , this film is not about death but life @-@ and @-@ death : how they 're linked , and what attitude we might adopt with regard to their symbiotic inevitability ... " 
 = = Visual and audio techniques = = 
 Kiarostami 's style is notable for the use of long shots , such as in the closing sequences of Life , and Nothing More ... and Through the Olive Trees , where the audience is intentionally distanced physically from the characters to invite reflection on their fate . Taste of Cherry is punctuated throughout by shots of this kind , including distant overhead shots of the suicidal Badii 's car moving across the hills , usually while he is in conversation with a passenger . The physical distancing techniques stand in juxtaposition to the dialogue , which always remains in the foreground . Like the coexistence of private and public space , or the frequent framing of landscapes through car windows , this fusion of distance with proximity has been seen as a way of generating suspense in the most mundane of moments . 
 This relationship between distance and intimacy , between imagery and sound , is also present in the opening sequence of The Wind Will Carry Us . From the outset , Kiarostami formulates a dialectical relationship between image and sound . The camera moves from long shots of the Land Rover winding its way through the mountain paths to extreme close @-@ ups of the film ’ s protagonist . Concurrently , Kiarostami aurally represents an expanse that extends far beyond what the viewer can see at any moment , even when the camera remains a considerable distance from the subject matter on @-@ screen . Kiarostami establishes numerous spaces beyond the visual field by fragmenting his soundtrack to include other sounds such as birds singing , dogs barking and electronic devices such as cell phones and radios blaring in the distance . By referring to characters the viewer does not see or hear , Kiarostami widens the scope of his films . 
 Michael J. Anderson has argued that such a thematic application of presence without presence manipulates our perception of nature and space in the geographical framework in which the world is portrayed . Kiarostami 's use of sound and imagery conveys a world beyond what is directly visible and / or audible , which Anderson believes emphasises the shrinking of time and space and the interconnectedness of the modern world . 
 Film critic Ben Zipper believes that Kiarostami ’ s work as a landscape artist is evident in the composition of distant shots of the dry hills throughout a number of his films . He points out that Kiarostami ’ s use of rural locations and remote settings is reminiscent of Sohrab Sepehri ’ s attention to landscape as represented in his poems such as <unk> , in which the poet treats the rural environment realistically and imbues it with a poetic aura . 
 = = Poetry and imagery = = 
 Ahmad Karimi @-@ Hakkak of the University of Maryland discusses how one aspect of Kiarostami 's cinematic style is that he is able to capture essences of Persian poetry and create poetic imagery within the landscape of his films . In Where Is the Friend 's Home ? and The Wind Will Carry Us , classical Persian poetry is directly quoted in the film , highlighting the artistic link and intimate connection between them . This in turn reflects on the connection between the past and present , between continuity and change . 
 In 2003 , Kiarostami directed Five , a poetic feature that contained no dialogue or characterisation whatsoever . The movie consists of five single @-@ take long shots of the natural landscape along the shores of the Caspian Sea . Although the film lacks a clear storyline , Geoff Andrew argues that the film is " more than just pretty pictures " : " assembled in order , they comprise a kind of abstract or emotional narrative arc , which moves evocatively from separation and solitude to community , from motion to rest , near @-@ silence to sound and song , light to darkness and back to light again , ending on a note of rebirth and regeneration . " 
 He notes the degree of artifice concealed behind the apparent simplicity of the imagery as everyday moments are captured . A piece of driftwood is tossed and broken by the waves ; people stroll along the promenade ; a group of dogs gather by the water 's edge whilst ducks strut across the frame . A pool of water is shot at night with the sounds of a storm , and frogs croaking break the stillness . 
 An aspect of Abbas Kiarostami 's artistry that eludes those unfamiliar with Persian poetry and that has therefore remained inaccessible to many is the way he turns poetic images into cinematic ones . This is most obvious in those Kiarostami films that recall specific texts of Persian poetry more or less explicitly : Where 's the Friend 's Home ? and The Wind will Carry Us . The characters recite poems mainly from classical Persian poet Omar Khayyám or modern Persian poets Sohrab Sepehri and Forough Farrokhzad . One of the most poetic moments in Wind Will Carry Us is a long shot of a wheat field with rippling golden crops through which the doctor , accompanied by the filmmaker , is riding his scooter down a twisting road . In response to his comment that the other world is a better place than this one , the doctor recites this poem of Khayyam : 
 However , the aesthetic involved with the poetry goes much farther back in time and is used much more subtly than these examples suggest . Beyond issues of adaptation of text to film , Kiarostami often begins with an insistent will to give visual embodiment to certain specific image @-@ making techniques in Persian poetry , both classical and contemporary , and often ends up enunciating a larger philosophical position , namely the ontological oneness of poetry and film . 
 Sima <unk> from the Department of Comparative Literature at the University of Washington feels that the creative merit of Kiarostami 's adaptation of Sohrab Sepehri and Forough Farrokhzad 's poems extends the domain of textual transformation . Adaptation is defined as the transformation of a prior text to a new text . Kiarostami 's adaptation arrives at theoretical realm of adaptation by expanding its limit from inter @-@ textual potential to trans @-@ generic potential . 
 = = Spirituality = = 
 Kiarostami 's complex sound @-@ images and philosophical approach have caused frequent comparisons with mystical filmmakers such as Andrei Tarkovsky and Robert Bresson . Irrespective of substantial cultural differences , much of western writing about Kiarostami positions him as the Iranian equivalent of such directors , by virtue of universal austere , spiritual poetics and moral commitment . Some draw parallels between certain imagery in Kiarostami 's films with that of Sufi concepts . 
 Kiarostami 's films often reflect upon immaterial concepts such as the soul and afterlife . At times , however , the very concept of the spiritual seems to be contradicted by the medium itself , given that it has no inherent means to confer the metaphysical . Some film theorists have argued that The Wind Will Carry Us provides a template by which a filmmaker can communicate metaphysical reality . The limits of the frame and the representation through dialogue with another that is not represented , physically become metaphors for the relationship between this world and those that may exist apart from it . By limiting the space of the mise en scène , Kiarostami expands the space of the art . 
 Asked in a 2000 Film Comment interview if there are any other directors who might be working on a " similar wavelength " , Kiarostami pointed to Hou Hsiao @-@ hsien as one . He said , 
 " Tarkovsky 's works separate me completely from physical life , and are the most spiritual films I have seen — what Fellini did in parts of his movies , bringing dream life into film , he does as well . Theo Angelopoulos ' movies also find this type of spirituality at certain moments . In general , I think movies and art should take us away from daily life , should take us to another state , even though daily life is where this flight is launched from . " 
 Differing viewpoints have arisen in this debate . While the vast majority of English @-@ language writers , such as David Sterritt and Spanish film professor Alberto Elena , interpret these films as spiritual films , critics including David Walsh and Hamish Ford disagree . 
 = = Kiarostami and digital micro cinema = = 
 At the turn of 21st century Kiarostami decided to change from 35 mm film production to digital video . The first film where he used this technology was ABC Africa , which was compiled from footage shot with two small digital video cameras , material originally gathered for the purposes of research and scouting . Referring to digital cinema Kiarostami said : " Digital video is within the reach of anybody , like a <unk> pen . I 'd even dare to predict that within the next decade , we 'll see a burst of interest in film @-@ making as a consequence of the impact of video " . Kiarostami stated about the documentary ABC Africa that " directing was spontaneously and unconsciously eliminated , by which I mean artificial and conventional directing . " 
 Abbas Kiarostami 's film Ten ( 2002 ) was an experiment that used digital cameras to virtually eliminate the director . Kiarostami fastened cameras to the dashboard of a car , and then allowed his actors to act . There was no film crew in the car , and no director . There is no camera movement , other than the movement of the car which carries the camera . There is minimal cutting and editing . This new direction is towards a digital micro cinema , defined as micro @-@ budget filmmaking allied with digital production . 
 According to filmmaker Matthew <unk> , Kiarostami 's work with digital video may be more valuable to cinema than it is to post @-@ cinema , but it also proves that virtually anyone with a camera can contribute to the art form in ways that were previously impossible . In 2005 , Kiarostami directed a workshop on digital film @-@ making at the London Film School , in which he expressed reservations about digital cinema . " My film 10 is a couple of years old now , " explains Kiarostami to film students , " and today I 'm not so fascinated by digital technology . [ ... ] recently it has become clear to me just how few people actually know how to use it properly . " 
 He also stated : " I have somewhat lost my enthusiasm [ for digital video ] in the last four or five years . Mainly because film students using digital video these days have not really produced anything more than superficial or simplistic ; so I have my doubts . Despite the great advantages of digital video and the great ease of using the medium , still those who use it have first to understand the sensitivities of how to best use the medium . " 
 = = Secondary literature = = 
 Books : 
 Víctor <unk> ; Abbas Kiarostami ( 2006 ) . <unk> — Kiarostami : correspondences . Centre de Cultura <unk> de Barcelona . ISBN 84 @-@ <unk> @-@ 24 @-@ 3 . 
 Alberto Elena ; Iran Heritage Foundation ( 2005 ) . The cinema of Abbas Kiarostami . <unk> Books . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 594 @-@ 6 . 
 Saeed @-@ Vafa , <unk> ( 2003 ) . Abbas Kiarostami . University of Illinois Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 252 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Nancy , Jean @-@ Luc ( 2001 ) . <unk> <unk> : <unk> <unk> . ISBN 978 @-@ 2 @-@ <unk> @-@ 17 @-@ 7 . 
 <unk> , Jean @-@ Claude ( 2004 ) . <unk> de Kiarostami . ISBN 978 @-@ 85 @-@ 359 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Marco Dalla <unk> ( 2000 ) . Abbas Kiarostami . Le Mani @-@ <unk> 'S . ISBN 978 @-@ 88 @-@ <unk> @-@ 147 @-@ 3 . 
 <unk> , Youssef ( 2000 ) . Le réel , face et pile : Le cinéma d <unk> Kiarostami . Editions <unk> . ISBN 978 @-@ 2 @-@ <unk> @-@ 063 @-@ 0 . 
 Barbera , Alberto ; <unk> , Elisa ( 2003 ) . Kiarostami . Mondadori Electa . ISBN 978 @-@ 88 @-@ 370 @-@ 2390 @-@ 4 . 
 Žižek , Slavoj ( 2006 ) . Lacan : The Silent Partners . Verso . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 549 @-@ 4 . 
 Articles : 
 Cheshire , Godfrey , " Confessions of a Sin @-@ <unk> : Close @-@ Up " Cinema Scope ( Toronto ) , Winter 2000 , issue 2 , pp. 3 – 8 
 Cheshire , Godfrey , " The Short Films of Abbas Kiarostami , " <unk> 5 ( film festival catalog , October 16 – 22 , 2000 , Austin Texas ) , pp. 154 – 159 
 <unk> , Rashmi , " Abbas Kiarostami : Life and Much More " ( interview ) , <unk> : The Asian Film Quarterly , Summer 1999 , pp. 18 – 20 
 <unk> , <unk> , ed . , <unk> @-@ e @-@ ye <unk> dar <unk> @-@ e va <unk> Asar @-@ e Abbas Kiarostami ( " A Collection of Articles on Criticizing and Introducing the Work of Abbas Kiarostami " ) , Tehran : <unk> @-@ e <unk> , 1375 [ 1996 ] ( In Persian ) 
 <unk> , Mamad , with the collaboration of Frédéric <unk> , Histoire du Cinéma Iranian , 1900 — 1999 , Paris : Centre Georges Pompidou / Bibliothèque publique d ’ information ( Cinéma du réel ) , 1999 ( In French ) 
 Hampton , Howard , " Lynch Mob , " Artforum , January 2000 ( See also letters from Kent Jones and Jonathan Rosenbaum and responses from Hampton in March 2000 issue of Artforum ) 
 <unk> , Youssef , Le réel , face et pile : Le cinéma d ’ Abbas Kiarostami , Tours : <unk> , 2000 ( In French ) 
 Jones , Kent , " The Wind Will Carry Us " , Film Comment , Volume 36 , No. 2 , ( March – April 2000 ) , pp. 72 – 3 
 Karimi , <unk> , Abbas Kiarostami , <unk> @-@ e Realist ( " Abbas Kiarostami : The Realistic Filmmaker " ) , Tehran : <unk> @-@ e <unk> , 1365 [ 1987 ] ( In Persian ) Kiarostami , Abbas : <unk> , <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Paris : Petit Bibliothèque des Cahiers du Cinéma , 1997 ( In French ) 
 Kiarostami , Abbas , " Le <unk> de la <unk> " ( cutting continuity of Taste Of Cherry ) , L ’ Avant @-@ Scène Cinéma no . 471 , April 1998 
 Kiarostami , Abbas , " Le monde d <unk> , " Cahiers du Cinéma no . 493 . ( in French ) 
 Kiarostami , Abbas , <unk> , Photographs , Fotografie ... , Paris : Editions Hazan , 1999 ( trilingual book in French , English , and Italian ; includes interview with Kiarostami by Michel Ciment and short biographical sketch ) 
 <unk> , Laurent " Is Cinema Renewing Itself ? " , Film @-@ Philosophy. vol . 6 no . 15 , July 2002 . 
 <unk> , Hamid , An <unk> Cinema : Exilic and <unk> Filmmaking , Princeton / Oxford : Princeton University Press , 2001 
 Nancy , Jean @-@ Luc and Kiarostami , Abbas , L ’ Evidence du film / The Evidence of Film ( trilingual text in French , English , and Persian ) , Bruxelles : Yves Gevaert <unk> , 2001 
 <unk> , Erik , “ Between the Dark Earth and the Sheltering Sky : The Arboreal in Kiarostami ’ s Photography ” <unk> <unk> , March 2006 ( <unk> , No.1 ) 
 Over , William , " Worlds Transformed : Iranian Cinema and Social Vision " Contemporary Justice Review , Volume 9 , Number 1 , Number 1 / March 2006 , pp. 67 – 80 ( 14 ) 
 Perez , Gilberto , " History Lessons , " The Material Ghost : Films and Their Medium , Baltimore and London : The Johns Hopkins University Press , 1998 
 <unk> , Mohammed Shabani , ed . , <unk> Az <unk> : <unk> be <unk> va Asar @-@ e <unk> @-@ e <unk> Abbas Kiarostami ( " A Design of a Friend " ) , Tehran : <unk> @-@ e <unk> , 1376 [ 1997 ] ( In Persian ) 
 Rosenbaum , Jonathan , " The Death of Hulot , " Placing Movies : The Practice of Film Criticism , Berkeley / Los Angeles : University of California Press , pp. 163 – 179 . See also " Tati 's Democracy , " Movies as Politics , Berkeley / Los Angeles : University of California Press , 1997 , pp. 37 – 40 
 Rosenbaum , Jonathan , " Lessons from a Master , " Chicago Reader , June 14 , 1996 ( Other early Chicago Reader articles on Kiarostami : October 23 , 1992 and September 29 , 1995 ) 
 Rosenbaum , Jonathan , " Short and Sweet " , Film Comment , Volume 36 , No. 4 , ( July / August 2000 ) , p 27 
 Rosenbaum , Jonathan , " Life and Nothing More - Abbas Kiarostami 's African Musical " , Film Comment , vol . 37 no . 5 , Sept / Oct 2001 , pp. 20 – 21 
 Saeed @-@ Vafa , <unk> , " Sohrab Shahid <unk> : A Cinema of Exile , " Life and Art : The New Iranian Cinema , edited by Rose Issa and Sheila Whitaker , London : National Film Theatre ( British Film Institute ) , 1999 , pp. 135 – 144 
 Sterritt , David , " With Borrowed Eyes " , Film Comment , Volume 36 , No. 4 , ( July – August 2000 ) , pp 20 – 26 
 = Light gun shooter = 
 Light gun shooter , also called light gun game or simply gun game , is a shooter video game genre in which the primary design element is aiming and shooting with a gun @-@ shaped controller . Light gun shooters revolve around the protagonist shooting targets , either antagonists or inanimate objects . Light gun shooters generally feature action or horror themes and some may employ a humorous , parodic treatment of these conventions . These games typically feature " on @-@ rails " movement , which gives the player control only over aiming ; the protagonist 's other movements are determined by the game . Games featuring this device are sometimes termed " rail shooters " , though this term is also applied to games of other genres in which " on @-@ rails " movement is a feature . Some , particularly later , games give the player greater control over movement and in still others the protagonist does not move at all . 
 Light gun shooters employ " light gun " controllers , so named because they function through the use of light sensors . Mechanical games using light guns had existed since the 1930s , though they operated differently from those used in video games . Throughout the 1970s mechanical games were replaced by electronic video games and in the 1980s popular light gun shooters such as Duck Hunt emerged . The genre was most popular in the 1990s , subsequent to the release of Virtua Cop , the formula of which was later improved upon by Time Crisis . The genre is less popular in the new millennium , as well as being hampered by compatibility issues , but retains a niche appeal for fans of " old school " gameplay . 
 = = Definition = = 
 " Light gun shooters " , " light gun games " or " gun games " are games in which the protagonist shoots at targets , whether antagonists or objects , and which utilize a gun @-@ shaped controller ( termed a " light gun " ) with which the player aims . While light gun games may feature a first @-@ person perspective , they are distinct from first person shooters , which utilize more conventional input devices . Light gun games which feature " on @-@ rails " movement are sometimes termed " rail shooters " , though this term is also applied to other types of shooters featuring similar movement . The light gun itself is so termed because it functions through the use of a light sensor : pulling the trigger allows it to detect light from the on @-@ screen targets . 
 = = Design = = 
 Targets in light gun shooters may be threatening antagonists such as criminals , terrorists or zombies , or they may be inanimate objects such as apples or bottles . Although these games may be played without a light gun , the use of more conventional input methods has been deemed inferior . Light gun shooters typically feature generic action or horror themes , though some later games employ more humorous , self @-@ referential styles . 
 Light gun shooters primarily revolve around shooting large numbers of enemies attacking in waves . The protagonist may be required to defend himself by taking cover , or by shooting incoming thrown weapons , such as axes or grenades . The player may also compete against the clock , however , with some games also featuring boss battles . Games may also reward the player for accurate shooting , with extra points , power @-@ ups or secrets . Games which do not pit the player against antagonists instead feature elaborate challenges constructed mainly from inanimate objects , testing the player 's speed and accuracy . More conventional games may feature these types of challenges as minigames . 
 Light gun shooters typically feature " on @-@ rails " movement , which gives the player no control over the direction the protagonist moves in ; the player only has control over aiming and shooting . Some games , however , may allow the protagonist to take cover at the push of a button . Other games may eschew on @-@ rails movement altogether and allow the player to move the protagonist freely around the game 's environment ; still others may feature a static environment . Light gun shooters utilise a first person perspective for aiming , though some games may allow the player to switch to a third person perspective in order to maneuver the protagonist . 
 = = History = = 
 Mechanical gun games existed before the emergence of electronic video games , as far back as the 1920s . The first light guns appeared in the 1930s , with the Seeburg Ray @-@ O @-@ Lite . Games using this toy rifle were mechanical and the rifle fired beams of light at targets wired with sensors . These evolved throughout subsequent decades , culminating in games such as Sega 's Periscope ( the company 's first successful game , released in 1966 ) , which required the player to target cardboard ships . Throughout the 1970s , mechanical arcade games were gradually replaced by electronic video games , following the release of Pong in 1972 , with 1978 's Space Invaders dealing a yet more powerful blow to the popularity of mechanical games . Light guns used in electronic video games work in the opposite manner to their mechanical counterparts : the sensor is in the gun and pulling the trigger allows it to receive light from the on @-@ screen targets . Computer light pens had been used for practical purposes at MIT in the early 1960s , and the Magnavox Odyssey had a light gun accessory , in the production of which Nintendo was involved . 
 Light guns first became popularly used for video games in the mid @-@ 1980s , with Nintendo 's Duck Hunt being a much @-@ loved example . Sega 's Virtua Cop , released in arcades in 1994 , broke new ground , popularized the use of 3D polygons in shooter games , and led to a " Renaissance " in the popularity of arcade gun games . The game was inspired by the Clint Eastwood film Dirty Harry as well as a coffee advertisement in which a can of coffee grew larger in a gun 's sights ; in Virtua Cop the player had to shoot approaching targets as fast as possible . The acclaimed Time Crisis by Namco , released in Japanese arcades in 1995 and Sony 's PlayStation console in 1997 , introduced innovations such as simulated recoil and a foot pedal which when pressed caused the protagonist to take cover . The game 's light gun controller , the <unk> , was also acclaimed . Namco also released Point Blank for the PlayStation in 1998 ( previously available in Japanese arcades as Gun Bullet since 1994 ) , a 2D sprite @-@ based game featuring a unique minigame structure and quirky , humorous tone . The game was critically acclaimed and received two sequels , both for the PlayStation console . 
 Light guns were suppressed for a time in the U.S. after the 1999 Columbine High School massacre and its attendant controversy over video games and gun crime . Since the late 1980s light gun controllers have been generally manufactured to look like toys by painting them in bright colours . In Japan , which lacks the gun crime found in the U.S. and in which civilians cannot legally own guns , more realistic light guns are widely available . 
 Light gun shooters are less popular in the new millennium than in the 1990s , with new games in the genre seen as " old school " . The Time Crisis and House of the Dead franchises continued to receive acclaimed installments , with the arcade machine for the latter 's House of the Dead 4 Special ( 2006 ) featuring large screens enclosing the player , as well as swivelling , vibrating chairs . Some games attempted to incorporate elements of first person shooter or survival horror games through the use of less restricted character movement and exploration , with varying degrees of success . Others , however , unashamedly paid homage to 1990s arcade gameplay , even embracing a somewhat parodic style . Light guns are not compatible with modern high @-@ definition televisions , leading developers to experiment with hybrid controllers , particularly with the Wii Remote for the Nintendo Wii , as well as the PlayStation 3 's <unk> 3 peripheral used with Time Crisis 4 . Others have used the PlayStation Move motion control system . 
 = Young Lord Stanley = 
 Young Lord Stanley , possibly re @-@ issued as His Only Son , is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film focuses on Jack Stanley who is disinherited by this father , Lord Stanley , for refusing to marry his cousin . Jack heads to America and takes a job as a groom . He is dismissed from his position after his employer learns of Jack 's affections for his daughter , Ann . Meanwhile , Lord Stanley decides to reinstate Jack in his will and then promptly dies , giving him his entire fortune . Jack reads of his father 's death in the newspaper and learns of his father 's will . The film concludes with the lawyer bringing Jack to a dinner party as " Lord Stanley " . Ann 's father wishes for her to earn his affections , but she is defiant and does not even look at him . Once she learns it his Jack , they kiss . The scenario was written by Lloyd Lonergan and the only known actor is Justus D. Barnes as Ann 's father . A surviving print of the film exists in the Library of Congress and it shows the improvement of the Thanhouser interior sets over films from months prior . The film was released on October 25 , 1910 , and was met with mixed reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jack Stanley is disinherited by his father , Lord Stanley , because he refuses to marry his cousin , Lady Maude . Jack emigrates to America , but has no money and has no job upon which to sustain himself . While pondering his actions , he witnesses a trio of riders approach and speak to him . He accepts a position as a groom for a wealthy American , but he falls in love with his daughter , Ann . When her father learns of this , he dismisses Jack and Ann says she will never marry anyone but him . Meanwhile , Lord Stanley has come to forgive his son and decided to reinstate him in his will . No sooner has the task been completed does Lord Stanley suddenly dies . 
 Upon reading the paper , Jack sees an advertisement about the heir of the late Lord Stanley . He heads to Hotel Astor and learns that he has received his father 's entire fortune . The lawyer accepts a dinner invitation at the wealthy American 's house and brings along Jack . The father urges his daughter to win the affections of the rich , handsome and unmarried young Lord Stanley . Upon his arrival , the father who had shunned him is taken aback and greets him , but Ann refuses to even look at the guest . She ignores him , and refuses to face him even as they head towards the dining room , but Jack attempts to kiss her and she pulls away . Suddenly , Ann sees it is Jack and embraces him with a kiss . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Jack ( Young Lord Stanley ) - Unknown actor 
 Lord Stanley - Unknown actor 
 Ann ( the girl ) - Unknown actress 
 Ann 's father - Justus D. Barnes 
 Snaith the lawyer - Unknown actor 
 = = Production = = 
 The script for the production was written by Lloyd Lonergan , an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil . Film historian Q. David Bowers does not attribute a cameraman for this production , but at least two possible candidates exist . Blair Smith was the first cameraman of the Thanhouser company , but he was soon joined by Carl Louis Gregory who had years of experience as a still and motion picture photographer . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . The other cast credits are unknown , but many 1910 Thanhouser productions are fragmentary . In late 1910 , the Thanhouser company released a list of the important personalities in their films . The list includes G.W. Abbe , Justus D. Barnes , Frank H. Crane , Irene Crane , Marie Eline , Violet Heming , Martin J. Faust , Thomas Fortune , George Middleton , Grace Moore , John W. Noble , Anna Rosemond , Mrs. George Walters . 
 The production of the film shows the continuing improvement of Thanhouser works , specifically for more realistic interior scenes , over those shot in the months prior . The progress referred to here is the improvement from works like The Two Roses . The interior sets are still very small , but the exterior shots show strength in their variety . Bowers believes that the uncommon surname , Snaith , is of some importance to Lonergan because of its reoccurring usage , including the titled works Miss Arabella Snaith and Professor Snaith . An analysis of the frame showing the newspaper advertisement shows that it was from a real newspaper dated from September 21 , 1910 . The title of the film might possibly be a reference to " Lord Stanley " , the courtesy title of the heir apparent of the Earl of Derby . At the time of the production Edward Stanley , Lord Stanley , was " Lord Stanley " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on October 25 , 1910 . The film was originally released a Young Lord Stanley , but the surviving print from the Library of Congress has " His Only Son " as what appears to be the title of the print . Bowers notes that this first card is in a different format from the other inter @-@ titles which follow and may have been a replacement or alternate name for the print . The surviving print is 928 feet long , and its shown length is 13 minutes and 35 seconds . The film likely had a wide national release , advertising theaters are known in Kansas , Indiana , and Pennsylvania . 
 Walton of The Moving Picture News said the film was , " A bright , clean , human interest tale . It holds the attention from beginning to end . A thoroughly commendable reel - in every way . " The Moving Picture World offers a summary of the work and was more or less neutral in its review of the film . The reviewer states , " It is a romantic picture , affording ample opportunity for the imagination to run riot in a number of different directions . ... Much of human nature is disclosed in this film , even though it is , in a way , a travesty upon the way wealthy girls often fall in love with <unk> or others employed about their fathers ' places . " The New York Dramatic Mirror was not very critical , but not offering any praise either . The reviewer highlighted the " common fault of actors " by throwing things on the floor and how Ann 's refusal to even look at the titled guest was overdone . 
 = Fatimid architecture = 
 The Fatimid architecture that developed in the Fatimid Caliphate ( 909 – 1167 CE ) of North Africa combined elements of eastern and western architecture , drawing on Abbasid architecture , Byzantine and Coptic architecture and North African traditions ; it bridged early Islamic styles and the medieval architecture of the Mamluks , introducing many innovations . 
 The wealth of Fatimid architecture was found in the main cities of Mahdia ( 921 – 948 ) , Al @-@ Mansuriya ( 948 – 973 ) and Cairo ( 973 – 1169 ) . The heartland of architectural activity and expression during Fatimid rule was at al @-@ Qahira , the old city of Cairo , on the eastern side of the Nile , where many of the palaces , mosques and other buildings were built . Al @-@ Aziz Billah ( ruled 975 – 996 ) is generally considered to have been the most extensive of Fatimid builders , credited with at least thirteen major landmarks including the Golden Palace , the Cairo Mosque , a fortress , a belvedere , a bridge and public baths . 
 The Fatimid Caliphs competed with the rulers of the Abbasid and Byzantine empires , and indulged in luxurious palace building . Their palaces , their greatest architectural achievements , are known only by written descriptions , however . Several surviving tombs , mosques , gates and walls , mainly in Cairo , retain original elements , although they have been extensively modified or rebuilt in later periods . Notable extant examples of Fatimid architecture include the Great Mosque of Mahdiya , and the Al @-@ Azhar Mosque , Al @-@ Hakim Mosque , Juyushi and Lulua of Cairo . 
 Although heavily influenced by architecture from Mesopotamia and Byzantium , the Fatimids introduced or developed unique features such as the four @-@ centred keel arch and the squinch , connecting square interior volumes to the dome . Their mosques followed the hypostyle plan , where a central courtyard was surrounded by arcades with their roofs usually supported by keel arches , initially resting on columns with leafy Corinthian capitals . They typically had features such as portals that protrude from the wall , domes above mihrabs and <unk> , and façade ornamentation with iconographic inscriptions , and stucco decorations . The woodwork of the doors and interiors of the buildings was often finely carved . The Fatimids also made considerable development towards mausoleum building . The <unk> , a shrine that commemorates a descendant of the Prophet Muhammad , was a characteristic type of Fatimid architecture . 
 Three Fatimid @-@ era gates in Cairo , Bab al @-@ Nasr ( 1087 ) , Bab al @-@ Futuh ( 1087 ) and Bab Zuweila ( 1092 ) , built under the orders of the vizier Badr al @-@ Jamali ( r . 1074 – 1094 ) , have survived . Though they have been altered over the centuries , they have Byzantine architectural features , with little trace of the eastern Islamic tradition . Recently a " Neo @-@ Fatimid " style has emerged , used in restorations or in modern Shia mosques by the Dawoodi Bohra , which claims continuity from the original Fatimid architecture . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The Fatimid Caliphate originated in an Ismaili Shia movement launched in al @-@ Salamiyah , on the western edge of the Syrian Desert , by Abd Allah al @-@ Akbar , a claimed eight generation descendant of the Islamic prophet Muhammad , through the prophet 's daughter Fatimah . In 899 his grandson , to be known as Abd Allah al @-@ Mahdi , became leader of the movement . He fled from his enemies to Sijilmasa in Morocco , where he proselytized under the guise of being a merchant . He was supported by a militant named Abu Abd Allah al @-@ Shi 'i , who organized a Berber uprising that overthrew the Tunisian Aghlabid dynasty , and then invited al @-@ Mahdi to assume the position of imam and caliph . The empire grew to include Sicily and to stretch across North Africa from the Atlantic to Libya . The Fatimid caliphs built three capital cities , which they occupied in sequential order : Mahdia ( 921 – 948 ) and al @-@ Mansuriya ( 948 – 973 ) in Ifriqiya and Cairo ( 973 – 1169 ) in Egypt . 
 = = = Ifriqiya = = = 
 Mahdia was a walled city located on a peninsula that projected into the Mediterranean from the coast of what is now Tunisia , then part of Ifriqiya . The Carthaginian port of Zella had once occupied the site . Mahdia was founded in 913 by Abdullah al @-@ Mahdi Billah , the first Fatimid imam , and later was the port from which the Fatimid invasion of Egypt was <unk> al @-@ Mahdi built the Great Mosque of Mahdiya , the earliest Fatimid mosque , in the new city . The other buildings erected nearby at that time have since disappeared , but the monumental access gate and portico in the north of the mosque are preserved from the original structure . 
 Al @-@ Mansuriya , near Kairouan , Tunisia , was the capital of Fatimid Caliphate during the rules of the Imams Al @-@ Mansur Billah ( r . 946 – 953 ) and Al @-@ Mu 'izz li @-@ Din Allah ( r . 953 – 975 ) . Built between 946 and 972 , it was a circular walled city holding elaborate palaces surrounded by gardens , artificial pools and water channels . The caliph Al @-@ Mu 'izz moved from the city to the new city of al @-@ Qāhira ( Cairo ) in 973 , but Al @-@ Mansuriya continued to serve as the provincial capital . In 1057 it was abandoned and destroyed . Any useful objects or materials were scavenged during the centuries that followed . Today only faint traces remain . 
 = = = Egypt = = = 
 The Fatimid general , Jawhar al @-@ Siqilli built a new palace city near to <unk> upon conquering Egypt in 969 , which he at first called al @-@ <unk> after the capital in Tunisia . When Al @-@ Mu 'izz arrived in 973 , the name was changed to al @-@ Qāhira ( Cairo ) . The new city incorporated elements of the design of Al @-@ Mansuriya , although it was rectangular rather than circular in plan . Both cities had mosques named al @-@ Azhar after the Prophet 's daughter , Fatima al @-@ Azhar , and both had gates named Bab al @-@ Futuh and Bab <unk> . Both cities had two palaces , for the caliph and for his heir , opposite and facing each other . 
 Al @-@ Aziz Billah ( 955 – 996 ) is generally considered to have been the most extensive of Fatimid builders . Aided in part by funds generated through his father al @-@ Mu 'izz 's tax reforms , Al @-@ Aziz is credited with at least 13 major building works during this reign from 975 until his death , including the Golden Palace , the Cairo Mosque , a fortress , a belvedere , a bridge and public baths . His mother , <unk> , widow of al @-@ Mu 'izz , was also responsible for ordering the commencement of building projects , mainly in the Qarafa area , ordering construction of the second mosque in Cairo , Jami al @-@ Qarafa Mosque , in 975 . Similar to the first mosque , Al @-@ Azhar Mosque , it had some fourteen gates but was later destroyed by fire , leaving only its " green mihrab " . <unk> is also credited with ordering construction of the Qarafa Palace , a public bath , cistern , or pool , and a royal garden and hydraulic pump for the Abu ' l @-@ Ma <unk> fortress . She also ordered a well to be built in the courtyard of Ibn Tulun Mosque in 995 , a pavilion overlooking the Nile called Manazil al @-@ izz , and her own mausoleum in Qarafa . 
 Badr al @-@ Jamali was also a noted builder , sponsoring numerous state architectural projects and restoration works during his rule from 1074 – 1094 , particularly with mosques , restoring minarets in Upper Egypt and building mosques in Lower Egypt . He also built many of the gates and fortifications in Cairo . 
 = = Architectural style = = 
 According to Ira M. Lapidus , public architecture under the Fatimids was an " extension of the ceremonial aspects of the royal court " , and was also intricately made . Fatimid architecture drew together decorative and architectural elements from the east and west , and spanned from the early Islamic period to the Middle Ages , making it difficult to categorize . The architecture that developed as an indigenous form under the Fatimids incorporated elements from Samarra , the seat of the Abbasids , as well as Coptic and Byzantine features . Most early buildings of the Fatimid period were of brick , although from the 12th century onward stone gradually became the chief building material . The Fatimids combined elements of eastern and western architecture , drawing on Abbasid , North African , Greek and indigenous Coptic traditions , and bridged between the early Islamic styles and medieval architecture of the Mamluks . The Fatimids were unusually tolerant of people with different ethnic origins and religious views , and were adept at exploiting their abilities . Thus many of the works of Fatimid architecture reflect architectural details imported from Northern Syria and Mesopotamia , probably in part due to the fact that they often employed architects from these places to construct their buildings . Fatimid architecture in Egypt drew from earlier Tulunid styles and techniques , and used similar types of material . While also consciously adhering to Abbasid architectural concepts , the architecture is more influenced by Mediterranean cultures and less by Iranian . 
 While Fatimid architecture followed traditional plans and aesthetics , it differed in architectural details such as the massive portals of some mosques and their elaborate façades . Scholars such as <unk> Kuban describe Fatimid architecture as " inventive more in decoration than in broad architectural concept " , although he acknowledges that the Fatimids contributed to a distinct style of mosque . The Fatimids introduced or developed the usage of the four @-@ <unk> keel arch and the muqarnas squinch , a feature connecting the square to the dome . The muqarnas squinch was a complex innovation . In it a niche was placed between two niche segments , over which there was another niche . It is possible that this design had Iranian inspiration . A similar system was applied to window building . According to De Lacy O 'Leary , the horse @-@ shoe arch was developed in Egypt under Fatimid rule and is not of Persian origin as is commonly thought . 
 = = Palaces = = 
 The palaces of the Caliphs , their greatest architectural achievements , have been destroyed and are known only from written descriptions . The heartland of architectural activity and expression during Fatimid rule was at al @-@ Qahira , on the outskirts of Cairo on the eastern side of the Nile , where many of the palaces , mosques and other buildings were built . The Caliphs competed with their rivals of the Abbasid and Byzantine empires , and were known to indulge in furnishing their palaces with " extraordinary splendor " . The palaces had gold rafters to support the ceilings and Caliphs typically asked for a golden throne encased with a curtain similar to those of the rulers of the Abbasids and Byzantines . Furniture and ceramics were elegantly adorned with motifs of birds and animals which were said to bring good luck , and depictions of hunters , and musicians and dancers of the court which reflected the exuberance of Fatimid palace life . Fountains were installed in the palaces to cool the atmosphere . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The <unk> is a characteristic type of Fatimid building , a shrine that commemorates a descendant of the Prophet Muhammad . The tombs of the Fatimid caliphs were also treated as shrines . Most of the <unk> were straightforward square structures with a dome , but a few of the mausoleums at Aswan were more complex and included side rooms . During the rule of al @-@ Hafiz ( r . 1130 – 1149 ) several mausoleums and mosques were rebuilt to honour notable female figures in Shi 'i history . The caliphs also built tombs for their wives and daughters . 
 Most of the Fatimid mausoleums have either been destroyed or have been greatly altered through later renovations . The Mashad al @-@ Juyushi , also called Mashad Badr al @-@ Jamali , is an exception . This building has a prayer hall covered with cross @-@ vaults , with a dome resting on squinches over the area in front of the mihrab . It has a courtyard with a tall square minaret . It is not clear whom the <unk> commemorates . Two other important <unk> from the Fatimid era in Cairo are those of <unk> <unk> and <unk> al @-@ Shabib , in the Fustat cemetery . <unk> <unk> , a descendant of Ali , never visited Egypt , but the <unk> was built to commemorate her . It is similar to al @-@ Juyushi , but with a larger , fluted dome and with an elegantly decorated mihrab . 
 = = Mosques = = 
 The plan and decoration of Fatimid mosques reflect Shiite doctrine and that the mosques were often used for royal ceremonial purposes . The characteristic architectural styles of Fatimid mosques include portals that protrude from the wall , domes above mihrabs and <unk> , porches and arcades with keel @-@ shaped arches supported by a series of columns , façade ornamentation with iconographic inscriptions and stucco decorations . The mosques followed the hypostyle plan , where a central courtyard was surrounded by arcades with their roofs usually supported by keel arches , initially resting on columns with Corinthian capitals . The arches held inscription bands , a style that is unique to Fatimid architecture . The later columns often had a bell @-@ shaped capital with the same shape mirrored to form the base . The prayer niche was architecturally more elaborate , with features such as a dome or transept . The Fatimid architects built modified versions of Coptic keel @-@ arched niches with radiating fluted hoods , and later extended the concept to fluted domes . The woodwork of the doors and interiors of the buildings was often finely carved . 
 Early Fatimid mosques such as the mosque of the Qarafa did not have a minaret . Later mosques built in Egypt and in Ifriqiya incorporated brick minarets , which were probably part of their original designs . These were derived from early Abbasid forms of minaret . Minarets later evolved to the characteristic <unk> ( incense burner ) shape , where a lower rectangular shaft supported an octagon section that was capped by a ribbed helmet . Almost all of Cairo 's Fatimid minarets were destroyed by an earthquake in 1303 . 
 Some " floating " mosques were located above shops . For the first time , the façade of the mosque was aligned with the street and was elaborately decorated . The decorations were in wood , stucco and stone , including marble , with geometrical and floral patterns and arabesques with <unk> and Byzantine origins . The decorations were more complex than the earlier Islamic forms and more carefully adapted to structural constraints . The imposing architecture and decoration of Fatimid buildings such as the al @-@ Hakim mosque provided a backdrop that supported the dual role of the Fatimid caliph as both religious and political leader . 
 = = = Great Mosque of Mahdiya = = = 
 The Great Mosque of Mahdiya was built in Mahdia , Tunisia , in 916 CE ( 303 – 304 in the Islamic calendar ) , on an artificial platform " reclaimed from the sea " as mentioned by the Andalusian geographer Al @-@ Bakri , after the founding of the city in 909 by the first Fatimid imam , Abdullah al @-@ Mahdi Billah . Internally , the Great Mosque had a layout similar to other mosques in the region . A transverse aisle paralleled the qibla wall , with nine aisles at right angles to the transverse . The original qibla wall was destroyed by sea erosion and had to be rebuilt , reducing the size of the prayer hall . Like other mosques in the region , the orientation of the qibla differs significantly from the " true " great circle route to Mecca . 
 Unlike other North African mosques , the Great Mosque did not have minarets , and had a single imposing entrance . This is the first known example of a projecting monumental porch in a mosque , which may have been derived from the architecture of secular buildings . The mosque at Ajdabiya in Libya had a similar plan , although it did not have the same monumental entrance . Like the Mahdiya mosque , for the same ideological reasons , the Ajdabiya mosque did not have a minaret . 
 = = = Al @-@ Azhar Mosque = = = 
 The Al @-@ Azhar Mosque was commissioned by the Caliph Al @-@ Mu 'izz li @-@ Din Allah for the newly established capital city of Cairo . Its name is a tribute to the name of Fatima Al @-@ Azhar , the daughter of the Prophet Mohammed . Jawhar al @-@ Siqilli , commander of the Fatimid army started construction of the mosque in 970 . It was the first mosque established in the city . The first prayers were held there in 972 , and in 989 the mosque authorities hired 35 scholars , making it a teaching centre for Shia theology . A waqf for the mosque was established in 1009 by Caliph al @-@ Hakim . 
 The Al @-@ Azhar Mosque in Cairo seems to have had a similar projecting entrance to the Great Mosque of Mahdiya . The original building had an open central courtyard with three arcades . Its layout was similar to the Kairouan and Samarra mosques . These had round arches on pre @-@ Islamic columns with Corinthian capitals . There were three domes ( indicative of the location of the prayer hall ) , two at the corners of the qibla wall and one over the prayer niche , and a small brick minaret over the main entrance . The gallery around the courtyard had series of columns and the prayer hall , which had the domes built over it , had five more rows of five pillars . 
 Minor alterations were made by the Caliphs Al @-@ Hakim bi @-@ Amr Allah in 1009 and Al @-@ Amir bi @-@ <unk> l @-@ Lah in 1125 . The Caliph al @-@ Hafiz ( 1129 – 1149 ) made significant further changes , adding a fourth arcade with keel arches , and a dome with elaborate carved stucco decorations in front of the transept . Since then , the mosque has been greatly enlarged and modified over the years . Of the original building little remains other than the arcades and some of the stucco decoration . 
 = = = Mosque of the Qarafa = = = 
 An unusually detailed description of the mosque of the Qarafa in Cairo , built by two noblewomen in 976 , has been left by the historian al @-@ <unk> 'i , who died around 1062 – 1065 . He said , 
 This mosque had a lovely garden to its west , and a cistern . The door by which one enters has large mastabas . The middle [ of the mosque ] is under the high <unk> , which has iron sheets on it . [ It runs ] from the door right up to the mihrab and the <unk> . It has fourteen square doors of baked brick . In front of all the doors is a row of arches ; each arch rests on two marble columns . There are three <unk> . [ The interior ] is carved in relief and decorated in blue , red , green and other colors , and in certain places , painted in a uniform tone . The ceilings are entirely painted in polychrome ; the <unk> and the <unk> of the arcades supported by columns are covered with paintings of all different colors . 
 It seems probable from this description that the mosque had a portal that projected from the wall , as did the earlier Great Mosque of Mahdiya . In other respects it seems to have resembled the al @-@ Azhar mosque in layout , architecture and decoration . Although the geographers al @-@ Muqaddasi and Ibn Hawqal both praised this mosque , neither left specific descriptions of this or any other mosque . Thus Ibn Hawqal says of it only that , " It is one of the mosques distinguished by the spaciousness of its court , elegance of construction , and the fineness of its ceilings . " 
 = = = Al @-@ Hakim Mosque = = = 
 The Al @-@ Hakim Mosque is named after Imam Al @-@ Hakim bi @-@ Amr Allah ( 985 – 1021 ) , the third Fatimid caliph to rule in Egypt . Construction of the mosque started in 990 . In 1002 – 3 Caliph al @-@ Hakim ordered completion of the building . The southern minaret has an inscription with his name and the date of 393 ( 1003 ) . Significant changes were made to the minarets in 1010 . At first the mosque was outside the city walls , but when Badr al @-@ Jamali rebuilt the walls he enclosed a larger area , and the north wall of the mosque became part of the new stone city wall . The mosque was badly damaged in the 1303 earthquake , and suffered further damage in later years . By the nineteenth century it was ruined , but has since been reconstructed . 
 The mosque is an irregular rectangle with four arcades that surround the courtyard . As with the Ibn Tulun mosque , the arches are pointed and rest on brick piers . It resembles the al @-@ Azhar mosque in having three domes along the qibla wall , one at each corner and one over the mihrab . Also like al @-@ Azhar , the prayer hall is crossed by a transept at right angles to the qibla . This wide and tall central aisle leading to the prayer niche borrows from the Mahdiya mosque 's design . The al @-@ Hakim mosque differs from the al @-@ Azhar and Ibn Tulun mosques in having two stone minarets at the corners of the stone façade , which has a monumental projecting portal like the Mosque of Mahdiya . 
 = = = Other Cairo mosques = = = 
 The Lulua Mosque , located in the southern cemetery of the <unk> hills , was built in 1015 – 16 during the reign of the third Caliph al @-@ Hakim . The mosque was built on a promontory of limestone and consisted originally of a three @-@ storey tower @-@ like structure built over a rectangular plan . It exhibited typical aspects of the Fatimid architectural style , with portals with slight protrusions , mihrabs and qibla walls , several domes , and columned porches with triple arches or keel @-@ shaped <unk> mosque partially collapsed in 1919 , but was later refurbished in 1998 by the Dawoodi Bohras . 
 The Juyushi Mosque was built by Badr al @-@ Jamali , the " Amir al <unk> " ( Commander of Forces ) of the Fatimids . The mosque was completed in 1085 under the patronage of the then Caliph and Imam Ma 'ad al @-@ Mustansir Billah . It was built on an end of the <unk> Hills which would ensure a view of the Cairo city . 
 The Aqmar Mosque was built in the under vizier al @-@ Ma 'mun al @-@ Bata <unk> during the caliphate of Imam Al @-@ Amir bi @-@ <unk> l @-@ Lah . The mosque is located on north Muizz Street . It is notable for its façade , which is elaborately decorated with inscriptions and geometric carving . It is both the first mosque in Cairo to have such decoration , and also the first to have a façade which follows the line of the street , built at an angle to the rectangular hypostyle hall whose orientation is dictated by the qibla direction . 
 = = Cairo fortifications = = 
 A new city wall was built around Cairo on the orders of the vizier Badr al @-@ Jamali ( r . 1074 – 1094 ) . Cairo had expanded beyond the original city walls , and the city faced threats from the east , notably by the Turkoman Atsiz ibn <unk> , commander of the Seljuk army . In fact , the fortifications were never put to the test . Three of the gates in the new walls have survived : Bab al @-@ Nasr ( 1087 ) , Bab al @-@ Futuh ( 1087 ) and Bab Zuweila ( 1092 ) . Bab al @-@ Futuh and Bab Zuweila were built at the northern and southern ends of Muizz Street , the main axis of Fatimid Cairo . 
 Al @-@ Jamali , an Armenian in origin , is said to have employed Armenians from the north of Mesopotamia as well as Syrians in his extensive building works . Each gate was said to have been built by a different architect . The gates have Byzantine architectural features , with little trace of the Islamic tradition . According to <unk> , the gates were built by three Christian monks from Edessa , who had fled from the <unk> . There are no surviving structures similar to the gates near Edessa or in Armenia , but stylistic evidence indicates that Byzantine origins for the design are entirely plausible . 
 Al @-@ Jamali preferred stone as the medium for his building works , introducing a new style into Cairo architecture . All three gates have massive towers linked by curtain walls above the passageways . They introduced architectural features new to Egypt including the pendentives that support the domes above the passageways of the Bab al @-@ Futuh and Bab Zuweila gates , and intersecting barrel vaults . Use of semi @-@ circular and horizontal arches , and lack of pointed arches , represented a departure from normal Fatimid architecture , probably taken from Syrian examples , and were never widely used during the Fatimid period . The use of stone also reflects Syrian tastes . 
 The passageways through each of the gates are 20 metres ( 66 ft ) long , and have vaulted ceilings with hidden machicolation openings in their ceilings . The lower part of each tower is of solid stone , while the upper third has a vaulted room with arrowslits . An unusual feature of the wall near Bab al @-@ Nasr is a stone latrine which appears like a balcony . The wall between Bab al @-@ Nasr and Bab al @-@ Futuh contains an inscription of Quranic texts in Kufic characters . 
 = = = Bab al @-@ Futuh = = = 
 Bab al @-@ Futuh is a gate in the north wall of the old city , built in 1087 . It stands at the northern end of Muizz Street . The name " Futuh " means " conquest " . the gate had rounded towers , with both of their façades incorporating a design of two parallel carved lines with loops between them . No earlier use of this decorative style is known , although it became common in the Mamluk period . There are carved brackets above the entrance arch , two of which have the head of a ram . This appears to be a survival of pre @-@ Islamic symbolism . However , Fatimid arabesques decorate the brackets . 
 = = = Bab al @-@ Nasr = = = 
 Bab al @-@ Nasr is a massive fortified gate built in 1087 with rectangular stone towers . The name means " Gate of Victory " . The entrance vestibule is cross @-@ vaulted . There are two shallow domes over the upper levels of the towers . The walls are decorated with shields and swords , possibly Byzantine in design . Many French inscriptions on the Bab al @-@ Nasr indicate use of the fort by Napoleon 's soldiers , including " Tour Courbin " and " Tour Julien " . 
 = = = Bab Zuweila = = = 
 Bab Zuweila ( or <unk> ) is a medieval gate built in 1092 . It is the last remaining southern gate from the walls of Fatimid Cairo . The gate is today commonly called <unk> El <unk> . Its name comes from <unk> , meaning " door " , and <unk> , the name of a North African tribe . The towers are semi @-@ circular . Their inner flanks have lobed arches as decorations , a North African motif introduced to Egypt by the Fatimids . The vestibule to the right contains a half @-@ domed recess with elegantly carved arches at each corner . The gates were massive , weighing four tons . The gates today have two minarets , open to visitors , from which the area may be viewed . Additions were made during the 15th century . 
 = = Restorations and modern mosques = = 
 The Fatimid buildings have gone through many renovations and restructurings in different styles from the early Mamluk period to modern times . The <unk> Mosque exemplifies this process . It was built in the Fatimid period , either as a suspended mosque ( one with shops underneath it ) or with a high basement . After the earthquake of 1302 it was rebuilt . In 1440 an ablution basin was added , and early in the Ottoman period a minaret was built . The amir Ahmad Katkhuda <unk> al @-@ <unk> in 1735 ordered a major reconstruction , almost all of the original building being replaced apart from two doors . These finely carved doors were registered as a historical monument in 1908 by the committee of conservation , and the building itself was registered in 1937 . 
 The Dawoodi Bohra , a group of around one million Ismaili Shi 'ites who trace their faith back to converts from the Hindu faith during the time of the Fatimid caliph Al @-@ Mustansir Billah ( 1029 – 1094 ) , have been engaged in restorations of the Cairo mosques since the 1970s . Aside from respecting their heritage , the purpose of the campaign to restore Fatimid architecture in Cairo is to encourage <unk> , a pilgrimage which aims to increase the cohesion of the Bohra community internationally . These activities have drawn negative comments from critics in Europe and America who believe that the mosques should be preserved in their current state . In November 1979 the first newsletter of the Society for the Preservation of the Architectural Resources of Egypt wrote a scathing report of the Bohras ' renovation of the al @-@ Hakim mosque , saying " Though their method of financing the project is intriguing , their concrete arcades can only be deplored . " However , when the mosque was re @-@ opened a year later the Egyptian Gazette was complimentary about the transformation of the run @-@ down building , achieved without resort to public aid . 
 The restorations have significantly changed the buildings from their prior state . Helwan marble has been used extensively on both interior and exterior surfaces , and inscriptions in the interior have been gilded . Motifs and designs have been copied from one mosque to another . The qibla bay of the al @-@ Hakim mosque , which had been irreparably damaged , was replaced by a version in marble and gilt of the mihrab of al @-@ Azhar mosque . The Lu 'lu 'a Mosque , formerly a ruin , has been rebuilt as a three @-@ story building somewhat like Bab al @-@ Nasr , with decorative elements from al @-@ Aqmar and al @-@ Hakim . Silver and gold grilles now enclose tombs in mosques and mausoleums . Arches , particularly in groups of three , are considered " Fatimid " , regardless of their shape . The result is what could be termed " Neo @-@ Fatimid " architecture , now found in new Bohra mosques around the world . The Aga Sir Sultan Muhammad Shah , leader of the Ismaili sect , was buried in 1957 in a mausoleum built in this neo @-@ Fatimid style . In some cases this style incorporates elements that are clearly from a different period . All but one of the Fatimid minarets were destroyed by an earthquake in 1303 , and later rebuilt by the Mamluks , but replicas of these minarets are used in Neo @-@ Fatimid mosques . 
 = = To Read = = 
 Al @-@ Aqmar @-@ Living @-@ Testimony @-@ <unk> [ 1 ] 
 al Juyushi : A Vision of the <unk> [ 2 ] 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Wicked ( musical ) = 
 Wicked : The Untold Story of the Witches of Oz is a musical with music and lyrics by Stephen Schwartz and book by Winnie Holzman . It is based on the 1995 Gregory Maguire novel Wicked : The Life and Times of the Wicked Witch of the West , an alternative telling of the 1939 film The Wizard of Oz and L. Frank Baum 's classic 1900 story , The Wonderful Wizard of Oz . The musical is told from the perspective of the witches of the Land of Oz ; its plot begins before and continues after Dorothy 's arrival in Oz from Kansas , and it includes several references to the 1939 film and Baum 's novel . Wicked tells the story of two unlikely friends , Elphaba ( the Wicked Witch of the West ) and Galinda , ( whose name later changes to Glinda the Good Witch ) who struggle through opposing personalities and viewpoints , rivalry over the same love @-@ interest , reactions to the Wizard 's corrupt government and , ultimately , Elphaba 's public fall from grace . 
 Produced by Universal Stage Productions in coalition with Marc Platt , Jon B. Platt and David Stone , with direction by Joe Mantello and choreography by Wayne Cilento , the original production of Wicked premiered on Broadway at the Gershwin Theatre in October 2003 , after completing pre @-@ Broadway tryouts at San Francisco 's Curran Theatre in April 2003 . Its original stars included Idina Menzel as Elphaba , Kristin Chenoweth as Glinda , and Joel Grey as the Wizard . The original Broadway production won three Tony Awards and six Drama Desk Awards , while its original cast album received a Grammy Award . 
 Wicked celebrated its tenth anniversary on Broadway on October 30 , 2013 . On February 14 , 2016 , Wicked performed its <unk> performance with a 2PM matinee , making Wicked the 10th longest @-@ running Broadway show , passing Rent . A typical performance runs for approximately two hours and 30 minutes , plus a 15 @-@ minute intermission . 
 The success of the Broadway production has spawned several other productions worldwide , including various North American productions , a long @-@ running Laurence Olivier Award – nominated West End production and a series of international productions . Since its 2003 debut , Wicked has broken box office records around the world , currently holding weekly @-@ gross @-@ takings records in Los Angeles , Chicago , St. Louis and London . In the week ending January 2 , 2011 , the London , Broadway and both North American touring productions simultaneously broke their respective records for the highest weekly gross . In the final week of 2013 , the Broadway production broke this record again , earning $ 3 @.@ 2 million . The West End production and the North American tour have each been seen by over two million patrons . 
 = = Inception and development = = 
 Composer and lyricist Stephen Schwartz discovered writer Gregory Maguire 's 1995 novel Wicked : The Life and Times of the Wicked Witch of the West while on vacation and saw its potential for a dramatic adaptation . Maguire , however , had released the rights to Universal Pictures , who had planned to develop a live @-@ action feature film . In 1998 , Schwartz persuaded Maguire to release the rights to a stage production while also making what Schwartz called an " impassioned plea " to Universal producer Marc Platt to realise Schwartz 's own intended adaptation . Persuaded , Platt signed on as joint producer of the project with Universal and David Stone . 
 The novel , described as a political , social and ethical commentary on the nature of good and evil , takes place in the Land of Oz , in the years leading to Dorothy 's arrival . The story centers on Elphaba , the misunderstood , smart , and fiery girl of emerald @-@ green skin who grows up to become the notorious Wicked Witch of the West and Galinda , the beautiful , blonde , popular girl who grows up to become Glinda the Good Witch of the South . The story is divided into five different sections based on the plot location and presents events , characters and situations from L. Frank Baum 's The Wonderful Wizard of Oz ( 1900 ) and its 1939 film adaptation in new ways . It is designed to set the reader thinking about what it really is to be ' Wicked ' , and whether good intentions with bad results are the same as bad intentions with bad results . Schwartz considered how best to condense the novel 's dense and complicated plot into a sensible script . To this end , he collaborated with Emmy Award – winning writer Winnie Holzman to develop the outline of the plot over the course of a year while meeting with producer Marc Platt to refine the structural outline of the show , spinning an original stage piece rather than creating a strict adaptation of Maguire 's work . 
 While the draft followed Maguire 's idea of retelling the story of the 1939 film from the perspective of its main villain , the storyline of the stage adaptation " goes far afield " from the novel . As Holzman observed in an interview with Playbill , " It was [ Maguire 's ] brilliant idea to take this hated figure and tell things from her point of view , and to have the two witches be roommates in college , but the way in which their friendship develops – and really the whole plot – is different onstage . " Schwartz justified the deviation , saying " Primarily we were interested in the relationship between Galinda – who becomes Glinda – and Elphaba ... the friendship of these two women and how their characters lead them to completely different destinies . " In addition to this change in focus , other major plot modifications include Fiyero 's appearance as the scarecrow , Elphaba 's survival at the end , Nessarose using a wheelchair instead of being born without arms , Boq having a continuing love interest for Glinda - and eventually becoming the Tin Woodman instead of Nick Chopper , the complete cutting of Elphaba 's years in the <unk> , the deletion of <unk> 's birth , Fiyero not having a wife and children , and Doctor Dillamond not being murdered . 
 The book , lyrics and score for the musical were developed through a series of readings . For these developmental workshops , Kristin Chenoweth , the Tony Award – winning actress whom Stephen Schwartz had in mind while composing the music for the character , joined the project as Glinda . Stephanie J. Block played Elphaba in all of the workshops , ( she was the original Elphaba in the 1st National Tour and joined the Broadway cast later on ) before fellow performer Idina Menzel was cast in the role in late 2000 . In early 2000 , the creators recruited New York producer David Stone , who began the transition of the workshop production into a full Broadway production . Joe Mantello was brought in as director and Wayne Cilento as choreographer while Tony Award – winning designer Eugene Lee created the set and visual style for the production based on both W. W. <unk> 's original illustrations for Baum 's novels and Maguire 's concept of the story being told through a giant clock . Costume designer Susan <unk> created a " twisted Edwardian " style through more than 200 costumes , while lighting designer Kenneth Posner used more than 800 individual lights to give each of the 54 distinct scenes and locations " its own mood " . By April 2003 , a full cast had been assembled and the show readied its debut . 
 On May 28 , 2003 , the first performance of Wicked was held at the Curran Theatre in San Francisco , as the start of SHN pre @-@ Broadway tryouts . After officially opening on June 10 , 2003 , it ran there for the month and finished on June 29 , 2003 . Audience reaction was mostly positive and although critics tended to compliment the aesthetic and spectacle of the show , they disparaged the state of its book , score , and choreography . Dennis Harvey of Variety commented positively of the " sleekly directed " , " <unk> designed " and " smartly cast " production yet still disapproved of its " mediocre " book , " trite " lyrics and " largely generic " music while Karen D 'Souza of the San Jose Mercury News wrote that " Style over substance is the real theme in this Emerald City . " Noting mixed response , the creative team started making extensive changes , tweaking it before its transfer to Broadway . Winnie Holzman stated , " Stephen [ Schwartz ] wisely had insisted on having three months to rewrite in @-@ between the time we closed in San Francisco and when we were to go back into rehearsals in New York . That was crucial ; that was the thing that made the biggest difference in the life of the show . That time is what made the show work . " 
 Elements of the book were rewritten while several songs underwent minor transformations . This included the excision of " Which Way is the Party ? " , the introductory song to the character Fiyero , which was subsequently replaced by " Dancing Through Life " in Schwartz 's fear that the former failed to be a clear " statement of Fiyero 's philosophy of life " . In addition , there was concern that Menzel 's Elphaba " got a little overshadowed " by Chenoweth 's Glinda . San Francisco Chronicle critic Robert Hurwitt wrote , " Menzel 's brightly intense Elphaba the Wicked Witch [ needs ] a chance of holding her own alongside Chenoweth 's gloriously , insidiously bubbly Glinda " , so the creative team set about making her character " more prominent " . On the subject of the Broadway revisions , Schwartz recalled , " It was clear there was work to be done and revisions to be made in the book and the score . The critical community was , frankly , very helpful to us . We learned a lot from the reviews , which were honest and constructive in the aggregate , unlike New York , where the critics make up their minds before they come to the theatre . " On October 30 , 2003 , the musical opened on Broadway . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Act One 
 The Ozians are cheering that the Wicked Witch of the West , Elphaba , is dead ( " No One Mourns the Wicked " ) . Glinda arrives and an <unk> asks her if she and Elphaba were friends . She admits that they knew each other , which surprises all of the Ozians , leading Glinda to tell them the story of how they became best friends . She also tells them her name was Galinda before she changed it . A flashback starts with a scene in a school , Shiz , where Elphaba arrives . Elphaba ( later known as the Wicked Witch of the West ) was the daughter of the governor of Munchkinland - but it is heavily implied that she is the product of an affair between the governor 's wife and a mysterious stranger and his bottle of " green elixir . " Elphaba was born with green skin . Her father despised her and showered his affection on her younger sister , Nessarose , who is confined to a wheelchair . The two sisters both go to Shiz University , where the pretty and popular Galinda is also in their class ( " Dear Old Shiz " ) . As their father says goodbye , he gives Nessarose a pair of silver slippers . The headmistress , Madame Morrible , decides to take Nessarose under her protection , despite Elphaba 's objections . Elphaba is now without a roommate and ends up with Galinda , to the disgust of both . Elphaba attempts to take back her sister as she is wheeled away , and her frustration manifests itself physically in an explosion . Madame Morrible recognizes that she has special powers and decides to teach her sorcery - and to teach no one else , even though Galinda had her heart set on studying with magic at school . She even tells Elphaba that her powers might allow her to work with the Wonderful Wizard of Oz , something which Elphaba has dreamed of ( " The Wizard and I " ) . 
 All of this does little to endear Elphaba to Galinda and the feeling is mutual ( " What is this Feeling ? " ) . They clash constantly , even in their classes , such as their history class with Dr. Dillamond . Dr. Dillamond is the only Animal professor at the university and is beginning to suffer from discrimination , even from the students , which is shown when someone writes " Animals should be seen and not heard " on the chalkboard . He tells Elphaba that there is a conspiracy to stop the Animals from speaking , and she wants to let the Wizard know , for he would surely stop it ( " Something Bad " ) . 
 Meanwhile , a young roguish prince , Fiyero , has arrived at Shiz . Galinda is charmed when Fiyero shares his life philosophy ( " Dancing Through Life " ) . They all decide to have a party that evening . Boq , a Munchkin that has developed a crush on Galinda , tries to invite her to the party , but she convinces him instead to ask Nessarose out of pity , leaving her free to go with Fiyero . Nessarose is delighted and tells her sister how she and Boq are meant to be together and how Galinda helped it happen . When Galinda offers Elphaba a hat to wear to the party , Elphaba begins to wonder if she was wrong about her roommate . 
 At the party that evening , Boq tries to tell Nessarose the real reason he invited her , but is unable to hurt her feelings . She is becoming infatuated with him . Madame Morrible arrives to tell Glinda that she can join her sorcery class , at Elphaba 's request . Elphaba herself arrives , wearing the hat Galinda gave her , a witch 's hat . The other students laugh and stare while Elphaba awkwardly dances on her own . Glinda feels terrible , and goes to dance with Elphaba . Soon everyone joins them , and the two girls look at each other in a new light . 
 Back in their room , they continue to bond . Galinda tells Elphaba of her plans to marry Fiyero even though he hasn 't proposed and Elphaba confesses that her father blames her for the death of her mother , who died birthing Nessarose . Galinda decides that she will help Elphaba become popular and she gives her roommate the nickname " <unk> " ( " Popular " ) . When Elphaba arrives at class the next day , Fiyero sees Galinda 's influence , and tells Elphaba that she doesn 't need to change . Dr. Dillamond enters to tell the class that he is leaving - he is no longer permitted to teach . Elphaba wants to help , but no one will stand up with her . The students are introduced to the new technological advancement of the cage , which will keep Animals controlled , so that they never learn to speak . Elphaba 's outrage cannot be contained , and in the ensuing chaos , she and Fiyero grab the Lion cub in the cage and escape . 
 Fiyero is confused about what he has just seen and what he is doing , but he is caught up in Elphaba 's passion . She begins to fall in love with him and they share a moment before he has to leave . Elphaba reminds herself that it 's pointless to wish for something to happen between them ( " I 'm Not that Girl " ) . Madame Morrible comes and tells her that the Wizard has asked to meet her . Nessarose and Glinda come to see her off , and Fiyero meets her too . Galinda is saddened by Fiyero 's emotional distance from her , and tries to win his respect by changing her name to " Glinda " , in solidarity with Dr. Dillamond , who could not pronounce the first syllable of her name . But Fiyero barely notices , saying goodbye to Elphaba , and it is suggested that her feelings for him are mutual . Elphaba invites Glinda to the Emerald City with her ( " One Short Day " ) . 
 At last , the two girls stand in front of the Wizard . He turns out to be not quite as terrifying as they thought ( " A Sentimental Man " ) . He promises Elphaba that he will grant her request if she proves herself . Madame Morrible appears - she is the Wizard 's new " Press Secretary " . She gives Elphaba an ancient book of spells , called the " Grimmerie , " which only the magically gifted can read . Elphaba is asked to try a levitation spell on the Wizard 's monkey servant , <unk> . However , the spell doesn 't go the way Elphaba plans when <unk> sprouts wings , and she realizes that the Wizard is the one behind the suppression of the Animals . Elphaba has been tricked , and instead of just performing the spell on one monkey , she actually performed the spell on all of them . Elphaba realizes that the Wizard is not who she thought he was - he has no powers ; he is merely a charlatan who cannot read the Grimmerie . He offers her and Glinda everything they 've ever wanted if they will help him , but Elphaba is unable to comply . She runs away , and in order to prevent the truth from getting out , Madame Morrible spreads reports that Elphaba is " wicked , " not to be trusted , and claims that Elphaba is the one behind the animal mischief . This only reaffirms Elphaba 's belief that she must not let anyone hold her down ; she must go on her own to do what 's best for her . She performs a spell on a broom and flies . ( " Defying Gravity " ) . 
 Act Two 
 Some time later , Elphaba 's opposition of the Wizard 's regime has earned her the title " The Wicked Witch of the West " . Glinda has become the smiling public front of the Wizard 's regime , given the title " Glinda the Good " and positioned by Morrible as the nation 's defender against the Witch . A press conference to celebrate Fiyero 's appointment as Captain of the Guard ( a position he has accepted in order to find Elphaba ) is hijacked by the crowd 's panicked rumors about the Witch , including an idiotic story that she will be melted by water . Fiyero is furious and not calmed by Glinda 's insistence that Elphaba does not want to be found . He is further shocked when Morrible announces his engagement to Glinda . This is news to Fiyero and he storms off . Glinda attempts to keep a cheerful front for the press , but it is clear she realizes her dream life has come at a great price ( " Thank Goodness " ) . 
 Elphaba pays a visit to Nessarose , who is now the governor of Munchkinland following the death of their father , who Nessarose says " died of shame " when he heard what Elphaba did . Nessarose has taken away the rights of the Munchkins in a desperate attempt to keep Boq at her side . Elphaba tries to convince her sister to side with her against the Wizard , but Nessarose is more concerned with her own problems . Elphaba tries to help by giving Nessarose the power to walk . Convinced that Boq must love her now , Nessarose calls for him , but he only sees this as proof that she doesn 't need him any more . Furious , Nessarose takes Elphaba 's spell book and tries to cast a spell to make Boq fall in love with her . However , the spell backfires , shrinking Boq 's heart and Elphaba must work another spell to save his life , if in a slightly different condition than he was before ( " The Wicked Witch of the East " ) . When Boq awakens , he is horrified at his new state as a man made of tin , and Nessarose tells him it was Elphaba who did this to him . 
 Elphaba returns to the Wizard 's palace to free the monkey servants and comes across the Wizard himself . He tries once again to convince her to work with him , telling her that he is not evil - just a mediocre man who came into his position by chance , led to stay by the reverence of the Ozians , and he offers to redeem Elphaba 's reputation ( " Wonderful " ) . She is almost won over , until she sees Dr. Dillamond , who has lost the power of speech . She vows to fight the Wizard until the end . Fiyero and the guards enter , followed by Glinda . Fiyero helps Elphaba escape , and decides to escape with her , leaving Glinda behind . Broken @-@ hearted , Glinda tells the Wizard and Madame Morrible that the way to capture Elphaba is to make her think her sister is in trouble , and she will be sure to come to her rescue . She mourns that Fiyero does not love her ( " I 'm Not that Girl , Reprise " ) . 
 Elphaba and Fiyero are both taken by surprise by the strength of their feelings for each other , and promise to be together always ( " As Long As You 're Mine " ) . Their happiness is interrupted when Elphaba suddenly has a vision of a house flying through the sky and Nessarose being in pain . Before Elphaba leaves to investigate , Fiyero tells her about a castle that his family owns that she can stay in . 
 Glinda and Elphaba meet again at the site where Nessarose has been crushed by a house with a girl named Dorothy inside . Fueled by the rivalry over Fiyero , the two have a heated argument . The guards arrive , and Elphaba guesses that Glinda arranged for all of this . Fiyero arrives as well , and holds Glinda hostage until Elphaba can escape . Glinda realizes that Fiyero does truly love Elphaba , and tells the guards not to hurt him , but they don 't listen . Elphaba tries to cast a spell to save his life and protect him from injury , but is frustrated by the limitations of her power . She decides that from this point on , she will live up to her reputation as the Wicked Witch of the West ( " No Good Deed " ) . 
 Meanwhile , the citizens of Oz , spurred on by Madame Morrible and Boq 's testimony , band together to help rescue Dorothy from the clutches of the Wicked Witch of the West . Glinda has realized Morrible , who can control the weather , is responsible for Nessarose 's death , but when she confronts her Morrible tells her that there is blood on her hands as well , and advises her to smile and wave . Glinda flees in horror to warn Elphaba as the angry mob sets out to kill Elphaba . ( " March of the Witch Hunters " ) . Elphaba captures Dorothy , refusing to release her until she relinquishes Nessarose 's slippers – the only things left of her dead sister . Glinda travels to Elphaba 's castle to warn her of the danger and persuade her to let Dorothy go . Elphaba refuses until she suddenly receives a letter saying that Fiyero has supposedly died . The two women forgive each other for all grievances , acknowledging they have both made mistakes . To help her in her future , Elphaba gives the Grimmerie to Glinda . The two friends embrace for the last time before saying goodbye forever , and acknowledge that they are who they are because of each other ( " For Good " ) . As the Mob Arrives at the Castle Elphaba forces Glinda to hide , and she watches from the shadows as Dorothy throws a bucket of water on Elphaba , who appears to melt away . Grief @-@ stricken , Glinda sees that all that remains of her friend is her black hat and the small bottle of green elixir which she had slept with under her pillow . 
 Back at the Emerald City , Glinda confronts the Wizard with Elphaba 's bottle , which he recognizes as identical to his own . He was Elphaba 's biological father , and the cause of her green skin . He breaks down in agony , and Madame Morrible surmises that Elphaba 's powers were so strong because she was a child of two worlds . Glinda orders the Wizard to leave Oz and sends Madame Morrible to prison for murdering Nessarose . 
 Meanwhile , back at the castle , Fiyero ( now a scarecrow ) comes to the spot where Elphaba was melted . Making sure that no one is observing , he knocks on the floor and out from a trap door steps Elphaba , very much alive ; the entire thing was a ruse to convince her enemies of her death and to ensure her future with Fiyero , who was transformed into the scarecrow by her spell . Before leaving , Elphaba regrets that she 'll never see Glinda again and tell her that she and Fiyero are alive . Simultaneously , returning to the musical 's starting point , Glinda reports to the people of Oz that the Wicked Witch of the West has been killed and promises to properly earn her title as Glinda the Good . As the people celebrate and Glinda mourns , Elphaba and Fiyero leave Oz behind . ( " Finale " ) 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Original casts = = = 
 Notes 
 Kristy Cates began the 1st National Tour as Elphaba on March 8 , 2009 , while Block was out due to injury , and Block returned to the role on March 25 , 2009 . 
 Victoria Matlock became the first standby for Elphaba on the 1st National Tour on March 8 , 2006 . 
 Laura Bell Bundy became the first standby for Glinda on Broadway in November 2003 . 
 Neither US National Tour has / had a Glinda standby . 
 = = = Casts of current productions = = = 
 = = = Cast distinctions = = = 
 In January 2005 , <unk> <unk> took over as the standby for Elphaba and became the first African @-@ American woman to play the role of Elphaba . Since then , five other black women have either played or covered the role ( Brandi <unk> Massey , Dan <unk> Williamson , Alexia <unk> , Lilli Cooper and Emmy Raver @-@ Lampman ) with <unk> being the first , and so far only , to play Elphaba full @-@ time . 
 Marcie Dodd is the only actress to have been billed in both lead roles of Elphaba and Nessarose when she starred as Elphaba on Broadway after playing Nessarose in Los Angeles . 
 Willemijn Verkaik , who created the role of Elphaba for German and Dutch audiences , joined the Broadway production for a limited run in 2013 , becoming the first actress to have appeared in three different language productions . Later that year , she transferred to the London company and made her West End debut . 
 British Glinda Gina Beck joined the company of the first North American tour only weeks after completing her West End run , making her the first performer to play the role on both sides of the Atlantic . 
 Jackie Burns and Rachel Tucker are the longest @-@ running Broadway and West End <unk> respectively . 
 Katie Rose Clarke and Savannah Stevenson are the longest running Broadway and West End <unk> respectively . 
 When Louise Dearman took over as London 's Elphaba , she became the first person in the musical 's history to play both female leads , having played Glinda in the production from 2010 @-@ 11 . 
 Jennifer <unk> has played Elphaba in four countries ( six productions ) and became the fourth actress to have played the role on Broadway and in the West End . 
 Miriam Margolyes became the first ( and only to date ) actress to have played Madame Morrible in the West End ( original cast ) and on Broadway , when she repeated her performance at the Gershwin in 2008 . 
 Tom McGowan became the first ( and only to date ) actor to have played The Wizard on Broadway and in the West End , when he joined the London company in 2015 . 
 Willemijn Verkaik , Dee <unk> , Rachel Tucker and Jemma Rix have each performed as Elphaba over 1000 times . 
 Danna Paola , the Mexican Elphaba , is the youngest actress to play the role at 18 years old . 
 Myra Ruiz , currently playing Elphaba in the Brazilian production , is the second youngest actress to play the role , at 23 years old . 
 Katie Rowley Jones has played Nessarose more times than any other actress , having spent seven years in the role ( 2006 @-@ 2008 , 2012 @-@ 2017 ) by the time her contract expires in January 2017 . 
 = = Musical numbers = = 
 = = Music and recordings = = 
 = = = Music analysis = = = 
 The score of Wicked is heavily thematic , bearing in some senses more resemblance to a film score than a traditional musical score . While many musical scores employ new motifs and melodies for each song with little overlap , Schwartz integrated a handful of leitmotifs throughout the production . Some of these motifs indicate irony – for example , when Galinda presents Elphaba with a " ghastly " hat in " Dancing through Life " , the score reprises a theme from " What is this Feeling ? " a few scenes earlier , in which Elphaba and Glinda had espoused their mutual loathing . 
 Two musical themes in Wicked run throughout the score . Although Schwartz rarely reuses motifs or melodies from earlier works , the first – Elphaba 's theme – came from The Survival of St. Joan , on which he worked as musical director . " I always liked this tune a lot and I never could figure out what to do with it , " he remarked in an interview in 2004 . The chord progression that he first penned in 1971 became a major theme of the show 's orchestration . By changing the instruments that carry the motif in each instance , Schwartz enables the same melody to convey different moods . In the overture , the tune is carried by the orchestra 's brass section , with heavy percussion . The result is , in Schwartz ' own words , " like a giant shadow terrorizing you " . When played by the piano with some electric bass in " As Long As You 're Mine " , however , the same chord progression becomes the basis for a romantic duet . And with new lyrics and an altered bridge , the theme forms the core of the song " No One Mourns the Wicked " and its reprises . 
 Schwartz uses the " Unlimited " theme as the second major motif running through the score . Although not included as a titled song , the theme appears as an interlude in several of the musical numbers . In a tribute to Harold Arlen , who wrote the score for the 1939 film adaptation , the " Unlimited " melody incorporates the first seven notes of the song " Over the Rainbow . " Schwartz included it as an inside joke as , " according to copyright law , when you get to the eighth note , then people can come and say , ' Oh you stole our tune . ' And of course obviously it 's also disguised in that it 's completely different rhythmically . And it 's also harmonized completely differently .... It 's over a different chord and so on , but still it 's the first seven notes of ' Somewhere Over the Rainbow ' " . Schwartz further obscured the motif 's origin by setting it in a minor key in most instances . This also creates contrast in the songs in which it forms a part , for example in " Defying Gravity " , which is written primarily in the key of D @-@ flat major . In the song " The Wicked Witch of the East " , however , when Elphaba finally uses her powers to let her sister walk , the " Unlimited " theme is played in a major key . 
 = = = Recordings = = = 
 A cast recording of the original Broadway production was released on December 16 , 2003 , by Universal Music . All of the songs featured on stage are present on the recording with the exception of " The Wizard and I ( Reprise ) " and " The Wicked Witch of the East " . The short reprise of " No One Mourns the Wicked " that opens Act II is attached to the beginning of " Thank Goodness " . The music was arranged by Stephen Oremus , who was also the conductor and musical director and James Lynn Abbott , with orchestrations by William David <unk> . The recording received the Grammy Award for Best Musical Show Album in 2005 and was certified platinum by the RIAA on November 30 , 2006 . The album was certified double platinum on November 8 , 2010 . A fifth @-@ anniversary special edition of the original Broadway cast recording was released on October 28 , 2008 , with a bonus CD including tracks from the Japanese and German cast recordings , " Making Good " – a song later replaced by " The Wizard and I " – sung by Stephanie J. Block with Schwartz at the piano , " I 'm Not that Girl " by Kerry Ellis ( featuring Brian May on guitar ) , Menzel 's dance mix of " Defying Gravity " and " For Good " sung by LeAnn Rimes and Delta Goodrem . 
 A German recording of the Stuttgart production was released on December 7 , 2007 , featuring a track listing and arrangements identical to those of the Broadway recording . The Japanese cast recording was released on July 23 , 2008 , featuring the original Tokyo cast . It is notable for being the only Cast Album of the show that includes Glinda 's Finale dialogue . 
 = = = Orchestration = = = 
 = = Productions = = 
 = = = Original Broadway production = = = 
 Wicked officially opened on June 10 , 2003 at the Curran Theatre in San Francisco , after previews began on May 28 , in a pre @-@ Broadway tryout presented by SHN . The cast included Kristin Chenoweth as Glinda , Idina Menzel as Elphaba , Robert Morse as the Wizard , Norbert Leo Butz as Fiyero , Michelle Federer as Nessarose , Carole Shelley as Madame Morrible , John Horton as Doctor Dillamond , and Kirk McDonald as Boq while Stephanie J. Block , who originally read the role of Elphaba in workshop development , served as an ensemble member and understudied the lead role . The tryout closed on June 29 , 2003 , and after extensive retooling , the musical began previews on Broadway at the Gershwin Theatre on October 8 , 2003 , and made its official premiere on October 30 . Most of the original production team and cast members remained with the show , with the exception of some minor ensemble changes and the replacement of Robert Morse with Joel Grey as the Wizard , John Horton with William Youmans as Doctor Dillamond and Kirk McDonald with Christopher Fitzgerald as Boq , while Eden Espinosa and Laura Bell Bundy were added as standbys for Elphaba and Glinda respectively . 
 = = = North American productions = = = 
 In 2005 , the first national tour of Wicked ( called the " Emerald City Tour " by the producers ) started in Toronto , Ontario , and has since visited numerous cities throughout the United States and Canada . Stephanie J. Block was set to open the tour as Elphaba with previews beginning March 8 , but after having sustained a minor injury in rehearsal , Kristy Cates temporarily took her place . Previews were therefore postponed until the following day . After some delay , Block made her debut on March 25 , and the tour officially opened on March 31 . The original touring cast also included Kendra Kassebaum as Glinda , Derrick Williams as Fiyero , Jenna Leigh Green as Nessarose , Carol Kane as Madame Morrible , Timothy Britten Parker as Doctor Dillamond , Logan Lipton as Boq , and David Garrison as the Wizard . After a decade of shows , the tour concluded at the Pantages Theatre in Los Angeles on March 15 , 2015 . The tour played 4 @,@ 160 performances at 124 engagements , and grossed over $ 790 million ( an average of $ 1 @.@ 5 million a week ) . It was seen by 10 @.@ 3 million people in 55 cities . The closing cast included Jennifer <unk> as Elphaba , Chandra Lee Schwartz as Glinda , Nick Adams as Fiyero , Kim Zimmer as Madam Morrible , Tim <unk> as The Wizard , Jenny <unk> as Nessarose , Tom Flynn as Doctor Dillamond and <unk> Benson as Boq . 
 While the original touring cast intended to play a limited engagement from April 29 to June 12 , 2005 at the Oriental Theatre in Chicago , producers decided to extend it to an open @-@ ended run , making it the first non @-@ Broadway sit @-@ down production of Wicked . Opening at the same Chicago theatre the day after the touring production had finished , the original Chicago cast included Ana Gasteyer as Elphaba , Kate <unk> as Glinda , <unk> Reed as Madame Morrible , Kristoffer Cusick as Fiyero , Telly Leung as Boq , Heidi <unk> as Nessarose and Gene <unk> as the Wizard . The production closed on January 25 , 2009 , after over 1 @,@ 500 performances . The touring production returned to Chicago for a special engagement at the Cadillac Palace Theatre from December 1 , 2010 to January 23 , 2011 . In celebration of the musical 's 10th anniversary , the tour played an eight @-@ week return engagement , returning to the Oriental Theatre , from October 30 through December 21 , 2013 . 
 An open @-@ ended production also appeared in Los Angeles , California at the Pantages Theatre . Performances began on February 10 , 2007 , with an official opening on February 21 . Megan Hilty and original Broadway standby Eden Espinosa were Glinda and Elphaba respectively while Carol Kane was Madame Morrible , Timothy Britten Parker was Doctor Dillamond , Jenna Leigh Green was Nessarose , Adam Wylie was Boq , Kristoffer Cusick was Fiyero , and John Rubinstein was the Wizard . The production closed on January 11 , 2009 , after 791 performances and 12 previews . The first national touring production returned to the Pantages Theatre for a limited engagement from November 30 , 2011 until January 29 , 2012 . Another engagement played at the Pantages Theatre for an extended run lasting from December 10 , 2014 until the tour 's closing performance on March 15 , 2015 . This LA production was also featured in " Something Wicked This Way Comes " , a 2007 episode of Ugly Betty , as the Broadway production of Wicked , which is a major setting and plot point of the episode . 
 A San Francisco production of Wicked officially opened February 6 , 2009 , at SHN 's Orpheum Theatre , following previews from January 27 . The cast included Teal Wicks as Elphaba , Kendra Kassebaum as Glinda , Nicolas <unk> as Fiyero , Carol Kane as Madame Morrible , David Garrison as the Wizard , Deedee Magno Hall as Nessarose , Tom Flynn as Doctor Dillamond , and Eddy Rioseco as Boq . The production closed on September 5 , 2010 , after 672 performances and 12 previews with Marcie Dodd as Elphaba and Alli <unk> as Glinda . The first national touring company ended their second San Francisco engagement at the Orpheum Theatre , which ran January 23 – February 17 , 2013 . 
 The second national tour of Wicked ( called the " Munchkinland Tour " ) began in 2009 with previews on March 7 and official opening night on March 12 at the Barbara B. Mann Performing Arts Hall in Fort Myers , Florida . Like the first , this touring production has since visited numerous cities throughout North America . The original cast starred Marcie Dodd as Elphaba , Helene Yorke as Glinda , Colin Donnell as Fiyero , Kristine Reese as Nessarose , Marilyn Caskey as Madame Morrible , David <unk> as Doctor Dillamond , Ted Ely as Boq and Tom McGowan as the Wizard . 
 = = = London = = = 
 The West End production began previews at the Apollo Victoria Theatre from September 7th , and officially opened on September 27th , 2006 . The production is currently booking until April 29th , 2017 and celebrated its fifth anniversary in 2011 with a special curtain call featuring former West End cast members . On June 3 , 2014 , the production became the 10th longest running show in the West End . The London production was tailored slightly for a British audience , including minor creative changes to dialogue , choreography and special effects . A majority of these changes were later incorporated into all productions of Wicked . The changes include Elphaba first meeting Fiyero when he first arrives at Shiz University . In addition , the waltz between Elphaba and the Wizard during Wonderful was removed . 
 The West End production reunited the show 's original creative team with Idina Menzel , who had originated the role of Elphaba in the Broadway production . Original London cast members included Helen Dallimore as Glinda , Miriam Margolyes as Madame Morrible , Adam Garcia as Fiyero , Martin Ball as Doctor Dillamond , James Gillan as Boq , Katie Rowley Jones as Nessarose and Nigel Planer as the Wizard . After her limited engagement , Menzel was succeeded by Kerry Ellis , who became the first British woman to assume the role of Elphaba and the following year , the second actress to play Elphaba on Broadway and in the West End productions . 
 Wicked will have the premiere of its first Autism @-@ Friendly performance on 14 May 2016 . The production was working with the National Autistic Society to adapt the show for people with autism . 
 = = = U.K. and Ireland tour = = = 
 The show began its first national tour of the UK and Ireland on September 12 , 2013 at the Palace Theatre in Manchester , where it is played to November 16 . It then played Dublin in 2013 , and in 2014 , Milton Keynes , Cardiff , Glasgow , Leeds , Birmingham , Liverpool , Southampton and Edinburgh . In 2015 , the tour visited Plymouth , Bristol , Sunderland and Aberdeen , before concluding in Salford on July 25 , 2015 . 
 The original cast comprised former West End standby Nikki Davis @-@ Jones as Elphaba , with former ensemble member of the West End production , Emily Tierney , as Glinda . Alongside them were Liam Doyle as Fiyero , Marilyn Cutts as Madame Morrible , Carina Gillespie as Nessarose and George Ure , who was reprising his role as Boq from the West End production . For the first time , the roles of The Wizard and Doctor Dillamond were played by a single actor , Dale Rapley . At the time , the only other actor to play both roles in a single performance was London 's David Stoller in November 2008 , but this was only due to the absence of several actors . 
 Another former West End standby , Ashleigh Gray , took over as Elphaba for the tour 's second contract run , making her the second actress after Davis @-@ Jones to have played the role in both the West End and the UK touring production . Originally , Davis @-@ Jones was due to leave in order to return to the London company and lead its cast , however , it was later announced that , towards the end of her run in August 2014 she had withdrawn from the tour and subsequently would not be appearing in the West End . 
 The tour is expected to re @-@ launch in July 2016 . The show will open with its only UK dates being a 5 @-@ week run at the Bradford Alhambra before heading to Asia . 
 = = = Australian productions = = = 
 An Australian production officially opened on July 12 , 2008 , with previews commencing June 27 at the Regent Theatre in Melbourne . 
 Amanda Harrison was originally cast as Elphaba , with Lucy Durack as Glinda . The original cast consisted of Rob Mills as Fiyero , Anthony Callea as Boq , Rob Guest as the Wizard , Maggie Kirkpatrick as Madame Morrible , Penny McNamee as Nessarose and Rodney Dobson as Doctor Dillamond . Guest unexpectedly died months into the Melbourne season , with the role being taken up by Bert Newton . 
 Closing in Melbourne August 9 , 2009 , the show transferred to Sydney 's Capitol Theatre . Previews began on September 5 , 2009 , with the official opening on September 12 . Shortly into the run , Harrison was forced to leave the role of Elphaba , so current standby Jemma Rix and Australian theatre veteran Pippa Grandison began to share the role , each appearing in four shows per week . Eventually , it was confirmed that she would not be returning to the cast . 
 Closing in Sydney September 26 , 2010 , the production embarked on a national Australian tour which began at the <unk> Lyric Theatre in Brisbane . After a two @-@ week delay due to the Queensland floods , performances began January 25 , 2011 , and ran until April 2 . Rix became the sole lead Elphaba with David Harris joining as the new Fiyero . 
 The touring production then moved to the Festival Centre in Adelaide , running from April 14 until June 4 , 2011 , with the final leg of the tour playing the Burswood Theatre in Perth , from June 19 to September 11 , 2011 , wrapping up more than three years of performances in Australia . 
 An Asian tour began at Singapore 's Grand Theater in Marina Bay from December 6 , 2011 with Suzie Mathers taking over as Glinda opposite Rix . 
 After the Singapore engagement of the tour closed April 22 , 2012 , performances began in Seoul , Korea from May 31 through October 6 , 2012 . The show then made its premiere in New Zealand , with previews taking place on September 17 , 2013 , and the official opening night on September 21 . The Auckland run concluded on November 24 , 2013 , where it played the Civic Theatre . The cast then moved on to the Main Theater of the Cultural Center of the Philippines in Manila on a limited run from January 22 through March 9 , 2014 after having been extended from its original closing date . 
 At the time of the Wicked ’ s 10th Anniversary on Broadway , the show announced it would return to Australia for a commemorative national tour , beginning in Melbourne on May 10 , 2014 . Lucy Durack returned as Glinda , with Jemma Rix continuing as Elphaba . 
 The final cast included Suzie Mathers ( who had returned once Durack announced her pregnancy ) as Glinda , Steve Danielsen as Fiyero , Simon Gallaher as the Wizard , Edward Grey as Boq , Emily Cascarino as Nessarose , Glen <unk> as Doctor Dillamond and original cast members Jemma Rix as Elphaba and Maggie Kirkpatrick as Madame Morrible . After seven years and close to 2 @,@ 000 performances across 8 different cities internationally , Wicked closed indefinitely at the Burswood Theatre in Perth on June 28 , 2015 . 
 In 2015 , <unk> announced a non @-@ professional performance in May 2016 at The National Theatre in Melbourne . The show , which was the Australian amateur premiere , ran from 16 to 21 May 2016 . Redcliffe Musical Theatre will stage the Queensland amateur premiere from 29 July to 14 August 2016 . 
 = = = Subsequent international productions = = = 
 A condensed thirty @-@ minute version of the musical played at Universal Studios Japan in Osaka , Japan . Australian Jemma Rix was part of the original cast , alternating the role of Elphaba with Jillian <unk> and Taylor Jordan . The show , which opened on July 12 , 2006 , featured the preliminary storyline of Act 1 but Fiyero , Madame Morrible , Boq , Nessarose and Doctor Dillamond were absent and there were considerable changes in sets and costumes . The final performance took place on January 11 , 2011 . The first replicated non @-@ English production opened in Tokyo , Japan , on June 17 , 2007 with Hamada Megumi as Elphaba and <unk> Miyuki as Glinda . The production closed on September 6 , 2009 , in preparation for its transfer to Osaka . After opening on October 11 , 2009 , the Osaka production closed on February 13 , 2011 , featuring Ebata Masae as Elphaba with <unk> Asako as Glinda . The production then moved again to Fukuoka on April 2 , 2011 where its original stars were Ebata Masae ( Elphaba ) and <unk> Miyuki ( Glinda ) . After its closure in Fukuoka on August 28 , 2011 , the production re @-@ located to Nagoya with performances beginning September 23 . It starred Masae Ebata and Asako <unk> as Elphaba and Glinda , respectively . Wicked re @-@ opened in Tokyo at the Dentsu Shiki Theatre on August 3 , 2013 . The production closed on November 16 , 2014 . And the Production re @-@ located to Sapporo in May 2016 . 
 Renamed Wicked : Die Hexen von Oz ( Wicked : The Witches of Oz ) , the German production of Wicked began previews on November 1 , 2007 and opened on November 15 , at the Palladium Theater in Stuttgart . Willemijn Verkaik played Elphaba , Lucy Scherer played Glinda , Mark Seibert played Fiyero , Angelika Wedekind was Madame Morrible , Nicole <unk> was Nessarose , Stefan Stara was Boq , Michael Gunther was Doctor Dillamond , and Carlo Lauber played the Wizard . The production was produced by Stage Entertainment and closed on January 29 , 2010 , and transferred to Oberhausen where previews began at the <unk> Theater am <unk> on March 5 , 2010 , with an opening night of March 8 . The cast featured Willemijn Verkaik as Elphaba , Joana Fee <unk> as Glinda , Barbara <unk> as Madame Morrible , Mathias Edenborn as Fiyero , Janine <unk> as Nessarose , Ben <unk> as Boq , Thomas Wissmann as Doctor Dillamond , and Carlo Lauber as the Wizard . Willemijn Verkaik left the role of Elphaba in February 2011 , after being consistently billed as lead for almost three and a half years between the Stuttgart and Oberhausen productions . The Oberhausen production closed on September 2 , 2011 . 
 A brand new production , notable for not being a replica of the original Broadway staging , opened at the City Theatre in Helsinki , Finland on August 26 , 2010 after a preview performance took place on August 24 . Directed by Hans <unk> , the production stars Maria <unk> as Elphaba , Anna @-@ <unk> <unk> as Glinda , Tuukka <unk> as Fiyero , Ursula Salo as Madame Morrible , <unk> <unk> as Nessarose , Antti Lang as Boq , Heikki <unk> as Doctor Dillamond , and Eero Saarinen as the Wizard . The second non @-@ replicated production ran in Copenhagen , Denmark from January 12 until May 29 , 2011 , and was presented by Det Ny Teater . The cast included Annette <unk> as Glinda , Maria Lucia Heiberg Rosenberg as Elphaba , John Martin Bengtsson as Fiyero , Marianne Mortensen as Madame Morrible , Anais <unk> as Nessarose , Kim <unk> Henriksen as Boq , Kristian Boland as Doctor Dillamond and Steen <unk> as the Wizard . 
 A Dutch @-@ language production began previews at the <unk> in Scheveningen , The Netherlands on October 26 , 2011 and was produced by Joop van den Ende <unk> / Stage Entertainment . The official opening took place on November 6 . Willemijn Verkaik reprises her role of Elphaba from the German productions , becoming the first actress to play the role in two different languages . She is joined by Chantal Janzen as Glinda , Jim <unk> as Fiyero , Pamela <unk> as Madame Morrible , <unk> de Bruijn as Nessarose , Niels Jacobs as Boq , <unk> <unk> <unk> as Doctor Dillamond and Bill van Dijk in the role of the Wizard . As musicals do not usually run for a long open @-@ ended run in the Netherlands , closing night took place as announced on January 11 , 2013 , following a 14 @-@ month run . 
 The first Spanish @-@ language production opened in Mexico City , Mexico on October 17 , 2013 , following previews from October 10 . Produced by <unk> Teatro , the replica production plays at the Teatro <unk> . Former child star , Danna Paola , shares the role of Elphaba with Ana Cecilia Anzaldúa , making the 18 @-@ year @-@ old Paola the youngest actress in history to take on the role . They are both joined by Cecilia de la Cueva and <unk> Pérez as Glinda , Jorge Lau as Fiyero , <unk> <unk> as Madame Morrible , Marisol Meneses as Nessarose , Adam <unk> as Boq and Beto Torres as Doctor Dillamond . Eugenio <unk> was originally cast as the Wizard , but was replaced during previews by Paco Morales , for unknown reasons . Sebastian Treviño and <unk> Ruiz are recurrent Boq and Nessa <unk> and play the roles once a week . 
 The first Korean @-@ language production began performances in Seoul on November 22 , 2013 and is an all @-@ new replica production . This production , located at the Charlotte Theater in <unk> , ran from November 22 , 2013 , to October 5 , 2014 . 
 In November 2015 , the company " Time For Fun " , a leading company in the entertainment market in Latin America , announced the adaptation of the musical in Brazil , that debuted in March 2016 in São Paulo . 
 = = Film adaptation = = 
 A film adaptation of Wicked had been in talks since 2004 , though producers were waiting for a dip in the stage musical 's earnings . Since 2012 , Universal Studios were reported to be producing the film with Stephen Daldry as director and Winnie Holzman , who wrote the musical 's book , to pen the screenplay . 
 After long development , Universal announced in 2016 that the film will be released in theaters on December 20 , 2019 . Daldry is still scheduled to direct it , and the script is to be co @-@ written by the musical 's creators , Holzman and Schwartz . 
 = = Response = = 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 The original Broadway production of Wicked was nominated for 10 Tony Awards in 2004 , including Best Musical ; Book ; Orchestrations ; Original Score ; Choreography ; Costume Design ; Lighting Design ; Scenic Design while receiving two nominations for Best Actress – for Menzel and Chenoweth . Menzel won the Best Actress award , and the show also won the Tony Awards for Best Scenic Design and Best Costume Design , notably losing Best Book , Original Score and ultimately Best Musical to Avenue Q. The same year , the show won 6 Drama Desk Awards out of 11 nominations , including Outstanding Musical , Book , Director and Costume Design in addition to winning 4 Outer Critics Circle Awards out of 10 nominations . The original Broadway cast recording also received the 2005 Grammy Award for Best Musical Show Album . 
 Subsequent productions have received awards and nominations . The West End production received 5 Laurence Olivier Award nominations and later won the Audience Award for Most Popular Show at the 2010 award ceremony . The original Australian production received 6 Helpmann Awards out of 12 nominations , including Best Musical . Wicked was named the Best Musical of the Decade by Entertainment Weekly magazine and hailed " a cultural phenomenon " by Variety magazine . While not technically an " award " , the character of Elphaba was named 79th on Entertainment Weekly 's list of The 100 Greatest Characters of the Past 20 Years . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The Broadway production opened on October 30 , 2003 , to mixed reviews from theatre critics . Menzel and Chenoweth received nearly unanimous praise for their performances as Elphaba and Glinda . Both USA Today and Time Magazine gave the Broadway production of Wicked very positive reviews , with Richard Zoglin of Time saying , " If every musical had a brain , a heart and the courage of Wicked , Broadway really would be a magical place . " Elysa Gardner of USA Today described it as " the most complete , and completely satisfying , new musical I 've come across in a long time . " Conversely , Ben Brantley in the New York Times loved the production but panned the show itself , calling it a " sermon " that " so overplays its hand that it seriously dilutes its power , " with a " generic " score . He noted that Glinda is such a showy role that the audience ends up rooting for her rather than the " surprisingly colorless " Elphaba , who is " nominally " the hero . Despite these mixed reviews , interest in Wicked spread quickly by word @-@ of @-@ mouth , leading to record @-@ breaking success at the box office , as described below . Speaking to The Arizona Republic in 2006 , Schwartz commented , " What can I say ? Reviews are reviews .... I know we divided the critics . We didn 't divide the audience , and that 's what counts . " 
 International productions have opened to similarly ambivalent critical reception . The West End production opened to a slightly more upbeat response . The majority of critics have appreciated the spectacle of the lavish production , and the " powerhouse " performances of actors in the roles of the two witches . However , contemporaries have characterized the production as overblown , occasionally preachy , and suffering from more hype than heart . Although Charles Spencer of The Daily Telegraph described it as " at times ... a bit of a mess , " he praised Holzman 's script , described Kenneth Posner 's lighting design as " magical " and lauded Menzel 's Elphaba and Helen Dallimore 's Glinda . Michael Billington of The Guardian gave it three out of five stars and remarked on the competence of all the lead actors ; however , he complained that Wicked was " all too typical of the modern Broadway musical : efficient , knowing and highly professional but more like a piece of industrial product than something that genuinely touches the heart or mind " . Paul Taylor of The Independent gave extremely negative remarks to his viewing of the London production , calling the attempt at topical political allegory " well @-@ meaning but also melodramatic , incoherent and dreadfully superficial " while deploring the acting , songs and book , concluding that " the production manages to feel at once overblown and empty . " 
 = = = Commercial reception = = = 
 Since its opening in 2003 , the original Broadway production of Wicked has broken the house record at the Gershwin Theatre twenty times . It regularly grosses in excess of $ 1 @.@ 6 million each week , making it one of the most lucrative productions on Broadway . With a $ 14 million capitalization , the Broadway production took 15 months to break even , earning back its initial investment by December 21 , 2004 . In its first year , it grossed more than $ 56 million . In the week ending January 1 , 2006 , Wicked broke the record , previously held by the musical The Producers , for the highest weekly box office gross in Broadway history , earning $ 1 @,@ 610 @,@ 934 . It has gone on to break its own record numerous times , reaching $ 1 @,@ 715 @,@ 155 in November 2006 , $ 1 @,@ 839 @,@ 950 , during the 2007 Christmas week , $ 2 @,@ 086 @,@ 135 for the week ending November 29 , 2009 , $ 2 @,@ 125 @,@ 740 just a few weeks later for the eight performances ending January 3 , 2010 , and over $ 2 @.@ 2 million in the week ending January 2 , 2011 . In the first week of 2012 , the Broadway production broke a record again , earning $ 2 @.@ 7 million . Wicked once again broke this record in the final week of 2012 when it grossed $ 2 @.@ 9 million . In the final weekend of 2013 , Wicked became the first musical to gross $ 3 million in one week . 
 Wicked 's productions across North America and abroad have been equally financially successful . The Los Angeles production took the local weekly gross record , again from a performance of The Producers , bringing in $ 1 @,@ 786 @,@ 110 in the week ending March 4 , 2007 . The production joined its Broadway counterpart in setting a new record over Christmas 2007 with $ 1 @,@ 949 @,@ 968 , with records also set in Chicago ( $ 1 @,@ 418 @,@ 363 ) , and St Louis ( $ 2 @,@ 291 @,@ 608 ) , to bring the collective gross of the seven worldwide productions to a world record @-@ breaking $ 11 @.@ 2 million . A new suite of records were set over Christmas 2010 , with house records broken in San Francisco ( $ 1 @,@ 485 @,@ 692 ) , Providence ( $ 1 @,@ 793 @,@ 764 ) and Schenectady ( $ 1 @,@ 657 @,@ 139 ) as well as Broadway , bringing the musical 's one @-@ week gross in North America alone to $ 7 @,@ 062 @,@ 335 . 
 Wicked played to more than 2 million visitors in Chicago with a gross of over $ 200 million , making it the highest @-@ grossing show in Chicago history by June 2007 . With an opening @-@ week gross of $ 1 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 , it continually set records and became the longest @-@ running Broadway musical in Chicago history . Producer David Stone told Variety , " we thought it [ the Chicago production ] would run 18 months , then we 'd spend a year in Los Angeles and six months in San Francisco ... but sales stayed so strong that the producers created another road show and kept the show running in Chicago . " In addition , over 2 @.@ 2 million saw the touring production in its first two years , which grossed over $ 155 million The Los Angeles production grossed over $ 145 million and was seen by more than 1 @.@ 8 million patrons . Over the 672 performances of the San Francisco production , Wicked sold over 1 million tickets with a cumulative gross of over $ 75 million . While the Broadway production of Wicked welcomed its 5 millionth audience member on September 29 , 2010 @,@ 
 International productions of Wicked have matched the extremely positive reception at the box @-@ office . Although West End theatres do not publish audited weekly grosses , the West End production of Wicked claimed to take the record for highest one @-@ week gross in December 2006 , taking £ 761 @,@ 000 in the week ending December 30 . On June 23 , 2008 , the producers reported that over 1 @.@ 4 million people had seen the London production since its opening , and grosses had topped £ 50 million ; The same reports stated that the show has consistently been one of the two highest @-@ grossing shows in the West End . For the week commencing December 27 , 2010 , the London production grossed £ 1 @,@ 002 @,@ 885 , the highest single @-@ week gross in West End theatre history , with over 20 @,@ 000 theatregoers attending the nine performances of Wicked that week . The Melbourne production broke Australian box @-@ office records , selling 24 @,@ 750 tickets in three hours during pre @-@ sales and grossing over $ 1 @.@ 3 million on the first business day after its official opening . On April 27 , 2009 , the production passed the milestone of 500 @,@ 000 patrons . When it transferred to Sydney , the production broke " all previous weekly box office records for a musical at the Capitol Theatre , grossing $ 1 @,@ 473 @,@ 775 @.@ 70 " in one week during October 2009 . 
 In the week ending October 17 , 2010 , Wicked became only the third musical in Broadway history to exceed $ 500 million in total gross . By seats sold on Broadway , it ranks tenth of all time . As of September 2011 , Wicked 's North American and international companies have cumulatively grossed nearly $ 2 @.@ 5 billion and have been seen by nearly 30 million people worldwide . The original production still runs today and currently stands as the 11th longest @-@ running Broadway show in history . Wicked celebrated its 1,000th performance on Broadway on March 23 , 2006 . Several other productions have also reached the 1,000th performance milestone , including the first North American touring company on August 15 , 2007 , the Chicago company on November 14 , 2007 , the West End company on February 14 , 2009 , the Australian company on May 7 , 2011 and the second North American touring company on August 4 , 2011 . 
 = = = Behind the Emerald Curtain = = = 
 The success of the Broadway production has led to the development of an auxiliary show , Behind the Emerald Curtain , created by Sean McCourt – an original Broadway production cast member who played the Witch 's Father , among other roles , in addition to <unk> the Wizard and Doctor Dillamond , before taking over the latter principal role – and Anthony <unk> who was a long @-@ running swing in the Broadway company from 2004 to 2012 . The tour features a ninety @-@ minute behind @-@ the @-@ scenes look at the props , masks , costumes and sets used in the show , and includes a question @-@ and @-@ answer session with the cast members . The Broadway tour is currently led by McCourt and long @-@ running ensemble member and Glinda understudy Lindsay K. Northen . The tour also featured in the Los Angeles , San Francisco and Chicago sit @-@ down productions , and were each run by different long @-@ serving cast members of the show . The tour provides a behind the scenes look at what goes into putting on the show every day . Participants get a first hand account of what it is like to be a part of the massive production that Wicked is . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The success of Wicked has made several of the show 's songs popular and has resulted in references to the show , characters , and songs in popular culture . The Broadway production has been featured in episodes of television programs , including Brothers & Sisters and The War at Home . For filming purposes , the Pantages Theatre in Los Angeles doubled for the Gershwin Theatre on Broadway in Ugly Betty in an episode titled " Something Wicked This Way Comes " in which Betty , the show 's protagonist , goes to see Wicked on a date and accidentally stops the show . In the previous episode " Brothers " , Betty gets tickets to see Wicked and discusses with a friend how much she relates to Elphaba 's outcast status in a popularity and beauty @-@ oriented environment ; In addition , The Simpsons episode " Donnie Fatso " sees Homer Simpson and Moe Szyslak accidentally sneak into a Springfield production of the show while the South Park episode " Broadway Bro Down " features Wicked and other musicals and have these shows contain subliminal messaging . In the episode , these messages persuade women into performing oral sex upon their spouse or boyfriend . 
 The television series Glee has featured covers of songs from Wicked four times : firstly in the " Wheels " episode where two students ( Rachel and Kurt ) compete for a lead solo , using the song " Defying Gravity " , secondly in the " New York " episode where the same students duet on the Gershwin stage and sing " For Good " , on the show 's 100th episode , where three students sing " Defying Gravity " together and in the series ' penultimate episode , the same students sing " Popular " . On the show New Girl , a main character ( Winston ) sings the songs " Popular " and " Defying Gravity " on a trip to Mexico . A clip of the song " Popular " also plays in the 2009 movie Zombieland . 
 Entertainer John Barrowman sang a version of " The Wizard and I " ( retitled " The Doctor and I ) on his 2008 UK tour , with adapted lyrics referring to his Doctor Who and Torchwood character Jack 's affection for The Doctor . Kerry Ellis , who played Elphaba in the West End and on Broadway , recorded " I 'm Not that Girl " for the fifth anniversary edition of the original Broadway cast recording . She also recorded her own rock version of " Defying Gravity " . Both songs were produced by British musician Brian May and were featured on her extended play Wicked in Rock ( 2008 ) and debut album Anthems ( 2010 ) . She performed her version of " Defying Gravity " at the 2008 Royal Variety Performance alongside May on guitar . A dance remix of her rock version of " Defying Gravity " was later released in 2011 . Louise Dearman , who has played both Elphaba and Glinda in the West End , released an acoustic version of " Defying Gravity " for the Wicked edition of her album Here Comes the Sun . Her former co @-@ star and London Elphaba Rachel Tucker also covered " Defying Gravity " on her debut album The Reason ( 2013 ) . Rapper Drake and singer Mika both sampled the musical 's song in their songs " Popular " and " Popular Song " respectively . American band Wheatus released an EP ' The Lightning EP ' in their ' Pop , Songs & Death ' series that was inspired by Wicked with heavy influences throughout including lyrics in " Real Girl " such as " You were the perfect colour , Bright green lady " with Elphaba and Scarecrow @-@ like characters in the video . The cover art for the album was also bright green and included an Elphaba @-@ style hat . 
 Media as diverse as the anime series Red Garden , the daytime drama Passions and the Buffy the Vampire Slayer graphic novels have all parodied Wicked 's songs and characters . At the start of the second of three episodes of the miniseries , Tin Man ( another adaptation of Baum 's <unk> universe ) , protagonist DG refers to her father as " Popsicle " vice the more common names " Pop " or " <unk> " , echoing Galinda in her letter home at the start of " What is this Feeling ? " . Also , in the second episode of the ABC Family drama series Huge , one of the characters wears a " Shiz University " athletic Dept T @-@ shirt , while Wicked and its " long lines " have been mentioned in the Nickelodeon series iCarly . The Broadway musical Shrek the Musical parodies the show 's Act I finale with " What 's Up , Duloc ? " ; character Lord Farquaad re @-@ enacts " Defying Gravity " by proclaiming " No one 's gonna bring me down " followed by the legato belt while atop his castle . 
 The end of the song " Killer Instinct " in Bring It On the Musical parodies the closing notes of " No One Mourns the Wicked . " 
 The Oscar @-@ winning song " Let It Go " from the successful 2013 Disney film Frozen , that also won the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature , had been compared to " Defying Gravity " due to its similar theme and similar singing style , and was sung by the original Elphaba Idina Menzel . Willemijn Verkaik voiced the Dutch and German versions of the role of Elsa in Frozen and sang Let It Go in these two languages . This became another role originally played by Idina Menzel that Willemijn Verkaik played , following her success in the German , Dutch and English language productions of Wicked . 
 = John O 'Reily = 
 John O 'Reily ( born John O 'Reilly , 19 November 1846 – 6 July 1915 ) was an Australian Roman Catholic clergyman , the first Bishop of Port Augusta , and the second Archbishop of Adelaide . Born in Kilkenny , Ireland , O 'Reily studied for the priesthood in Dublin . Upon his ordination in 1869 , he migrated to Western Australia , serving as a parish priest in Fremantle , and founding a Catholic newspaper there . When the Diocese of Port Augusta was established in 1887 , Pope Leo XIII named O 'Reily as its first bishop . Concerned about the financial position of the diocese ( which had inherited significant debt from the Diocese of Adelaide ) , he accepted the posting reluctantly . As bishop , he greatly improved the financial position of the new diocese , reducing its debt by half and earning a reputation as a competent administrator . 
 In 1894 , O 'Reily was appointed to replace the deceased Christopher Reynolds as Archbishop of Adelaide . The archdiocese he inherited was burdened with substantial debt , again left over from the old Diocese of Adelaide . Through the sale of church assets and a fundraising campaign , O 'Reily was able to eliminate most of the Archdiocese 's liabilities while still investing in church infrastructure . He also actively participated in public discussions relating to education policy at a time when the role of the state in supporting religious education was topical . O 'Reily publicly advocated government assistance for religious schools , stating that it was unfair Catholics paid taxes to support state schools , but received no funding for their own . In the later years of his life , poor health forced him to spend less time attending to his episcopal duties , and from 1905 , he largely retreated from public life . At his request , Robert Spence was appointed as his coadjutor and successor in 1914 , and on 6 July 1915 , he died at his house in Adelaide . O 'Reily was highly regarded by many in South Australian society , with Adelaide 's daily newspapers praising his character , administrative ability and positive relations with non @-@ Catholics . 
 = = Early life = = 
 O 'Reily was born John O 'Reilly on 19 November 1846 , in Kilkenny , Ireland , the son of Michael , a military officer , and Anne , née Gallagher . He completed his primary education at the parochial school of St. John 's Parish , and spent six and a half years at St Kieran 's College . Due to poor health , he decided against pursuing a military career , and in 1864 he entered All Hallows College in Dublin to study for the priesthood . He learnt Irish , and studied mental philosophy , mathematics and ecclesiastical studies , achieving first prize in each of his classes . After being ordained on 21 June 1869 , he left Ireland for Western Australia in October , arriving in January 1870 . Having served briefly in Newcastle ( present day Toodyay ) and Northam , he became a parish priest in Fremantle , establishing the West Australian Catholic Record in 1874 and serving as its publisher , editor and printer from 1883 . 
 = = Bishop of Port Augusta = = 
 Following a recommendation from the first plenary council of Australia and New Zealand in 1885 , in May 1887 Pope Leo XIII elevated the Diocese of Adelaide to an Archdiocese and metropolitan see . As a suffragan diocese to Adelaide , the Pope established the rural Diocese of Port Pirie , naming O 'Reilly as its inaugural bishop . Upon his appointment , O 'Reilly travelled to Adelaide , where he met with the Archbishop of Adelaide Christopher Reynolds and the Cardinal of Sydney Patrick Moran to discuss the formation of the new diocese . The poor financial state of the Archdiocese made the discussions contentious , with O 'Reilly concerned about the amount of debt Port Augusta would inherit from Adelaide . To ensure a sufficiently large population for the new diocese , Moran suggested that its boundaries be altered from those drawn up by the Pope , but Reynolds opposed this plan . Dissatisfied with the outcome of the discussions , O 'Reilly decided to travel to Sydney to deliberate further with the Cardinal , prompting Reynolds to write to Moran : 
 " If the Holy See would think well of giving the entire colony of South Australia to the care of Dr O 'Reily , [ sic ] I would offer no opposition to it and would gladly enter a monastery and spend my few remaining years in preparation for the end ! " 
 On 27 October , O 'Reilly wrote to Pope Leo XIII requesting permission to reverse his decision to accept the appointment to Port Augusta , believing he would be unable to administer a diocese with such significant debt and such a small , impoverished population . In addition , he wrote , he had no personal wealth to contribute to the finances of the diocese . The concerns O 'Reilly raised prompted Cardinal <unk> of the Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith to call for an official church inquiry into the financial situation of the South Australian dioceses . The report found a total of almost £ 38 @,@ 000 of debt , with the new Port Augusta diocese bearing £ 18 @,@ 000 . Following the report , O 'Reilly 's request was refused , and on 1 May 1888 , he was consecrated in St Mary 's Cathedral in Sydney . Later that year , in an effort to save time while signing documents , O 'Reilly removed an " l " from his surname . 
 Although the Sisters of St. Joseph operated eight primary schools in the Diocese of Port Augusta , it was without a Catholic high school — boarding or otherwise . Accordingly , while he was staying in Sydney for his consecration , O 'Reily sought to establish a convent for the Sydney @-@ based Sisters of the Good Samaritan in Port Pirie . At the bishop 's expense , the order 's Mother @-@ General spent two months in Port Pirie , and once she had found appropriate living quarters , a school was established , teaching over 100 students . A convent for the sisters was completed in 1890 on the same block as the school . 
 Upon his return to South Australia , O 'Reily immediately set about improving the financial situation of the Diocese of Port Augusta . He requested financial assistance from the Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith , and divided the diocese into fund @-@ raising districts , campaigning for contributions in each of them . With the permission of Archbishop Thomas Carr in Melbourne , O 'Reily toured parishes in Victoria asking for funds for his new diocese . By 1893 , he had reduced the diocesan debt by half , with his peers describing him as a " practical , clear @-@ headed man of business " due to his administrative ability . 
 While Bishop of Port Augusta , O 'Reily showed an interest in education policy . He authored a pastoral letter on the matter in March 1889 , and the next year gave a speech criticising the lack of government funding for Catholic schools . According to O 'Reily , it was unfair and unjust that Catholics paid taxes to support state schools but received no government support for their own . O 'Reily 's views on education were frequently cited when the Free Education Bill ( which aimed to make state schools free ) came before the South Australian Parliament in 1890 , but the cost of the scheme meant that the bill was not passed . Although there was some discussion of funding for religious schools when the bill was reintroduced the next year , these proposals failed to gain significant parliamentary support , and in 1891 , the bill was passed without assistance for religious schools . 
 O 'Reily suffered a long and serious illness through early 1894 and continued to suffer from migraines throughout the year , forcing him to delegate many of his duties to James Maher ( his vicar general ) and John Norton ( an official <unk> ) who would later become , respectively , the second and third Bishops of Port Augusta . 
 = = Archbishop of Adelaide = = 
 After suffering a two @-@ year illness , Archbishop Reynolds died in June 1893 , and by January 1894 , rumours of O 'Reily being appointed as his successor were published in Port Augusta papers . Although he dismissed such speculation , a letter of appointment arrived from Rome in March , naming him as the next Archbishop of Adelaide . 
 = = = Archdiocesan finances = = = 
 As Bishop of Port Augusta , O 'Reily had fought to minimise the debt inherited from the old Diocese of Adelaide . Having reduced the new diocese 's debts by half in his six years as bishop , upon becoming Archbishop of Adelaide , O 'Reily found the rest of the old diocesan liabilities awaiting him , their size having actually increased . In 1895 , he presented a report on the state of the archdiocesan finances to the Sunday congregation in St. Francis Xavier 's Cathedral , revealing total liabilities of just over £ 37 @,@ 000 . O 'Reily reckoned £ 10 @,@ 000 could be paid off by selling land owned by the Archdiocese . Two weeks after his address , a meeting of Adelaide Catholics supported moves to liquidate the archdiocesan debts , with £ 3 @,@ 600 pledged at that meeting , including £ 1 @,@ 000 over four years from O 'Reily himself , a significant portion of his income . 
 Since the sale or mortgaging of church land required an act of Parliament , in 1896 , the South Australian Parliament unanimously approved The Catholic Church Endowment Society Incorporated Sale of Lands Bill . This allowed the Archbishop to make good on his intention to sell all diocesan land not used for church purposes , and over the next few years , land , surplus vestments and works of art owned by the Archdiocese were sold off . These sales , combined the efforts of the Archbishop and diocesan priests to secure donations from around the Archdiocese , meant that by 1901 O 'Reily was able to report that the debt had been reduced by three @-@ quarters . This had been achieved at the same time as expenditure was being made on new schools , churches and other diocesan buildings . In fact , O 'Reily noted in his report for that year that the remainder of the debt could have been removed had expenditure been cut , writing : 
 " Were we but willing to check our expansion and in checking it , check our expenditure as well , the last vestige of our debts would speedily have disappeared . Living things must grow , however . Our churches , our schools , our charitable institutions must expand and multiply . We have future needs to provide for as well as at present . " 
 = = = Education policy = = = 
 As Archbishop , O 'Reily continued his participation in public discussions regarding education . In 1896 , a colony @-@ wide referendum sought to gauge public opinion on state education , scripture reading in state schools , and the provision of capitation grants ( fixed grants per student ) to non @-@ state schools . O 'Reily weighed into the debate in The Register , giving conditional support to scriptural instruction in state schools , so long as the teachers themselves were religious and Catholic students received instruction from Catholic teachers . On the subject of a capitation grant , O 'Reily was strongly supportive , arguing that moral impediments prevented Catholics from using secular education , and that , since religious schools provided elements of secular education as well as religious instruction , they should receive government assistance . At the referendum , South Australians affirmed the system of free secular education , but rejected scriptural readings in schools and the capitation grant . 
 O 'Reily blamed the Labor Party for the loss of the capitation grant . According to O 'Reily , the serving Premier Charles Kingston could have been convinced to support the grant were it not for the objections of Labor , with whom Kingston had formed a coalition government . In 1899 , in the lead @-@ up to that year 's general election , O 'Reily gave a speech criticising the Labor Party , accusing some Labor leaders of having " an evident disposition to crush [ Catholic labourers ] with successive burdens . " 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 In 1904 , O 'Reily travelled Europe to make his ad <unk> visit to Rome , and to visit his native Ireland where he was made a freeman of Kilkenny . Due to poor health , from 1905 , O 'Reily kept to himself in his house in Glen Osmond , leading to the local press referring to him as the " Recluse of Glen Osmond " . Increasingly , his episcopal duties were fulfilled by Bishop of Port Augusta John Norton , who would have to visit the more remote parts of O 'Reily 's see on his behalf . As he became more frail , O 'Reily would ask certain priests to accompany him when he travelled , among whom was the Dominican prior Robert Spence . When O 'Reily requested a coadjutor in 1913 , he chose Spence as his first preference for the role . Despite the reluctance of some clergy to the appointment of a religious as Archbishop , Spence was consecrated as coadjutor , with right of succession , in August 1914 . O 'Reily died on 6 July 1915 at his house in Glen Osmond , and was buried under a large Celtic cross at the West Terrace Cemetery . 
 During his time as Archbishop , O 'Reily had formed positive relationships with many senior members of South Australian society , including the Anglican Bishop of Adelaide Nutter Thomas , and the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of South Australia , Samuel Way , who considered him a friend . In an editorial in 1913 , The Advertiser praised O 'Reily , lauding his administrative abilities and crediting the good relations between Protestants and Catholics in South Australia to his " broadness of mind and to his quiet determination to avoid all unnecessary controversy . " Upon his death , The Register gave a glowing editorial , describing him as " loveable and highly estimable " , a " hard hitter " and asserting that , had he not been a religious leader , he could have been " a leading financier , Imperial legislator or even an eminent military commander . " 
 = SS El Occidente = 
 SS El Occidente was a cargo ship for the Morgan Line , a subsidiary of the Southern Pacific Company . During World War I , she was known as USAT El Occidente in service with the United States Army and as USS El Occidente ( ID @-@ <unk> ) in service with the United States Navy . At the end of war , she reverted to her original name of SS El Occidente . 
 Built in 1910 , SS El Occidente was one of four sister ships that carried cargo and a limited number of passengers for the Morgan Line . She was acquired by the U.S. Army after the United States entered World War I in April 1917 , and converted to carry horses and mules to France . In February 1918 , she fought a 20 @-@ minute gun battle with two German submarines , destroying the periscope of one . In August 1918 , the ship was transferred to the U.S. Navy and continued transporting animals through the end of the war . 
 El Occidente returned to the Morgan Line in 1919 and sailed with them until June 1941 , when the entire Morgan Line fleet was purchased by the United States Maritime Commission . While serving as a civilian @-@ crewed cargo ship during World War II , El Occidente was torpedoed and sunk by German submarine U @-@ 435 on 13 April 1942 . 
 = = Early career = = 
 SS El Occidente was a cargo and passenger steamship launched on 24 September 1910 by the Newport News Shipbuilding and Dry Dock Co. of Newport News , Virginia ( yard no . 133 ) , and delivered to the Atlantic division of the Morgan Line on 2 December 1910 . She was the newest of four sister ships ; the older three being El Sol , El Mundo , and El Oriente . El Occidente was 6 @,@ 008 gross register tons ( GRT ) , was 430 feet 2 inches ( 131 @.@ 11 m ) long by 53 feet 1 inch ( 16 @.@ 18 m ) abeam , and made 15 @.@ 5 knots ( 28 @.@ 7 km / h ) . The vessel sailed for the Morgan Line , the brand name of the Southern Pacific Steamship Company ( a subsidiary of the Southern Pacific Railroad ) , which employed her to carry cargo and a limited number of passengers between New York and New Orleans , the eastern terminus of the Southern Pacific line . 
 In April 1913 , The New York Times reported that El Occidente , loaded only with cargo , had rammed a schooner in fog off the New Jersey coast . Responding to a wireless message , the Savannah steamer City of Montgomery came alongside El Occidente to offer assistance , but was refused . The name and fate of the schooner were not reported . 
 = = World War I = = 
 After the United States declared war on Germany in April 1917 , the United States Army , needing transports to get its men and materiel to France , had a select committee of shipping executives pore over registries of American shipping . The committee selected El Occidente and thirteen other American @-@ flagged ships that were sufficiently fast , could carry enough fuel in their bunkers for transatlantic crossings , and , most importantly , were in port or not far at sea . After El Occidente discharged her last load of passengers and cargo , she was officially handed over to the Army on 30 May . 
 Before any troop transportation could be undertaken , all of the ships had to be hastily refitted . Of the fourteen ships , four , including El Occidente , were designated to carry animals and cargo ; the other ten were designated to carry human passengers . The four ships designated to carry animals had to have ramps and stalls built . All the ships had to have gun platforms installed , before each ship docked at the Brooklyn Navy Yard to have the guns themselves installed . All the ships were manned by merchant officers and crews but carried two U.S. Navy officers , Navy gun crews , quartermasters , signalmen , and wireless operators . The senior Navy officer on board would take control if a ship came under attack . 
 The American convoy carrying the first units of the American Expeditionary Force was broken into four groups ; El Occidente was in the fourth group with Montanan , Dakotan , and Edward Luckenbach , and escorts consisting of cruiser St. Louis , U.S. Navy transport Hancock , and destroyers Shaw , Ammen , and Flusser . El Occidente departed with her group on the morning of 17 June for Brest , France , steaming at an 11 @-@ knot ( 20 km / h ) pace . A thwarted submarine attack on the first convoy group , and reports of heavy submarine activity off of Brest resulted in a change in the convoy 's destination to Saint @-@ Nazaire . 
 El Occidente departed Saint @-@ Nazaire on 14 July in the company of her convoy mates Dakotan , Montanan , and Edward Luckenbach . Joining the return trip were Army transport Momus , Navy armed collier Cyclops , Navy oiler Kanawha , and cruiser Seattle , the flagship of Rear Admiral Albert Gleaves , the head of the Navy 's Cruiser and Transport Force . 
 Sources do not reveal El Occidente 's movements over the next eight months . But in April 1918 , the Chicago Daily Tribune reported on an encounter El Occidente had with two German submarines that had occurred on 2 February . In a 20 @-@ minute running gun battle , Naval Armed Guardsmen aboard El Occidente exchanged fire with two U @-@ boats , one on the port and one on the starboard . The news item reported that El Occidente 's gunners had demolished the periscope of one of her attackers . 
 El Occidente 's next recorded convoy trip took place on 23 March , when she sailed with Navy transports Martha Washington and Powhatan , Army transport ship Finland , and cruiser Pueblo , arriving in France on 4 April . El Occidente next sailed on 18 May with President Grant , Calamares , stores ship Bridge , and Italian steamer Duca degli Abruzzi . <unk> with a contingent of transports from Newport News — Madawaska , Pocahontas , Zeelandia , and Italian steamer Re d 'Italia — the convoy was escorted by American cruiser Huntington , and destroyers Little and Kimberly . The convoy arrived in France on 30 May . On 10 July , El Occidente departed Newport News with Navy transports Aeolus , Powhatan , Martha Washington , Matsonia , but had to return to port with a leaky gas injector . 
 On 27 August 1918 , El Occidente was transferred to the Navy and commissioned the same day with Lt. Commander E. S. Campbell , USNRF . El Occidente loaded cargo and 585 horses and mules , and sailed for France on 17 September . Five animals died or were destroyed during the voyage . Offloading her cargo at Saint @-@ Nazaire and Verdun , El Occidente returned to the U.S. on 1 November . 
 In port when the Armistice with Germany was signed on 11 November , El Occidente loaded 1 @,@ 467 short tons ( 1 @,@ 331 t ) of cargo and 800 animals for a second Navy voyage . Departing on 17 November for Verdun , the ship arrived there on 19 December . Returning to Baltimore for repairs and alterations which included the removal of her armament and the stalls for animal cargo , El Occidente sailed again on 15 January 1919 for Bordeaux where she unloaded cargo for the Army of Occupation and embarked 90 passengers for return to the United States . She was decommissioned at New York on 18 March 1919 , and delivered to the United States Shipping Board the same day . 
 = = Interwar civilian service = = 
 Returned by the USSB in March 1919 , El Occidente resumed cargo service with the Morgan Line , where she had almost 15 years of routine operation . However , in the 1930s , sailing on a New York – Galveston route , El Occidente was involved in several notable events . 
 In July 1933 , El Occidente had a fire in her No. 1 cargo hold while she was southbound 15 nautical miles ( 28 km ) out from Norfolk , Virginia . El Occidente 's initial radio message reported that her crew had the blaze under control , but when that proved not to be the case , she headed in , docked at the Norfolk grain elevator , and requested assistance from local firefighters . 
 In September 1935 , El Occidente came to the aid of Morgan passenger liner Dixie , which had been driven onto French Reef by the Labor Day Hurricane . Dixie had been headed from New Orleans to New York when she grounded on the reef , located about 60 nautical miles ( 110 km ) south of Miami , Florida and 4 @.@ 5 nautical miles ( 8 @.@ 3 km ) off shore . El Occidente , one of 15 ships that responded to Dixie 's distress calls , carried two loads of passengers and baggage from Dixie to Miami . There was no loss of life during the grounding or the rescue of Dixie 's passengers . 
 In January 1937 , El Occidente issued a distress call while she was in the Gulf of Mexico . After she reported a fire while some 200 nautical miles ( 370 @,@ 000 m ) south of the mouth of the Mississippi River , U.S. Coast Guard cutters Kimball and Triton and German freighter <unk> all responded to the call . Before any reached the burning vessel , El Occidente reported that she had gotten the fire under control and needed no further assistance . El Occidente headed to Galveston . The following month , El Occidente issued another distress call , this time for a broken rudder while 80 nautical miles ( 150 km ) off the Virginia Capes . Coast Guard cutter Sebago responded and towed El Occidente to Norfolk , delivering her there on 7 February . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In June 1941 , the United States Maritime Commission ( USMC ) announced that it had requisitioned the entire Morgan Line fleet of ten ships , including El Occidente and her remaining sister ships , El Oriente and El Mundo . The ships were to finish previously scheduled cargo runs and be handed over to the USMC over the following six weeks . The USMC had been charged with assembling a 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 GRT U.S. fleet to " aid the democracies " fighting Germany in World War II , and paid $ 4 @.@ 7 million for all ten ships and a further $ 2 @.@ 6 million for repairs and refits . 
 El Occidente was handed over to the War Shipping Administration at Galveston on 7 July and assigned to United States Lines , Inc . , for operation . The cargo ship was placed under Panamanian registry by U.S. Lines . Little is known of El Occidente 's movements over the six months , but on 30 January 1942 , she left Boston for Halifax loaded with a general cargo . Arriving at Halifax on 1 February , she joined Convoy HX 174 and headed for Liverpool on 7 February , arriving at her destination on 21 February . 
 Two days later , El Occidente sailed for Reykjavík , where she arrived on 1 March , just in time to depart with Convoy PQ 12 for Murmansk . After the convoy arrived at Murmansk on 12 March , El Occidente unloaded her cargo and took on a partial ballast load of chromium ore . She departed in Convoy QP 10 on 10 April . At 01 : 29 on 13 April , while at position 73 ° 28 ′ N 28 ° 30 ′ E , German submarine U @-@ 435 under the command of Siegfried <unk> fired one or two torpedoes which struck El Occidente in the engine room , nearly breaking the vessel in half . El Occidente went down stern first within two minutes , with no time to launch lifeboats . Within 30 minutes of her sinking , HMS Speedwell , one of the convoy 's escorts , rescued 21 of the ship 's 41 @-@ man crew ; the remaining 20 crewmen died . 
 = Wally Hammond = 
 Walter Reginald " Wally " Hammond ( 19 June 1903 – 1 July 1965 ) was an English Test cricketer who played for Gloucestershire in a career that lasted from 1920 to 1951 . Beginning as a professional , he later became an amateur and was appointed captain of England . Primarily a middle @-@ order batsman , Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack described him in his obituary as one of the four best batsmen in the history of cricket . He was considered to be the best English batsman of the 1930s by commentators and those with whom he played ; they also said that he was one of the best slip fielders ever . Hammond was an effective fast @-@ medium pace bowler and contemporaries believed that if he had been less reluctant to bowl , he could have achieved even more with the ball than he did . 
 In a Test career spanning 85 matches , he scored 7 @,@ 249 runs and took 83 wickets . Hammond captained England in 20 of those Tests , winning four , losing three , and drawing 13 . His career aggregate of runs was the highest in Test cricket until surpassed by Colin Cowdrey in 1970 ; his total of 22 Test centuries remained an English record until Alastair Cook surpassed it in December 2012 . In 1933 , he set a record for the highest individual Test innings of 336 not out , surpassed by Len Hutton in 1938 . In all first @-@ class cricket , he scored 50 @,@ 551 runs and 167 centuries , respectively the seventh and third highest totals by a first @-@ class cricketer as of 2015 . With the ball , he took 732 wickets . 
 Although Hammond began his career in 1920 , he was required to wait until 1923 before he could play full @-@ time , after his qualification to play for Gloucestershire was challenged . His potential was spotted immediately and after three full seasons , he was chosen to visit the West Indies in 1925 – 26 as a member of a Marylebone Cricket Club ( M.C.C. ) touring party , but contracted a serious illness on the tour . He began to score heavily after his recovery in 1927 and was selected for England . In the 1928 – 29 series against Australia he scored 905 runs , then a record aggregate for a Test series . He dominated county cricket in the 1930s and , despite a mid @-@ decade slump in Test form , was made captain of England in 1938 . He continued as captain after the Second World War , but his health had deteriorated and he retired from first @-@ class cricket after an unsuccessful tour of Australia in 1946 – 47 . He appeared in two more first @-@ class matches in the early 1950s . 
 Hammond was married twice , divorcing his first wife in acrimonious circumstances , and had a reputation for infidelity . His relationships with other players were difficult ; team @-@ mates and opponents alike found him hard to get along with . He was unsuccessful in business dealings and failed to establish a successful career once he retired from cricket . He moved to South Africa in the 1950s in an attempt to start a business , but this came to nothing . As a result , he and his family struggled financially . Shortly after beginning a career as a sports administrator , he was involved in a serious car crash in 1960 which left him frail . He died of a heart attack in 1965 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 = = = Childhood and school life = = = 
 Hammond was born on 19 June 1903 in Dover . His parents , William — a corporal in the Royal Garrison Artillery — and Marion Hammond ( née Crisp ) , lived in the married quarters at Dover Castle where Walter was born . They had wed the previous December . Hammond spent his early years in Dover , often playing cricket . When he was five years old , his father was posted to Hong Kong to serve on the China Station and promoted to sergeant . The family remained there until 1911 , followed by a posting to Malta until 1914 . Hammond later recalled playing cricket in Malta using improvised equipment , including a soldier 's old bat which he believed taught him to strike the ball powerfully . 
 When the First World War broke out , the Hammonds returned to England with the rest of the 46th Company of the Royal Garrison Artillery . William was subsequently posted to France where , promoted to major , he was killed near Amiens in 1918 . Marion settled in Southsea and sent Walter to The Portsmouth Grammar School , before moving him in 1918 to board at Cirencester Grammar School , believing that he would benefit from living away from home and hoping to encourage a career in farming . He did not enjoy an easy relationship with his mother , often staying with friends during holidays in preference to returning home . 
 At both Portsmouth and Cirencester , Hammond excelled at sports including cricket ( playing for the Portsmouth Grammar School second eleven ) , football and fives . At Cirencester , he played football for the school first eleven in his first term . He quickly reached the school cricket first eleven , where he outperformed the other players and became captain in his second season ; his headmaster , quickly spotting his potential , encouraged him . His first century was scored in a match against a parents ' team from the school . In an inter @-@ house match , he scored 365 not out , albeit against very weak bowling . These achievements brought him some local acclaim . Hammond enjoyed less success in the classroom ; his marks were usually low , and he preferred to be out playing cricket . 
 Leaving Cirencester in July 1920 , Hammond planned to go to Winchester Agricultural College , following the path into farming mapped out by his mother . However , his plans changed when his headmaster wrote to the captain of Gloucestershire , Foster Robinson , reporting Hammond 's school cricket record and suggesting that they take a look at him . Hammond , who scored a century in his first appearance in adult cricket days after leaving school , played in a trial match for the Gloucestershire Club and Ground , scoring 60 runs , taking two wickets and impressing the local press . Subsequently , two members of Gloucestershire 's committee visited Hammond 's mother in an attempt to sign him for the club . Hammond 's mother was initially reluctant , but his eagerness finally convinced her and he signed a professional contract . 
 = = = First years with Gloucestershire = = = 
 Hammond made his first @-@ class debut for Gloucestershire in August 1920 . Although his first four innings yielded only 27 runs , the local press saw enough to predict a great future for him . He spent the winter working on a farm on the Isle of Wight , then moved to Bristol for the start of the 1921 English cricket season . Playing only two first @-@ class matches in 1921 , both against the powerful Australian tourists , Hammond scored two runs in three innings , overwhelmed by fast bowler Jack Gregory . In between these games , Gloucestershire arranged his appointment as assistant coach at Clifton College , Bristol , where he worked on his batting technique with former county cricketers John Tunnicliffe and George Dennett . 
 Gloucestershire gave Hammond an extended run at the start of the 1922 season . He played five matches without passing 32 runs in an innings at a batting average of under ten . He did not have the opportunity to improve his record as Lord Harris , the Marylebone Cricket Club ( M.C.C. ) treasurer , noticed that Hammond was born in Kent . He had not resided in Gloucestershire long enough to be eligible to play for the team under County Championship rules , and was barred for the rest of the season . The press criticised the ruling for interrupting the career of a player seen as very promising , despite his lack of success thus far . Hammond spent the rest of the summer , which he later described as the most miserable of his life , watching county games , although Gloucestershire continued to pay him in full . 
 = = = Football career = = = 
 In the winter of 1921 – 22 , Hammond , needing work , signed to play professional football for Bristol Rovers F.C. in Division Three South , following his success at school and in the Bristol Downs Football League . After some time in the reserves , he made four appearances for the first team that season . He played in ten games the following season , and four times in 1923 – 24 . His usual position was on the right wing . Despite scoring twice in his career , he never showed much enthusiasm for the game and was cautious around tackles , mindful that his main career was cricket . He was criticised in the local press for his role in two defeats shortly before his final appearance . After he was left out of the team , he never played again and left the club , deciding that he could not play two sports professionally . Even so , the Rovers ' trainer , Bert Williams , and manager , Andy Wilson , believed that Hammond , one of the fastest players they had seen at the club , would have had the potential to play international football . 
 = = = Making an impression = = = 
 Conscious of the need to improve after his uncertain start to first @-@ class cricket , Hammond scored his maiden first @-@ class century in the first match of the 1923 season , making 110 and 92 opening the batting against Surrey . He did not reach three figures again that season , but his performances and batting technique impressed several critics , such as cricket correspondent Neville Cardus , former England and Middlesex captain Plum Warner , and The Times correspondent ; Cardus described him as a future England player . In all first @-@ class matches that season , Hammond scored 1 @,@ 421 runs at an average of 27 @.@ 86 . With the ball , he took 18 first @-@ class wickets at an average of 41 @.@ 22 , including figures of six for 59 against Hampshire . Reviewing the season , Wisden 's correspondent declared that Hammond " has all the world before him and there is no telling how far he may go " . 
 Hammond reached 1 @,@ 239 runs in 1924 , scoring a century against Somerset and reaching fifty against Oxford , Essex and Hampshire . In the final County Championship match of the season , against Middlesex , he scored 174 not out after Gloucestershire had been bowled out for 31 in their first innings . He finished the season with an average of 30 @.@ 21 and supplemented his batting with 29 wickets . He improved on this record in 1925 with 1 @,@ 818 runs at an average of 34 @.@ 30 and 68 wickets at an average of just under 30 , more than doubling his career aggregate of wickets . His bowling performances led critics to describe him as a potentially good all @-@ rounder . Hammond was not satisfied with his batting form in 1925 , but against Lancashire at Old Trafford , he scored 250 not out , repeatedly hooking the short @-@ pitched bowling of Australian Test bowler Ted McDonald . Cardus described it as " one of the finest innings that can ever have been accomplished by a boy of his age " . Over these two seasons , Hammond increasingly batted in the middle order , where he remained for most of his career . 
 = = = Serious illness = = = 
 Hammond 's performances earned him selection for the M.C.C. winter tour of the West Indies in the 1925 – 26 season . At that time , such tours were popular with amateur cricketers , who were often chosen for social rather than cricketing reasons . The touring party contained only eight professionals , who were expected to do most of the bowling and provide the cricketing quality . The West Indies team did not have Test status , so no official internationals were scheduled , but a series of representative matches against a West Indian team were played . Rain disrupted much of the cricket , but Hammond enjoyed the experience . In first @-@ class matches , he scored 732 runs at an average of 48 @.@ 80 , with two hundreds and two fifties , and took 20 wickets at an average of 28 @.@ 65 . He scored 238 not out in the first representative game against a West Indies side . Following the tour , he won praise from Warner and the captain of the M.C.C. team , Freddie Calthorpe , and was believed to be close to the full England side . 
 Towards the end of the tour , Hammond fell seriously ill ; according to him , a mosquito stung him in the groin area , close to a strain he had suffered , causing blood poisoning . Playing against Jamaica , he moved awkwardly and his team @-@ mates observed him to be in pain . He missed the remaining matches of the tour , and none of the doctors he saw were able to help . On the journey home , during which no doctor was available , his condition worsened , confining him to his cabin with a severe fever for most of the trip . The day after his arrival home , in April 1926 , Hammond had the first of 12 operations at the nursing home to which he was taken . His condition worsened to the point where the doctors believed he would die ; they considered amputating his leg , a suggestion vetoed by his mother out of concern for his career . Hammond later claimed that his illness remained a mystery to those treating him . A visit from Warner encouraged Hammond to believe recovery was possible , and he began a slow return to health about a month after his return to England . By July , he could watch Gloucestershire playing in Bristol , though he missed the entire 1926 season . No official announcement about Hammond 's illness was made , other than to say he was in a nursing home . Although the cause of the illness was never made clear , David Foot has argued that it was syphilis or a related sexually transmitted disease . He has also suggested that its treatment , which in the days before antibiotics probably involved mercury , adversely affected Hammond 's subsequent character and personality , leading to moody and depressive behaviour . Rumours of this nature circulated among his contemporaries for many years before Foot published his theory . That winter , Hammond coached in South Africa , where it was felt the climate might aid his recovery . 
 = = Test cricketer = = 
 = = = Test debut = = = 
 On his return to first @-@ class cricket in the 1927 season , Hammond made an immediate impact , becoming only the second man , after W. G. Grace , to score 1 @,@ 000 runs in May , traditionally the first month of the English cricket season . This sequence included another effective performance against Lancashire , regarded by some observers as one of the best innings ever played . He scored 99 in the first innings and 187 in the second to ensure the match was drawn . He again hooked McDonald effectively , at one point hitting five consecutive fours . Hammond played in the prestigious Gentlemen v Players match at Lord 's for the first time , although he neither batted nor bowled , as well as two Test trials . Coming close to scoring 1 @,@ 000 runs in June as well , he finished the season with 2 @,@ 969 runs , including 12 centuries . His average of 69 @.@ 04 was the fifth highest in first @-@ class cricket . He won selection for the M.C.C. team that would tour South Africa in the winter and the accolade of being named one of the Wisden Cricketers of the Year . 
 While on tour in South Africa in 1927 – 28 , Hammond did not dominate as expected . Still recovering from his illness , he was worn out from the strain of a long season . He showed good batting form , but once George Geary was injured , a strong but not fully representative side found itself short of bowling , forcing Hammond to play as an all @-@ rounder . In all first @-@ class matches on the tour , he scored 908 runs at an average of 47 @.@ 78 , and took 27 wickets at an average of 23 @.@ 85 . His Test debut came in the first match of the series , as he scored a quick 51 in his only innings and took five wickets for 36 runs in the South African second innings . At one point , he took three wickets for no runs and his bowling was described by Wisden as a key factor in an England victory . His best innings came in the third Test as he reached 90 . He had some good bowling spells , and in the fourth Test he removed both South African openers . An innings of 66 in the fifth and final Test left him with 321 runs at an average of 40 @.@ 12 in his debut series , while his 15 wickets cost 26 @.@ 60 runs each . All of Hammond 's batting appearances were at number four in the order ; of his 140 career Test innings , 118 were at number three or four . The series was drawn 2 – 2 . 
 In the following season of 1928 , Hammond scored 2 @,@ 825 runs ( average 65 @.@ 69 ) with three double centuries , took 84 wickets ( average 23 @.@ 10 ) , his highest total in a season , and held 79 catches , a single season record . These performances helped Gloucestershire to mount a rare but unsuccessful challenge for the County Championship . At the Cheltenham festival , in six days , Hammond scored 362 runs , took 11 wickets and held 11 catches . Against Surrey , he scored a century in both innings and held ten catches , including six in the second innings , which remains a first @-@ class record as of 2015 . In the following match , against Worcestershire , Hammond scored 80 . Bowling off @-@ spin on a testing pitch , he then took nine wickets for 23 , the best bowling figures of his career . He followed up with six for 105 as Worcestershire followed on . He played in a Test trial and in the Gentlemen v Players match at Lord 's for the second time , before participating in the three Test matches against the West Indies cricket team . While England won the series 3 – 0 , Hammond had mixed success . Despite scores of 45 in the first Test and a careful 63 in the second , he made just 111 runs in the series at an average of 37 . 
 = = = 1928 – 29 tour of Australia = = = 
 In the winter of 1928 – 29 , Hammond toured Australia with the M.C.C. The side was a strong one which overpowered Australia , winning the five @-@ match series 4 – 1 . Hammond was remarkably successful in his first campaign for The Ashes . Wisden described his batting as a " series of triumphs " . He scored 779 runs in five consecutive Test innings , totalling 905 runs at an average of 113 @.@ 12 in the series , a record passed only by Don Bradman since . In all first @-@ class matches , he scored 1 @,@ 553 runs ( average 91 @.@ 35 ) . However , except for one inspired spell in the final Test , in which he bowled the first three batsmen , Wisden described his bowling as disappointing . He began the tour with a century and a double century before the Test series . He scored 251 in a seven @-@ hour innings in the second Test . This was his maiden Test century and the second highest Test score between England and Australia . In the next Test , Hammond scored 200 against an accurate attack , again taking around seven hours . In the fourth Test he scored 119 not out and then 177 , in what Wisden judged his best innings of the tour due to his mastery of the bowlers and the difficult match situation when he came in to bat . Hammond had altered his usual batting style , playing more carefully and avoiding risk as runs were certain to come in the easy Australian batting conditions if a batsman did not get out . He eliminated the hook shot entirely from his repertoire and rarely played the cut shot . Unless the bowler bowled a bad ball , he limited his scoring between extra cover and midwicket , as the Australians unsuccessfully tried to block his shots in that area . Wisden stated that , even with his more cautious play , his batting on tour had shown skill and beauty . 
 Hammond married Dorothy Lister almost immediately after returning home , just before the 1929 season began . Gloucestershire 's inspirational new captain , Bev Lyon , led another Gloucestershire challenge for the County Championship . He used Hammond 's bowling less due to the emergence of Tom Goddard , but Hammond was less dominant with the bat than was expected . In first @-@ class cricket , he scored 2 @,@ 456 runs at an average of 64 @.@ 63 . He played in four of the five Tests against South Africa , missing the fourth due to injury ; he also suffered an injury in the second Test which required him to use a runner . Adopting tactics similar to those with which he had success in Australia , he scored two centuries — an unbeaten 138 in the first Test , and a match @-@ saving 101 not out in the final Test which gave England a 2 – 0 series victory . His only other innings over fifty was played in the third Test . He ended the series with 352 runs at an average of 58 @.@ 66 . At the time , critics considered him the best batsman in the world . 
 = = = Career in the early 1930s = = = 
 The 1930 season saw the Australians tour England , Bradman 's first tour . Over five Tests , the young Australian scored 974 runs in a flawless batting display to break Hammond 's record run aggregate and average set in the 1928 – 29 series . While Bradman dominated , Hammond found it very difficult to play the leg spin bowling of Clarrie Grimmett , who dismissed him five times . Hammond scored 306 runs at an average of 34 @.@ 00 , passing fifty just twice . He batted over five hours for a match @-@ saving 113 in the third Test . On a difficult pitch and with little support , he made a hard @-@ hitting 60 in the final Test in a losing cause . The visitors took the series 2 – 1 , and the newspapers unfavourably compared Hammond 's scoring with Bradman 's . Later in the season , Hammond scored 89 for Gloucestershire in a tied match against the Australians which he described as the most exciting of his career . One player said that he had never seen Hammond as excited as he was at the conclusion of the game . In all first @-@ class cricket that season , he scored 2 @,@ 032 runs ( average 53 @.@ 47 ) and for Gloucestershire , he came top of the batting averages as the club finished second in the Championship . He took 30 wickets , including match figures of 12 for 74 against Glamorgan . 
 Hammond toured South Africa in the winter of 1930 – 31 , in a weak M.C.C. side without some of the best English players . The tourists were short of opening batsmen , frequently forcing Hammond into the role . Although successful , he brought a more wary approach than usual to his unaccustomed position . In all first @-@ class cricket , he scored 1 @,@ 045 runs ( average 61 @.@ 47 ) . In the five @-@ Test series , which South Africa won 1 – 0 , he scored 517 runs ( average 64 @.@ 62 ) , passing fifty five times in nine innings . A very cautious approach batting at number three saw Hammond score 49 and 63 in the first Test . Opening the batting in the second Test , he scored two fifties to save the game ; he also kept wicket for a time following an injury to the regular wicketkeeper . Hammond continued to open in the third Test , playing more aggressively for 136 not out , before returning to number three and making 75 in the fourth Test . In the final Test , he opened both the batting and the bowling . 
 In 1931 , Hammond increased his first @-@ class wicket total to 47 , and scored 1 @,@ 781 runs at an average of 42 @.@ 40 . Although he remained a key batsman for Gloucestershire , both his aggregate and average fell , at least partly due to wet weather that often led to difficult batting conditions . In the three Tests against New Zealand , their first in England , he made an attacking century in the second Test , England 's only victory . He did not pass fifty in the rest of the series , ending the victorious campaign with 169 runs at an average of 56 @.@ 33 . In 1932 , Hammond was appointed vice @-@ captain of Gloucestershire , but it was noted in Wisden that he sometimes failed to inspire his team . Hammond himself felt unable , as a new captain , to take the same risks that Lyon had done . He scored 2 @,@ 528 runs ( average 56 @.@ 17 ) , including his then highest score of 264 , and his first hundred for the Players against the Gentlemen . He also took 53 wickets . 
 = = = Bodyline tour = = = 
 Hammond was selected for the M.C.C. tour of Australia in 1932 – 33 . Known as the Bodyline series , it became notorious for the controversial English tactic of bowling short on the line of leg stump , making the ball rise towards the batsman 's body to create deflections that could be caught by leg @-@ side fielders . Hammond , one of the first players selected , was part of the selection committee on tour , and the M.C.C. captain , Douglas Jardine , may have discussed tactics with him on the outward journey . Hammond disapproved of Bodyline bowling , believing it to be dangerous , although he understood some of the reasons for its use . He kept his feelings hidden during the tour , preferring to go along with his captain and the rest of the team . It was not until 1946 that he openly voiced his opinion . 
 Wisden described Hammond 's campaign as successful , although he failed to reach the heights of his previous tour . In the Tests , Hammond scored 440 runs ( average 55 @.@ 00 ) and took nine wickets ( average 32 @.@ 33 ) , while scoring 948 runs ( average 55 @.@ 76 ) and taking 20 wickets ( average 28 @.@ 90 ) in all first @-@ class matches . Although Wisden said that Hammond accomplished little with the ball , team manager Plum Warner praised his bowling , claiming that during the first Test it was comparable to that of revered former England bowler Sydney Barnes . His best performance was in a match against New South Wales , where he took six for 43 , including the wicket of Bradman . In an early game on tour against Victoria , Hammond was instructed by Jardine to attack the bowling of Chuck Fleetwood @-@ Smith , who was on the verge of making his Test debut . Hammond scored 203 , freely punishing Fleetwood @-@ Smith 's bowling and in effect delaying his Test debut for several years . 
 In England 's victory in the first Test , Hammond scored 112 , playing powerfully through the off side . He took two wickets in two balls in the second Australian innings , making the ball move around . In the second Test , he bowled spin , as England left out Hedley Verity , their specialist spinner ; his bowling impressed Jardine and the Wisden correspondent . His bowling against Bradman , who scored an unbeaten century , produced a personal duel that struck observers as particularly tense . Hammond took three for 23 in the second innings but achieved little with the bat as England lost the match . In the third Test , he appeared uncomfortable facing Tim Wall 's fast , short bowling , and was heard to say , " If that 's what the bloody game 's coming to , I 've had enough of it ! " He scored 85 in the second innings before being bowled by a full toss from Bradman , to his annoyance . Hammond did not pass 20 runs in England 's Ashes @-@ securing victory in the fourth Test , attracting criticism from Wisden and others for overcautious batting . He returned to form in the final Test at Sydney , a ground on which he was often successful , scoring 101 and 75 not out . Wisden praised his style and brilliant play , and he ended the match with a six , securing England 's third successive victory and a 4 – 1 series win . 
 A short tour of New Zealand followed ; Hammond scored 621 runs in three first @-@ class innings . In the first Test , he scored 227 , and in the second and final Test , he broke the world record for a Test innings on 1 April by scoring 336 not out . His record innings began cautiously , but against a weak bowling side , he increased his scoring rate after making his century and again after reaching 200 . As he passed Bradman 's record of 334 , he shouted " Yes ! " He hit ten sixes , then a Test record , including three from consecutive balls . However , the weakness of the bowling compared to that faced by Bradman and the importance of Ashes matches meant that Hammond 's record was not as prestigious as the Australian 's . When Len Hutton broke the record in 1938 , he considered Bradman 's 334 the score to beat . 
 = = = Loss of Test form = = = 
 The Bodyline controversy continued into the 1933 season . Bodyline tactics were used in several matches , including by the West Indian tourists in the second Test . In all first @-@ class cricket , Hammond , no longer vice @-@ captain of Gloucestershire , scored 3 @,@ 323 runs , passing 3 @,@ 000 in a season for the first time . With an average of 67 @.@ 81 , he topped the first @-@ class tables for what would be the first of eight successive seasons . He also took 38 wickets . However , his highest score in three Test innings was 34 . In the second Test , unsettled by Bodyline , Hammond was cut on the chin by a short ball , causing him to retire hurt . He again commented that he would quit rather than face such bowling ; soon after his return , he was out . Les Ames , who played in the three @-@ match series , won by England 2 – 0 , believed that the West Indian pacemen worried Hammond , who showed a weakness against short , fast bowling . 
 Hammond spent much of the 1934 season troubled by sore throats and back problems which restricted his appearances for Gloucestershire . His form for his county was good and in all first @-@ class matches , he scored 2 @,@ 366 runs ( average 76 @.@ 32 ) , although he took fewer wickets at a higher average than the previous season . Awarded a benefit match , which raised just over £ 2 @,@ 600 , Hammond was idolised by the press and public for his achievements . In Tests , it was a different story ; according to Wisden , he failed badly . England lost the Ashes , 2 – 1 , in a series overshadowed at times by the Bodyline controversy . Hammond played in all five Tests against Australia but his top score was 43 ; he scored 162 runs at an average of 20 @.@ 25 , and took five wickets at an average of 72 @.@ 80 . Although the press and selectors supported him , there were some suggestions he should be left out of the side , and Hammond felt under great pressure . 
 The pattern of failure in Test matches but success elsewhere continued during the 1934 – 35 tour of the West Indies . In all first @-@ class cricket he scored 789 runs , averaging 56 @.@ 35 , with an innings of 281 not out the highest of his three centuries . The four @-@ Test series , which England lost 2 – 1 , was another matter . Wisden noted that the West Indian pace attack , considered the best in the world by Bob Wyatt , unsettled the English batsmen ; the home bowlers were accused of intimidation by some of the England side . Hammond had a top score of 47 and scored 175 runs at an average of 25 @.@ 00 . He played well in difficult batting conditions , which he believed were among the worst he ever faced , in the first Test . In the first innings he scored 43 , before dominating the bowlers at a critical time in his unbeaten 29 in the second innings , winning the match with a six . 
 Hammond 's health remained poor at the start of the 1935 season . He developed septic tonsillitis which made it difficult for him to breathe , eat and sleep , and ultimately required an operation to remove his tonsils in early 1936 . Hammond 's form was indifferent and he believed it was his worst season . In first @-@ class matches , he scored 2 @,@ 616 runs ( average 49 @.@ 35 ) and took 60 wickets ( average 27 @.@ 26 ) . He became the ninth player to reach 100 first @-@ class centuries , emerging from a run of bad form against Somerset . Long a regular in the side , for the first time he captained the Players against the Gentlemen at Lord 's . In the five @-@ Test series against South Africa , a run of low scores again brought press speculation about his place in the national side . He did not pass fifty until the third Test , when he scored 63 and 87 not out , ending a run of 22 innings without a fifty , in which time he averaged 23 @.@ 47 over 14 Tests . Hammond made two more fifties in the last two Tests , although they were insufficient to prevent England from losing 1 – 0 , their third successive series defeat . He finished the series with 389 runs at an average of 64 @.@ 83 , but remained unsatisfied with his form . 
 = = = Return to form = = = 
 As the 1936 season began , Hammond remained weak from the recent removal of his tonsils . Returning to cricket too soon , he was in poor form ; he took a longer rest , which caused him to miss the first of three Tests against India . It was July before he felt fully well . In all first @-@ class cricket that season , Hammond scored 2 @,@ 107 runs , averaging 56 @.@ 94 , and took 41 wickets . In county cricket , Gloucestershire appointed a new captain , Dallas Page . Hammond had been offered the joint captaincy with Bev Lyon , conditional on his becoming assistant secretary at the club to enable him to play as an amateur , but declined for financial reasons . Hammond returned to the England side for the second Test , making 167 , his first century in 28 innings , scoring quickly throughout . He was praised by Wisden for his control . Hammond continued to score heavily in the third Test , making 217 after being dropped twice early on . His highest score came in the last county match of the season , at Gloucestershire , which was Tom Goddard 's benefit match . A difficult pitch meant that wickets tumbled on the first day , prompting fears of an early finish which would possibly lose money for Goddard . Hammond batted all of the second day , ensuring the match lasted the full three days , to score 317 out of a total of 485 . 
 Selected for the M.C.C. tour of Australia in 1936 – 37 under the captaincy of Gubby Allen , Hammond was again part of the tour selection committee . He was successful with bat and ball , scoring 1 @,@ 206 runs ( average 67 @.@ 00 ) and taking 21 wickets ( average 24 @.@ 57 ) in all first @-@ class matches in Australia ( he played two more in New Zealand at the conclusion of the tour ) . In Tests , Hammond scored 468 runs at an average of 58 @.@ 50 and took 12 wickets at an average of 25 @.@ 08 . His tour began with four consecutive first @-@ class hundreds against the state teams , but Wisden reported that he never recaptured this form during the remainder of the tour , owing to the bowling of Bill O 'Reilly . Hammond could not overcome O 'Reilly 's use of slow leg theory in the later Tests which restricted scoring . England won the first two Tests , although Hammond did not contribute in the first , making a first ball duck . In the second he scored an unbeaten 231 , then took three for 29 with the ball in Australia 's second innings , during a period when the other bowlers lost control . From this point , his contributions fell away , although he believed that the best innings of his life , on one of the most difficult pitches he ever confronted , was his 32 in the third Test . Neville Cardus , who saw it , described it as remarkable . However , his free @-@ scoring 51 in the second innings was not enough to prevent defeat in the face of an unrealistic target . In the fourth Test , Hammond took five for 57 in Australia 's second innings , but his dismissal on the final morning by Fleetwood @-@ Smith ensured that Australia won the match to level the series . One of Hammond 's team @-@ mates opined that Bradman would not have been dismissed as easily in a similar situation . In the decisive final Test , he was restricted by O 'Reilly 's leg theory attack and failed in the first innings . His 56 in the second innings was not enough to prevent Australia 's third win in succession to take the Ashes 3 – 2 . 
 In the 1937 season , Hammond scored 3 @,@ 252 runs at an average of 65 @.@ 04 , passing 3 @,@ 000 runs a second time , and taking 48 wickets . In the three Tests against New Zealand , he passed the previous record number of England appearances , overtaking Frank Woolley 's 64 Tests . While scoring 140 in the first Test , he passed the total number of runs scored by Jack Hobbs to become the leading run scorer in Tests , a record he held until it was broken by Colin Cowdrey in December 1970 . This innings was his only score above fifty in the series , in which he scored 204 runs ( average 51 ) . At the end of the season , in November 1937 , it was announced that he had accepted a job , joining the Marsham Tyres board of directors , meaning he would play as an amateur in the future . This led to immediate speculation that he would be made captain of England in the 1938 Ashes series . The chairman of selectors , Plum Warner , later wrote that there was never any doubt from then that Hammond would be captain . 
 = = Amateur cricketer = = 
 = = = England captain = = = 
 In the 1938 season , his first as an amateur , Hammond scored 3 @,@ 011 runs at an average of 75 @.@ 27 . During the season , he was elected to life membership of Gloucestershire and membership of the M.C.C. , which barred professionals . He captained the Gentlemen against the Players at Lord 's — having previously led the Players , he is the only person to skipper both teams . Early in the season , he led England in a Test trial before , as expected , being given the role full @-@ time against Australia . His leadership during the series , which was drawn 1 – 1 , won him praise . He was criticised , however , for his handling of bowlers , specifically for not giving enough work to spinners Hedley Verity in the first Test or Doug Wright in the fourth . In the second Test , he scored 240 , briefly a record for an England batsman playing at home , to rescue the side from a poor start . This innings was lauded by observers including Warner , Bradman and Cardus , and The Times correspondent pronounced it one of the best ever . The match , like the first , was drawn and with the third Test completely washed out by rain , the crucial match proved to be the fourth . In a low @-@ scoring game , Hammond scored 76 , holding England 's first innings together . In the second innings , however , he made a first @-@ ball duck ; an English batting collapse allowed Australia to win the match and retain the Ashes . England had some consolation with a massive victory in the final Test ; following Hammond 's instructions to be cautious , the side slowly amassed a record total of 903 for seven , with Hutton beating Hammond 's Test record innings by scoring 364 . Hammond scored 59 , giving him 403 runs at an average of 67 @.@ 16 in the series . 
 In the 1938 – 39 season , Hammond captained the M.C.C. tour of South Africa in a five @-@ match series . Wisden criticised both sides for slow play , and the almanack 's correspondent felt Hammond was reluctant to try to force a win . In general , though , judgements on his captaincy were positive ; his team @-@ mates and opponents believed he had firm control of the side and E. W. Swanton complimented his tactics . In the Tests , he used the cautious batting method which had been successful in Australia . He scored three Test centuries , making 181 after a shaky start in the second Test , a quick 120 in the third and 140 in the fifth . England won the third match , the only one in the series with a result , and Hammond was praised for his use of bowlers . The final match , in which Hammond lost the toss , having previously won it eight consecutive times , was drawn after ten days ' play . In the fourth innings , England faced a victory target of 696 . Hammond was credited with nearly forcing a remarkable win , first by promoting Bill Edrich , who had failed thus far in the series but scored 219 , and then by playing himself what Wisden described as " one of the finest innings of his career " before rain forced the match to be abandoned . Hammond also tallied two fifties in the series to score 609 runs in total , at an average of 87 @.@ 00 . In all first @-@ class tour matches , he scored 1 @,@ 025 runs ( average 60 @.@ 29 ) . While on tour , he met Sybil Ness @-@ Harvey , who was to become his second wife . 
 Appointed as Gloucestershire captain for the 1939 season , Hammond led the team to third in the County Championship and recorded a rare double victory over Yorkshire . While Wisden commended his adventurous style of leadership , others such as Basil Allen , his predecessor as captain , did not approve ; their main criticism was his failure to encourage his players . In first @-@ class cricket , he scored 2 @,@ 479 runs at an average of 63 @.@ 56 . He placed at the top of the first @-@ class averages for the seventh successive season , although some critics detected a decline in his abilities . While he led England to a 1 – 0 series victory over West Indies in three Tests , Wisden reported some criticism of his captaincy . R. C. Robertson @-@ Glasgow said that " Hammond does not rank among the more imaginative England captains " , although he concluded by defending Hammond as " experienced and sound " . In the second match , he took his 100th catch in Tests , and in the third , he scored 138 , his final Test century . In the series , Hammond scored 279 runs ( average 55 @.@ 80 ) . The impending war overshadowed much of the season ; throughout the Tests , Hammond made public appeals for citizens to join the armed forces . On the outbreak of the Second World War , he joined the services and was commissioned as a pilot officer in the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve ( RAFVR ) in October 1939 . 
 = = = Career in the war = = = 
 Hammond was posted to a training wing of the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) at Hastings in Sussex before he moved with his unit to Torquay . He had mainly administrative duties , including instructing recruits , for whom he made life hard . He played some games of cricket in 1940 for various teams before being posted to Cairo in December . His responsibilities in Egypt included organising , promoting and playing in cricket matches . Posted there until 1943 , he was promoted to flight lieutenant and then to squadron leader . While Hammond may have helped to raise morale , Cairo was an easy posting during the war and he was not involved directly in combat . He also spent much time in South Africa , where he played cricket and was reunited with Sybil Ness @-@ Harvey . At the beginning of 1944 , Hammond was posted back to England , where he lectured and drilled cadets . Playing as captain in many one @-@ day cricket matches , he was praised by Wisden for encouraging exciting contests . Others applauded his batting , including his hitting of many sixes , fitting the games ' relaxed atmosphere . In December 1944 , Hammond , suffering from fibrositis , was discharged from the RAFVR on health grounds and returned to work at Marsham Tyres . Once the war ended in Europe in May 1945 , several first @-@ class matches were organised . Hammond played in six , scoring 592 runs at an average of 59 @.@ 20 with two centuries . In a match for an England team against the Dominions at Lord 's , he made a century in each innings , becoming the first man to do this seven times . 
 = = = End of career = = = 
 During 1946 , the first full season after the war , Hammond played only 26 innings but scored 1 @,@ 783 runs at an average of 84 @.@ 90 , topping the first @-@ class averages for the eighth time in succession — still an English record as of 2015 . At times , he began to show technical weaknesses . Captaining England to a 1 – 0 victory in a three @-@ Test series against India , he scored one fifty , making 119 runs at an average of 39 @.@ 66 . He batted fifth in the order in the final match , as he would in four of his five remaining Tests . Gloucestershire fell to fifth in the County Championship , and Hammond , after enthusiastically making the team very competitive at the start of the season , became increasingly affected by pain , particularly in damp weather . As captain , he could be irritable and consciously created remoteness and division . 
 Remaining captain of England , Hammond led the M.C.C. side which toured Australia in 1946 – 47 . The visit was unsuccessful as England lost the five @-@ match Test series 3 – 0 . According to Wisden , Hammond 's inability to make large scores was one of the reasons for the failure . Nor was he a success as captain . He was criticised for his field placement and people at home wondered if he had lost control of the team . While he suffered some ill luck , Wisden said that he " was not the same inspiring leader as at home against Australia in 1938 " . Other journalists noted that he did not consult his players , one of whom later commented that he showed little imagination in his use of bowlers . Hammond approached the tour as an exercise in goodwill , promising his men an enjoyable time . It was noted that Bradman , the Australian captain , took a more competitive attitude towards the series . Team spirit was good on the outward journey , but Hammond 's forthcoming divorce and other domestic concerns caused him to become isolated from the players and increasingly moody . He had poor relations with the press , who were very critical of his captaincy and reporting details of the dissolution of his marriage . As the tour progressed , he lost his dynamism as a leader , gave poor advice to the batsmen and made poor selections for the team . 
 As a batsman , Hammond started the tour well , scoring 208 in an early game , but lost form once the Tests began . One of the turning points of the series was a disputed catch in the first Test . Bradman , who looked in poor form and uncertain to continue his cricket career for much longer , had reached 28 when the English team believed he had edged the ball to Jack Ikin at slip . Bradman , as was his entitlement , waited for the umpire 's decision instead of leaving the field . The fielders were certain that he was out , but the umpire said he was not , believing the ball had bounced before it was caught ; opinion among other participants and spectators was divided . However , Hammond was extremely angry , saying loudly , either to Bradman or the umpires , " a fine fucking way to start a series " . Afterwards , relations between Hammond and Bradman deteriorated and there was a coldness between them . Bradman went on to score 187 and Australia won the match and , ultimately , the series . In that first Test , Hammond played two good innings on a very difficult wicket , but in the series , he did not pass fifty , scoring 168 runs at an average of 21 @.@ 00 before missing the final Test . In all first @-@ class cricket , he scored 633 runs ( average 45 @.@ 21 ) . He suffered increasing pain from fibrositis throughout the series , and later admitted that he felt close to a breakdown . Hammond played his last Test in New Zealand at the end of the tour , scoring 79 in his final innings . He ended his career with 7 @,@ 249 Test runs at an average of 58 @.@ 46 . His 22 centuries remained an English record until surpassed by Alastair Cook in December 2012 . 
 Hammond decided to retire from all cricket after the tour , not returning for Gloucestershire in 1947 . Within 24 hours of his arrival back in England , he married Sybil Ness @-@ Harvey . He played only two more first @-@ class games . He scored an unbeaten 92 for the M.C.C. against Ireland in 1950 . To help boost a Gloucestershire membership drive , he joined his former side for a match the following year . Although given an excellent reception by the crowd , his tired appearance and struggle to score seven runs before being dismissed embarrassed many of those present . In all first @-@ class cricket , Hammond scored 50 @,@ 551 runs at an average of 56 @.@ 10 with 167 centuries . He remains seventh on the list of highest run scorers in first @-@ class cricket and has the third highest number of centuries , as of 2015 . 
 = = Style and technique = = 
 Wisden 's obituary described Hammond as one of the top four batsmen who had ever played , calling him " a most exciting cricketer . ... The instant he walked out of a pavilion , white @-@ spotted blue handkerchief showing from his right pocket , bat tucked underarm , cap at a hint of an angle , he was identifiable as a thoroughbred . " Throughout the 1930s , the public and critics regarded Hammond as England 's best batsman , succeeding Jack Hobbs , and next to Bradman , the best in the world ( although George Headley also had a claim ) . Among English batsmen , only Herbert Sutcliffe , with a higher Test average , was similarly successful . According to Alan Gibson , however , although Sutcliffe was dependable in a crisis , " his batting never gave quite the same sense of majesty and excitement that Hammond 's did " . More recently , Hammond was one of the inaugural inductees into the ICC Cricket Hall of Fame , launched in January 2009 , and was selected by a jury of cricket journalists as a member of England 's all @-@ time XI in August 2009 . 
 Balanced and still at the crease , Hammond was known for the power and beauty of his driving through the off side , although he could play any shot . A very attacking player early in his career , he later became more defensive , playing more frequently off the back foot and abandoning the hook shot as too risky . He was particularly effective on difficult wickets , scoring runs where others struggled to survive . Many of his contemporaries believed that he was the finest off @-@ side player in the history of cricket . In the words of Patrick Murphy , fellow players considered him " on a different plane — majestic , assured , poised , a devastating amalgam of the physical and mental attributes that make up a great batsman . " County bowlers who played against him considered it an achievement merely to prevent him scoring runs . 
 However , Australian bowlers such as O 'Reilly and Grimmett troubled him by bowling at his leg stump , restricting his scoring as he had fewer effective leg @-@ side shots . Occasionally , he displayed discomfort against the fastest bowlers . His team @-@ mate Charlie Barnett said that he did not relish fast bowling , although he was capable of playing it well in the initial stages of his career . Other colleagues , such as Les Ames , Bob Wyatt and Reg Sinfield , believed that he did not like to face the new ball , and he was occasionally happy for the other batsmen to face the difficult bowling . 
 His bowling was smooth and effortless , with a classical action . He could bowl fast , but more often bowled at fast @-@ medium pace . He could make the ball swing in humid weather , and deliver off @-@ spin when conditions were suitable . However , Hammond was reluctant to bowl , particularly for Gloucestershire . Bill Bowes believed that he was a very good bowler who would not take it seriously . In his obituary , Wisden said that " at slip he had no superior . He stood all but motionless , moved late but with uncanny speed , never needing to stretch or strain but plucking the ball from the air like an apple from a tree . " He was also able to field further away from the batsmen than was the norm , particularly in his younger days , as he could chase the ball quickly and had a very good throwing arm . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 Hammond struck his contemporaries as a sad figure , a loner with few friends in cricket . He rarely encouraged young players or gave out praise . He liked to mix with middle @-@ class people , spending money he did not really have , leading to accusations of snobbery . Team @-@ mates regarded him as moody , private and uncommunicative . Often silent in the company of others , he could be arrogant and unfriendly . Charlie Barnett and Charles Dacre , two of his Gloucestershire team @-@ mates , came almost to hate him . Dacre often played in a reckless way of which Hammond disapproved ; Hammond , in turn , may have been jealous of him . Hammond once tried hard to injure Dacre by bowling fast at him while he was wicketkeeper . Barnett began as a close friend but fell out over Hammond 's treatment of his first wife and later his refusal to play in Barnett 's benefit match . Other players who were involved in disputes with Hammond included Denis Compton , whose cavalier approach Hammond disliked , and Learie Constantine , who believed Hammond insulted him in the West Indies in 1925 , although the two later made peace . Hammond 's ultimate rivalry was with Bradman , who overshadowed him throughout his career , and with whom he developed an increasing obsession . It was not enough for Hammond to be the second @-@ best batsman in the world , and he disliked the constant comparisons made between them in Bradman 's favour . He felt not only that he had to do well , but also that he had to score more than Bradman . 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 David Foot quotes an unnamed cricketer saying that the two ruling passions of Hammond 's life " were his cricket bat and his genitals " . His strong desire for women was noticed by team @-@ mates from early in his career . Foot believes that Hammond had sexual relationships with many women , sometimes several contemporaneously , before and during his first marriage , some of which led to marriage proposals . This was widely known in cricket circles , prompting disapproval from figures such as Barnett . 
 In 1929 , Hammond married Dorothy Lister , the daughter of a Yorkshire textile merchant , in a highly publicised ceremony at a parish church in Bingley . They met at a cricket match in 1927 but spent little time together before the wedding , having little in common . When married , they rarely communicated or got on well . Acquaintances believed Hammond treated her badly , particularly once her father lost nearly everything in the Depression , causing them financial worry . She remained loyal , but their relations gradually broke down , even after she sailed to South Africa , joining Hammond on tour in 1939 in an attempt to save the marriage . By that time , he was already seeing his future second wife , Sybil Ness @-@ Harvey , a former beauty queen whom he had met while on tour . 
 During the war , Hammond spent much of his leave with Ness @-@ Harvey in South Africa . In 1945 , she followed him back to England , but did not like it . When Hammond left to tour Australia in 1946 – 47 , Ness @-@ Harvey remained behind with his mother , with whom she did not get along . This was one of the factors which led to Hammond 's problems on the tour . His divorce went through , and on his return , he and Sybil married at Kingston Register Office . She had already changed her name to Hammond by deed poll . Their first child , Roger , was born in 1948 . Carolyn was born in 1950 and Valerie was born in 1952 . 
 = = = Business = = = 
 Hammond was involved with several businesses . In 1933 , to ease his financial concerns , he took a job with the Cater Motor Company . He was used as a sales promotions manager , which mainly involved publicity and meeting customers , although he also test @-@ drove cars . Taking a job with Marsham Tyres in 1937 enabled him to become an amateur cricketer . He joined the board of directors and was again used for publicity , but he was never a hard worker or determined salesman . Returning to Marsham 's after he was discharged from the RAF in 1944 , he supplemented his income by working as a journalist . He wrote for The Star during the 1948 Test series and penned three books with the assistance of a ghostwriter . 
 In 1951 , Hammond resigned from Marsham 's ; his wife was homesick , leading Hammond to plan a business in South Africa with a partner . However , after moving to Durban , they realised they had insufficient money . He took a job with Denham Motors in Durban , where he was forced to work much harder than in England . He lost his job in 1959 when the firm went out of business , and the Hammond family again found themselves in financial trouble . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 At the end of 1959 , Hammond was offered a job as a sports administrator at University of Natal with the aim of developing its sports facilities . In February 1960 , he was involved in a serious car crash . It was uncertain whether he would survive , but he pulled through . Three months after the accident , he returned to work and became involved with coaching . In 1962 , Hammond visited England as part of a drive to recruit new members for Gloucestershire . He showed some interest in taking over a pub , but nothing came of it . On the M.C.C. tour of South Africa in 1964 – 65 , he joined the England dressing room , becoming popular with the players . On 1 July 1965 , he had a heart attack and died after a few hours ' illness . 
 = Quainton Road railway station = 
 Quainton Road railway station was opened in 1868 in under @-@ developed countryside near Quainton , in the English county of Buckinghamshire , 44 miles ( 71 km ) from London . Built by the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway , it was the result of pressure from the 3rd Duke of Buckingham to route the railway near his home at Wotton House and to open a railway station at the nearest point to it . Serving a relatively unpopulated area , Quainton Road was a crude railway station , described as " extremely primitive " . 
 The Duke of Buckingham built a short horse @-@ drawn tramway to transport goods between his estates at Wotton and a terminus adjacent to the station . He extended it soon afterwards to provide a passenger service to the town of Brill , & the tramway was converted to locomotive operation , known as the Brill Tramway . All goods to and from the Brill Tramway passed through Quainton Road , making it relatively heavily used despite its geographical isolation , and traffic increased further when construction began on Ferdinand de Rothschild 's mansion of Waddesdon Manor . The plan of extending the Brill Tramway to Oxford , which would have made Quainton Road a major junction station , was abandoned . Instead , the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway and the Brill Tramway were absorbed by London 's Metropolitan Railway ( MR ) , which already operated the line from Aylesbury to London . The MR rebuilt Quainton Road and re @-@ sited it to a more convenient location , allowing through running between the Brill Tramway and the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway . When the Great Central Railway ( GCR ) from the north of England opened , Quainton Road became a significant junction at which trains from four directions met , and by far the busiest of the MR 's rural stations . 
 In 1933 the Metropolitan Railway was taken into public ownership to become the Metropolitan line of the London Passenger Transport Board 's London Underground , including Quainton Road . The LPTB aimed to move away from freight operations , and saw no way in which the rural parts of the MR could be made into viable passenger routes . In 1935 the Brill Tramway was closed . From 1936 Underground trains were withdrawn north of Aylesbury , leaving the London and North Eastern Railway ( successor to the GCR ) as the only operator using the station , although Underground services were restored for a short period in the 1940s . In 1963 stopping passenger services were withdrawn but fast passenger trains continued to pass through . In 1966 the line was closed to passenger traffic and local goods trains ceased using the station . The line through the station was singled and used by occasional freight trains only . 
 In 1969 the Quainton Road Society was formed with the aim of preserving the station . In 1971 , it absorbed the London Railway Preservation Society , taking over its collection of historic railway equipment . The station was fully restored and reopened as a museum , the Buckinghamshire Railway Centre . In addition to the original station buildings , the museum has also acquired the former Oxford Rewley Road railway station and a London Transport building from Wembley Park , both of which have been reassembled on the site . Although no scheduled trains pass through Quainton Road , the station remains connected to the railway network . Freight trains still use this line , and passenger trains still call at the station for special events at the Buckinghamshire Railway Centre . 
 = = Origins = = 
 On 15 June 1839 entrepreneur and former Member of Parliament for Buckingham Sir Harry Verney , 2nd Baronet , opened the Aylesbury Railway . Built under the direction of Robert Stephenson , it connected the London and Birmingham Railway 's Cheddington railway station on the West Coast Main Line to Aylesbury High Street railway station in eastern Aylesbury , the first railway station in the Aylesbury Vale . On 1 October 1863 the Wycombe Railway opened a branch line from Princes Risborough railway station to Aylesbury railway station on the western side of Aylesbury , making Aylesbury the terminus of two small and unconnected branch lines . 
 Meanwhile , to the north of Aylesbury the Buckinghamshire Railway was being built by Sir Harry Verney . The scheme consisted of a line running roughly southwest to northeast from Oxford to Bletchley and a line running southeast from Brackley via Buckingham , joining roughly halfway along the Oxford – Bletchley line . The first section opened on 1 May 1850 , and the rest opened on 20 May 1851 . The Buckinghamshire Railway intended to extend the line southwards to connect to its station at Aylesbury , but this extension was not built . 
 Richard Plantagenet Campbell Temple @-@ Nugent @-@ Brydges @-@ Chandos @-@ Grenville ( 10 September 1823 – 26 March 1889 ) , the only son of Richard Plantagenet Temple @-@ Nugent @-@ Brydges @-@ Chandos @-@ Grenville , 2nd Duke of Buckingham and Chandos , was in serious financial difficulties by the middle of the 19th century . The 2nd Duke had spent heavily on artworks , womanising , and attempting to influence elections , and by 1847 he was nicknamed " the Greatest Debtor in the World " . Over 40 @,@ 000 acres ( 16 @,@ 000 ha ) of the family 's 55 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 22 @,@ 000 ha ) estates and their London home at Buckingham House were sold to meet debts , and the family seat of Stowe House was seized by bailiffs as security and its contents sold . The only property remaining in the control of the Grenville family was the family 's relatively small ancestral home of Wotton House and its associated lands around Wotton Underwood in Buckinghamshire . Deeply in debt , the Grenvilles began to look for ways to maximise profits from their remaining farmland around Wotton , and to seek business opportunities in the emerging fields of heavy industry and engineering . Richard Plantagenet Campbell Temple @-@ Nugent @-@ Brydges @-@ Chandos @-@ Grenville , who became the Marquess of Chandos on the death of his grandfather Richard Temple @-@ Nugent @-@ Brydges @-@ Chandos @-@ Grenville , 1st Duke of Buckingham and Chandos in 1839 , was appointed chairman of the London and North Western Railway ( LNWR ) on 27 May 1857 . On the death of his father on 29 July 1861 he became the 3rd Duke of Buckingham and Chandos , and resigned from the chairmanship of the LNWR , returning to Wotton House to manage the family 's remaining estates . 
 = = Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway = = 
 On 6 August 1860 the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway ( A & B ) , with the 3rd Duke ( then still Marquess of Chandos ) as chairman and Sir Harry Verney as deputy chairman , was incorporated by Act of Parliament with the object of connecting the Buckinghamshire Railway ( by now operated by the LNWR ) to Aylesbury . The 2nd Duke used his influence to ensure the new route would run via Quainton , near his remaining estates around Wotton , instead of the intended more direct route via <unk> . Beset by financial difficulties , the line took over eight years to build , eventually opening on 23 September 1868 . The new line was connected to the Wycombe Railway 's Aylesbury station , and joined the existing Buckinghamshire Railway lines at the point where the Oxford – Bletchley line and the line to Buckingham already met . Verney Junction railway station was built at the point where the lines joined , named after Sir Harry who owned the land on which it was built , since there was no nearby town . Aylesbury now had railways to the east , north and southwest , but no line southeast towards London and the Channel ports . 
 Quainton Road station was built on a curve in the line at the nearest point to the Duke 's estates at Wotton . Six miles ( 10 km ) northwest of Aylesbury , it was southwest of the small village of Quainton and immediately northwest of the road connecting Quainton to Akeman Street . The railway towards Aylesbury crossed the road via a level crossing immediately southeast of the station . The Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway had spent most of their limited budget on the construction of the line itself . Details of the design of the original Quainton Road station are lost , but it is likely that the station had a single timber @-@ covered earth platform and minimal buildings ; it was described in 1890 as being extremely primitive . 
 = = Wotton Tramway = = 
 With a railway now running near the boundary of the Wotton House estate at Quainton Road , the 3rd Duke decided to open a small @-@ scale agricultural railway to connect the estate to the railway . The line was intended purely for the transport of construction materials and agricultural produce , and not passengers . The line was to run roughly southwest from Quainton Road to a new railway station near Wotton Underwood . Just west of the station at Wotton the line split . One section would run west to Wood Siding near Brill . A short stub called Church Siding would run northwest into the village of Wotton Underwood itself , terminating near the parish church , and a 1 mile 57 chain ( 1 mile 1 @,@ 254 yards ; 2 @.@ 8 km ) siding would run north to a coal siding near Kingswood . 
 Construction began on the line on 8 September 1870 . It was built as cheaply as possible , using the cheapest available materials and winding around hills wherever feasible to avoid expensive earthworks . The station platforms were crude earth banks 6 inches ( 150 mm ) high , held in place by wooden planks . As the Duke intended that the line be worked by horses , it was built with longitudinal sleepers to reduce the risk of them tripping . 
 On 1 April 1871 the section between Quainton Road and Wotton was formally opened by the Duke in a brief ceremony . At the time of its opening the line was unnamed , although it was referred to as " The Quainton Tramway " in internal correspondence . The extension from Wotton to Wood Siding was complete by 17 June 1871 ; the opening date of the northern branch to Kingswood is not recorded , but it was not yet fully open in February 1873 . The London and North Western Railway immediately began to operate a dedicated service from Quainton Road , with three vans per week of milk collected from the Wotton estate shipped to Broad Street . Passengers were not carried , other than estate employees and people accompanying livestock . 
 The tramway did not link to the A & B , but had its own station at Quainton Road at a right angle to the A & B. A 13 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) diameter turntable at the end of the tramway linked to a spur from the A & B. This spur ran behind a goods shed , joining the A & B line to the northwest of the road . The Tramway had no buildings at Quainton Road , using the A & B 's facilities when necessary . As the tramway ran on the east side of the road , opposite the station , the spur line had its own level crossing to reach the main line . In 1871 permission was granted to build a direct connection between the two lines , but it was not built . 
 = = = Expansion of the Wotton Tramway = = = 
 In late 1871 the residents of Brill , the former seat of the Mercian kings and the only significant town near Wotton House , petitioned the Duke to extend the route to Brill and to run a passenger service on the line . In January 1872 a passenger timetable was published for the first time , and the line was officially named the " Wotton Tramway " , but it was commonly known as the " Brill Tramway " from its opening to passengers until closure . The new terminus of Brill opened in March 1872 . With horses unable to cope with the loads being carried , the Tramway was upgraded for locomotive use . The lightly laid track with longitudinal sleepers limited the locomotive weight to a maximum of nine tons , lighter than almost all locomotives then available , so it was not possible to use standard locomotives . Two traction engines converted for railway use were bought from Aveling and Porter at a cost of £ 398 ( about £ 32 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) each . The locomotives were chosen on grounds of weight and reliability , and had a top speed on the level of only 8 miles per hour ( 13 km / h ) , taking 95 – 98 minutes to travel the six miles ( 10 km ) between Brill and Quainton Road , an average speed of 4 miles per hour ( 6 @.@ 4 km / h ) . 
 The line was heavily used for the shipment of bricks from the brickworks around Brill , and of cattle and milk from the dairy farms on the Wotton estate . By 1875 the line was carrying around 40 @,@ 000 gallons ( 180 @,@ 000 l ; 48 @,@ 000 US gal ) of milk each year . Delivery of linseed cake to the dairy farms and of coal to the area 's buildings were also important uses of the line . The line also began to carry large quantities of manure from London to the area 's farms , carrying 3 @,@ 200 tons ( 3 @,@ 300 t ) in 1872 . As it was the only physical link between the Tramway and the national railway network , almost all of this traffic passed through Quainton Road station . 
 By the mid @-@ 1870s the slow speed of the Aveling and Porter locomotives and their unreliability and inability to handle heavy loads were recognised as major problems for the Tramway . In 1874 Ferdinand de Rothschild bought a 2 @,@ 700 @-@ acre ( 1 @,@ 100 ha ) site near the Tramway 's Waddesdon station to use as a site for his country mansion of Waddesdon Manor . The Tramway 's management recognised that the construction works would lead to a significant increase in the haulage of heavy goods , and that the Aveling and Porter engines would be unable to cope with the increased loads . The newly established engineering firm of W. G. Bagnall wrote to the Duke offering to hire a locomotive to him for trials . The offer was accepted , and on 18 December 1876 the locomotive was delivered . The tests were generally successful and an order was placed to buy a locomotive from Bagnall for £ 640 ( about £ 54 @,@ 300 in 2016 ) which was delivered on 28 December 1877 . With trains now hauled by the Bagnall locomotive ( the Kingswood branch generally remained worked by horses , and occasionally by the Aveling and Porter engines ) , traffic levels soon rose . Milk traffic rose from 40 @,@ 000 gallons carried in 1875 to 58 @,@ 000 gallons ( 260 @,@ 000 l ; 70 @,@ 000 US gal ) in 1879 , and in 1877 the Tramway carried a total of 20 @,@ 994 tons ( 21 @,@ 331 t ) of goods . In early 1877 the Tramway was shown on Bradshaw maps for the first time , and from May 1882 Bradshaw included its timetable . 
 Although the introduction of the Bagnall locomotives and the traffic generated by the works at Waddesdon Manor had boosted the line 's fortunes , it remained in serious financial difficulty . The only connection with the national railway network was by the turntable at Quainton Road . Although the 3rd Duke of Buckingham was both the owner of the Wotton Tramway and Chairman of the A & B , the latter regarded the Tramway as a nuisance , and in the 1870s pursued a policy of charging disproportionately high fees for through traffic between the Tramway and the main line , with the intention of forcing the Tramway out of business . A & B trains would deliberately miss connections with the Tramway , causing milk shipped via Quainton Road to become <unk> . The Tramway sought legal advice and was informed that the Duke would be likely to win a legal action against the A & B. However , the A & B was in such a precarious financial position that any successful legal action against it would likely have forced its through Quainton Road to close , severing the Tramway 's connection with the national network . Many Tramway passengers changed trains at Quainton Road to continue their journey on the A & B ; in 1885 , 5 @,@ 192 passengers did so . The Tramway 's management suggested that the A & B subsidise the Tramway to the sum of £ 25 ( about £ 2 @,@ 400 in 2016 ) per month to allow passenger services to continue , but the A & B agreed to pay only £ 5 ( about £ 500 in 2016 ) per month . By the mid @-@ 1880s the Tramway was finding it difficult to cover the operating expenses of either goods or passenger operations . 
 = = Metropolitan Railway takeover of the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway = = 
 In 1837 Euston railway station opened , the first railway station connecting London with the industrial heartlands of the West Midlands and Lancashire . Railways were banned by a Parliamentary commission from operating in London itself , and thus the station was built on what was then the northern boundary of the built @-@ up area . Other main line termini soon followed at Paddington ( 1838 ) , Bishopsgate ( 1840 ) , Fenchurch Street ( 1841 ) , King 's Cross ( 1852 ) and St Pancras ( 1868 ) . All were built outside the built @-@ up area , making them inconvenient to reach . 
 Charles Pearson ( 1793 – 1862 ) had proposed the idea of an underground railway connecting the City of London with the relatively distant main @-@ line termini in around 1840 . Construction began in 1860 . On 9 January 1863 the line opened as the Metropolitan Railway ( MR ) , the world 's first underground passenger railway . The MR was successful and grew steadily , extending its services and acquiring other local railways north and west of London . In 1872 Edward Watkin ( 1819 – 1901 ) was appointed its Chairman . A director of many railway companies , he had a vision of unifying a string of railways to create a single line from Manchester via London to an intended Channel Tunnel and on to France . In 1873 Watkin entered negotiations to take control of the A & B and the section of the former Buckinghamshire Railway north from Verney Junction to Buckingham . He planned to extend the MR north from London to Aylesbury and the Tramway southwest to Oxford , creating a through route from London to Oxford . Rail services between Oxford and London at this time were poor : although still an extremely roundabout route , this scheme would have formed the shortest route from London to Oxford , Aylesbury , Buckingham and Stratford upon Avon . The Duke of Buckingham was enthusiastic , and authorisation was sought from Parliament . Parliament did not share the enthusiasm of Watkin and the Duke , and in 1875 the Buckinghamshire and Northamptonshire Union Railway Bill was rejected . Watkin did , however , receive consent in 1881 to extend the MR to Aylesbury . 
 = = Wotton Tramway Oxford extension scheme = = 
 With the MR extension to Aylesbury approved , in March 1883 the Duke announced his own scheme to extend the Tramway to Oxford . The turntable at Quainton Road would be replaced by a junction to the south of the turntable to allow through running of trains . The stretch from Quainton Road to Brill would be straightened and improved to main @-@ line standards , and the little @-@ used stations at Waddesdon Road and Wood Siding would be closed . From Brill , the line would pass in a 1 @,@ 650 @-@ yard ( 1 @,@ 510 m ) tunnel through Muswell Hill to the south of Brill , and on via <unk> before crossing from Buckinghamshire into Oxfordshire at Stanton St. John , calling at Headington on the outskirts of Oxford and terminating at a station to be built in the back garden of 12 High Street , St Clement 's , near Magdalen Bridge . 
 At 23 miles ( 37 km ) the line would have been by far the shortest route between Oxford and Aylesbury , compared with 28 miles ( 45 km ) via the Great Western Railway ( GWR ) , which had absorbed the Wycombe Railway , and 34 miles ( 55 km ) via the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway and the LNWR . The Act of Parliament authorising the scheme received the Royal Assent on 20 August 1883 , and the new Oxford , Aylesbury and Metropolitan Junction Railway Company , including the Duke of Buckingham , Ferdinand de Rothschild and Harry Verney among its directors , was created . The scheme caught the attention of the expansionist Metropolitan Railway , who paid for the survey to be conducted . Despite the scheme 's powerful backers , the expensive Muswell Hill tunnel deterred investors and the company found it difficult to raise capital . De Rothschild promised to lend money for the scheme in return for guarantees that the line would include a passenger station at Westcott , and that the Duke would press the A & B into opening a station at the nearest point to Waddesdon Manor . Waddesdon Manor railway station was duly opened on 1 January 1897 . 
 = = Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad = = 
 The new company was unable to raise sufficient investment to begin construction of the Oxford extension , and had been given only five years by Parliament to build it . On 7 August 1888 , less than two weeks before the authorisation was due to expire , the directors of the Oxford , Aylesbury and Metropolitan Junction Railway Company received the Royal Assent for a revised and much cheaper version . To be called the Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad ( O & AT ) , this envisaged the extension being built to the same light specifications as the existing Tramway . 
 On 26 March 1889 the 3rd Duke of Buckingham and Chandos died , aged 65 . By this time the construction of the MR extension to Aylesbury was well underway , and on 1 July 1891 the MR formally absorbed the A & B. Sir Harry Verney died on 12 February 1894 , and on 31 March 1894 the MR took over the operation of the A & B from the GWR . On 1 July 1894 the MR extension to Aylesbury was completed , giving the MR a unified route from London to Verney Junction . The MR embarked on a programme of upgrading and rebuilding the stations along the newly acquired line . 
 Construction from Brill to Oxford had not yet begun . Further Acts of Parliament were granted in 1892 and 1894 varying the proposed route slightly and allowing for its electrification , but no work was carried out other than some preliminary surveying . On 1 April 1894 , with the proposed extension to Oxford still intended , the O & AT exercised a clause of the 1888 Act and took over the Tramway . Work began on upgrading the line in preparation for the extension . The line from Quainton Road to Brill was relaid with improved rails on transverse sleepers , replacing the original flimsy rails and longitudinal sleepers . At around this time two Manning Wardle locomotives were brought into use . 
 = = Re @-@ siting = = 
 The rebuilding of the Tramway greatly improved service speeds , reducing journey times between Quainton Road and Brill to between 35 and 43 minutes . The population of the area had remained low ; in 1901 Brill had a population of only 1 @,@ 206 . Passenger traffic remained a relatively insignificant part of the Tramway 's business , and in 1898 passenger receipts were only £ 24 per month ( about £ 2 @,@ 400 in 2016 ) . 
 Quainton Road had seen little change since its construction by the A & B in 1868 , and in 1890 was described by The Times as " one of the most primitive @-@ looking stations in the British Isles " . While the line to Brill was being upgraded , the MR were rebuilding and re @-@ siting Quainton Road as part of its improvement programme , freeing space for a direct link between the former A & B and the O & AT to be built . The new station was re @-@ sited to the southeast of the road , on the same side as the turntable connection with the Tramway . The new station had two platforms on the former A & B line and a third platform for Brill trains . In 1896 the level crossings around the station were replaced by a road bridge over the railway . A curve between the former A & B and the Tramway opened on 1 January 1897 , allowing through running without the need to turn the engine and carriages individually on the turntable for the first time . The MR made a concerted effort to generate passenger traffic on the line . From 1910 to 1914 Pullman cars operated between Aldgate and Verney Junction , calling at Quainton Road , and a luxurious hotel was built in the new village of Verney Junction . 
 = = Metropolitan Railway takeover of Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad services = = 
 By 1899 the MR and the O & AT were cooperating closely . Although the line had been upgraded in preparation for the Oxford extension and had been authorised as a railway in 1894 , construction of the extension had yet to begin . On 27 November the MR arranged to lease the Tramway from the O & AT , for an annual fee of £ 600 ( about £ 61 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) with an option to buy the line outright . From 1 December 1899 , the MR took over all operations on the Tramway . The O & AT 's single passenger coach , a relic of Wotton Tramway days , was removed from its wheels and used as a <unk> 's hut at Brill . An elderly Brown , Marshalls and Co passenger coach was transferred to the line to replace it , and a section of each platform was raised to accommodate the higher doors of this coach , using earth and old railway sleepers . 
 D class locomotives , introduced by the MR to improve services on the former Tramway line , damaged the track , and in 1910 the line between Quainton Road and Brill was relaid to MR standards using old track removed from the inner London MR route , still considered adequate for light use on a rural branch line . Following this track upgrading , the speed limit was increased to 25 miles per hour ( 40 km / h ) . The MR was unhappy with the performance and safety record of the D Class locomotives , and sold them to other railways between 1916 and 1922 , replacing them with A class locomotives . 
 = = Great Central Railway = = 
 In 1893 another of Edward Watkin 's railways , the Manchester , Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway , had been authorised to build a new 92 @-@ mile ( 148 km ) line from Annesley in Nottinghamshire south to Quainton Road . Watkin had intended to run services from Manchester and Sheffield via Quainton Road and along the MR to Baker Street . Following Watkin 's retirement in 1894 , the Manchester , Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway obtained permission for a separate station in London near Baker Street at Marylebone , and the line was renamed the Great Central Railway ( GCR ) . The new line joined the MR just north of Quainton Road , and opened to passengers on 15 March 1899 . 
 Although it served a lightly populated area , the opening of the GCR made Quainton Road an important junction station at which four railway lines met . The number of passengers using the station rose sharply . It had many passengers in comparison to other stations in the area . In 1932 , the last year of private operation , the station saw 10 @,@ 598 passenger journeys , earning a total of £ 601 ( about £ 37 @,@ 600 in 2016 ) in passenger receipts . 
 Quainton Road was by far the busiest of the MR 's rural passenger stations north of Aylesbury . Verney Junction railway station saw only 943 passenger journeys in the same year , and the five other stations on the Brill Tramway had a combined passenger total of 7 @,@ 761 . 
 = = = Great Western and Great Central Joint Railway = = = 
 Following Watkin 's retirement relations between the GCR and the MR deteriorated badly . The GCR route to London ran over the MR from Quainton Road to London , and to reduce reliance on the hostile MR , GCR General Manager William Pollitt decided to create a link with the Great Western Railway and a route into London that bypassed the MR. In 1899 the Great Western and Great Central Joint Railway began construction of a new line , commonly known as the Alternative Route , to link the GWR at Princes Risborough to the GCR at Grendon Underwood , about three miles ( 5 km ) north of Quainton Road . Although formally an independent company , the new line was operated as a part of the GCR . A substantial part of GCR traffic to and from London was diverted onto the Alternative Route , reducing the significance of Quainton Road as an interchange and damaging the profitability of the MR. 
 = = London Transport = = 
 On 1 July 1933 the MR , along with London 's other underground railways aside from the short Waterloo & City Railway , was taken into public ownership as part of the newly formed London Passenger Transport Board ( LPTB ) . Despite being 44 miles ( 71 km ) from London , Quainton Road became part of the London Underground network . By this time , the lines from Quainton Road to Verney Junction and Brill were in severe decline . Competition from the newer lines and from improving road haulage had drawn away much of the Tramway 's custom in particular , and Brill trains would often run without a single passenger . 
 Frank Pick , Managing Director of the Underground Group from 1928 and the Chief Executive of the LPTB , aimed to move the network away from freight services and concentrate on the electrification and improvement of the core routes in London . He saw the lines beyond Aylesbury via Quainton Road to Brill and Verney Junction as having little future as financially viable passenger routes . On 1 June 1935 the LPTB gave the required six months ' notice to the O & AT that it intended to terminate operations on the Brill Tramway . 
 = = Closure = = 
 The last scheduled passenger train on the Brill Tramway left Quainton Road in the afternoon of 30 November 1935 . Hundreds of people gathered , and a number of members of the Oxford University Railway Society travelled from Oxford in an effort to buy the last ticket . Accompanied by firecrackers and fog signals , the train ran to Brill , where the passengers posed for a photograph . Late that evening , a two @-@ coach staff train pulled out of Brill , accompanied by a band bearing a white flag and playing Auld Lang Syne . The train stopped at each station , picking up the staff , documents and valuables from each . At 11 @.@ 45 pm the train arrived at Quainton Road , greeted by hundreds of locals and railway enthusiasts . At the stroke of midnight , the rails connecting the Tramway to the main line were ceremonially severed . 
 Quainton Road remained open , but with the closure of the Brill Tramway it was no longer a significant junction . A connection between the GCR and the former Buckinghamshire Railway at Calvert was opened in 1942 , leaving the A & B route to Verney Junction with no purpose other than as a diversionary route . It was closed to passengers on 6 July 1936 . London Transport passenger services beyond Aylesbury were withdrawn , leaving the former GCR ( part of the London and North Eastern Railway after 1923 ) as the only passenger services to Quainton Road . 
 London Transport reduced the A & B route between Quainton Road and Verney Junction to a single track in 1939 – 40 . LT continued to operate freight services until 6 September 1947 , when the Quainton Road – Verney Junction route closed altogether , leaving the former GCR route from Aylesbury via Rugby as the only service through Quainton Road . London Transport services were briefly restored in 1943 with the extension of the Metropolitan line 's London – Aylesbury service to Quainton Road , but this service was once more withdrawn in 1948 . 
 Quainton Road closed to passengers on 4 March 1963 and to goods on 4 July 1966 . On 3 September 1966 the GCR line from Aylesbury to Rugby was abandoned , leaving only the stretch from Aylesbury to Calvert , running through the now @-@ closed Quainton Road , open for freight trains . This was reduced to a single track shortly afterwards . The signal box at Quainton Road was abandoned on 13 August 1967 , and the points connecting to the goods yard were disconnected . 
 = = Restoration = = 
 While other closed stations on the former MR lines north of Aylesbury were generally demolished or sold , in 1969 the Quainton Railway Society was formed to operate a working museum at the station . On 24 April 1971 the society absorbed the London Railway Preservation Society , taking custody of its collection of historic railway equipment . The station was maintained in working order and used as a bookshop and ticket office , and the sidings — still intact , although disconnected from the railway line in 1967 — were used for locomotive restoration work . 
 The Quainton Railway Society , which operates the station as the Buckinghamshire Railway Centre , restored the main station building to its 1900 appearance . A smaller building on the former Brill platform , once a shelter for passengers waiting for Brill and down trains , was used first as a store then as a shop for a number of years before its current use to house an exhibit on the history of the Brill Tramway . A former London Transport building from Wembley Park was dismantled and re @-@ erected at Quainton Road to serve as a maintenance shed . In 1988 , the station briefly came back into passenger use , with the introduction of special Christmas shopping services between Aylesbury and Bletchley . These services ran on Saturdays only , and stopped at Quainton Road . 
 Rewley Road , the Oxford terminus of Harry Verney 's Buckinghamshire Railway and of the Oxford to Cambridge Line , closed to passengers on 1 October 1951 with trains diverted to the former GWR Oxford General , the current Oxford station . In co @-@ operation with the Science Museum , Rewley Road was dismantled in 1999 , the main station building and part of the platform canopy being moved to Quainton Road for preservation and improved visitor facilities with the main shop and office of the Buckinghamshire Railway Centre , thus maintaining it as a working building . A number of former Ministry of Supply food warehouses in what is now the extended Down Yard have been converted for various uses by the Society , including storage and exhibition of rolling stock . 
 Although the Buckinghamshire Railway Centre 's steam trains run on the sidings which were disconnected from the network in 1967 , the station still has a working railway line passing through it , used for occasional special passenger trains from Aylesbury in connection with events at the Centre . Regular freight trains are mainly landfill trains from waste transfer depots in Greater London to the former brick pits at Calvert . 
 As one of the best @-@ preserved period railway stations in England , Quainton Road is regularly used as a filming location for period drama , and programmes such as The Jewel in the Crown , the Doctor Who serial Black Orchid and Midsomer Murders have been filmed there . As of 2010 the Buckinghamshire Railway Centre are negotiating for a reconnection of the link between their sidings and the main line to allow their locomotives to run to Aylesbury when the line is not in use by freight trains , and to rebuild part of the Brill Tramway between Quainton Road and Waddesdon Road . 
 = Castlevania : Lords of Shadow = 
 Castlevania : Lords of Shadow is an action @-@ adventure video game developed by MercurySteam and Kojima Productions , published by Konami and released on October 5 , 2010 for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . The PC version was released on August 27 , 2013 . The game is a reboot of the Castlevania series , and reveals the origins of Dracula . Set in Southern Europe during the Middle Ages , the story focuses on Gabriel Belmont and his quest to defeat a malevolent order known as the Lords of Shadow and resurrect his wife . The player controls Gabriel in 3D environments as he uses melee skills to defeat enemies and solves puzzles to move through the game . 
 The game was originally announced as Lords of Shadow with no connection to the Castlevania series mentioned . This was done to keep their plans to radically change the direction of the Castlevania mythos a secret and to prevent the announcement of the game from upstaging another series release , Castlevania Judgment . Hideo Kojima , creator of the Metal Gear series , helped produce the title . The music was composed by Spanish composer Óscar Araujo , who was acclaimed for his work on the game . 
 The game sold well and received positive reviews from video game publications . It was praised for new elements it provided to the franchise , although this was also the subject of criticism as it did not retain traits from previous Castlevania games . Konami requested that the development team produce more titles related to Lords of Shadow . This includes two sequels titled Castlevania : Lords of Shadow – Mirror of Fate and Castlevania : Lords of Shadow 2 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Lords of Shadow is a third @-@ person action @-@ adventure game in which the player controls the main character , Gabriel Belmont . The combat involves a retractable chain whip called the Combat Cross . The player can perform up to forty unlockable combos with it . The commands consist of direct attacks for dealing damage to single enemies , and weak area attacks when surrounded by them . It is also capable of interactions with secondary weapons , such as knives , holy water and other items which can be upgraded . In addition , the Combat Cross 's melee skills can be combined with the Light and Shadow magic system , which are spells aimed at defense and aggression , respectively . The whip is upgradeable and can also be used to guard against an opponent 's attack . 
 The developers attempted to reach out to new audiences by distancing Lords of Shadow from previous Castlevania games , but kept some elements intact to not alienate franchise fans . For example , vampires and werewolves are recurring enemies in the game , but other existing enemies include trolls , giant spiders and goblin @-@ like creatures . The enemies can be defeated for experience points , which can be used to purchase combos or to augment the player 's abilities further . Lords of Shadow has large @-@ scale bosses known as titans . The Combat Cross can be used to grapple onto their bodies and navigate them , and break the runes that animate the titan . 
 Similar to the original Castlevania titles , platforming and puzzles are a key component and are featured in fifty levels . The player can control Gabriel to jump most distances , dash or hold his balance above fatal pits . The Combat Cross can be used for exploration purposes like scaling walls , rappelling and swinging across gaps . Some sequences of the game require the player to solve physical puzzles or brain teasers . Alternatively , moving certain objects can set off chain reactions and open paths to new areas . Activating switches can also assist against traps . The player can explore the levels in order to find hidden items , which can increase health or magic abilities . These items are " gems " ; there are three types , including life gems , light gems and dark gems . These can increase life endurance , light magical ability and dark magical ability , respectively . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Producer David Cox stated the game is a reboot of the franchise . The setting of Lords of Shadow is during " the end of days " in the year 1047 . The Earth 's alliance with the Heavens has been threatened by a malevolent force known as the Lords of Shadow . A dark spell has stopped the souls of the deceased from leaving , while evil creatures inhabit the dying land and attack living people . 
 The main character , Gabriel Belmont ( voiced by Robert Carlyle ) , is a member of the Brotherhood of Light , an elite group of holy knights who protect and defend innocent people against the supernatural creatures . Gabriel 's wife Marie ( Natascha McElhone ) was brutally murdered by one of them , and her soul cannot leave as it is trapped in limbo . Because she is now neither alive nor dead , she realizes what is at stake and guides Gabriel to his destiny to save the world as he investigates the dark spell . He travels the destroyed land , meeting other characters , such as the oldest living member of his order , Zobek ( Patrick Stewart , who additionally narrates the game ) . Two masks referred to as the God and Devil Masks lie at the center of the plot , with the God Mask having powers to resurrect the dead . Gabriel intends to defeat the three factions of the Lords of Shadow in order to obtain the pieces of the God Mask and bring back his deceased wife . 
