 = = = Plot = = = 
 Gabriel is sent by the Brotherhood of Light to the Lake of Oblivion , where his deceased wife , Marie , tells him that Spirits who founded the Brotherhood said that the Lords of Shadow 's power will save the world . Gabriel meets a man from the Brotherhood called Zobek , who states that a prophecy has been kept a secret by a select few , which tells of a pure @-@ hearted warrior who will claim the Lords of Shadow 's power to overcome evil . Zobek says that he and Gabriel must enter the lands of the Dark Lords in order to unite the Heavens with the world again , and that with this Gabriel can bring Marie back from the dead . Gabriel defeats the werewolf Cornell ( Richard Ridings ) and the vampire Carmilla ( Sally <unk> ) for the first two pieces of the God Mask on his journey , while learning that they were once two of the three founding members of the Order who fought the spawns of Satan in God 's favor until they transformed into the Spirits , with power only second to God 's . After they ascended to the Heavens , they left behind their dark sides , who were known as the Lords of Shadow . 
 Gabriel departs for the Land of the Necromancers for the last part of the mask . There , Zobek appears before Gabriel with the Devil Mask over his face , and divulges that he is the Lord of the Necromancers and that he grew tired of the Lords of Shadow dividing the power amongst the three of them . <unk> the events of the story , he searched Hell for this power until an evil force entered him and expanded his knowledge of the dark arts , which allowed him to cast the spell that separated the Earth from the Heavens so that the Spirits would contact the Brotherhood . Zobek discloses he used the Devil Mask on Gabriel to kill Marie and that all he needed was for Gabriel to restore the power of the Spirits to avoid suspicion from them . Satan ( Jason Isaacs ) emerges and takes the God Mask from Zobek , revealing himself as the mastermind who gave Zobek his powers so that Satan could have revenge on God and return to the Heavens . Gabriel confronts Satan and defeats him , releasing souls of the deceased from limbo . Gabriel discovers the God Mask cannot bring Marie back and that it only allows him to see through God 's eyes . Marie tells him he has been given a new life to redeem himself before she departs with the God Mask . 
 The story is expanded in two DLC packs titled Reverie and Resurrection . Reverie has Gabriel returning to Carmilla 's castle to contain an ancient evil , the Forgotten One ( Colin McFarlane ) , with the help of Carmilla 's daughter Laura ( Grace Vance ) , who is also a playable character that assists Gabriel in some sequences of the DLC . Before entering a portal into the Forgotten One 's prison , Laura tells Gabriel he cannot enter it in his mortal form and dies after she has Gabriel drink her blood to use its powers to enter , turning him into a vampire . During Resurrection , the Forgotten One aspires to destroy the humans ' world , but he is defeated by Gabriel who claims his power for himself . Corrupted by the Forgotten One 's power , Gabriel destroys his Combat Cross and leaves through the portal . 
 In a post @-@ credits scene after the main game 's ending , Zobek is seen alive during modern times , and has uncovered Gabriel living as a vampire called Dracula . Zobek mentions the acolytes of Satan are preparing for his return and that they must stop him before he takes revenge on both of them . Before Gabriel disappears , Zobek tells him he will free him of his immortality if he helps him . 
 = = Development = = 
 Castlevania was rebooted due to the team 's concern over the poor sales in their latest Castlevania games . The team wished to expand the franchise 's fanbase with this game . A number of prototypes in parallel development competed to become the next Castlevania title . Konami told MercurySteam the game would be an original intellectual property ( IP ) when it was first greenlit as a Castlevania title . Konami eventually asked them to cease work on Lords of Shadow while it was still in its early stages , until David Cox showed the Japanese senior management the game and was offered help by video game designer Hideo Kojima . Konami then chose the pitch for it as the next Castlevania entry . The original concept for the game was to remake the first Castlevania starring Simon Belmont , but it was later decided to make a reboot of the franchise . Lords of Shadow still drew inspiration from earlier titles in the series , most notably Castlevania for the Nintendo Entertainment System , and Super Castlevania IV . 
 Kojima 's input included advising Cox 's team to redesign some of the lead character , Gabriel , who he felt needed a " more heroic face " . Originally , Gabriel 's design resembled a classic barbarian , before Kojima then advised the staff to refine him into a character that was more relatable for the player . Cox mentioned that the voice acting provided by Robert Carlyle helped humanize Gabriel 's character . Kojima also oversaw the Japanese localization of the game , employing a number of voice actors from the Japanese versions of Metal Gear Solid . Cox stated that Kojima otherwise allowed the actors a lot of freedom with the project . MercurySteam wanted to depart from the art style of the other games in favour of one that was darker . Cox said , " The old games had this boyish depiction of vampires and monsters and we wanted them to have a darker edge this time around . " VideoGamer.com drew comparisons between the art style and Guillermo del Toro 's work . 
 The developers claimed to avoid the use of quick time events during combat , stating that they distracted the player from the action , but the game relies heavily upon them , requiring their use for nearly every engagement . When the game was 60 % complete , MercurySteam was aiming for 30 frames per second performance , as opposed to 60 frames , which the company said was not a priority at that stage . The game reached gold status following an announcement on Twitter made by David Cox on September 9 , 2010 . The game 's two downloadable content ( DLC ) episodes , Reverie and Resurrection , were released in February 2011 and June 2011 respectively to explain the twist from the story 's ending . David Cox referred to these DLC chapters as " a mistake . " 
 A port for Microsoft Windows was announced in June 2013 with the subtitle of " Ultimate Edition " . The downloadable content chapters are also included within the game . It was released in Steam on August 27 , 2013 and in retail on August 30 , 2013 . 
 = = Audio = = 
 The game 's musical score was written by Spanish composer Óscar Araujo using a 120 @-@ piece orchestra . It also features previous Castlevania musical themes . A soundtrack CD was also included in limited editions of the game , with twenty tracks in total . In October 2013 , specialist label Sumthing Else Music Works issued the soundtrack in a more widely available CD release while selling a digital format of the previously issued tracks that were featured on the CD that came with collector 's editions of the game alongside additional material exclusive to the digital release . Araujo was nominated by the International Film Music Critics Association for breakout composer of the year for his work on Lords of Shadow . He won " Best Original Score for a Video Game or Interactive Media . " 
 Lords of Shadow features voiced dialogue by a professional cast recorded in London , an aspect which has been acclaimed by the gaming press . The cast includes Robert Carlyle and Patrick Stewart . The part of Gabriel was originally going to be offered to Gerard Butler , but he was not available . The cast would make their own contributions to the characters during the recordings . David Cox mentioned that " What could have been an ' in and out ' voiceover job for them [ the voice actors ] wasn 't . Instead , their love of the script and praise saw them developing their characters and working through the motivations for them " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 During its development , Lords of Shadow was placed on several lists for most anticipated video games . GameTrailers ranked it at number 7 for " Top 10 Most Anticipated Games of 2010 . " Explicit Gamer wrote " With so many great games in store for us in 2010 , you should be sure not to overlook Castlevania : Lords of Shadow when it hits the shelves . " Games Radar placed Lords of Shadow at number 26 for 100 Most Anticipated Games of 2010 , stating that " This could be a megaton release . " 1UP.com 's top 50 most anticipated games of E3 2010 ranked Lords of Shadow at number 17 . Despite the heavy anticipation , Cox noted there was still a small number of fans who did not like the game 's transition to the 3D format . He stated , " Fair enough , some people aren 't going to like what we 're doing and we accept that but generally what we 're trying to do is bring the fans with us ... there 's no point in going back and making the same game again – the point is to make a clean break and move forward with the series . " 
 Reaction to Lords of Shadow was highly positive . 1UP 's review praised how the game took elements from other series and executed them well . GamesRadar drew favorable comparisons to other action games it has given a perfect score , including God of War III , Bayonetta and Dante 's Inferno , while praising it for being " huge in scope , length , and depth , and it 's polished with obvious love and passion " . Official Xbox Magazine lauded the size of the game 's content , writing " ... [ it ] is big . Actually , big 's too little a word . It 's monolithic ... From the <unk> 4 mood of the scarecrow puzzle to the unexpected oddity of the music box level , this is a game that seemingly hasn 't heard of DLC – and decides to offer you immense value for money instead . " The publication concluded it was otherwise a success . Other reviews noted that it was derivative of other games and that it was unlike the classic Castlevania series . GameSpot 's review calls the game " a good start for a series in need of some new blood – so to speak – it 's just unfortunate so much of it comes from other games and not an original source . " IGN found the combat repetitive but felt the puzzles and platforming provided good pacing . Game Informer 's Tim Turi praised its boss battles , its magic @-@ based combat system , and its story . GameZone ranked it as the sixth best Castlevania title . The staff praised the developers ' success at bringing Castlevania to 3D . 
 Xbox World 360 awarded the game the " Star Player Accolade " in 2010 . GamesMaster also gave it the " Gold Award . " 
 The game was a commercial success . By November 2010 Konami had shipped one million copies in North America and Europe . Despite not achieving a high rank on the sales chart , Konami was satisfied with the game 's sales considering the budget it had and the staff 's intentions . The game also became the best @-@ selling Castlevania game , which resulted in Konami 's request to produce more titles . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 On May 29 , 2012 , Nintendo Power magazine revealed a sequel to Lords of Shadow for the Nintendo 3DS was in development by MercurySteam , titled Castlevania : Lords of Shadow – Mirror of Fate . The game takes place 25 years after Lords of Shadow and is in 3D with 2D gameplay . It follows Trevor Belmont , Simon Belmont , Alucard and Gabriel Belmont at different points in history . 
 On May 31 , 2012 , Konami announced the sequel at E3 2012 , Castlevania : Lords of Shadow 2 . The game stars Gabriel as Dracula while he seeks to regain his lost powers to combat the return of Satan . He also must deal with the Belmont clan , who want him dead . Mirror of Fate has a climax that sets up the events of Lords of Shadow 2 . 
 = Aaron Eckhart = 
 Aaron Edward Eckhart ( born March 12 , 1968 ) is an American film and stage actor . 
 Born in California , he moved to the United Kingdom at the age of 13 , when his father relocated the family . Several years later , he began his acting career by performing in school plays , before moving to Sydney , Australia for his high school senior year . He left high school without graduating , but earned a diploma through an adult education course , and graduated from Brigham Young University , Utah in 1994 with a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree in film . For much of the mid @-@ 1990s , he lived in New York City as a struggling , unemployed actor . As an undergraduate at Brigham Young , Eckhart met director and writer Neil LaBute , who cast him in several of his own original plays . Five years later Eckhart made a debut as an unctuous , sociopathic ladies ' man in LaBute 's black comedy film , In the Company of Men ( 1997 ) . Under LaBute 's guidance he worked in the director 's films , Your Friends & Neighbors ( 1998 ) , Nurse Betty ( 2000 ) , and Possession ( 2002 ) . 
 Eckhart gained wide recognition as George in Steven Soderbergh 's critically acclaimed film , Erin Brockovich ( 2000 ) , and in 2006 received a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actor for his portrayal of Nick Naylor in Thank You for Smoking . Another mainstream breakout occurred in 2008 when he starred in the blockbuster Batman film The Dark Knight as District Attorney Harvey Dent . Other key roles include The Pledge ( 2001 ) , The Core ( 2003 ) , Rabbit Hole ( 2010 ) and Olympus Has Fallen ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Eckhart was born on March 12 , 1968 in Cupertino , California , the son of Mary Martha Eckhart ( née Lawrence ) , a writer , artist , and poet , and James Conrad Eckhart , a computer executive . He is the youngest of three brothers . His father was of German ( including German @-@ Russian ) descent , while his mother was of English , Scottish , German and Scotch @-@ Irish ancestry . He was raised as a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( LDS Church ) , and served a two @-@ year LDS mission in France and Switzerland . 
 Eckhart 's family relocated to England in 1981 , following his father 's job in information technology . The family resided in Ripley Surrey , South East England , then moved onto Walton @-@ on @-@ Thames , later moving to Cobham . While living in England , Eckhart attended American Community School , now known as ACS International Schools , where he was first introduced to acting , starring in a school production as Charlie Brown . In 1985 he moved to Sydney , where he attended American International School of Sydney for his high school senior year ; he further developed his acting skills in productions like Waiting for Godot , where he admits that he gave a " terrible " performance . In the autumn of his senior year Eckhart left the school in order to take a job working at the Warringah Mall movie theater . He eventually earned his diploma through an adult education course . This also allowed Eckhart time to enjoy a year of surfing in Hawaii and the coastal waters of France as well as skiing in the Alps . In 1988 , Eckhart returned to the United States and enrolled as a film major at Brigham Young University – Hawaii , but later transferred to Brigham Young University ( BYU ) in Provo , Utah . He graduated in 1994 with a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early work = = = 
 While at Brigham Young University , Eckhart appeared in the Mormon @-@ themed film , Godly Sorrow , and the role marked Eckhart 's professional debut . At this time he met director / writer Neil LaBute , who cast him in several of his own original plays . After graduating from BYU , Eckhart moved to New York City , acquired an agent , and took various occasional jobs , including bartending , bus driving , and construction work . His first television roles were in commercials . In 1994 he appeared as an extra on the television drama series , Beverly Hills , 90210 . Eckhart followed this small part with roles in documentary re @-@ enactments ( Ancient Secrets of the Bible : Samson ) , made @-@ for @-@ television movies , and short @-@ lived programs like Aliens in the Family . 
 In 1997 Eckhart was approached by Neil LaBute to star in a film adaptation of LaBute 's stage play , In the Company of Men . He played a frustrated white @-@ collar worker who planned to woo a deaf office worker , gain her affections , then suddenly dump her . The film , his first feature to reach theaters , was critically well received , with Desson Howe of The Washington Post reporting that Eckhart is the " movie 's most malignant presence " and that he " is in chilling command as a sort of satanic prince in <unk> " . In the Company of Men was a critical success , winning Best First Film at the 63rd annual New York Film Critics Circle Award . His performance won him the Independent Spirit Award in the category of Best Debut Performance . The film was ranked as one of " The 25 Most Dangerous Movies " by Premiere magazine . 
 The following year Eckhart starred in another LaBute feature , Your Friends & Neighbors ( 1998 ) , as Barry , a sexually frustrated husband in a dysfunctional marriage . For the role Eckhart was required to gain weight . In 1999 he starred opposite Elisabeth Shue in Molly , a romantic comedy @-@ drama in which he played the self @-@ absorbed brother of an autistic woman who was cured by surgery . Eckhart also starred that year as a football coach , an offensive coordinator in Oliver Stone 's Any Given Sunday . 
 = = = Critical success = = = 
 Eckhart first gained wide exposure in 2000 as George , a pony tailed , <unk> biker , in Steven Soderbergh 's drama , Erin Brockovich . The film was met with reasonable reviews , and was a box office success , earning $ 256 million worldwide . His performance was well received by critics ; Entertainment Weekly 's Owen Gleiberman , wrote that Eckhart " may be playing a bit of an ideal [ ... ] but he makes goodness as palpable as he did yuppie evil in ' In the Company of Men ' . " In an August 2004 interview , Eckhart claimed that he had not worked for nearly a year before he was cast in the movie . " I felt like I sort of was getting away from what I wanted to do as an actor . [ ... ] I had nine months off , but it wasn 't a vacation . Sure , I didn 't earn any money for nine months , but every day I was reading scripts , I was producing my own material , I was taking meetings , I was working on my craft . " 
 Following the release of Erin Brockovich , Eckhart co @-@ starred with Renée Zellweger in LaBute 's Nurse Betty ( 2000 ) . He next appeared in Sean Penn 's mystery feature The Pledge ( 2001 ) , in which he played a young detective partnered with a veteran detective , played by Jack Nicholson . The movie received generally favorable reviews , but it did not fare particularly well at the box office . The following year , he collaborated with LaBute in a film adaptation of the Man Booker Prize @-@ winning novel Possession ( 2002 ) . In 2003 , Eckhart co @-@ starred with Hilary Swank in The Core , a film about a geophysicist who tries to detonate a nuclear device in order to save the world from destruction . The film was critically and financially unsuccessful . Also in 2003 , he appeared in The Missing , in which he played Cate Blanchett 's lover , and in the action @-@ thriller Paycheck opposite Ben Affleck . Paycheck , based on a short story by science fiction writer Philip K. Dick , garnered generally negative reception . Film critic Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the film two stars ( out of four ) , saying that he " enjoyed the movie " but felt that it " exploits [ Dick 's story ] for its action and plot potential , but never really develops it . " 
 The following year , away from film , Eckhart guest starred in two episodes of NBC 's comedy sitcom Frasier , where he played a boyfriend of Charlotte , Dr. Frasier Crane 's love interest . His next film role was in E. Elias <unk> 's thriller Suspect Zero , a movie about an FBI agent who tracks down a killer who murders serial killers . Upon release , the movie received broadly negative reviews . Despite the reception , Eckhart 's performance was favored by critics ; Newsday wrote that Eckhart was a " classically handsome leading man ... but <unk> demands of him complexity and anguish . " Suspect Zero was a box office disappointment , earning $ 11 million worldwide . Also in 2004 , Eckhart starred on the London stage , opposite Julia Stiles , in David Mamet 's <unk> at the Garrick Theatre . The drama ran until mid @-@ 2004 . For this performance , Eckhart received favorable critical reviews . In 2005 , returning to film , Eckhart appeared in <unk> as a therapist who takes a job at a rundown mental hospital that once treated his father ( Nick Nolte ) . The feature was never given a full theatrical release , eventually being released straight to DVD in 2007 . 
 = = = Worldwide recognition = = = 
 Eckhart 's next project was Thank You for Smoking , in which he played Nick Naylor , a tobacco lobbyist whose firm researched the link between smoking cigarettes and lung cancer . Eckhart said that he felt challenged playing the role : " You have to say these words that are crazy , and yet do it with a smile on your face and have the audience like you . At one point , I 'm doing a talk show with a kid who 's dying of cancer , and he 's going through chemotherapy and the whole thing , and I spin it so the anti @-@ smoking people are the bad guys and I 'm the good guy , and I 'm this guy 's best friend . I mean , it 's whacked out . " The film was screened at a special presentation at the 30th annual Toronto International Film Festival in 2005 . It had a limited release in March 2006 and was released worldwide the following month . For his performance , Eckhart received a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actor in a Motion Picture Musical or Comedy . A contributor of USA Today wrote that he gave a " standout , whip @-@ smart performance " citing that as Nick Naylor he kept him " likable even in his cynicism . " In the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer review of the film , it was reported that " Under his chummy but <unk> smile " Eckhart radiated charm and " Naylor 's true joys : manipulating arguments , steering debate , cooking words . " 
 In this same year , he starred with Helena Bonham Carter in Conversations with Other Women ( 2006 ) . While promoting this film , Eckhart revealed that he wishes not to be typecast or repeat himself , saying he does not want to play any more villains . He appeared in the 2006 film noir The Black Dahlia — based on a real 1947 crime — as Sergeant Leland " Lee " Blanchard , a detective investigating the murder of Elizabeth Short , later dubbed the " Black Dahlia " . The film premiered at the 63rd Venice International Film Festival . Reception for the movie was mixed , but many critics enjoyed Eckhart 's performance ; Time Out magazine praised Eckhart and co @-@ star Hilary Swank for their performances , writing " ... both [ are ] great in their secondary roles . " 
 Internationally viewed as a sex symbol , he was named one of People magazine 's 100 Most Beautiful People in 2006 . The following year , Eckhart was invited to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences . He starred in No Reservations ( 2007 ) , a remake of the 2001 German romantic comedy , Mostly Martha . He starred opposite Catherine Zeta @-@ Jones as an up @-@ and @-@ coming hotshot chef . The film was met with mixed reviews and was unfavorably compared to the original film . Eckhart starred in the 2008 comedy Meet Bill , in which he played the eponymous character , a sad executive working at his father @-@ in @-@ law 's bank . He gained 30 pounds and donned a fat suit for the role . 
 Also in 2008 , Eckhart portrayed the comic book character , Harvey Dent , in Christopher Nolan 's The Dark Knight , the sequel to the 2005 film Batman Begins . Nolan 's decision to cast Eckhart was based on his portrayal of corrupt characters in the films In the Company of Men , The Black Dahlia , and Thank You For Smoking . He noted in his depiction of the character that " [ he ] is still true to himself . He 's a crime fighter , he 's not killing good people . He 's not a bad guy , not purely " , while admitting " I 'm interested in good guys gone wrong . " The Dark Knight was a big financial and critical success , setting a new opening weekend box office record for North America . With revenue of $ 1 billion worldwide , it became the fourth highest grossing film of all time , and the highest grossing film of Eckhart 's career . Roger Ebert opined that Eckhart did an " especially good job " as his character in the feature , while Premiere magazine also enjoyed his performance , noting that he " makes you believe in his ill @-@ fated ambition ... of morphing into the conniving Two @-@ Face . " 
 Following the success of The Dark Knight , Eckhart next appeared in Alan Ball 's <unk> ( 2008 ) , an adaption of the Alicia <unk> novel of the same name , in which he played a Gulf War Army reservist who sexually abuses his 13 @-@ year @-@ old Arab @-@ American neighbor . The film was screened under the name Nothing is Private at the 2007 Toronto International Film Festival . When he was first approached for the role , Eckhart revealed that he did not want to play a " pedophile " . When asked about the sex scenes , Eckhart said : " Those were difficult times .... The way I did it was to really trust Alan . It was in the words . I really trusted Summer [ <unk> ] , and I tried to get her to trust me , to build a relationship when we were doing physical scenes . We 'd really rehearse them mechanically , and I 'd say , ' OK , I 'm going to put my hand here , I 'm going to do this . ' ... I think I found it more difficult . " <unk> was critically and financially unsuccessful . 
 He next co @-@ starred with Jennifer Aniston in the romantic drama , Love Happens , released in September 2009 , as a motivational speaker coming to terms with his own grief . The movie received ambivalent reviews , with a contributor of the Orlando Sentinel reporting that Eckhart plays " broken " for the whole movie . The following year he starred alongside Nicole Kidman in Rabbit Hole ( 2010 ) , an adaption of David Lindsay @-@ Abaire 's 2005 drama of the same name . The feature premiered at the 2010 Toronto International Film Festival . In 2011 , Eckhart starred in Jonathan Liebesman 's science fiction film Battle : Los Angeles , in which he portrayed a combat veteran Marine platoon sergeant . The film was set in modern @-@ day Los Angeles during a global alien invasion , and followed a platoon of U.S. Marines who are joined by an Air Force special operations sergeant and some Army infantry soldiers in combat operations against the alien enemy . He appeared alongside Johnny Depp , Richard Jenkins , and Amber Heard in Hunter S. Thompson 's novel adaptation The Rum Diary , directed by Bruce Robinson . In the film , Eckhart played Sanderson , a wealthy landowner , who believes everything has a price and introduces Paul Kemp ( Depp ) to a different standard of living . He recently appeared as the U.S. President who has taken hostage in the 2013 action thriller Olympus Has Fallen . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Eckhart once was engaged to actress Emily Cline whom he met during filming of In the Company of Men , but they separated in 1998 . He always has been reluctant in speaking about his relationships in interviews . Eckhart dated country music songwriter and member of <unk> , <unk> Osborn , from 2006 – 2007 . He appeared in the group 's video for their single , " I 'm Taking the Wheel " . 
 In various interviews Eckhart has talked about his beliefs , his way of life , and his future career ambitions . Talking to Entertainment Weekly regarding his Mormon faith , he revealed : " I 'm sure people think I 'm a Mormon , but I don 't know that I 'm a Mormon anymore , you know ? To be honest , to be perfectly clear , I 'd be a hypocrite if I did say that I was , just because I haven 't lived that lifestyle for so many years . " In other interviews he has divulged that , through hypnosis , he quit drinking , smoking , and partying , and that in his spare time , he enjoys photography . In an interview with Parade magazine , Eckhart revealed that before he discovered acting , he wanted to become a songwriter . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = When God Writes Your Love Story = 
 When God Writes Your Love Story : The Ultimate Approach to Guy / Girl Relationships is a 1999 book by Eric and Leslie Ludy , an American married couple . After becoming a bestseller on the Christian book market , the book was republished in 2004 and then revised and expanded in 2009 . It tells the story of the authors ' first meeting , courtship , and marriage . The authors advise single people not to be physically or emotionally intimate with others , but to wait for the spouse that God has planned for them . The first edition was packaged with a CD single by the Ludys : " Faithfully " , a song they had written specifically to accompany the book . 
 The book is divided into five sections and sixteen chapters . Each chapter is written from the perspective of one of the two authors ; nine are by Eric , while Leslie wrote seven , as well as the introduction . The Ludys argue that one 's love life should be both guided by and subordinate to one 's relationship with God . Leslie writes that God offers new beginnings to formerly unchaste or sexually abused individuals . 
 Other American Christian authors , such as Mark Matlock and Jason Evert , wrote highly of When God Writes Your Love Story . Leah Andrews of the Lewiston Morning Tribune compared When God Writes Your Love Story to other popular Christian books providing alternatives to dating , including Joshua Harris 's I Kissed Dating Goodbye and Boy Meets Girl . Eastern University Christian studies professors Margaret and Dwight Peterson responded to the Ludys ' book by writing an essay called " God Does Not Want to Write Your Love Story , " in which the Petersons argue that the book makes young people see marriage as a fantasy comparable to that of Disney Princesses , and that this fantasy often results in disappointment . Rick Holland , an instructor at The Master 's College and Seminary and pastor of College and Student Ministries at Grace Community Church , criticized the Ludys ' description of dating , claiming it was based too much on anecdotes and not enough on the Bible . 
 = = Background = = 
 When God Writes Your Love Story , first published in the United States in 1999 , is the third book written by Eric and Leslie Ludy , an American married couple . Like the Ludys ' previous two books , His Perfect Faithfulness : The Story of our Courtship ( 1996 ) and Romance God 's Way ( 1997 ) , its major themes are romance and Christianity ; it tells the story of the authors ' first meeting , courtship , and marriage . After becoming a bestseller on the Christian book market , When God Writes Your Love Story was republished in 2004 and then revised and expanded in 2009 . More than 350 @,@ 000 copies were sold worldwide by 2009 . Translations of the book have been published in Spanish , German , and Traditional Chinese . 
 Eric and Leslie Ludy met when Eric was 21 and Leslie was 16 . They pursued a friendship for several months before starting to court , and married in December 1994 , the same month that Eric turned 24 . In When God Writes Your Love Story , the Ludys advise single people not to be physically or emotionally intimate with others , but to wait for the life partner that God has planned for them ; the Ludys suggest that one should marry this person rather than independently choosing a mate . Also focusing on premarital physical and emotional purity , the authors do not discuss the physical processes of sexual activity . Like many other Christian books about premarital romantic relationships , the Ludys ' book explicitly does not present a set of rules to follow or a strategy for romantic success , but rather gives readers a framework for pursuing Christian romantic relationships ; the book is intended to be a tool in the creation of the reader 's unique romantic relationship rather than as a blueprint explaining what all Christian romantic relationships are supposed to look like . 
 Before the book 's release , it was endorsed by Leslie and Les Parrott , authors of Saving Your Marriage Before It Starts ; Beverly LaHaye of Concerned Women for America ; and Joe White , President of <unk> Kamps . The first edition was packaged with a CD single by the Ludys : " Faithfully " , a song they had written specifically to accompany the book , with lyrics discussing the beauty of having a life partner . 
 = = Content = = 
 The book is divided into five sections and sixteen chapters . Each chapter is written from the perspective of one of the two authors ; nine are by Eric , while Leslie writes seven , as well as the introduction . The first section , " Desiring a Love Story " , addresses sexual desire and lovesickness , suggesting that temporary relationships cannot fulfill those longings . Section Two , " Preparing for a Love Story " , advances ways in which one might , before initiating a romantic relationship , develop the characteristics of a good spouse . The next section , " Waiting for a Love Story " , discusses the practice of fidelity to one 's future spouse before meeting them by way of sexual abstinence and argues that waiting indefinitely is worth it even if one 's soulmate never arrives . In the fourth section , " <unk> a Love Story " , the Ludys provide advice on how to proceed once the possibility of a romantic relationship has presented itself . The final section , " Discovering a God @-@ written Love Story " , argues that it is never too late to give God control of one 's love life , and that this sacrifice should be made not in expectation of personal benefit but rather to benefit one 's future spouse and to honor God . 
 Early in the book , Eric retells a portion of Homer 's Odyssey , describing the episode in which Ulysses sails near the land of the Sirens : creatures whose song so attracts seafarers that they sail towards them and crash on the rocks . In this story , Ulysses orders all his men to fill their ears with beeswax and then tie him to the mast ; the ship therefore sails through the area unharmed . Still , Ulysses , hearing the Sirens ' song the entire time , is tortured by its beauty and his inability to get to the song 's source . Eric follows this story with a retelling of the story of Orpheus 's encounter with the Sirens . In this story , Orpheus 's solution is to play a " sweeter song " than that of the Sirens ; his ship also passes unharmed , his men so entranced by his song that they do not notice the Sirens . Eric then argues from analogy that , normally , those who force themselves to resist premarital sexual and romantic temptations are likely to find the process torturous ( like Ulysses ) , while those who listen to the plans God has for them find waiting for marriage much easier ( as it was for Orpheus 's crew ) . Eric expands on the concept of the " sweeter song " throughout the book and often refers to it . Another frequently mentioned concept in the book is " the beautiful side of love " ; the Ludys use this phrase to refer to a lasting , satisfying romance and contrast this state with such other experiences as breakups , unrequited love , and sexual frustration . 
 The Ludys argue that one 's love life should be both guided by and subordinate to one 's relationship with God . They suggest that , " if God 's plan and purpose for you is marriage , then the person you will one day marry ... is alive and wandering the earth " and that this knowledge should encourage people to act in such a way that their future spouses would be pleased . The Ludys contest the definition of " true love " as an emotion ; instead , they define " true love " as the choice to commit to another person no matter what happens . Eric writes that " there are two ways each of us can approach life : spending our days meeting our needs or looking for ways to meet others ' needs . The mystery is that when we spend our life focused on our own needs , we are never satisfied ... but when we pour out our life and focus on how we can serve others ... our deepest needs are met as well ! " 
 Leslie argues that non @-@ permanent relationships involving physical or emotional intimacy ( or both ) result in long @-@ term psychological pain and that one should therefore only become physically or emotionally intimate with one 's spouse . Eric retells the Greek myth of the suitors of Penelope , in which Penelope , whose husband Ulysses is erroneously believed to be dead , resists a large number of marriage proposals until Ulysses returns and kills the suitors . Eric uses the story to suggest that one should be faithful to one 's future spouse even if it appears that they will never arrive . Eric argues that selfless service is an important part of marriage . He therefore suggests that a good way for a man to make himself ready for his future spouse is to serve his mother and sisters , and that single women should practice serving their fathers and brothers . Leslie writes that she is commonly asked the question " How will I know when a relationship is from God ? " and her response is that people are likelier to recognize that a relationship is from God when they have a " team ... made up of godly people who can keep us accountable to our commitments , pray with us , and provide a refreshing outside perspective . " She indicates that this team should include one 's parents or , if one does not have living Christian parents , other Christians of an older generation . She writes that God offers new beginnings to formerly unchaste or sexually abused individuals . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 = = = Discussions of context = = = 
 When God Writes Your Love Story is a popular Christian book that provides alternatives to dating . For this reason , Leah Andrews of the Lewiston Morning Tribune compared the book to Joshua Harris 's I Kissed Dating Goodbye and Boy Meets Girl . When God Writes Your Love Story also contains Evangelical sexual abstinence teachings . Christine Gardner , a communications professor at Wheaton College , investigates such teachings in Making Chastity Sexy : The Rhetoric of Evangelical Abstinence Campaigns , and discusses the Ludys ' book as part of this investigation . Gardner writes that she interviewed a twenty @-@ two @-@ year @-@ old woman who had read When God Writes Your Love Story and " desperately wanted God to write her love story , but she thought that she would help him out by filling in the blanks . " Gardner argues that the result " was a fractured fairy tale , one without a happy ending . " 
 In the journal Critical Research on Religion , Courtney Ann Irby of Loyola University Chicago writes that the Ludys disparage secular American culture as overtly sexual and thus an obstacle to Christians . According to Irby , secular beliefs about dating are negatively presented in When God Writes Your Love Story and hookup culture is consistently discussed , although Irby indicates that , since the publication of the Ludys ' book , some scholars have disputed the prevalence of casual sex in the United States . Irby suggests that the Ludys have no discernible qualifications to speak on the issues they discuss , but rather justify their message by emphasising their own personal experience as the reason for their authority . She writes that the Ludys recognize their lack of expertise and therefore emphasize trusting God as being more important than learning from the specific stories in the book . Irby suggests that the Ludys ' book is , in these respects , similar to many other Evangelical books about premarital romantic relationships , such as <unk> <unk> 's And the Bride Wore White , Elisabeth Elliot 's Passion and Purity and Quest for Love , Don <unk> 's Choosing God 's Best , Ben Young 's and Sam Adams ' The Ten Commandments of Dating , Henry Cloud 's and John Townsend 's Boundaries in Dating , Alex <unk> 's 5 Paths to the Love of Your Life , and Joshua Harris 's I Kissed Dating Goodbye and Boy Meets Girl . 
 = = = Christian responses to the book 's advice = = = 
 Christine A. Colón and Bonnie E. Field , two single women in their thirties , expressed their frustrations with the Ludys ' book in Singled Out : Why Celibacy Must Be Reinvented in Today 's Church . Colón , an English professor at Wheaton College ; and Field , a former English professor at Wayland Baptist University , criticize Leslie Ludy 's account of her own wait for God to bring her a romantic partner . They argue that " the language Ludy uses to describe her time of waiting and trusting implies a difficult and long struggle that is finally rewarded by God " and suggests that a long wait results in an even greater reward , a concept that Colón and Field , despite acknowledging as commonplace , disagree with and trace back to William Shakespeare 's Cymbeline , which states " the more delay 'd , delighted . " Singled Out suggests that , because Leslie was only 16 when she met Eric , her story is unlikely to inspire hope in older singles . 
 Colón and Field compare When God Writes Your Love Story to Derek Prince 's God Is a Matchmaker , and argue that Prince 's book better expresses the concept that God allows some people to receive their soulmates quickly , while requiring others to undergo a long wait . While the Ludys ' book suggests that it is worth waiting for a soulmate because the wait indicates a better prize , Colón and Field favour Prince 's reasons for advocating waiting for one 's soulmate , which are that doing so tests one 's faith and that " God has required many of His choicest servants to wait long periods for the fulfillment of His promise or purpose . " 
 Margaret and Dwight Peterson , an American married couple who are Christian Studies professors at Eastern University , teach a course together called " Christian Marriage " and were very critical of When God Writes Your Love Story . They responded to the Ludys ' book by writing an essay called " God Does Not Want to Write Your Love Story . " They write therein that , while they read When God Writes Your Love Story , " it began to dawn on us with particular clarity how different these stories of romance are from any traditionally Christian understanding of marriage . " In response to Leslie Ludy 's recommendation that a single woman should seek to be God 's princess until becoming the princess of a human prince , the Petersons argue that this analogy makes young people see marriage as a fantasy comparable to that of Disney Princesses , and that this fantasy often results in disappointment . While referencing When God Writes Your Love Story specifically on several occasions , the Petersons acknowledge that the Ludys ' book is one of many books with this premise and write that " it is the entire genre that is problematic . " 
 Rick Holland , an instructor at The Master 's College and Seminary and pastor of College and Student Ministries at Grace Community Church , criticized the Ludys ' description of dating , claiming it was based too much on anecdotes and not enough on the Bible . Nonetheless , he commended the couple on the relevant Bible verses they do quote and he argued that the advice the Ludys share in the book is sound and that their story is an encouraging one . 
 When God Writes Your Love Story was received positively by some American Christian authors . In Freshman : The College Student 's Guide to Developing Wisdom , Mark Matlock , an ordained minister and youth pastor recommends When God Writes Your Love Story to college students . He describes the Ludys ' book as funny , honest , and candid . Jason Evert , a Catholic author and chastity speaker , wrote positively of When God Writes Your Love Story in his book If You Really Loved Me : 100 Questions on Dating , Relationships , and Sexual Purity . Evert commends Leslie Ludy writing about the importance of listening intently and regularly to God 's voice in seeking discernment about romantic relationships . Also in If You Really Loved Me , Evert praises a passage from When God Writes Your Love Story in which Leslie Ludy recalls having spoken with a group of young men who all agreed that the most desirable women were those who were slow to establish strong emotional attachments to potential romantic partners , and that the least desirable women were those who were emotionally promiscuous . According to Evert , these men are right ; he uses the passage to support his argument that lack of sexual experience is attractive . 
 Commentators have also noted the song " Faithfully " that accompanied the book . The Petersons criticized it , arguing that its lyrics suggest that singles should seek a kind of unachievable perfection in their future marriage and spouse . On the other hand , in Eyes Wide Open : Avoiding the Heartbreak of Emotional Promiscuity , Brienne Murk , a Christian musician and public speaker , identifies " Faithfully " as one of her favourite songs . 
 In 22 and Single : A Coming of Age Story , Katie <unk> wrote that , after reading the first chapter of When God Writes Your Love Story , she stopped because " it was too hard to hear about the wonderful way in which God brought another perfect couple together — because it wasn 't happening for me . " She wrote that her friends kept recommending the book to her , even after she had tried starting it . She eventually decided that the reason she didn 't like the book was her own selfishness in seeking to fulfill her own desires rather than leaving her desires for God to work out . She then read the book again , and wrote that God used her reading of it to make her thankful for her time as a single person . She also wrote that she found the book to be " mostly about letting God 's love overflow into all areas of your life rather than tales of perfect Christian couples . " 
 In 2012 , Clear Choices Pregnancy Resources Center , an American pro @-@ life crisis pregnancy center operated by Christians in Grayson County , Kentucky , offered a course on the topic of sexual integrity that employed When God Writes Your Love Story and two other Christian books as its basis , the other two being Gary Chapman 's The Five Love Languages and Bill and Pam Farrel 's Single Men Are Like Waffles — Single Women Are Like Spaghetti . 
 = Twice Through the Heart = 
 Twice Through the Heart is a musical work by the English composer Mark @-@ Anthony Turnage , variously described as a dramatic scena , as a monodrama , as a song cycle , as a chamber opera or even as a " dramatic song @-@ cycle @-@ cum @-@ scena " . It is scored for mezzo @-@ soprano and 16 instrumentalists and sets an English @-@ language libretto by the Scottish poet Jackie Kay based on her script for a television programme about a woman jailed for killing her violent husband . 
 Originally intended to be a full @-@ length opera , Twice was composed between 1994 and 1996 , undergoing substantial reworking before Turnage found a form with which he was satisfied . It was first performed in 1997 when it was put on both in the concert hall and in the opera house . The critical reception has been generally favourable , with several authors commenting positively about the instrumental writing and emotional impact of the work , though some critics see limitations in the libretto , find the mood of the work too unrelenting or note the great demands that the vocal writing provides for the soloist . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Twice Through the Heart is based on a 1992 poetry documentary of the same name that Kay had written for the BBC television series Words on Film . Kay was concerned by inequalities in how the legal system treats men and women who kill their spouses and , in particular , in how the law on provocation in the United Kingdom was then interpreted , allowing a defence to murder only in the context of what happened immediately before a homicide and excluding the battered woman defence which considers the broader context which may have involved years of violent abuse . She chose to base the poems on a specific true case , that of Amelia Rossiter , a woman in her sixties who refused to give evidence in court about the years of violence from her husband that eventually led to her stabbing him twice through the heart with a kitchen knife . By the time Kay 's programme was broadcast , Rossiter had been freed , her conviction reduced to manslaughter after her plea of provocation was accepted . 
 Turnage , who had previously composed one full @-@ length opera , Greek , worked on the musical version of Twice between 1994 and 1996 . It was commissioned by the John S. Cohen Foundation . He had learnt of Kay 's original work after he was shown a copy of the BBC video by poet and artistic director Maura Dooley . It was a difficult development with Turnage at one point abandoning the work in favour of other pieces . Composer and librettist had started out with the intention of developing a full @-@ length opera including both soprano and baritone narrators . ( The original television script had included poems for the judge as well as for the woman . ) However , the creators felt that their attempts at redeveloping and expanding the original work " water [ ed ] down its impact " and they eventually cut everything apart from the woman 's words . Both text and setting also underwent repeated changes in detail . Kay changed some of the wording to make it easier to sing . Similarly , Turnage revised the music after trying it out with Sally Burgess who was to give the first performance . He had become Composer in Association with English National Opera ( ENO ) in 1995 and was able to thoroughly workshop Twice and its companion piece with ENO 's Contemporary Opera Studio before arriving at their respective final versions . 
 = = Description = = 
 Twice Through the Heart lasts for approximately 30 minutes . It consists of nine musical numbers arranged in three sections . It is narrated by a woman in the prison cell where she has been sent for the murder of her husband . To express the woman 's feelings , Kay deliberately chose a voice that was unpoetic : " I wanted the voice to be so everyday , it would be banal . " Turnage 's music too includes similarly basic material , what critic Tom Service describes as " simple hummable tunes " , but these are transformed and distorted , a metaphor for how initial loving intimacy is destroyed and distorted by years of violence and abuse . Turnage 's musical language is modernist but influenced by jazz , an area of musical interest he shared with Kay . 
 The instrumental scoring is for flute ( doubling alto flute ) , oboe ( doubling cor anglais ) , 2 clarinets ( one doubling bass clarinet ) , horn , trumpet , trombone , one percussionist , harp , piano ( doubling celeste ) , violin , 2 violas , 2 cellos and double bass . The percussion consists of 8 crotales , vibraphone , marimba , suspended cymbal , 3 gongs , tam @-@ tam , bass drum , pedal bass drum , ratchet , claves and whip . 
 = = = The work = = = 
 = = = = Part One = = = = 
 1 . No Way Out — The woman tells of how her husband beat her and threatened to <unk> her with a towel and of how she picked up a kitchen knife to defend herself . 
 2 . Inside ( part 1 ) — The woman is in jail thinking of how she failed to take her lawyer 's advice to give evidence about her husband 's violence , because she did not want to be disloyal . 
 3 . Love — She remembers how she and her husband once loved each other and how things went wrong after their child was born . 
 = = = = Part Two = = = = 
 4 . By the Sea — She thinks of how she felt trapped in their house by the sea because she could not talk of his violence . 
 5 . Inside ( part 2 ) — She thinks of her husband and of her " heart , broken like bones " . 
 6 . Four Walls — She is trapped within the four walls of her house , her husband turning down suggestions of holidays and writing instructions for her in notes . 
 = = = = Part Three = = = = 
 7 . Interlude — Instrumental section . 
 8 . Landslide — Her husband is buried in land , she in prison . 
 9 . China Cup — She is locked in with only the decorated china cup which she has taken from home to prison . 
 = = Performance and recording history = = 
 Twice Through the Heart was first performed on 13 June 1997 at the Snape Maltings Concert Hall during the 50th Aldeburgh Festival . Sally Burgess was accompanied by the ENO Contemporary Opera Studio conducted by Nicholas Kok . The companion piece was the chamber opera The Country of the Blind which Turnage had composed relatively quickly in order to make up a full programme after Twice had turned out much shorter than originally intended . To Turnage 's surprise , ENO decided to follow up the original four performances , split between Snape Maltings and the Queen Elizabeth Hall , with a staging at its main home in the London Coliseum . This production was premiered on 20 October 1997 with Susan Bickley as the soloist and with Kok again conducting . In this context it was a companion piece for From the House of the Dead , an opera set in a Siberian prison camp . 
 Twice had received its mainland European premiere a day earlier than the first Coliseum performance , when it was given by the State Opera in Gießen , Germany . In 1998 , Twice received its North American premiere in Winnipeg , Canada and was also given in the United States , ( by the New York Philharmonic , ) Italy , Belgium and the Netherlands . In these last two countries composer Oliver Knussen conducted . The work has continued to receive international performances , for example by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra in 2009 . 
 A commercial recording was made in 2007 with Sarah Connolly singing and Marin Alsop conducting the London Philharmonic Orchestra . Some live performances have been recorded for broadcast , including one at the Queen Elizabeth Hall with the original performers , and the Winnipeg performance . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In reviewing the first performance for The Independent , Nick Kimberley felt that the Twice Through the Heart " w [ ore ] the scars of a difficult birth " with Sally Burgess " strain [ ing ] to find specific expression in the sharp angles and steep slides Turnage provided " in a work that Kimberley considered less natural than its relatively quickly written companion piece . For this critic , the instrumental writing came over far more successfully than the vocal part with Kimberley praising the use of colour and finding the " draining " final climax particularly effective . Michael Kennedy , in contrast to Kimberley , found the scena " the more dramatic and musically more inventive " of the two works performed that night . 
 Bernard Holland , of The New York Times heard both the Aldeburgh and New York premieres . He noted the influence both of Alban Berg and , in the strings and percussion , of rock music and appreciated a musical language that makes modernism easier on the ears . However , he felt a degree of ambivalence about a composer he described as " theatrical ... in both the good and bad senses of the word . " 
 Geoff Brown , reviewing Marin Alsop and Sarah Connolly 's recording in The Times , praised the directness of both Kay 's and Turnage 's writing and described Twice Through the Heart and its " awful clarity " as " among the best in Turnage 's recent output " . David Gutman suggested in Gramophone that " if listeners feel uncomfortable with the mix of artful delivery and documentary realism , that may be part of the intended effect . " The critics of The Daily Telegraph were later to list this disc among the hundred best classical recordings . 
 John von Rhein of the Chicago Tribune noted the <unk> of the solo part and criticised the " banality " of Kay 's verse but reported that he " was held by the sensitive lyrical , rather <unk> vocal writing and often translucent scoring " . " The woman 's suppressed anger and fear rise to the surface through Turnage 's music — poignant gritty yet always compassionate . " Considering the same Chicago performance , freelance music critic Lawrence A. Johnson , was taken by the use of instrumental colour and also by Turnage 's " <unk> rhythmic vitality " , but " If Twice through the Heart [ sic ] just misses being one of Turnage 's top @-@ drawer works , it 's because of the somewhat unvaried air of doleful melancholy as well as the text 's more pedestrian moments and repetition . " 
 Not all critics have been hostile to Kay 's poetry : reviewing a concert by the London Sinfonietta , Nicholas Williams refers to her " arresting text " . Whether positive or negative , the music critics only assessed part of Kay 's original work . In considering the original television version of Twice , the literary critic Laura Severin , praised the contrasted voices and the use of repetition as an adaptation to a medium where listeners would be less attentive to the words than if they were attending a conventional poetry reading . She also saw Kay 's portrayal of Rossiter as one that avoided both a conventional masculine representation of her as a ruthless murderer and an overly simplistic feminist one of her as a passive victim . 
 = Harry Trott = 
 George Henry Stevens " Harry " Trott ( 5 August 1866 – 10 November 1917 ) was an Australian Test cricketer who played 24 Test matches as an all @-@ rounder between 1888 and 1898 . Although Trott was a versatile batsman , spin bowler and outstanding fielder , " ... it is as a captain that he is best remembered , an understanding judge of human nature " . After a period of some instability and ill discipline in Australian cricket , he was the first in a succession of assertive Australian captains that included Joe Darling , Monty Noble and Clem Hill , who restored the prestige of the Test team . Respected by teammates and opponents alike for his cricketing judgement , he was quick to pick up a weakness in opponents . A right @-@ hand batsman , Trott was known for his sound defence and vigorous hitting . His slow leg spin bowling was often able to deceive batsmen through subtle variations of pace and flight , but allowed opposition batsmen to score quickly . 
 Trott made his Test debut in 1888 and toured England four times ; 1888 , 1890 , 1893 and 1896 , scoring over 1000 runs on each occasion . For the tour in 1896 , Trott was elected captain by his team @-@ mates . Despite England winning the series two Tests to one and retaining The Ashes , Trott 's ability as a captain was highly regarded . In the return series in Australia in 1897 – 98 , Trott 's team was more successful , winning the series 4 Tests to 1 and regaining The Ashes . At a time when the federation of the Australian colonies was under discussion , the victory saw Trott praised as a " national institution " and his team as having " done more for the federation of Australian hearts than all the big delegates put together " . 
 A severe mental illness abruptly ended the Test career of Trott at the age of 31 . After a series of seizures in 1898 , he suffered from insomnia , apathy and memory loss . Failing to recover lucidity , he was committed to a psychiatric hospital for over 400 days . After he was discharged , in time he returned to cricket , once again playing first @-@ class cricket for his state , Victoria , and performing at a consistently high level for his club , South Melbourne . A postman by trade , after retirement from cricket Trott served as a selector for the Victorian team . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Born in Collingwood , an inner suburb of Melbourne , Trott was the third of eight children for accountant Adolphus Trott and his wife Mary @-@ Ann ( née Stephens ) . His younger brother Albert also became a Test cricketer . The siblings played their junior cricket with the local Capulet club . Harry transferred to South Melbourne , which played in Melbourne 's pennant competition , after scouts for the club noticed him playing park cricket . In his first season , the 18 @-@ year @-@ old Trott recorded the best batting average and bowling average for the team . 
 Trott made his first @-@ class debut for Victoria against an " Australian XI " on New Year 's Day 1886 , scoring four and 18 not out . Two months later , he played his first inter @-@ colonial match , against South Australia at the Adelaide Oval . Batting , he scored 54 runs ; his innings included a memorable hit over the leg side boundary from the bowling of leading Test all @-@ rounder George Giffen , and he captured seven wickets for the match with his bowling . In 1886 – 87 , Trott hit a double century for South Melbourne in a match against St Kilda and appeared for Victoria against Alfred Shaw 's touring English team , claiming four wickets for 125 runs ( 4 / 125 ) . During the next summer , he played for a non @-@ representative " Australian XI " against Arthur Shrewsbury 's XI and George Vernon 's XI , two English teams touring Australia simultaneously . His chances for inclusion in the Australian squad for the forthcoming tour of England were enhanced when a number of leading players made themselves unavailable . However , Trott 's batting credentials were modest : he had scored only one half @-@ century in 29 first @-@ class innings . At this point , Trott had enjoyed more success with his bowling . Prior to the Australian team departing for England , a change to the leg before wicket ( LBW ) law that would aid bowlers of Trott 's style seemed imminent . The former Australian player Tom Horan wrote : " There is no bowler in England who has such a fast leg @-@ break , and on a fine , firm pitch many a batsman has saved his wicket by his legs or body in opposing Trott 's deliveries . " 
 = = Test cricket = = 
 = = = First tours of England = = = 
 Included in the Australian squad to tour England , Trott was selected in the team for the First Test at Lord 's . He had an inauspicious Test debut : he made a duck in the first innings and three runs in the second , and did not bowl . The Australians won the game by 62 runs , only their second Test match victory in England . However , England retained The Ashes by winning the remaining two Tests and Trott 's influence on the series was negligible : he did not pass 20 in an innings , and he failed to take a wicket . Nevertheless , his performances in the other matches of the season prompted Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack to write that he , " ... fully <unk> [ ied ] his selection by scoring the highly creditable total of 1 @,@ 212 runs , with an average of over 19 per innings " , and that his fielding was " excellent at point " . Wisden was less complimentary about his bowling : " We have no great opinion of Trott 's leg break bowling , and think it probably too slow to be effectual against good batsmen . " Trott 's opportunities were limited as his teammates Charles Turner and John Ferris , " monopolised the bowling " . 
 On his return to Australia , Trott 's batting continued to improve . He scored 172 runs for an Australian XI against New South Wales , his maiden century in first @-@ class cricket . The Sydney Morning Herald wrote that the innings " ... stamped him as a batsman of the highest class " . In first @-@ class matches , Trott posted 507 runs ( at 39 @.@ 00 average ) and claimed 25 wickets ( at 17 @.@ 44 average ) for the summer , and hit a double century in a club match against Melbourne . Another good all @-@ round season in 1889 – 90 ensured his place for the next trip to England . 
 The 1890 Australian team touring England was relatively inexperienced . The team missed the all @-@ round ability of George Giffen who had refused to tour , thinking it unlikely the tour would be a sporting or financial success . The Australians won 13 matches on tour , losing 16 and drawing 9 . Trott scored 1 @,@ 211 first @-@ class runs ( at 20 @.@ 87 average ) with a highest score of 186 against Cambridge University Past and Present , and captured 20 wickets . Disappointed by Trott 's performances , Wisden felt that he " ... barely maintained the reputation he had so honestly gained during the tour of 1888 ... it cannot be said that he came up to expectations " . 
 = = = Australian revival and Wisden cricketer of the year = = = 
 In 1891 – 92 , Lord Sheffield 's team ( captained by W. G. Grace ) toured Australia , the first English side to do so in four years . The presence of Grace contributed to a revival of interest in the game that had waned due to a surfeit of international tours and indifferent performances by the Australian team . The Australians won the series 2 – 1 to regain The Ashes . In the first Test at Melbourne , Trott scored three and 23 , but had greater impact with the ball . Requiring 213 runs for victory , England 's score reached 60 before their first two batsmen were dismissed . The Australian captain Jack Blackham then gambled by calling on Trott 's often inaccurate bowling . Trott took two quick wickets and the English innings never recovered . In returning 3 / 52 for the innings , Wisden noted that Trott " bowled admirably " . The remaining two Tests were less productive for Trott : he finished with 48 runs ( at an average of 8 @.@ 00 ) and 6 wickets ( at an average of 35 @.@ 00 ) for the series . 
 A reorganisation of Australian cricket took place in the wake of the tour . The first national body to control the game , the Australasian Cricket Council ( ACC ) , was formed to co @-@ ordinate the Australian Test team . Previously , private entrepreneurs and the players themselves organised international cricket . Lord Sheffield donated money to the ACC , which was used to purchase a trophy for the champion domestic team . Trott appeared in Victoria 's inaugural Sheffield Shield match , against New South Wales in December 1892 . He scored 63 and 70 not out in a winning effort . The ACC appointed Trott as one of the six players to select the touring team for England . 
 The Australian team toured England in 1893 to compete for The Ashes . The English won the series one Test to nil , with two drawn to recover The Ashes . Playing in all three Tests , Trott scored 146 runs in the series at an average of 29 @.@ 20 and in all first @-@ class matches he scored 1269 runs . While Trott did not take a wicket in the Tests , he took 38 wickets in all first @-@ class matches that season . In the Second Test at the Oval , Trott scored 92 runs in the second innings after the Australians were forced to follow @-@ on ; an innings described as " really superb cricket " and " the finest exhibition he has ever given in England " . England , regardless , still won the match by an innings . Trott was named as a Wisden Cricketer of the Year . Wisden noted that Trott " batted uncommonly well — much better than in 1890 " but that when bowling he " did a good many brilliant things against the weaker teams , but he was nearly always expensive and very rarely successful when opposed to batsmen of high class " . 
 = = = The Trott brothers = = = 
 Andrew Stoddart led an English team to Australia in 1894 – 95 to defend The Ashes . A feature of the summer was the emergence of Albert Trott and the performance of the brothers in tandem . Playing for Victoria against the touring side , the <unk> claimed twelve wickets and held eight catches between them ; Harry scored 63 in the second innings . During the second innings of the traditional Christmas fixture against New South Wales , Albert claimed five wickets , took three catches ( two from Harry 's bowling ) and made a run out . In between these two games , England won the first Test at Sydney — a remarkable turnaround after they had been forced to follow @-@ on — by bowling the Australians out for 166 in the second innings . The second Test at Melbourne saw another English victory ; Trott played a rearguard innings of 95 in the second innings , to no avail . Attempting to stay in the series , Australia dramatically revamped their team for the next Test at Adelaide . Albert Trott , making his Test debut , was one of four inclusions while Harry was elevated to open the batting . In a match played in intense heat throughout , Harry Trott made 48 on the opening day before he was run out . Albert was the dominant player of the match with innings of 38 not out and 72 not out ( both scored from the number ten position ) , and a bowling return of 8 / 43 in England 's second innings . Australia won the match by 382 runs . In a Sheffield Shield match that followed , the <unk> extricated Victoria from a difficult situation . Chasing 155 to win , New South Wales fell for 99 with Albert taking four wickets and Harry five . In the fourth Test at Sydney , Australia batted first and scored 284 runs ( Albert Trott 85 not out ) before England were bowled out for 65 and 72 on a wicket affected by heavy rain . Opening the bowling in the first innings , Harry Trott dismissed Archie MacLaren , Johnny Briggs and Stoddart . 
 The fluctuating fortunes of the Test series created immense interest in the deciding Test at Melbourne . Spectators arrived from all over the country , with special trains laid on from Adelaide and Sydney . Harry Trott 's all @-@ round contribution was a score of 42 in each innings , six wickets and two catches , but England won The Ashes by chasing a target of 297 runs in the second innings , which they reached with six wickets in hand . Even in England , " the interest was greater than had ever been felt in matches played away from [ England ] " . 
 During the following summer , Trott again acted as a Test selector , along with the incumbent Test captain George Giffen and former captain Percy McDonnell . When choosing the Australian team for the previous tour of England , Giffen used his influence to ensure the selection of his younger brother , Walter . The team chosen for the 1896 tour of England included a number of promising young players , including Joe Darling and Clem Hill , both of whom went on to captain Australia . Albert Trott was a controversial omission , in light of performances in the previous Ashes series , but he accompanied the team on their voyage and later settled in England . He had a successful career with Middlesex and appeared for England in two Test matches against South Africa . The cricket historian David Frith records that when the Trott brothers encountered each other on an English street , they merely exchanged acknowledging nods and kept walking . 
 = = = Captain of Australia = = = 
 While the team was en route to England , the players elected Trott as captain ahead of George Giffen . On the opening day of the first Test at Lord 's , England bowled Australia out in 75 minutes for only 53 runs on a pitch thought to be good for batting . In reply , England made 292 with Trott taking two wickets . In their second innings , Australia was still 177 runs in arrears with three wickets down when Syd Gregory joined Trott at the crease . Their partnership of 221 runs led Wisden to record that , " as long as cricket is played ... cause the match to be remembered " . Trott 's score of 143 ( the only Test century of his career ) was not enough to prevent England winning by six wickets . In the second Test at Manchester , Australia again batted first , scoring 412 runs ; Frank Iredale making 108 and Trott 53 . At the beginning of England 's first innings , Trott opened the bowling with his flighted leg @-@ spin . It was unusual for a leg @-@ spinner to take the new ball , but the move — a " stroke of genius " according to Wisden — was successful as he dismissed Stoddart and WG Grace for low scores . Both batsmen were deceived by Trott 's flight and stumped by the wicket @-@ keeper . England totaled 231 and , forced to follow on , scored 305 runs in the second innings , K. S. Ranjitsinhji making 154 not out . In a tense finish , Australia made the 125 runs needed for victory with three wickets in hand . On a pitch affected by rain , England won the series and The Ashes , defeating Australia in the Third Test by 66 runs ; Australia were bowled out for 44 runs in the second innings , at one stage having lost nine wickets for 25 . 
 Trott made 1297 runs and took 44 wickets in first @-@ class matches on the tour . Of his batting Wisden said " Trott 's average is a little disappointing , but when a special effort was required he was not often at fault . " and he bowled " on a good many occasions with fair results " . However it was as a captain that Trott earned most plaudits . Wisden rated Trott as " with the exception of [ Billy Murdoch ] , ... incomparably the best captain the Australians had ever had in this country " . 
 He was by no means anxious for the post , but almost from the first match it was perfectly clear that he was in every way fitted for it . Of course the continuous success of his side made his duties far more pleasant and easy than those of some previous captains , but we feel quite sure that in a season of ill @-@ fortune he would have earned just as great a reputation . Blessed with a temper that nothing could ruffle , he was always master both of himself and his team whatever the position of the game . More than that his judgement in changing the bowling was rarely or never at fault . 
 Although the team was considered successful , in spite of the failure to recapture The Ashes , the problems between the players and the administrators continued . Before the team departed Australia , the players arbitrarily replaced one of the selected players without recourse to the ACC . After the final match in England , Trott and his players broke an agreement to return home in time for the 1896 – 97 Australian season . Instead , they organised matches in North America and New Zealand . 
 = = = " A national institution " = = = 
 Trott retained the captaincy when Andrew Stoddart returned to Australia with his English team in 1897 – 98 . Stoddart 's team got away to a good start when they won the First Test in Sydney by nine wickets , K. S. Ranjitsinhji scoring 175 runs . With Joe Darling , Trott devised a plan to curb Ranjitsinhji 's run scoring . An exponent of the leg glance , " Ranji " would take a last look at the field before he took guard . Taking advantage of this fact , after he took strike , the Australians deliberately weakened the off side with two men placed about 10 metres ( 33 ft ) away from him . Bowling a leg side line , the Australians aimed for a catch from a shot played to that side . Darling said of the plan , " As soon as he had his last look and the bowler was at the point of delivering the ball , we shifted positions by a few yards , sometimes one way , sometimes the other . Occasionally , only one would move and sometimes none would move . [ ... ] This eventually put him clean off his game . " The English captain Archie MacLaren agreed saying , " Ranji is in a blue funk " . Regardless of the tactics , Ranji made 457 runs at an average of 50 @.@ 77 for the Test series . 
 Australia fought back to win the Second Test in Melbourne by an innings and 55 runs with Trott scoring 79 runs . The Third and Fourth Tests were both won by Australia as they retrieved The Ashes . The Fifth and final Test in Sydney would be Trott 's last . In the Sydney heat , Australia won the Test by 6 wickets but Trott had an attack of sunstroke . This caused him to lose the sight in one eye before his last Test innings , where he made 18 runs . In a review of the Test series Wisden noted that " the Australians owed much to the unfailing skill and tact of Trott as a captain " . 
 During the course of the Test series , a major convention was in progress to discuss the proposed federation of the Australian colonies . However , the victory over England dominated the attention of the Australian public and some newspapers decried the focus on cricket when important matters were being discussed . Another editor remarked in defence of the public , " We believe that Harry Trott and his ten good men and true have done more for the federation of Australian hearts than all the big delegates put together . " In reply to complaints about leave granted to Trott to play cricket , his proud employers at the Post office responded " Harry Trott is a national institution . " Passers @-@ by , including men and their families , would stop and look at Trott 's home in Albert Park " with the deference of worshippers at a shrine " , in the words of cricket writer Ray Robinson . 
 The impetus for federation did not extend to the administration of cricket , however . The ACC continued to attract criticism for being ineffectual and at a meeting of the Victorian Cricket Association in July 1898 , Trott ( in his capacity as a delegate for the South Melbourne club ) tabled a motion that Victoria secede from the ACC . Although the proposal was defeated by a single vote , Trott was one of twelve Test players who signed a letter to the ACC secretary calling for the disbanding of the organisation . Failing to win the support of the players , the ACC folded in January 1900 following the withdrawal of the New South Wales Cricket Association . 
 = = Illness and recovery = = 
 Less than six months after leading his team to victory over England , Trott endured a severe mental illness . While visiting his mother on 8 August 1898 , Trott collapsed and lost consciousness . Later , on the train home with his wife , he had another convulsive fit and yet another at 10 pm that evening , in the presence of a doctor . Trott passed in and out of consciousness over the next four weeks , unable to work or even communicate . His supporters raised ₤ 453 to send him for two weeks at a private retreat at Woodend , a small town north @-@ west of Melbourne . The treatment was unsuccessful and Trott continued to suffer from insomnia , memory loss and apathy . 
 = = = Hospitalisation = = = 
 Because Trott 's illness precluded his selection for the 1899 Australian team to England , the Australian captaincy passed to Joe Darling . On 8 May 1899 , Trott was committed to the Kew Asylum , a psychiatric hospital in the eastern suburbs of Melbourne . The facility opened in 1871 during an era when large asylums were in vogue . By the time of Trott 's admission , expert opinion had changed ; in January 1898 The Argus reported a specialist 's claim that the asylum was likely to make a patient , " just mad enough to be put under restraint " — that is , worse rather than better . Trott was recorded as suffering " dementia " and " alcoholism " , although there is little empirical evidence for either diagnosis . Cricket writer Gideon Haigh suggests that his symptoms would possibly be identified in modern times as depressive psychosis and treated with antipsychotics or electroconvulsive therapy . 
 Doctors observed that Trott continually stood in one place , showing little interest in events around him . A doctor noted on Trott 's file : " <unk> to converse not appearing to be able to follow what is said to him . Answers questions in monosyllables . Does not rouse up when subjects are spoken of that formerly he was interested in . " Attempting to reach him , doctors sent Trott to play cricket which he did in a , " mechanical , indifferent fashion " . In a departure from normal hospital procedure , he was allowed newspapers reporting the details of Darling 's Australian side in England ; this left him unmoved . Trott 's friend Ben Wardill , the secretary of the Melbourne Cricket Club , visited in November 1899 but Trott did not recognise him . A fellow patient , when released , wrote of Trott : " Here is a well @-@ known cricketer , whom we once treated as a hero . But alas ! Like everything else , times have changed and he is almost forgotten . " 
 = = = Return to cricket = = = 
 In February 1900 , Trott played in a cricket match for the asylum team against the North Melbourne Rovers club . To the astonishment of his treating doctors and his teammates , he scored 98 runs in 40 minutes , including 20 fours and a six . While the doctors remained cautious about his chances of recovery , Trott played in further matches against other visiting teams and in April 1900 , he took a hat @-@ trick against a team from the Commercial Travellers Association . Declared to be " recovered " , Trott was discharged after spending 400 days at Kew Asylum . He returned to the South Melbourne team and captained Victoria against Tasmania at Launceston ( taking eight wickets ) during the 1900 – 01 season , but otherwise failed to recapture the form that made him captain of his country . 
 To aid his convalescence , the Postmaster @-@ General 's Department — Trott 's employer — transferred him to the post office at Bendigo in central Victoria . In 1902 – 03 , he turned up uninvited to a Bendigo United Cricket Club practice session and asked to join in . He played five first @-@ class matches during 1903 – 04 , scoring 268 runs at an average of 26 @.@ 80 and taking 13 wickets at 23 @.@ 53 runs each . In his final appearance of the season , he led Victoria against Plum Warner 's touring English team . He captained the Carlton club for two seasons , before spending two seasons with Fitzroy . During the 1907 – 08 season , he led XVIII of Bendigo against the touring English team and made a farewell first @-@ class appearance against the tourists for Victoria . Opening the bowling , Trott returned 5 / 116 , including the wickets of England 's leading batsmen Jack Hobbs and George Gunn . Trott later returned to South Melbourne , where he played until the age of 44 . He led the club on a tour of New Zealand in 1912 – 13 and in the next season ( his last ) he topped the club 's batting and bowling averages , for the fifth time as a batsman and the third time as a bowler . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Trott spent his entire working life in the Post Office , employed as a postman and mail sorter . He married Violet Hodson in Fitzroy on 17 February 1890 and the couple had one son . In 1911 , Trott became a selector for the Victorian team when Hugh Trumble resigned to take the secretaryship of the Melbourne Cricket Club . Trott 's high standing in the cricket community saw the other candidate for the position withdraw rather than oppose him . In 1912 , Trott took the side of the " Big Six " , the Australian cricketers opposed to the newly formed Australian Board of Control for International Cricket 's attempt to wrest control of touring Australian sides from the players . At an " indignation meeting " at the Athenaeum Hall on Collins Street in Melbourne , the Argus reported Trott as saying that " to say he was disgusted with the Board of Control was to put it mildly " and that " [ h ] e would like to shake hands with the six men who had stood out against the Board " . 
 At the age of 51 , Trott died of Hodgkin 's lymphoma , at his home in inner @-@ suburban Albert Park on 9 November 1917 . He was buried at Brighton Cemetery where , two years later , a large monument was erected over his grave , paid for by the Victorian Cricket Association and cricket enthusiasts . His great @-@ grandson , Stuart Trott , played 200 games for St Kilda and Hawthorn in the Victorian Football League between 1967 and 1977 . The South African @-@ born English cricketer Jonathan Trott says he is a distant relation to Harry and Albert Trott . 
 Trott 's role in Australian cricket was recognised by the clubs for which he had played . Until 2005 , Trott 's club team , South Melbourne Cricket Club was based at Harry Trott Oval in Albert Park , while Bendigo United Cricket Club , for whom Trott played in 1902 , still play at the Harry Trott Oval in the Bendigo suburb of Kennington . 
 = = Context = = 
 = = = Playing style = = = 
 The authoritative cricket journal Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack , in an obituary , wrote " Australia has produced greater cricketers than Harry Trott , but in his day he held a place in the front rank of the world 's famous players . He was a first @-@ rate bat , a fine field at point , and his leg breaks made him a very effective change bowler . " As a batsman , Trott scored his runs mostly in front the wicket . He often lifted his on @-@ drives and was an exponent of the late cut . George Giffen said of Trott , " On a good wicket , I have seen Harry Trott adopt forcing tactics worthy of the big hitter , and in the very next match play keeps on a difficult pitch with wonderful skill . " Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack described Trott as " one of the soundest [ Australian batsman ] , combining as he does vigorous hitting with a strong , watchful defence " . 
 Trott was able to obtain turn from all types of pitches bowling his loopy leg spinners , through varying his pace and flight . He was noted for giving young batsmen a full toss on the leg side , allowing the batsman to hit it to the boundary . The next ball would seem identical , but for a subtle change in the position of a fielder , resulting in a catch and the comment , " That first ball was to give you confidence , son . The second to teach you a lesson . " Warwick Armstrong , a childhood admirer and later team @-@ mate of Trott , said " Trott had an almost uncanny knowledge of batsman who were likely to succumb to his wiles and after he had met with a success , he would at once take himself off and put on some other bowler of a different type . " Wisden thought his bowling was " too slow to be effectual against good batsmen " and " that though he may now and then get a wicket , runs are sure to come at the rate of six or eight an over " . 
 Clem Hill said , " As a captain Harry Trott was in a class by himself — the best I ever played under . Harry was quick to grasp a situation . He saw an opponent 's weakness in a second . [ ... ] Time and time again , he got a champion batsman 's wicket by putting on a bowler he knew the batsman did not like . " The English batsman K. S. Ranjitsinhji considered Trott as a captain " without a superior anywhere today " . Wisden thought him , " with the exception of [ Billy Murdoch ] ... incomparably the best captain the Australians had ever had in this country . " The sporting newspaper , The Referee wrote " [ Trott 's ] bowlers felt he understood the gruelling nature of their work and that they had his sympathy in the grimmest of battles . " Some English professional cricketers thought less of Trott 's captaincy ; wicket @-@ keeper William Storer said , " I like a captain to have a settled plan , [ Trott ] just seemed to do whatever he thought of at the moment . " 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 Trott 's sense of humour was well known . He originated a persistent myth that workers at the Sheffield steelworks generated extra plumes of smoke when the Australians were batting at nearby Bramall Lane , in order to reduce the quality of the light . When Australia played the Gentlemen of Philadelphia in the United States , a local reporter asked Trott why Australians did not play baseball . He replied : " Running around in circles makes us giddy . " When Trott , a humble postman , met the Prince of Wales ( later Edward VII ) in 1896 , his teammates admired his natural ease of manner in the presence of royalty . Given a cigar by the Prince , Trott simply smoked it , to the surprise of those who thought a royal souvenir worth keeping . With this in mind , Trott later played a practical joke when he returned home . Gathering cigar butts on board the ship before disembarking in Australia , he distributed them to his friends claiming it was the one given to him by the Prince of Wales ; he asked the recipients not to tell others in case it provoked jealousy . Trott was extremely fond of hats ; a teammate described him as , " ... the only man I have seen who , in the nude , had to have a hat on his head " . 
 Jack Pollard wrote " It was said that [ Trott ] never made an enemy and was universally admired . " His rival , England captain Archie MacLaren said " I would give anything to play the game as keenly and yet as light @-@ heartedly as Trott 's lads did . " 
 The personal popularity that Harry Trott enjoyed ... was remarkable . One is inclined to think that no Australian captain before or since , was liked so much by his opponents . By sheer force of character he overcame the disadvantages involved in lack of education , and won the warm regard of men with whom , apart from the comradeship of the cricket field , he had nothing in common . 
 = Tualatin River National Wildlife Refuge = 
 The Tualatin River National Wildlife Refuge is a 1 @,@ 856 acres ( 751 ha ) wetlands and lowlands sanctuary in the northwestern part of the U.S. state of Oregon . Established in 1992 and opened to the public in 2006 , it is managed by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service . Located in southeastern Washington County , 15 miles ( 24 km ) southwest of Portland , the refuge is bordered by Sherwood , Tualatin and Tigard . A newer area , extending into northern Yamhill County , is located further west near the city of Gaston surrounding the former Wapato Lake . 
 Part of the network of National Wildlife Refuges ( NWR ) , the Tualatin River refuge is one of only ten urban refuges in the United States . Habitats in the refuge include forested areas , wetlands , oak and pine grassland , and meadows , with mixed deciduous and coniferous forests common to Western Oregon . The refuge was established as an urban refuge to provide wetland , riparian , and upland habitats for a variety of migratory birds , threatened and endangered species , fish and other resident wildlife . The refuge is home to nearly 200 bird species and more than 70 other animal species . 
 A visitor center with exhibits and information about the refuge was opened in 2008 off of Oregon Route 99W near Sherwood in the Portland metropolitan area . Next to the center is the refuge 's headquarters and an observation deck overlooking seasonal ponds . The refuge has nearly five miles of wildlife interpretive trails open to the public . Up to 50 @,@ 000 waterfowl can be seen at the refuge during the winter months when officials flood portions of the refuge . 
 = = History = = 
 The creation of the refuge was first proposed to the city of Sherwood by a local citizen in 1990 . A year later , the United States Fish and Wildlife Service began looking at creating a national wildlife refuge along the Tualatin River near Sherwood at Rock Creek . The original plans called for a 2 @,@ 500 @-@ acre ( 1 @,@ 000 ha ) refuge near Sherwood and Oregon Route 99W and then grew to a 3 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 1 @,@ 200 ha ) proposal that would have unconnected parts , with the additional wetlands near Scholls to the west . To press for the creation of the proposed Tualatin River National Wildlife Refuge , citizens groups lobbied Congress for funding , which included a video narrated by actor Robert Wagner . Initial estimates for the completion of the project were up to 30 years at a cost of USD $ 10 million for land acquisitions . 
 In late 1992 , area residents Tom <unk> and Lisa Brenner donated the first 12 acres ( 4 @.@ 9 ha ) to the project , with the Fish and Wildlife Service then accepting the donation to officially create the refuge . They had purchased the 12 acres ( 49 @,@ 000 m2 ) of woodland which adjoined their own property and donated it to the refuge . Sherwood donated the second parcel to the refuge , 1 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 40 ha ) in 1993 . Congress approved $ 2 million for the project to purchase more land in November 1993 . In January 1994 , the Department of the Interior granted the Fish and Wildlife Service the authority to spend the money in order to begin buying land for the refuge . Congress gave the project an additional $ 2 @.@ 5 million in 1995 . 
 In the early years , the facility was only open to the public for a songbird festival in May and National Wildlife Refuge Week in October . A program to restore the habitat to its original state began in 1997 . During that year , twenty water flow systems and dikes were added at the refuge to allow managers to flood parts of the land . The refuge grew from what was once a former dairy farm that spanned 400 acres ( 160 ha ) to more than 800 acres ( 320 ha ) by September 1998 . In the spring of 1999 , the $ 1 @.@ 1 million system for flooding parts of the refuge was completed . In total , the refuge grew to 1 @,@ 066 acres ( 431 ha ) in 1999 , and increased the number of bird species from 18 to 146 . The facility was further enlarged to 1 @,@ 268 acres ( 513 ha ) in 2003 , and received nearly $ 750 @,@ 000 to build a new safe entrance to the planned visitor 's area . 
 In November 2004 , Congress appropriated $ 700 @,@ 000 for the NWR to cover the costs of designing a public visitor ’ s center . By 2005 construction had progressed on public facilities at the site that included trails , observations decks , parking , and an entrance from Oregon Route 99W with plans for permanently opening to the public in 2006 . In July 2005 , the refuge received $ 3 @.@ 9 million from the federal government to complete a visitor ’ s center and new headquarters for the facility . In February 2006 , construction began on the main observation deck at the visitor ’ s plaza , with plans to open the refuge to the public in June . 
 Regular public access began on June 3 , 2006 , when roughly 450 acres ( 180 ha ) of more than 1 @,@ 300 acres ( 530 ha ) of the refuge was opened on a permanent basis ; Construction on the visitor ’ s center began later that month . In March 2007 , the Wapato Lake Unit was created to the west near Gaston . In the same month , the refuge received the 2007 Sunset Magazine Environmental Award , with the magazine honoring the refuge as a " preserved paradise " . The number of annual visitors to the refuge totaled 40 @,@ 000 in 2007 . 
 The Wildlife Center at the refuge was finally completed and opened in January 2008 . A dedication ceremony was held at the Wildlife Center on March 29 , 2008 ; 500 people attended the event including Congressman David Wu and author Richard <unk> . In 2008 , the refuge had attracted 50 @,@ 000 birds in a single day , with 20 @,@ 000 birds wintering in the refuge . As of December 2008 , the federal government had spent $ 10 @.@ 4 million on the refuge and it had grown to 1 @,@ 358 acres ( 550 ha ) . The refuge submitted a proposal to start collecting user fees in February 2009 , with a planned start date of August 2009 . In December 2013 , the Wapato Lake National Wildlife Refuge was split out from <unk> . 
 = = Natural environment = = 
 Before becoming a protected area , much of the land in the Tualatin River National Wildlife Refuge was agricultural , with hog and dairy farms , and crops such as corn ( maize ) and onions . Today , the refuge spreads out over ten miles ( 16 km ) along the Tualatin River , Rock Creek , and Chicken Creek , and is managed in five main sections ( units ) : Rock Creek , Onion Flats , Riverboat , Tualatin River , and <unk> ´ i . 
 The refuge also includes the <unk> scablands created by the Missoula Floods to the southeast of the river . These scablands were scoured of the top layers of soil , leaving a marsh @-@ filled valley . There is also the Wapato Lake Unit approximately 15 miles ( 24 km ) to the west . Located along the Pacific Flyway for migratory birds , this habitat includes seasonal wetlands , streams , forested wetlands , savanna , riparian zones , forested uplands , and the Tualatin River and portions of its floodplain . 
 The refuge is home to almost 200 species of birds , more than 50 mammal species , and 25 species of reptiles and amphibians . Tree species include red alder , aspen , maple , oak , Oregon white ash , Douglas fir , ponderosa pine , Pacific yew , and cedar . A pair of 350 @-@ year @-@ old oak trees can be found at the visitor center . Plant species in the refuge include bulrushes , wapato , water plantain , as Oregon grape , wild trillium , camas , iris , snowberry , cattails , wild millet , wild rose , thimbleberry , and others . Wildflowers include blue chicory , Douglas spirea , and purple crocuses . 
 Waterfowl at the refuge are great blue herons , Canada geese , wood ducks , swans , northern pintails , green herons , teals , mergansers , belted kingfishers , and American wigeons among others . Birds that spend time there include , sandhill cranes , Oregon <unk> , wren , common starlings , blackbirds , nuthatches , Pacific @-@ slope flycatchers , red @-@ tailed hawks , American goldfinch , peregrine falcons , yellow warblers , western flycatchers , <unk> , northern harriers , osprey , egrets , quail , pheasants , golden @-@ crowned kinglets , owls , and black @-@ headed grosbeaks to name a few . There is also a pair of bald eagles . The year it was created officials counted 24 different bird species . By 2008 there were 185 birds species represented at the refuge . 
 River otter , beaver , nutria , mink , weasel , red fox , deer , elk , coyotes , raccoons , and rabbits make up a portion of the terrestrial animals . Other wildlife includes painted turtles , frogs , salamanders , crawfish , fish , and alligator lizards . The refuge is one of only ten national wildlife refuges in the United States located in an urban area . Groups have suggested that the refuge be expanded all the way to the Willamette River to provide a greenway through a heavily populated area . The Tualatin 's floodplain is the largest of any of the Willamette River ’ s tributaries . 
 = = Amenities = = 
 Within the refuge only 450 acres ( 180 ha ) of the <unk> 'i Unit is open to the public . This section includes the visitor ’ s center with the Wildlife Center and refuge headquarters . The Wildlife Center includes classrooms , a student lab , a gift shop , and informational displays , and is next to a grove of oak trees estimated to be 350 years old . Inside the center are murals , dioramas , and hands @-@ on exhibits , plus the classroom contains skins and skulls of wildlife that live in the refuge . From inside the center , visitors can view the scenery using a viewing scope through a large window overlooking the pond . 
 The 6 @,@ 300 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 590 m2 ) Wildlife Center was designed to give basic information and encourage visitors to then explore the wildlife in their natural habitats . The building is sienna in color and was built with a flat roof that has gravel on top to provide nesting habitat for birds , one of the features designed to be environmentally friendly . Built at a cost of $ 4 @.@ 6 million , the Wildlife Center also has a large arced skylight and atrium in the center to provide lots of natural light . Builders used local wood in the Wildlife Center , which has large , exposed beams . The center and headquarters are adjacent to each other off Oregon Route 99W on a knoll above a seasonal pond . 
 Original plans called for a $ 5 million headquarters and wildlife visitor ’ s center . Refuge headquarters were previously in old farm buildings to the west on Roy Rogers Road . The new building was awarded honorable mention by the Department of the Interior in its 2008 Environmental Achievement Awards . It was designed to meet Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design standards at the silver level , but did not receive certification from the United States Green Building Council . The administration building and visitor structures were constructed by Wade <unk> Construction . 
 A variety of people @-@ oriented amenities are spread outdoors across the part of the refuge open to the public . One feature is an outdoor deck overhanging an <unk> that overlooks ponds at the refuge . This 50 @-@ foot ( 15 m ) long concrete deck is of a cantilevered design that extends 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) over the embankment . Other amenities include footbridges , education sites , and walking trails . There are nearly five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) of trails , but they are closed in the fall and winter . Centennial and River are two of the viewing areas along the trails , each offering a place to view wildlife . Photographers have access to blinds which allow them to take pictures without disturbing the wildlife . 
 = = Wapato Lake Unit = = 
 Wapato Lake Unit is located about 15 miles ( 24 km ) to the west of the main refuge , near the city of Gaston along Oregon Route 47 in Washington and Yamhill counties . The area was once the site of Wapato Lake , whose soil held an organic @-@ rich peat that sustained a shrub swamp ecosystem . The wapato plant ( Sagittaria fasciculata ) grew in the upper marsh of the Wapato Lake Basin and was harvested by Native Americans . In 1892 , attempts began to drain the 800 acres ( 320 ha ) lake to increase farmland , with the Wapato Improvement District completing the effort in the 1930s . Valley forests , prairies , and wetlands encompass the region today , including two small streams , Ayers and Wapato creeks . 
 The government had hoped to add land in the Gaston area to the main refuge , but initially met resistance from local residents . Some residents later asked the government to buy their land for the refuge in 2000 . By 2002 , up to 6 @,@ 400 acres ( 2 @,@ 600 ha ) were being studied in that area for inclusion into the wildlife refuge as part of the then uncreated unit . At that time the Fish and Wildlife Service owned 108 acres ( 44 ha ) in the area , with plans to restore the lake if the unit was established . In March 2007 , the Service approved the creation of the Wapato Lake Unit with a boundary encompassing 4 @,@ 310 possible acres ( 17 @.@ 4 km2 ) . In June 2008 , the Wapato Lake Unit purchased its first sets of properties . <unk> 180 acres ( 73 ha ) from three properties , the Fish and Wildlife Service paid $ 631 @,@ 000 for the land using a grant from the Migratory Bird Conservation Commission . An additional 15 acres ( 6 @.@ 1 ha ) were added in September . Plans called for restoring the farmland back to its natural state and acquiring all land by 2011 . 
 = HMCS Fredericton ( <unk> ) = 
 For the Halifax @-@ class frigate , see HMCS Fredericton ( FFH 337 ) 
 HMCS Fredericton was a Flower @-@ class corvette of the Royal Canadian Navy . She was ordered from Marine Industries Ltd. in Sorel , Quebec and laid down on 22 March 1941 . She was launched on 2 September 1941 and commissioned on 8 December 1941 . She was named after the community of Fredericton , New Brunswick . 
 Fredericton 's design was slightly revised from the earlier Flower @-@ class ships . Corvettes built before 1941 behaved poorly in heavy seas , so her length and weight were increased . She was also outfitted with a water @-@ tube boiler which was more powerful and stable than earlier models . Her armament was limited to a 4 @-@ inch ( 100 mm ) gun forward and a 2 @-@ pound ( 0 @.@ 9 kg ) pom @-@ pom gun aft gun as well as depth charge throwers which suited her escort duties and anti @-@ submarine capabilities . Later on she was outfitted with the improved Hedgehog anti @-@ submarine device . She was manned by a crew of 85 which included six officers . Her unofficial emblem was a badge emblazoned with a flying tiger dropping a depth charge on a U @-@ boat . 
 Fredericton served during the Battle of the Atlantic from 1941 to 1945 . During 1942 she escorted oil tankers from the Caribbean to New York City . From 1943 to 1945 she escorted convoys in the Western Atlantic and then later on across the Atlantic to Northern Ireland . She was decommissioned on 14 July 1945 . Some question as to her final disposition lies with a possible error in Lloyd 's Register . Either she was sold for scrap in 1946 or ended up as a Panamanian @-@ flagged Japanese whaler which was used until 1979 . 
 = = Royal Canadian Navy corvettes = = 
 At the advent of World War II , the Royal Canadian Navy greatly desired to build naval class warships . However , Canadian ship building yards were not capable of building such vessels and at the time it was impossible to buy such ships from Britain as its capacity was taken up entirely by its own defence needs . It was decided that a modified whale catcher design could be built by Canadian yards which could later be traded with Britain for Tribal @-@ class destroyers . The barter scheme eventually failed , but the Canadian Navy had already ordered the whale catchers . Sixty @-@ four ships were originally ordered and these were built between 1939 – 1940 , becoming the basis of the RCN corvette fleet . 
 It was initially expected that the corvette fleet would be superseded by a line of larger frigates and destroyers , but the narrowness of Montreal 's Lachine Canal prevented larger ships from getting to Atlantic Ocean from Great Lake shipyards . The corvette fleet stayed . Eventually 123 were built , the largest class of ships ever used by the Canadian Navy . The corvettes were dubbed the Flower class after a similar British design . The British gave them names of flowers such as <unk> and <unk> . The Canadian Navy decided to name their ships after Canadian towns . While they should have been called the Town class , a line of American destroyers was already using that name so the term " flower " was retained for Canadian corvettes . 
 = = Building Fredericton = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Fredericton was laid down by Marine Industries on 22 March 1941 and completed five months and 11 days later on 2 September 1941 . The total cost for construction was about $ 600 @,@ 000 CAN . She was commissioned for active duty on 8 December 1941 . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Fredericton was part of the Revised Flower class built between 1940 and 1941 . There were 10 ships in this class including HMCS Calgary , HMCS Charlottetown and HMCS Halifax . Improvements on the original design included a lengthened forecastle and the foremast was moved behind the main bridge to improve forward vision . The sheer and flare of the bow was increased to improve performance in heavy seas . Earlier Flowers had twin 0 @.@ 5 inches ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) machine guns , which proved ineffective . The revised Flowers were built with single Oerlikon 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) cannon mounted on either side of the bridge . 
 Fredericton was built with a water @-@ tube boiler . Ships built from 1939 – 1940 used a Scotch marine boiler . The revised design used a water @-@ tube boiler that had not been available earlier . These boilers subsequently became standard in future ships as they were smaller , safer and easier to maintain than the Scotch marine , and produced a more reliable supply of steam . Fredericton was 208 feet 4 inches ( 63 @.@ 50 m ) long , which was about 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) longer than earlier designs . This allowed for a longer forecastle that added more living space and dry quarters . She was 33 ft 1 in ( 10 @.@ 08 m ) wide and she had a draught of 11 ft ( 3 @.@ 35 m ) forward and 15 ft 7 in ( 4 @.@ 75 m ) aft . She was driven by a single @-@ screw , triple @-@ expansion reciprocating engine of 2 @,@ 750 ihp ( 2 @,@ 050 kW ) , which gave her a top speed of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ) . 
 Like most corvettes , Fredericton was installed with a Type 123A ASDIC detection system . This technology was designed in 1934 for armed trawlers and minesweepers of the Royal Navy . The system was outdated but was the best system available to the Canadian Navy at the time . Type 123A could detect the distance to underwater sounds but could not determine the depth . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Fredericton was armed with one 4 @-@ inch ( 101 @.@ 6 mm ) gun forward and a 2 @-@ pound ( 0 @.@ 9 kg ) pom @-@ pom gun mounted aft . Two Oerlikon 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) cannon were mounted on the bridge wings for air defence . Depth charges , which were rolled from the stern through two ports or thrown from four launchers aft were used for anti @-@ submarine warfare . Later in the war , she was outfitted with the more effective Hedgehog depth bomb throwers . 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 Fredericton was built for a crew of 85 including the commanding officer and five other officers . From 8 December 1941 to 1 July 1942 she was commanded by Acting Lieutenant Commander ( <unk> ) <unk> MacDonald of the <unk> . <unk> J.E. Harrington of the RCNVR commanded her from 2 July 1942 to 20 July 1944 and Lieutenant J.C. Smythe of the RCN commanded her from 21 July 1944 until she was decommissioned on 14 July 1945 . MacDonald also served on two other corvettes , HMCS <unk> from February to December 1941 and HMCS Timmins from March to April 1943 . 
 = = = Badge = = = 
 Many Canadian naval ships of World War II adopted an unofficial coat of arms , and Fredericton was no exception . Her badge , which was displayed on the front of the bridge , was a flying tiger dropping a depth charge on a U @-@ boat . 
 = = War duty = = 
 Fredericton served during the Battle of the Atlantic from December 1941 to the end of the war in May 1945 . After Fredericton was launched she spent a short time undergoing sea trials . From January to July 1942 she escorted convoys between Halifax , St. John 's , New York City and Boston . 
 In 1942 there was an increased U @-@ boat threat in the Caribbean against oil shipments . After Halifax and the UK started experiencing oil shortages , tanker convoys were organized between Caribbean ports and Halifax and New York City . In July , Fredericton was assigned to escort convoy <unk> / <unk> from Halifax to Aruba and back . Since the U.S. Navy had insufficient ships for these convoys , Fredericton along with six other Canadian corvettes was temporarily transferred to American naval operational command for convoy escort between Guantánamo Bay and New York City . She participated in these oil convoy escorts from September until February 1943 . 
 After the Caribbean duty she was transferred to Western Local Escort Force for duty between New York City and St. John 's , Newfoundland . Fredericton came close to seeing action when she was assigned to convoy <unk> on 8 March 1943 , but she turned back at St. John 's on 14 March . Two days later the convoy was attacked by a wolfpack of nearly 40 U @-@ boats , which resulted in the sinking of 22 ships . 
 After a major refit she was reassigned to the Mid @-@ Ocean Escort Force in October 1943 escorting convoys between St. John 's and Londonderry , Northern Ireland . Fredericton spent 11 months in this capacity before undergoing a second refit in September 1944 . For the remainder of the war , she served as an ocean escort . 
 During her time in the Battle of the Atlantic she was never fired upon nor had cause to use her own weapons in anger . This earned her the reputation as the " luckiest ship in the Royal Canadian Navy " . 
 = = Convoy record summary = = 
 = = Disputed disposition = = 
 Several sources ( Lenton , Lynch , Macpherson ) show that in July 1945 Fredericton was transferred to Sydney , Nova Scotia to be decommissioned for disposal and scrapping . Other sources ( <unk> , Royal Canadian Navy ) claim that a mistake in Lloyd 's Register switched its records with HMCS Saskatoon ( <unk> ) . The alternative information shows that Fredericton was sold in 1948 . She was registered under the Panamanian flag as Tra los Montes . In 1950 she was renamed as Olympic Fighter for use as a whaler . Subsequent names included <unk> Maru No. 6 in 1956 and Kyo Maru No. 20 in 1961 . The last notation in Lloyd 's Register was for 1978 – 79 . 
 = Binary logarithm = 
 In mathematics , the binary logarithm ( log2 n ) is the power to which the number 2 must be raised to obtain the value n . That is , for any real number x , 
 <formula> 
 For example , the binary logarithm of 1 is 0 , the binary logarithm of 2 is 1 , the binary logarithm of 4 is 2 , and the binary logarithm of 32 is 5 . 
 The binary logarithm is the logarithm to the base 2 . The binary logarithm function is the inverse function of the power of two function . As well as log2 , alternative notations for the binary logarithm include lg , ld , lb , and ( with a prior statement that the default base is 2 ) log . 
 Historically , the first application of binary logarithms was in music theory , by Leonhard Euler : the binary logarithm of a frequency ratio of two musical tones gives the number of octaves by which the tones differ . Binary logarithms can be used to calculate the length of the representation of a number in the binary numeral system , or the number of bits needed to encode a message in information theory . In computer science , they count the number of steps needed for binary search and related algorithms . Other areas in which the binary logarithm is frequently used include combinatorics , bioinformatics , the design of sports tournaments , and photography . 
 Binary logarithms are included in the standard C mathematical functions and other mathematical software packages . The integer part of a binary logarithm can be found using the find first set operation on an integer value , or by looking up the exponent of a floating point value . The fractional part of the logarithm can be calculated efficiently . 
 = = History = = 
 The powers of two have been known since antiquity ; for instance they appear in Euclid 's Elements , Props . <unk> ( on the factorization of powers of two ) and <unk> ( half of the Euclid – Euler theorem , on the structure of even perfect numbers ) . And the binary logarithm of a power of two is just its position in the ordered sequence of powers of two . On this basis , Michael Stifel has been credited with publishing the first known table of binary logarithms in 1544 . His book <unk> Integra contains several tables that show the integers with their corresponding powers of two . Reversing the rows of these tables allow them to be interpreted as tables of binary logarithms . 
 Earlier than Stifel , the 8th century Jain mathematician Virasena is credited with a precursor to the binary logarithm . Virasena 's concept of <unk> has been defined as the number of times a given number can be divided evenly by two . This definition gives rise to a function that coincides with the binary logarithm on the powers of two , but it is different for other integers , giving the 2 @-@ adic order rather than the logarithm . 
 The modern form of a binary logarithm , applying to any number ( not just powers of two ) was considered explicitly by Leonhard Euler in 1739 . Euler established the application of binary logarithms to music theory , long before their more significant applications in information theory and computer science became known . As part of his work in this area , Euler published a table of binary logarithms of the integers from 1 to 8 , to seven decimal digits of accuracy . 
 = = Definition and properties = = 
 The binary logarithm function may be defined as the inverse function to the power of two function , which is a strictly increasing function over the positive real numbers and therefore has a unique inverse . Alternatively , it may be defined as ln n / ln 2 , where ln is the natural logarithm , defined in any of its standard ways . Using the complex logarithm in this definition allows the binary logarithm to be extended to the complex numbers . 
 As with other logarithms , the binary logarithm obeys the following equations , which can be used to simplify formulas that combine binary logarithms with multiplication or exponentiation : 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 For more , see list of logarithmic identities . 
 = = Notation = = 
 In mathematics , the binary logarithm of a number n is often written as log2 n . However , several other notations for this function have been used or proposed , especially in application areas . 
 Some authors write the binary logarithm as lg n , the notation listed in The Chicago Manual of Style . Donald Knuth credits this notation to a suggestion of Edward Reingold , but its use in both information theory and computer science dates to before Reingold was active . The binary logarithm has also been written as log n with a prior statement that the default base for the logarithm is 2 . Another notation that is sometimes used for the same function ( especially in the German scientific literature ) is ld n , from Latin <unk> <unk> . The DIN 1302 , ISO 31 @-@ 11 and ISO 80000 @-@ 2 standards recommend yet another notation , lb n . According to these standards , lg n should not be used for the binary logarithm , as it is instead reserved for log10 n . 
 = = Applications = = 
 = = = Information theory = = = 
 The number of digits ( bits ) in the binary representation of a positive integer n is the integral part of 1 + log2 n , i.e. 
 <formula> 
 In information theory , the definition of the amount of self @-@ information and information entropy is often expressed with the binary logarithm , corresponding to making the bit the fundamental unit of information . However , the natural logarithm and the nat are also used in alternative notations for these definitions . 
 = = = Combinatorics = = = 
 Although the natural logarithm is more important than the binary logarithm in many areas of pure mathematics such as number theory and mathematical analysis , the binary logarithm has several applications in combinatorics : 
 Every binary tree with n leaves has height at least log2 n , with equality when n is a power of two and the tree is a complete binary tree . Relatedly , the Strahler number of a river system with n tributary streams is at most log2 n + 1 . 
 Every family of sets with n different sets has at least log2 n elements in its union , with equality when the family is a power set . 
 Every partial cube with n vertices has isometric dimension at least log2 n , and has at most 1 / 2 n log2 n edges , with equality when the partial cube is a hypercube graph . 
 According to Ramsey 's theorem , every n @-@ vertex undirected graph has either a clique or an independent set of size logarithmic in n . The precise size that can be guaranteed is not known , but the best bounds known on its size involve binary logarithms . In particular , all graphs have a clique or independent set of size at least 1 / 2 log2 n ( 1 − o ( 1 ) ) and almost all graphs do not have a clique or independent set of size larger than 2 log2 n ( 1 + o ( 1 ) ) . 
 From a mathematical analysis of the Gilbert – Shannon – Reeds model of random shuffles , one can show that the number of times one needs to shuffle an n @-@ card deck of cards , using riffle shuffles , to get a distribution on permutations that is close to uniformly random , is approximately 3 / 2 log2 n . This calculation forms the basis for a recommendation that 52 @-@ card decks should be shuffled seven times . 
 = = = Computational complexity = = = 
 The binary logarithm also frequently appears in the analysis of algorithms , not only because of the frequent use of binary number arithmetic in algorithms , but also because binary logarithms occur in the analysis of algorithms based on two @-@ way branching . If a problem initially has n choices for its solution , and each iteration of the algorithm reduces the number of choices by a factor of two , then the number of iterations needed to select a single choice is again the integral part of log2 n . This idea is used in the analysis of several algorithms and data structures . For example , in binary search , the size of the problem to be solved is halved with each iteration , and therefore roughly log2 n iterations are needed to obtain a problem of size 1 , which is solved easily in constant time . Similarly , a perfectly balanced binary search tree containing n elements has height log2 ( n + 1 ) − 1 . 
 The running time of an algorithm is usually expressed in big O notation , which is used to simplify expressions by omitting their constant factors and lower @-@ order terms . Because logarithms in different bases differ from each other only by a constant factor , algorithms that run in O ( log2 n ) time can also be said to run in , say , O ( <unk> n ) time . The base of the logarithm in expressions such as O ( log n ) or O ( n log n ) is therefore not important and can be omitted . However , for logarithms that appear in the exponent of a time bound , the base of the logarithm cannot be omitted . For example , O ( <unk> n ) is not the same as O ( <unk> n ) because the former is equal to O ( n ) and the latter to O ( <unk> ... ) . 
 Algorithms with running time O ( n log n ) are sometimes called <unk> . Some examples of algorithms with running time O ( log n ) or O ( n log n ) are : 
 Average time <unk> and other comparison sort algorithms 
 Searching in balanced binary search trees 
 Exponentiation by squaring 
 Longest increasing subsequence 
 Binary logarithms also occur in the exponents of the time bounds for some divide and conquer algorithms , such as the <unk> algorithm for multiplying n @-@ bit numbers in time O ( <unk> 3 ) , and the Strassen algorithm for multiplying n × n matrices in time O ( <unk> 7 ) . The occurrence of binary logarithms in these running times can be explained by reference to the master theorem . 
 = = = Bioinformatics = = = 
 In bioinformatics , microarrays are used to measure how strongly different genes are expressed in a sample of biological material . Different rates of expression of a gene are often compared by using the binary logarithm of the ratio of expression rates : the log ratio of two expression rates is defined as the binary logarithm of the ratio of the two rates . Binary logarithms allow for a convenient comparison of expression rates : a doubled expression rate can be described by a log ratio of 1 , a halved expression rate can be described by a log ratio of − 1 , and an unchanged expression rate can be described by a log ratio of zero , for instance . 
 Data points obtained in this way are often visualized as a <unk> in which one or both of the coordinate axes are binary logarithms of intensity ratios , or in visualizations such as the MA plot and RA plot that rotate and scale these log ratio <unk> . 
 = = = Music theory = = = 
 In music theory , the interval or perceptual difference between two tones is determined by the ratio of their frequencies . Intervals coming from rational number ratios with small <unk> and denominators are perceived as particularly euphonious . The simplest and most important of these intervals is the octave , a frequency ratio of 2 : 1 . The number of octaves by which two tones differ is the binary logarithm of their frequency ratio . 
 To study tuning systems and other aspects of music theory that require finer distinctions between tones , it is helpful to have a measure of the size of an interval that is finer than an octave and is additive ( as logarithms are ) rather than multiplicative ( as frequency ratios are ) . That is , if tones x , y , and z form a rising sequence of tones , then the measure of the interval from x to y plus the measure of the interval from y to z should equal the measure of the interval from x to z . Such a measure is given by the cent , which divides the octave into 1200 equal intervals ( 12 semitones of 100 cents each ) . Mathematically , given tones with frequencies f1 and f2 , the number of cents in the interval from f1 to f2 is 
 <formula> 
 The <unk> is defined in the same way , but with a multiplier of 1000 instead of 1200 . 
 = = = Sports scheduling = = = 
 In competitive games and sports involving two players or teams in each game or match , the binary logarithm indicates the number of rounds necessary in a single @-@ elimination tournament required to determine a winner . For example , a tournament of 4 players requires log2 4 
 = 2 rounds to determine the winner , a tournament of 32 teams requires log2 32 = 
 5 rounds , etc . In this case , for n players / teams where n is not a power of 2 , log2 n is rounded up since it is necessary to have at least one round in which not all remaining competitors play . For example , log2 6 is approximately 2 @.@ 585 , which rounds up to 3 , indicating that a tournament of 6 teams requires 3 rounds ( either two teams sit out the first round , or one team sits out the second round ) . The same number of rounds is also necessary to determine a clear winner in a Swiss @-@ system tournament . 
 = = = Photography = = = 
 In photography , exposure values are measured in terms of the binary logarithm of the amount of light reaching the film or sensor , in accordance with the Weber – Fechner law describing a logarithmic response of the human visual system to light . A single stop of exposure is one unit on a base @-@ 2 logarithmic scale . More precisely , the exposure value of a photograph is defined as 
 <formula> 
 where N is the f @-@ number measuring the aperture of the lens during the exposure , and t is the number of seconds of exposure . 
 Binary logarithms ( expressed as stops ) are also used in <unk> , to express the dynamic range of light @-@ sensitive materials or digital sensors . 
 = = Calculation = = 
 = = = Conversion from other bases = = = 
 An easy way to calculate log2 n on calculators that do not have a log2 function is to use the natural logarithm ( ln ) or the common logarithm ( log or log10 ) functions , which are found on most scientific calculators . The specific change of logarithm base formulae for this are : 
 <formula> 
 or approximately 
 <formula> 
 = = = Integer rounding = = = 
 The binary logarithm can be made into a function from integers and to integers by rounding it up or down . These two forms of integer binary logarithm are related by this formula : 
 <formula> 
 The definition can be extended by defining <formula> . Extended in this way , this function is related to the number of leading zeros of the 32 @-@ bit unsigned binary representation of x , <unk> ( x ) . 
 <formula> 
 The integer binary logarithm can be interpreted as the zero @-@ based index of the most significant 1 bit in the input . In this sense it is the complement of the find first set operation , which finds the index of the least significant 1 bit . Many hardware platforms include support for finding the number of leading zeros , or equivalent operations , which can be used to quickly find the binary logarithm . The <unk> and <unk> functions in the Linux kernel and in some versions of the libc software library also compute the binary logarithm ( rounded up to an integer , plus one ) . 
 = = = Iterative approximation = = = 
 For a general positive real number , the binary logarithm may be computed in two parts . First , one computes the integer part , <formula> ( called the characteristic of the logarithm ) . This reduces the problem to one where the argument of the logarithm is in a restricted range , the interval [ 1 @,@ 2 ) , simplifying the second step of computing the fractional part ( the mantissa of the logarithm ) . For any x > 0 , there exists a unique integer n such that 2n ≤ x < 2n + 1 , or equivalently 1 ≤ 2 − nx < 2 . Now the integer part of the logarithm is simply n , and the fractional part is log2 ( 2 − nx ) . In other words : 
 <formula> 
 For normalized floating point numbers , the integer part is given by the floating point exponent , and for integers it can be determined by performing a count leading zeros operation . 
 The fractional part of the result is log2 y , and can be computed iteratively , using only elementary multiplication and division . The algorithm for computing the fractional part can be described in pseudocode as follows : 
 Start with a real number y in the half @-@ open interval [ 1 @,@ 2 ) . If y 
 = 1 , then the algorithm is done and the fractional part is zero . 
 Otherwise , square y repeatedly until the result z lies in the interval [ 2 @,@ 4 ) . Let m be the number of squarings needed . That is , z = 
 <unk> with m chosen such that z is in [ 2 @,@ 4 ) . 
 Taking the logarithm of both sides and doing some algebra : 
 <formula> 
 Once again z / 2 is a real number in the interval [ 1 @,@ 2 ) . Return to step 1 , and compute the binary logarithm of z / 2 using the same method . 
 The result of this is expressed by the following recursive formulas , in which <formula> is the number of squarings required in the i @-@ th iteration of the algorithm : 
 <formula> 
 In the special case where the fractional part in step 1 is found to be zero , this is a finite sequence terminating at some point . Otherwise , it is an infinite series that converges according to the ratio test , since each term is strictly less than the previous one ( since every mi > 0 ) . For practical use , this infinite series must be truncated to reach an approximate result . If the series is truncated after the ith term , then the error in the result is less than 2 − ( m1 + m2 + ... + mi ) . 
 = = = Software library support = = = 
 The log2 function is included in the standard C mathematical functions . The default version of this function takes double precision arguments but variants of it allow the argument to be single @-@ precision or to be a long double . In MATLAB , the argument to the log2 function is allowed to be a negative number , and in this case the result will be a complex number . 
 = The Regina Monologues = 
 " The Regina Monologues " is the fourth episode of The Simpsons ' fifteenth season , and originally aired November 23 , 2003 in the United States . It was written by John Swartzwelder , and directed by Mark Kirkland . The episode sees the Simpson family travel to the United Kingdom for vacation . There , they meet several celebrities including Tony Blair , Evan Marriott , Ian McKellen and J. K. Rowling , who all appear as themselves . Later , Homer gets arrested and locked in the Tower of London for accidentally crashing into the Queen 's carriage . Meanwhile , Abraham Simpson journeys to find Edwina , his long lost love , who is voiced by Jane Leeves . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mr. Burns withdraws a $ 1000 bill from an ATM , but he drops it and an updraft carries it away to the Simpsons ' house , where it is found by Bart and Milhouse . Marge makes Bart and Homer put up fliers so that the person who lost the bill can reclaim it . No one can describe it correctly so Lisa suggests that they spend the money on a vacation , but then decide against it because Homer always manages to ruin any trip they go on . After realizing he can make money from the bill , Bart displays it in a museum in his tree house . Mr. Burns visits and reclaims his money , forcing Bart to close his museum . However , Bart has made over $ 3000 from the museum so they decide to spend the money on a vacation for Marge . Abraham Simpson suggests they go to Britain , where he hopes to meet his long @-@ lost love Edwina . During World War II , he made love to her after claiming he was going out to the front lines the next day , not realising that he really was shipping out the next day ( D @-@ Day ) . 
 Upon their arrival in London the family is greeted by the Prime Minister , Tony Blair , whom Homer mistakes for Mr. Bean . They visit London 's tourist attractions , and later meet J. K. Rowling and Ian McKellen . Grampa tries to contact Edwina whilst Bart and Lisa go on a " sugar rush " after discovering the joys of British candy . Homer and Marge rent a Mini Cooper and start to drive around London but get stuck on Hyde Park Corner . After literally driving in circles for hours , Homer decides to break out of it , plows straight through the gates of Buckingham Palace and slams into Queen Elizabeth II 's horse @-@ drawn carriage . 
 Homer is put on trial for causing harm to the Queen as well as wrecking her carriage . He humiliates himself by calling the Queen an impostor , since her luggage is inscribed " H.R.H. " which he believes is short for " Henrietta R. Hippo " , and mistaking the judge for a woman due to the wig he is wearing . The Queen , highly offended , demands that he be executed . He is taken away to the Tower of London to await his execution , where it is planned for his head to be stuck on a pike . The rest of the family call him from outside and Lisa tells him that he can use a secret tunnel that Sir Walter Raleigh built to escape . However , the tunnel leads straight into the Queen 's bedroom , and she calls her guards . Homer pleads with the Queen to find it in her heart to forgive him and she allows him to leave the country on the condition that he take Madonna as well . As they prepare to leave , Edwina appears and introduces Abe to her daughter Abbie Simpson , who looks and sounds like an British female version of Homer . Fearing that he is most likely the father , Abe runs away quickly to the plane . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Regina Monologues " is ( as of 2016 ) the last regular episode written by longtime Simpsons writer John Swartzwelder ( though Swartzwelder was credited for contributing to the script to The Simpsons Movie ) . The episode was directed by Mark Kirkland . The plot of Homer hitting the Queen 's carriage was recycled from a spec script that previous Simpsons <unk> team Al Jean and Mike Reiss had pitched to The Golden Girls . In that script , Dorothy Zbornak was injured after a collision with Mother Teresa 's car . 
 Tony Blair recorded his part for the episode in April 2003 , in ten minutes at Downing Street . Blair was sent the script early on in the writing process , and it took eight months of negotiation between Fox and Blair 's director of communications Alastair Campbell before Blair could guest star . In the original script , Blair was supposed to welcome the Simpsons to the United Kingdom " with a garland of ' genuine Newcastle coal ' and hand [ Marge ] a complimentary Corgi " , but Campbell had them changed , as Blair " made it very clear that he was only interested in doing the show if he could promote tourism in Britain " . The show 's staff did not know whether Blair would actually record his lines until showrunner Al Jean and his wife were in London promoting the 300th episode of The Simpsons . They received a call stating : " If you go over to Downing Street tomorrow and can promise to get the recording done in 15 minutes , then the Prime Minister will do it " . Jean was " so nervous , it was ridiculous " when he met Blair , an event he has cited as " one of the most fantastic moments of his life " . Blair was the top choice to guest star in the episode , but the staff did not think they had a chance to get him to appear . Blair is the only head of government to guest star in the show , with Rudy Giuliani ( who played himself in the episode " Stop or My Dog Will Shoot " ) the only other politician to guest star . 
 J. K. Rowling recorded her part via satellite from her home in Scotland , and Ian McKellen recorded his over the phone . Evan Marriott , contestant on the first series of Joe Millionaire appears as himself , while Jane Leeves plays Edwina . Manchester United footballer Ryan Giggs is mentioned by Homer , something which Giggs thought was " brilliant " . 
 The writers originally drew up a list of ten British celebrities they wanted to appear in the episode . The Archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams ( a fan of the show ) was included in a draft of the script acting as a tour guide and showing some of his relatives around London . Williams had to reject the part due to other engagements . The script also included a role for a musician ; the staff had hoped to get David Bowie or Morrissey for the part but nothing came together . David and Victoria Beckham were also originally sought to guest star in the episode , and would be seen bickering on the street . The idea was dropped after Blair agreed to guest star , and it was deemed that they were not famous enough in the United States and so were not approached . Jean commented " We thought about it , we didn 't ask . I 've heard of him because my daughter plays soccer . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode originally aired in America on November 23 , 2003 on Fox , and on January 9 , 2004 in the United Kingdom on Sky One . IGN.com named the episode the best of the fifteenth season , saying that " It may not be the best episode ever , but hell if it isn 't a lot of fun " , as well as calling it " extremely funny " and a " high point for the past few seasons " . Tony Blair received criticism from a number of commentators for his appearance in the episode due to the fact that he recorded his part at the height of the war in Iraq . Sunday Telegraph journalist Jack Roberts noted that it was " not [ Blair 's ] finest hour " . On the other hand , Simon Crerar of The Times named Blair 's appearance as one of the 33 best guest appearances in the show 's history , and the BBC classified his appearance as a " PR masterstroke " . The episode is included on the Around the World in 80 D 'ohs DVD . 
 When Blair left office in 2007 , it was reported that his successor as Prime Minister , Gordon Brown , was also being lined up to guest star on the show . Animator Dan Povenmire noted that American audiences would probably require subtitles to understand what Brown was saying . Voice actress Yeardley Smith noted that she would like Brown to appear in The Simpsons , but Brown ruled a guest role out stating : " I think Tony Blair did that , I don 't think that is for me " . Series creator Matt Groening confirmed that Brown would not be approached for a part . 
 I think with Tony Blair we 've reached our quota of British Prime Ministers we 're going to have on the show . We have one per century – I think that 's our rule . Sorry , Gordon Brown , it 's too late ! 
 The episode has become study material for sociology courses at University of California Berkeley , where it is used to " examine issues of the production and reception of cultural objects , in this case , a satirical cartoon show " , and to figure out what it is " trying to tell audiences about aspects primarily of American society , and , to a lesser extent , about other societies " . Some questions asked in the courses include : 
 • What aspects of American society are being addressed in the episode ? 
 • What aspects of them are used to make the points ? 
 • How is the satire conveyed : through language ? drawing ? music ? 
 • Is the behavior of each character consistent with his / her character as developed over the years ? 
 • Can we identify elements of the historical / political context that the writers are satirizing ? 
 • What is the difference between satire and parody ? 
 = River Frome , Bristol = 
 The River Frome / <unk> / , historically the River Froom , is a river in South Gloucestershire and Bristol , England . It is approximately 20 miles ( 32 km ) long , rises in Dodington Park , South Gloucestershire , and flows in a south westerly direction through Bristol , joining the former course of the river Avon in Bristol 's Floating Harbour . The mean flow at Frenchay is 60 cubic feet per second ( 1 @.@ 7 m3 / s ) The name Frome is shared with several other rivers in South West England and means ' fair , fine , brisk ’ . The river is familiarly known in east Bristol as the Danny . 
 Originally the Frome joined the Avon downstream of Bristol Bridge , and formed part of the city defences , but in the thirteenth century the river was diverted through marshland belonging to St Augustine 's Abbey ( now Bristol Cathedral ) , as part of major port improvement works . In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries , the lower reaches of the river were culverted and the river now flows under The Centre into St Augustine 's Reach . 
 As with many urban rivers , the Frome has suffered from pollution , but several stretches run through parks and reserves that sustain a range of wildlife . The power of the water was harnessed in many watermills and the area around the river mouth was developed as shipyards by the eighteenth century . As the city of Bristol developed in the nineteenth and twentieth century , flooding became a major problem , remedied by the construction of storm drains and diversions . 
 = = Course = = 
 20 miles ( 32 km ) long , the River Frome rises in the grounds of Dodington Park in the Cotswolds of South Gloucestershire , flows through Chipping Sodbury in a north westerly direction through Yate , and is then joined by the Nibley brook on the left at Nibley . The river turns south towards the next settlement of Frampton Cotterell , where it is met by the <unk> brook on the right bank . Continuing southwards between Yate and Winterbourne , the Frome crosses Winterbourne Down , to <unk> Bridge where the Folly brook tributary merges on the left bank . 
 The Bradley brook joins on the right bank at <unk> just before the river passes underneath the M4 motorway . After passing under the A4174 the Frome enters a more urban environment passing between Frenchay on the right and Bromley Heath and <unk> on the left . Turning in a more south westerly direction the river enters Oldbury Court estate , a city park also known as Vassal 's , past Snuff Mills , entering a steep valley at Stapleton , then passing Eastville park , where it feeds the former boating lake and is met by the Fishponds brook on the right . 
 The river then flows under the M32 motorway and parallels its course for a while before disappearing into an underground culvert at Eastville Sluices , upstream of Baptist Mills . It is joined underground by Coombe brook on the left and Horfield brook on the right . A brief stretch in St Judes is uncovered and then the river runs underneath Broad Weir , Fairfax Street and Rupert Street . At the site of the former Stone Bridge , near the junction of Rupert Street and Christmas Street , the main flow is channelled through <unk> Culvert . This follows the course of Marsh Street , Prince Street and Wapping Road , and joins the New Cut close to Gaol Ferry Bridge . The culverted section between Stone Bridge and St Augustine 's Reach is now a flood relief channel . 
 = = = Navigation = = = 
 From <unk> Bridge ( Grid Reference <unk> ) to Snuff Mills ( <unk> ) the river is navigable , but only by canoe ( kayak ) though some <unk> may be required . It 's also possible to start at <unk> Bridge ( <unk> ) or Frenchay Bridge ( <unk> ) . Some of the Bradley brook has also been <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 Between Frenchay and Stapleton the river drops nearly 50 feet ( 15 m ) , and as a result there a number of corn and other mills were established to harness the water power . They were undershot mills with no mill ponds . Today a wheel at Snuff Mills is preserved and the mill buildings of Cleeve Mill survive as a private residence . 
 The Frome originally flowed east of its present @-@ day course from Stone Bridge ( now underground by St John 's Gate ) along the line of St Stephen 's Street and Baldwin Street , joining the Avon near Bristol Bridge . The narrow strip of high land between the two rivers was a naturally strategic place for the Saxon town of <unk> , later the walled centre of the city , to develop . When Robert , 1st Earl of Gloucester , rebuilt Bristol Castle , the Frome was diverted ( at present @-@ day Broad Weir ) to form the castle moat , so that the city was entirely surrounded by water . 
 In the mid @-@ thirteenth century the harbour had become so busy that it was decided to divert the Frome into a new course through a marsh belonging to St Augustine 's Abbey into a " Deep Ditch " that was dug from Stone Bridge to join the Avon at the present site of Prince Street bridge . This has been the line of the river ever since , known as St Augustine 's Reach . 
 The Floating Harbour was constructed in 1809 , isolating the Avon and Frome from tides between Cumberland Basin and Totterdown Lock . The increasing use of the Frome as an open sewer combined with the loss of the scouring action of the tides meant that it was now becoming a health hazard and in 1825 it was again diverted , with locks at Stone House , channelling the main flow through Mylne 's Culvert to the tidal Avon at New Cut , to the east of what is now Gaol Ferry Bridge . Up to 1858 the Frome was open along its whole length , and crossed by some 13 bridges . During the latter half of the nineteenth century , a culvert was built from Wade Street in St Judes to Stone Bridge , covering this stretch completely : Rupert Street , Fairfax Street and Broad Weir run over this culverted section . St Augustine 's Trench from Stone Bridge to Draw Bridge ( near the northern end of Baldwin Street ) was covered over in 1893 and the section between that point and the bottom of Park Street was covered over in 1938 . 
 = = = Shipbuilding = = = 
 Shipbuilding began on the River Frome near its mouth in Bristol at least by the seventeenth century , with Francis Baylie building warships at Narrow Quay . Tombs ' Dock was built opposite at Dean 's Marsh in 1760 , the builders including FW Green , and two additional docks were built by at <unk> 's Docks in 1790 . The last shipbuilder closed in 1883 . 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 The name derives from the British Celtic , meaning ' fair , fine , brisk ’ . It is not to be confused with other rivers in the south west of England with the same name . The historic spelling , Froom , is still sometimes used and this is how the name of the river is pronounced ( as in broom ) . In the nineteenth and twentieth century the River Frome became known in East Bristol as the Danny . The derivation of this name is uncertain , some suggest a nickname , taken from the Blue Danube Waltz , others that it was derived from the Australian slang word dunny . 
 = = Hydrology and flooding = = 
 The mean flow as measured at Frampton Cottrell is 60 cubic feet per second ( 1 @.@ 7 m3 / s ) , with a peak on 30 October 2000 of 788 cubic feet per second ( 22 @.@ 3 m3 / s ) and a minimum on 10 August 1990 of 1 @.@ 0 cubic foot per second ( 0 @.@ 028 m3 / s ) . The mean flow as measured at Frenchay is 60 cubic feet per second ( 1 @.@ 7 m3 / s ) , with a peak on 10 July 1968 of 2 @,@ 474 cubic feet per second ( 70 @.@ 1 m3 / s ) and a minimum on 9 August 1976 of 2 @.@ 8 cubic feet per second ( 0 @.@ 079 m3 / s ) . 
 The Environment Agency in 2008 classified the river as Grade A ( highest grade ) for chemical content , but the biology was assessed at C grade ( mid ) . Measurements were taken over a stretch of river between Bradley brook and Broomhill . 
 Where it passes through Bristol the river was prone to flooding , but the Northern Stormwater Interceptor , running from Eastville Sluices to the River Avon downstream of Clifton Suspension Bridge , has since been constructed to control this . At Wade Street , St Judes , the river enters an underground culvert , emerging at what Bristolians call The Centre ( formerly the ' Tramways Centre ' ) , but only when there is a risk of flooding . The river is otherwise channelled through Mylne 's Culvert into the River Avon at a point between Bathurst Basin and Gaol Ferry Bridge . Three further flood relief <unk> Castle Ditch , Fosseway and Castle Green Tunnel - run under Castle Park in central Bristol to carry excess flows into the Floating Harbour . 
 Major floods have included Mina Road , St Werburghs and Wellington Road in October 1882 ; Eastville , St Werburghs and Broadmead in 1936 and 1937 ; Eastville Park and nearby due to melting snow in 1947 ; 1968 Bristol Rovers F.C. old ground at Eastville . The Broadmead area still remains at risk of flooding in severe weather conditions . 
 In December 2011 , a kayaker was killed after capsizing in the flooded river at Snuff Mills weir in Frenchay during a night @-@ time paddle . 
 = = Frome Valley Walkway = = 
 The Frome Valley Walkway is a public footpath , 18 miles ( 29 km ) long , that runs almost the entire length of the river from Old Sodbury to Bristol . A guide pamphlet has been published . The walkway was created by a partnership between local authorities , the Environment Agency , wildlife organisations and location action groups , including Avon Biodiversity Partnership , Avon Invasive Weeds Forum , Avon Wildlife Trust , Bristol City Council , Bristol Naturalists ' Society and South Gloucestershire Council . Regular events include clearing of invasive species and guided walks . 
 = = Natural history = = 
 The Frome valley supports a range of wildlife and plants , passing through or near to a number of nature reserves and parks , including Goose Green fields , Chill Wood , Cleeve Valley , Oldbury Court park and Eastville Park . Notable species include grey wagtails , wild service trees , dippers and several species of bats . One of the last British populations of the endangered native white @-@ clawed crayfish in the Bristol area was found in the river , but became extinct in 2008 . 
 = French cruiser Amiral Charner = 
 Amiral Charner was an armored cruiser built for the French Navy in the 1890s , the name ship of her class . She spent most of her career in the Mediterranean , although she was sent to China during the Boxer Rebellion of 1900 – 01 . The ship was assigned to the International Squadron off the island of Crete during the Greco @-@ Turkish War of 1897 to protect French interests and citizens . Amiral Charner spent most of the first decade of the 20th century as a training ship or in reserve . The ship was recommissioned when World War I began in 1914 and escorted convoys for several months before she was assigned to the Eastern Mediterranean to blockade the Ottoman @-@ controlled coast . During this time , she helped to rescue several thousand Armenians from Syria during the Armenian Genocide of 1915 . Amiral Charner was sunk in early 1916 by a German submarine , with only a single survivor rescued . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Amiral Charner @-@ class ships were designed to be smaller and cheaper than the preceding armored cruiser design , the Dupuy de Lôme . Like the older ship , they were intended to fill the commerce @-@ raiding strategy of the Jeune École . 
 The ship measured 106 @.@ 12 meters ( 348 ft 2 in ) between perpendiculars , with a beam of 14 @.@ 04 meters ( 46 ft 1 in ) . Amiral Charner had a forward draft of 5 @.@ 55 meters ( 18 ft 3 in ) and drew 6 @.@ 06 meters ( 19 ft 11 in ) aft . She displaced 4 @,@ 748 metric tons ( 4 @,@ 673 long tons ) at normal load and 4 @,@ 990 metric tons ( 4 @,@ 910 long tons ) at deep load . 
 The Amiral Charner class had two triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving a single propeller shaft . Steam for the engines was provided by 16 Belleville boilers and they were rated at a total of 8 @,@ 300 metric horsepower ( 6 @,@ 100 kW ) using forced draught . Amiral Charner had a designed speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) , but during sea trials on 18 July 1895 the engines produced 8 @,@ 956 metric horsepower ( 6 @,@ 587 kW ) , but only gave a maximum speed of 18 @.@ 4 knots ( 34 @.@ 1 km / h ; 21 @.@ 2 mph ) . The ship carried up to 535 metric tons ( 527 long tons ; 590 short tons ) of coal and could steam for 4 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 400 km ; 4 @,@ 600 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The ships of the Amiral Charner class had a main armament that consisted of two Canon de 194 mm Modèle 1887 guns that were mounted in single gun turrets , one each fore and aft of the superstructure . Their secondary armament comprised six Canon de 138 @.@ 6 mm Modèle 1887 guns , each in single gun turrets on each broadside . For anti @-@ torpedo boat defense , they carried four 65 @-@ millimeter ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) guns , four 47 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) and eight 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) five @-@ barreled revolving Hotchkiss guns . They were also armed with four 450 @-@ millimeter ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) pivoting torpedo tubes ; two mounted on each broadside above water . 
 The side of the Amiral Charner class was generally protected by 92 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 6 in ) of steel armor , from 1 @.@ 3 meters ( 4 ft 3 in ) below the waterline to 2 @.@ 5 meters ( 8 ft 2 in ) above it . The bottom 20 centimeters ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) tapered in thickness and the armor at the ends of the ships thinned to 60 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) . The curved protective deck of mild steel had a thickness of 40 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) along its centerline that increased to 50 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) at its outer edges . Protecting the boiler rooms , engine rooms , and magazines below it was a thin splinter deck . A watertight internal cofferdam , filled with cellulose , ran the length of the ship from the protective deck to a height of 1 @.@ 2 meters ( 4 ft ) above the waterline . Below the protective deck the ship was divided by 13 watertight transverse bulkheads with five more above it . The ship 's conning tower and turrets were protected by 92 millimeters of armor . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Amiral Charner , named after Admiral Léonard Charner , was laid down at the Arsenal de Rochefort with the name of Charner on 15 June 1889 . She was launched on 18 March 1893 and renamed Amiral Charner on 25 March 1895 before she was commissioned on 26 August . The ship was initially assigned to the 2nd Light Division of the Mediterranean Squadron before she was briefly detached for service in the Eastern Mediterranean . 
 On 6 January 1896 , Amiral Charner became the flagship of the Higher Naval War College ( École supérieure de guerre de la marine ) , commanding her sister ship Latouche @-@ Tréville and the protected cruiser Suchet . The mission of the school was to prepare officers for command at sea and for service on staffs . Ten months later , she was reassigned back to the active fleet on 20 October . The ship was sent to Crete on 10 February 1897 as part of the French contingent of the International Squadron deployed there during the Greco @-@ Turkish War to protect Western interests and citizens and remained with the squadron until November 1898 . Amiral Charner was reassigned to the college on 1 January 1899 together with the protected cruisers Friant and Davout . She was detached to the Northern Squadron ( Escadre du Nord ) , based at Brest , for the first half of the year before returning to Toulon in late June . Three months later , the ship returned to Brest and was temporarily placed in reserve . 
 In January 1900 she was ordered to Rochefort for repairs to her steam @-@ piping in preparation for her upcoming deployment to the Far East . Amiral Charner departed Brest on 26 June and arrived in Saigon , French Indochina , on 1 August . She supported Allied forces during the later stages of the Boxer Rebellion in mid @-@ 1901 before returning to Toulon on 8 November . After a brief refit , the ship was assigned to the 3rd Armored Division on 24 January 1902 . During the annual naval maneuvers in July – August 1902 , Amiral Charner simulated defending against a force breaking into the Mediterranean from the Atlantic , attacked the fortifications at Bizerte , French North Africa , and blockaded hostile ports . She was placed in reserve in Toulon on 15 January 1903 and later assigned to the gunnery school there until the middle of 1910 . Amiral Charner became the guardship at Souda Bay , Crete on 13 May until relieved by her sister Bruix in July 1912 and was then refitted before being placed in reserve at Bizerta , Tunisia . 
 When World War I began in August 1914 , she was recommissioned and assigned to escort convoys between Morocco and France together with Latouche @-@ Tréville and Bruix . In November she was assigned to the 3rd Division of the 3rd Squadron based at Port Said , Egypt where she bombarded Ottoman positions on the Syrian coast several times . Amiral Charner ran aground under enemy fire off Dedeagatch , Bulgaria on 3 March 1915 and had to be pulled off by the small Italian cargo liner SS Bosnia . Together with the predreadnought battleship Jauréguiberry and the protected cruiser <unk> , she was assigned to blockade the coast between Tripoli , Lebanon and El Arish , Egypt in late August . On 11 – 12 September , the ship participated in the rescue of 3 @,@ 000 Armenians north of the Orontes River Delta from pursuing Ottoman troops . The ship supported the occupation of the island of Kastelorizo on 28 December , along with the armored cruiser Jeanne d 'Arc . 
 Sailing from Ruad Island , Syria to Port Said , Egypt , Amiral Charner was torpedoed by the German submarine U @-@ 21 on the morning of 8 February 1916 . She sank in only two minutes with the loss of nearly the entire crew . Some 427 men were lost , with only a single survivor rescued five days later . 
 = Boeing Chinook ( UK variants ) = 
 The Boeing Chinook is a tandem rotor helicopter operated by the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) . A series of variants based on the United States Army 's Boeing CH @-@ 47 Chinook , the RAF Chinook fleet is the largest outside the United States . RAF Chinooks have seen extensive service including fighting in the Falklands War , peace @-@ keeping commitments in the Balkans , and action in the Iraq and Afghanistan wars . 
 The Chinook aircraft , normally based at RAF Odiham , provides heavy @-@ lift support and transport across all branches of the British armed forces , and is supported by the smaller , medium @-@ lift helicopters such as the AgustaWestland Merlin HC.3 of the Royal Navy 's Commando Helicopter Force and the RAF 's Westland Puma HC.2 , based at RNAS Yeovilton and RAF Benson . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 = = = Chinook HC Mk1 = = = 
 In March 1967 an order was placed for fifteen Chinook HC Mk1s , standing for Helicopter , Cargo Mark 1 , for the Royal Air Force to replace the Bristol Belvedere . This original MK1 variant was to be based on the CH @-@ 47B but the order was cancelled in a review of defence spending in November 1967 . 
 UK Chinook procurement ambitions were revived in 1978 with an announced requirement for a new heavy @-@ lift helicopter to replace the Westland Wessex . Thirty Chinooks were ordered at a price of US $ 200 million . These helicopters , comparable to the CH @-@ 47C with Lycoming T55 @-@ L @-@ 11E engines , were again designated Chinook HC Mk1 , and entered service in December 1980 . Eight more Mk1s were delivered from 1984 to 1986 with the CH @-@ 47D 's Lycoming T55 @-@ L @-@ 712 turboshafts . 
 The replacement of the Mk1 's metal rotor blades with aluminium and glass fibre composite rotor blades saw these aircraft designated Chinook HC Mk1B . All surviving aircraft were later returned to Boeing and updated to the Chinook HC Mk2 standard for further service within the RAF . 
 = = = Chinook HC Mk2 = = = 
 The US Army 's next generation Chinook , the CH @-@ 47D , entered service in 1982 . Improvements from the CH @-@ 47C included upgraded engines , composite rotor blades , a redesigned cockpit to reduce pilot workload , redundant and improved electrical systems , an advanced flight control system ( FCS ) and improved avionics . The RAF returned their original Mk1s to Boeing for upgrading to CH @-@ 47D standard , the first of which returned to the UK in 1993 . 
 Three additional HC Mk2 Chinooks were ordered with delivery beginning in 1995 . Another six were ordered in 1995 under the Chinook HC Mk2A designation ; the main difference between these and the standard Mk2 was the strengthening of the front fuselage to allow the fitting of an aerial refuelling probe in future . 
 One Argentine CH @-@ 47C was captured during the Falklands War , and used by the RAF as a training aid . The rear fuselage was later used to repair a crashed RAF Chinook in 2003 . 
 In 2006 , the retirement dates for the Mk2 and Mk2A fleets were scheduled for 2015 and 2025 respectively , but if planned upgrades are made both types could expect to be flying until 2040 . 
 = = = Chinook HC Mk3 = = = 
 Eight Chinook HC Mk3s were ordered in 1995 as dedicated special forces helicopters , which were intended to be low @-@ cost variants of the US Army 's MH @-@ <unk> . The Mk3s include improved range , night vision sensors and navigation capability . The eight aircraft were to cost £ 259 million and the forecast in @-@ service date was November 1998 . Although delivered in 2001 , the Mk3 could not receive airworthiness certificates as it was not possible to certify the avionics software . 
 Unfortunately the procurement was " a profoundly inept piece of procurement " : Sir Peter Spencer , who as head of Defence Procurement inherited the project , said that : the " original requirement was ... actually impossible . I mean , there were 100 essential requirements . I read all of them . One of them said to give protection against any missile coming from any direction . " Spencer later commented : " it is always hard to imagine why people think you would be able cost effectively to buy a bespoke requirement for a very small production run . " 
 The avionics were unsuitable due to poor risk analysis and necessary requirements omitted from the procurement contract . The Times claimed that the Ministry of Defence planned to perform software integration itself , without Boeing 's involvement , in order to reduce costs . While lacking certification , the helicopters were only permitted to fly in visual meteorological conditions and subsequently stored in climate controlled hangars . 
 After protracted negotiations to allow them to enter service , Air Forces Monthly reported in November 2006 that the Defence Aviation Repair Agency would likely receive a contract to install the Thales " TopDeck " avionics system on the Chinook HC Mk3s . However , the Ministry of Defence announced in March 2007 that this so @-@ called " Fix to Field " programme would be cancelled , and instead it would revert the helicopters ' avionics to Chinook Mk2 / 2A specification . The programme was estimated to cost £ 50 – 60 million . In June 2008 , the National Audit Office issued a scathing report on the MoD 's handling of the affair , stating that the whole programme was likely to cost £ 500 million by the time the helicopters enter service . On 6 July 2009 the first of the eight modified Chinook HC Mk3s made its first test flight at MoD Boscombe Down as part of the flight testing and evaluation phase of the HC Mk3 " reversion " program . 
 = = = Chinook HC Mk4 / Mk5 / Mk6 = = = 
 A programme to upgrade 46 Chinook Mk2 / 2A and Mk3 helicopters was initiated in December 2008 . Called Project Julius , it includes new digital flight deck avionics based on the Thales TopDeck avionics suite , comprising new multifunction displays , a digital moving map display and an electronic flight bag , installation of a nose @-@ mounted FLIR detector , and upgrading the engines to the more powerful T55 @-@ 714 standard . Upgraded Mk2 / 2A and Mk3 aircraft will be redesignated Mk4 from Mk2 / 2a , and Mk5 from Mk3 . Deliveries are expected to commence in 2011 . The first conversion , a Chinook HC Mk4 , first flew on 9 December 2010 . Initial operating capability status was reached in June 2012 with seven aircraft delivered . 
 The Chinook HC Mk6 designation has been assigned to the 24 ( later reduced to 14 ) CH @-@ 47F @-@ derived Chinooks ordered in 2009 . These have digital flight @-@ control systems and have all now been delivered 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 RAF Chinooks have been widely deployed in support of British military engagements , serving their first wartime role in Operation Corporate , the Falklands War , in 1982 . Chinooks were used in Operation Granby in the 1991 Gulf War , attached to large peace @-@ keeping commitments in the Balkans , the continued British presence in Afghanistan , and in Operation Telic in the 2003 Iraq War . They provide routine supply and support missions to the British military , notably in Operation Banner in Northern Ireland . The helicopter has also been of use in military humanitarian missions and the extraction of civilians from warzones , such as the evacuation of Sierra Leone in 2000 , and the evacuation from Lebanon in 2006 . 
 One Chinook in particular , known by its original squadron code Bravo November , has come to widespread public recognition due to its remarkable service record . It has seen action in every major operation involving the RAF in the helicopter 's 25 @-@ year service life , including the Falkland Islands , Lebanon , Germany , Northern Ireland , Iraq , and Afghanistan . 
 = = = Falklands War = = = 
 During the Falklands War , Chinooks were deployed by both the British and Argentinian forces . In April 1982 , five Chinooks were loaded aboard the container ship MV Atlantic Conveyor bound for the Falkland Islands , to support the British operations . On 25 May 1982 , the Chinook Bravo November was sent to pick up freight from HMS Glasgow . While the helicopter was airborne , the Atlantic Conveyor was attacked by an Argentine Navy Dassault Super Étendard with an Exocet sea @-@ skimming missile . Bravo November avoided the ship 's destruction , assisted in the evacuation of the ship , and later landed on the aircraft carrier HMS Hermes , gaining the nickname " The Survivor " . Owing to the rapid spread of fire and smoke aboard the Atlantic Conveyor after the Exocet strike , it was not possible to fly any of the helicopters that remained on the ship 's deck . 
 One Argentine Army Chinook was captured intact by British Army forces after the surrender . RAF Chinooks were part of an estimated force of 40 helicopters in the British task force , alongside Westland Sea King and Westland Wessex helicopters . Post @-@ war , two Chinooks were operated by No. 78 Squadron as part of the Falklands Garrison ; this was reduced to a single helicopter in the mid @-@ 1990s and the type was eventually withdrawn from the Falklands in 2006 in order to free up resources and craft for operations in Afghanistan . 
 = = = First Gulf War = = = 
 The Chinook became a vital transit tool during the 1991 Gulf War in Iraq . They were used for moving troops into the region at the start of the conflict ; a Chinook was used on 22 January 1991 to transport a Special Air Service ( SAS ) patrol on the infamous Bravo Two Zero mission . In the aftermath of the conflict as many as nine British Chinooks delivered food and supplies to thousands of Kurdish refugees from Iraq . 
 = = = Kosovo = = = 
 On 6 June 1999 , two Chinooks of No. 27 Squadron left base at RAF Odiham in Hampshire , carrying paratroopers to join NATO forces serving in the Balkans ; six more arrived the following week in Kosovo to support operations such as casualty evacuations and transporting vital supplies . On 12 June 1999 , waves of Chinooks , escorted by Westland Lynx and American AH @-@ 64 Apache attack helicopters , were used to rapidly deploy British infantry forces into Kosovo as a part of NATO 's first phase of deployment . On 10 August 1999 hundreds of Chinooks around the world , including those used by the British armed forces , were grounded due to cracking discovered in the landing gear of a British helicopter during routine inspection . 
 = = = Sierra Leone = = = 
 In May 2000 , several Chinook helicopters airlifted British and European Union citizens out of Freetown in Sierra Leone in an evacuation due to regional instability . In September 2000 Chinooks were being used to evacuate casualties from fighting in Freetown to RFA Sir Percivale , a support ship docked there . 
 = = = Lebanon = = = 
 In July 2006 , 3 Chinook helicopters of No. 27 Squadron deployed to RAF Akrotiri in Cyprus to evacuate British citizens from Lebanon ; the squadron also flew the EU foreign affairs representative Javier Solana to Beirut at the start of the crisis . Members of the SAS and Special Boat Service ( SBS ) units were deployed via Chinooks into Lebanon to locate and make contact with British citizens . 
 = = = Afghanistan = = = 
 Chinook helicopters have been relied upon heavily to support the British forces in Afghanistan continuously since the start of the war in Afghanistan in 2001 ; Operation Snipe saw the helicopters used to assist the 1 @,@ 000 British Commandos sweeping a region of <unk> Afghanistan . Due to the threat of improvised explosive devices ( IEDs ) scattered throughout the terrain by insurgents , transport helicopters have become highly valued and demanded units in this style of warfare . By April 2006 six Chinooks had been deployed by C @-@ 17 transport planes to Kandahar in Southern Afghanistan , in support of Operation Herrick . Two RAF Chinooks were lost in August 2009 during combat operations with the Taliban , one of which was brought down by enemy fire , in spite of warnings months before of Taliban plans to attack the helicopters . 
 The continued operation of the fleet was made more cost effective when <unk> and support regimes were altered in 2006 – 7 . On 15 December 2009 the British government announced its Future Helicopter Strategy including the purchase of 24 new build Chinooks , 22 to expand the force and two to replace losses in Afghanistan , to be delivered to the Royal Air Force from 2012 . The number of additional Chinooks was cut to 12 with the October 2010 defence review , however . This will bring the total fleet size to 60 aircraft ; as of 2009 , the RAF had 48 Chinooks in inventory . 
 = = Variants = = 
 Chinook HC Mk1 
 New @-@ build aircraft for the RAF based on the CH @-@ 47C , 41 built . 
 Chinook HC Mk1B 
 Modification of the 41 Mk1s with metal rotor blades , survivors converted to Mk2 . 
 Chinook HC Mk2 
 Conversion by Boeing of 32 surviving <unk> to CH @-@ 47D standard , and 3 new build @-@ aircraft 
 Chinook HC Mk2A 
 Similar to the HC2 with strengthened fuselage using milled structure manufacturing techniques , 6 built . 
 Chinook HC Mk3 
 Special forces variant based on the CH @-@ <unk> , 8 built . 
 Chinook HC Mk4 
 Mk2 / 2A aircraft with upgraded engines and avionics under Project Julius . 46 conversions planned . 
 Chinook HC Mk5 
 Mk3 aircraft with upgraded avionics under Project Julius . 
 Chinook HC Mk6 
 New @-@ build Chinooks announced in 2009 , expected to be delivered beginning in 2014 . Originally 24 aircraft , later reduced to 14 ( 12 helicopters plus 2 attrition replacements ) . 
 = = Operators = = 
 RAF Odiham 
 7 Squadron - Joint Special Forces Aviation Wing 
 18 ( B ) Squadron 
 27 Squadron 
 RAF Benson 
 28 ( R ) Squadron - Joint Chinook and Puma HC.2 OCU 
 There is a suggestion that 78 Squadron , which previously operated the Merlin HC.3 from RAF Benson , could reform as a new Chinook squadron when new <unk> aircraft on order from Boeing are delivered . 
 The day @-@ to @-@ day maintenance of Nos. 18 and 27 Squadron aircraft is carried out by 18 / 27 ( Engineering ) Squadron , a separate Squadron using the innovative ' fight by flight ' structure to provide the efficiencies of combined engineering whilst maintaining aircrew / ground crew relationships when deployed . 
 When deployed , the detachment of Nos. 18 and 27 Squadron aircrew and 18 / 27 ( Engineering ) Squadron groundcrew is known as No. 1310 Flight . The RAF has a total of 48 Chinooks in inventory as of late August 2009 . 
 = = Notable incidents and accidents = = 
 On 13 May 1986 , Chinook HC Mk1 <unk> crashed in bad weather in the Falkland Islands . The helicopter , with four crew and 12 troops , crashed into a hill 4 miles from its destination . With rescuers hampered by blizzards , the personnel were recovered but one crew member had died shortly after the crash , and the co @-@ pilot and a soldier died on the way to hospital . The board of enquiry concluded that the crew had become disorientated due to " white @-@ out " conditions . 
 On 27 February 1987 , Chinook HC Mk1 <unk> crashed in the Falkland Islands on a test flight following servicing . After leaving RAF Mount Pleasant , the helicopter was at a normal cruising speed and an altitude of between 300 and 700 feet when it nosed down and crashed into the ground about 6 kilometres south @-@ east of the airfield ; it was destroyed by a subsequent fire . The board of enquiry was unable to determine the exact cause but it may have been the forward @-@ swivelling upper boost actuator jamming . All seven on board , three crew and four technicians , were killed . 
 On 6 May 1988 , Chinook HC Mk1 <unk> hit a pier at Hannover Airport while taxiing into position in a confined space . Its front rotor struck the underside of Pier 10 , causing the helicopter to rear up vertically and then fall on its side . A fire started at the rear of the fuselage and soon spread . Three crew members were killed and one had major injuries ; the Chinook was destroyed . 
 On 2 June 1994 , Chinook HC Mk2 <unk> crashed on the Mull of Kintyre , Scotland , killing all 25 passengers and all four crew members ; the cause is disputed . 
 On 19 August 2009 , Chinook HC Mk2 <unk> the Ministry of Defence announced that a Chinook made an emergency landing following an RPG strike and subsequent engine fire after a cargo drop @-@ off just north of Sangin in Helmand Province , Afghanistan . The Chinook flew two kilometres to a safe area before landing . None of the crew sustained any injuries and all evacuated the aircraft before they were rescued by a second Chinook on the same sortie . The damaged aircraft was then destroyed by coalition air strikes to prevent it falling into the hands of the Taliban . 
 On 30 August 2009 , Chinook HC Mk2 <unk> the loss of another Chinook was announced . The helicopter made a hard landing while on operations near Sangin , Helmand province . It suffered damage to the undercarriage , nose and front rotor , but the crew and 15 soldiers on board were unharmed . According to the Ministry of Defence due to the location of the crash it was not possible to safely recover the aircraft and it was destroyed with explosives deliberately . The cause of the hard landing is being investigated , although it is not thought to have been shot down . 
 = = Specifications ( Chinook ) = = 
 Data from Royal Air Force . 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 3 – 4 ( pilot , copilot , one or two air loadmasters depending on aircraft role ) 
 Capacity : 55 soldiers and equipment 
 Length : 30 @.@ 1 m ( 98 ft 9 in ) 
 Rotor diameter : 18 @.@ 3 m ( 60 ft 0 in ) 
 Height : 5 @.@ 7 m ( 18 ft 8 in ) 
 Empty weight : 10 @,@ 185 kg ( 22 @,@ 450 lb ) 
 Loaded weight : 12 @,@ 100 kg ( 26 @,@ 680 lb ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 22 @,@ 680 kg ( 50 @,@ 000 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 2 × Honeywell T55 @-@ GA @-@ 712 turboshaft , 2 @,@ 800 kW ( 3 @,@ 750 hp ) each 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 295 km / h ( 183 mph ; 159 kn ) 
 Service ceiling : 5 @,@ 600 m ( 18 @,@ 500 ft ) 
 Rate of climb : 10 @.@ 1 m / s ( 1 @,@ 980 ft / min ) 
 Armament 
 2 × <unk> <unk> and 1 × M60 machine gun 
 = Once More , with Feeling ( Buffy the Vampire Slayer ) = 
 " Once More , with Feeling " is the seventh episode of the sixth season of the supernatural drama television series Buffy the Vampire Slayer ( 1997 – 2003 ) and the only one in the series performed as a musical . It was written and directed by the show 's creator , Joss Whedon , and originally aired on UPN in the United States on November 6 , 2001 . 
 " Once More , with Feeling " explores changes in the relationships of the main characters , using the plot device that a demon — credited as " Sweet " but unnamed in the episode — compels the people of Sunnydale to break into song at random moments to express hidden truths . The title of the episode comes from a line sung by Sweet ; once the characters have revealed their truths and face the consequences of hearing each other 's secrets , he challenges them to " say you 're happy now , once more , with feeling " . 
 All of the regular cast performed their own vocals , although two actors were given minimal singing at their request . " Once More , with Feeling " is the most technically complex episode in the series , as extra voice and dance training for the cast was interspersed with the production of four other Buffy episodes . It was Joss Whedon 's first attempt at writing music , and different styles — from 1950s sitcom theme music to rock opera — express the characters ' secrets in specific ways . The episode was well received critically upon airing , specifically for containing the humor and wit to which fans had become accustomed . The musical format allowed characters to stay true to their natures while they struggled to overcome deceit and miscommunication , fitting with the sixth season 's themes of growing up and facing adult responsibilities . It is considered one of the most effective and popular episodes of the series , and — prior to a financial dispute in 2007 — was shown in theaters with the audience invited to sing along . 
 = = Background = = 
 Throughout the series Buffy Summers ( Sarah Michelle Gellar ) , in her role as the Vampire Slayer , is assisted by her close friends , who refer to themselves as the " Scooby Gang " . These include Xander Harris ( Nicholas Brendon ) , a young man without particular strengths or talents , but devoted to Buffy and her calling , and Willow Rosenberg ( Alyson Hannigan ) , a young woman who has grown from a shy but gifted student into a strong woman and powerful user of magic . They are mentored by Buffy 's " Watcher " , Rupert Giles ( Anthony Stewart Head ) , a paternal figure since the first season , when Buffy moved to Sunnydale after her parents ' divorce . Xander is engaged to Anya Jenkins ( Emma Caulfield ) , a former vengeance demon who has become human . They have struggled with disclosing their engagement to the rest of the group and individually doubt their impending marriage . 
 Buffy died at the end of the fifth season ( " The Gift " ) , sacrificing herself in place of her younger sister Dawn ( Michelle Trachtenberg ) in order to save the world . In the first episode of the sixth season , Willow , believing Buffy to be in Hell , used magic to bring her back from the grave . Buffy was in fact at peace , in what she thinks was heaven , but she has kept this a secret from her friends . Since her resurrection , Buffy has been lost and without inspiration to perform her duties as a Slayer . Willow is romantically involved with Tara Maclay ( Amber Benson ) , a powerful but ethical witch . Tara has previously expressed concern at Willow 's use of her emergent magical powers for trivial or personal matters . In the preceding episode ( " All the Way " ) , Willow cast a spell to make Tara forget an argument about her abuse of magic . In the same episode , Dawn , who has been stealing from stores , including Anya 's magic shop , lies to Buffy and goes on a clandestine and almost deadly date . Left to take care of Dawn after the death of their mother Joyce Summers ( Kristine Sutherland ) in the fifth season ( " The Body " ) , Buffy has come to depend more heavily on Giles . Following Dawn 's date , Buffy asks Giles to shoulder responsibility for disciplining her , much to his discomfort . 
 Buffy 's former nemesis is Spike ( James Marsters ) , a vampire . In the fourth season The Initiative , a secret military organization whose mission is to evaluate and eliminate demonic beings , rendered Spike harmless by implanting a microchip in his head that causes him intense pain when he attacks humans . However , the chip does not affect him when he harms demons and he now often fights on Buffy 's side , after at first fighting just for the pleasure of brawling . His motivations changed when , in the fifth season , Spike realized he had fallen in love with Buffy . She initially rejected him , but after and just before her death they had begun to form a friendship of sorts . She has been confiding in him ; prior to this episode , he is the only one to whom Buffy has revealed that she was in heaven . 
 Throughout Buffy the Vampire Slayer , music serves as a narrative tool , integral to character development and action . The mood is set by music , characters discuss it , and writers use it to emphasize differences between generations . In an essay on the use of music in the series , Jacqueline Bach writes that in conjunction with the sixth season themes of growing up , " Once More , with Feeling " gives music a central role instead of keeping it in the background . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On a routine nighttime graveyard patrol , Buffy laments in song about how uninspired her life has become ( " Going Through the Motions " ) . The next morning at the Magic Box , Buffy 's friends reveal that they also sang that evening . Led by Giles , the gang theorizes about the cause of the singing , sensing no immediate danger but agreeing that by working together they can overcome anything ( " I 've Got a Theory / Bunnies / If We 're Together " ) . Buffy learns that the whole town is affected when she looks outside the shop to see a large group ( led by series writer and producer David Fury ) singing and dancing about how a dry @-@ cleaning service got their stains out ( " The Mustard " ) . 
 Tara and Willow leave to research at home , but dally along the way while Tara muses about how much Willow has improved her life ( " Under Your Spell " ) . The next morning , Xander and Anya perform a duet about their secret annoyances with each other and their respective doubts about their impending marriage ( " I 'll Never Tell " ) . They realize that the songs are bringing out hidden truths , and later insist to Giles that something evil is to blame . As they argue , they walk past a woman ( series writer and producer Marti Noxon ) protesting a parking ticket ( " The Parking Ticket " ) . That evening , Buffy visits Spike , who angrily tells Buffy to leave him alone if she will not love him ( " Rest in Peace " ) . 
 Dawn tells Tara she is glad that Tara and Willow have made up after their argument . Since Tara has no recollection of an argument , she suspects that Willow has used magic to alter her memory . She goes to the Magic Box to consult a book , leaving Dawn alone . Dawn starts to bemoan that no one seems to notice her ( " Dawn 's Lament " ) , but is seized by minions of Sweet ( Hinton Battle ) , a zoot suit @-@ wearing , tap @-@ dancing , singing demon . They take Dawn to The Bronze , where her attempt to escape transforms into an interpretive dance with the minions ( " Dawn 's Ballet " ) before she meets Sweet . He tells Dawn that he has come to Sunnydale in response to her " invocation " , and he will take her to his dimension to make her his bride ( " What You Feel " ) when his visit is complete . 
 At the Magic Box , Giles recognizes that he must stand aside if Buffy is to face her responsibilities to Dawn instead of relying on him ( " Standing " ) and Tara finds a picture of the forget @-@ me @-@ not flower Willow used to cast a spell on her in a book of magic . Giles and Tara separately resolve to leave the people they love , respectively Buffy and Willow . In the case of Buffy , for her own good , and in the case of Willow because Tara has become disgusted by Willow 's magical manipulation of their relationship ( " Under Your Spell / Standing — Reprise " ) . Captured by Spike outside the store , one of Sweet 's minions conveys a challenge from Sweet for Buffy to rescue Dawn from The Bronze . Giles forbids the gang to assist Buffy so she goes alone , despite having no will to do so ; eventually Giles and the Scoobies change their minds and leave to catch up . Spike begrudgingly decides to help Buffy , despite thinking things would be better for him if she were dead , and Sweet opines that Buffy is drawn to danger ( " Walk Through the Fire " ) . 
 Meeting Sweet at The Bronze , Buffy offers a deal to Sweet to take the place of her sister if she can 't kill him . When asked by Sweet what she thinks about life , Buffy gives her pessimistic take on its meaning ( " Something to Sing About " ) . When the others arrive , she divulges that Willow took her from heaven and Willow reacts with horror at finding out what she 's done . Upon divulging this truth , Buffy gives up on singing and dances so frenetically that she begins to smoke , on the verge of combusting as other victims of Sweet have been shown to have done , until Spike stops her , telling her that the only way to go forward is to just keep living her life . Xander then reveals that he , not Dawn , called Sweet , hoping he would be shown a happy ending for his marriage plans . Sweet tells the group how much fun they have been ( " What You Feel — Reprise " ) and disappears . The Scoobies realize that their relationships have been changed irreversibly by the secrets revealed in their songs ( " Where Do We Go from Here ? " ) . Spike leaves The Bronze , but Buffy follows him out and they kiss ( " Coda " ) . 
 = = Production and writing = = 
 Joss Whedon had wanted to make a musical episode since the start of the series . This was heightened during the fifth season when he hosted a Shakespeare reading at his house , to which the cast was invited . They began drinking and singing , demonstrating to Whedon that certain cast members had musical talents . Whedon knew he would have to write an entire score , which would take weeks or months . During the first three seasons of Buffy , he was unable to take more than two weeks off at a time , and the constraints of writing and directing the show precluded him from putting forth the effort of preparing a musical . Whedon spoke to the show 's producer , Gareth Davies , about his idea ; they agreed that a musical episode would be written . 
 Whedon spent six months writing the music for " Once More , with Feeling " . When he returned after the end of the fifth season , he presented Davies with a script and CD , complete with notated and orchestrated music , which Davies found " mind @-@ boggling " . The actors were initially bewildered ; in 2012 , James Marsters commented that " it 's obvious now that they were good songs but the thing was Joss and his wife Kai , they don 't sing very well . And they don 't play piano very well . The songs sounded really cheesy and horrible ... We were saying , ' Joss , you 're ruining our careers . ' " 
 Preparing for the episode was physically difficult for some of the cast members , most of whom had little experience singing and dancing . They spent three months in voice training . Two choreographers worked with Whedon and the cast on dance sequences . Michelle Trachtenberg ( Dawn ) , who is trained in ballet , requested a dance sequence in lieu of a significant singing part , and Alyson Hannigan ( Willow ) , according to Whedon , begged him not to give her many lines . Sarah Michelle Gellar ( Buffy ) told the BBC that " It took something like 19 hours of singing and 17 hours of dancing in between shooting four other episodes " and she was so anxious about singing that she " hated every moment of it " . When Whedon suggested using a voice double for her , however , she said , " I basically started to cry and said , ' You mean someone else is going to do my big emotional turning point for the season ? ' In the end , it was an incredible experience and I 'm glad I did it . And I never want to do it again . " Davies was so impressed with Hinton Battle 's performance on Broadway in The Wiz that he asked Battle to play the demon Sweet . Battle , a three @-@ time Tony @-@ winner , wore prosthetic make @-@ up for the first time to give him a demonic red face . Sweet was portrayed as " slick " , smooth and stylish ; in contrast , most demons on the series were designed to be crude and ugly . The set for The Bronze was used frequently throughout the series , but stairs were built from the stage to maximize floor space for Battle 's dance . 
 Running eight minutes longer than any in the series , the episode was also the most technical and complex . Whedon , who has stated this is one of his favorite Buffy episodes , used a widescreen letterbox format for filming ( the only episode in the series to get this treatment ) , different lighting to bring out the sets more vibrantly , and long takes for shooting — including a complicated shot with a full conversation , a song , and two choreographed dances that took 21 attempts to get right . These were designed to give viewers all the clues they needed to establish all the nuances of the relationships between characters . Davies commented that the intricacies of filming this episode were " infinitely more complicated than a regular Buffy " episode , and Whedon stated in the DVD commentary that he was ambitious to prove what television is capable of , saying " it just depends how much you care " . UPN , the television network that aired Buffy 's last two seasons , promoted the episode by displaying Gellar 's face on billboards with music notes over her eyes , and held a special premiere event . Network president Dean Valentine remarked he thought it was " one of the best episodes of television I ever saw in my life " . 
 Critics hailed the episode as successful in telling a complex story about all the characters in a unique way , while retaining the series ' effective elements of writing and character development . Throughout the show — as in the rest of the series — the characters self @-@ consciously address their own dialogue and actions . Anya describes her own duet " I 'll Never Tell " as " a retro pastiche that 's never gonna be a breakaway pop hit " . With a characteristic dry demeanor , Giles explains that he overheard the information about Sunnydale residents spontaneously combusting as he was eavesdropping upon the police taking " witness arias " . In her opening number , " Going Through the Motions " , Buffy sings that she feels as though she is playing a part : " nothing here is real , nothing here is right " . The song introduces the character 's emotional state but also removes the barrier between the actor and the audience , as Gellar the actor portrays Buffy , who feels she is merely playing the part of the Slayer . This hints to the audience that the episode 's musical format is strange to the actors and characters . According to Buffy essayist Richard Albright , the lack of polish among cast members ' singing voices added to the authenticity of their breaking out into song for the first time in the series . Whedon included self @-@ conscious dialogue and references about the characters being in a musical and showed their reluctance toward song and dance , so that the audience would feel more comfortable with the improbability of such a thing happening on the show . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The dynamic nature of the characters was a unique element of writing in the series at the time . Once they were established in the twelve episodes of the first season , characters began to change and relationships were developed in the second . This continued through the series to the point of unpredictability that sometimes became unsettling to fans . Buffy essayist Marguerite Krause asserts that the monsters and demons faced by the Scoobies are thin symbolism for the show 's true focus : relationships and how to maintain or ruin them . Common among most of these relationships — romantic , platonic , and familial — is , according to Krause , a " failure to communicate , lack of trust , [ and the ] inability to envision or create a viable future " . <unk> is worsened or sustained through multiple episodes and seasons , leading to overwhelming misunderstanding and critical turning points for the characters , some of whom do not recover . 
 " Once More , with Feeling " propelled the story arc for season six by allowing characters to confess previously taboo issues to themselves and each other . Whedon commented that he was " obsessive about progressing a plot in a song , about saying things we haven 't said " , comparing the musical theater format to the fourth season episode " Hush " , in which characters begin communicating when they stop talking . According to Buffy essayist Zoe @-@ Jane <unk> , earlier episodes ' " false saccharine behaviour " impedes the characters so crucially that it summons a demon to force them to be honest . The consequences in the episode of concealing truth , spontaneous combustion , is an allusion to Bleak House by Charles Dickens — of whom Whedon is a fan — where characters also face immolation for being deceitful . For Buffy , however , truth is slow in coming , as she continues to lie to the Scoobies , claiming to forget what she sang about in the graveyard during " Going Through the Motions " . Buffy continues her charade in the chorus number " If We 're Together " , beginning the song by persuading others to join in one by one , as if each is convinced that she is still invested and in charge , and their strength as a group is infallible . Although she asks in verse " Apocalypse / We 've all been there / The same old trips / Why should we care ? " , all the Scoobies join her , including Giles despite his suspicions that Buffy is no longer interested in her life . 
 Secrets reveal themselves steadily throughout the episode . Xander fears that his future marriage will turn him into an argumentative drunk like his father . He attempts to avoid his fears through the song " I 'll Never Tell " , singing " ' <unk> there 's nothing to tell " , after summoning Sweet to Sunnydale to show him that he and Anya will be happy . Amid the various annoyances Xander and Anya express through this song , some verses are clear @-@ sighted observations of behavior , such as Anya 's accusation that Xander — once in love with Buffy — uses Buffy as a mother figure to hide behind . Anya also avoids the truth by burying herself in wedding plans without thinking critically about what being married will entail ; instead she considers Xander an accessory to her desired lifestyle . Of all the characters , Anya is the most preoccupied with the style of singing and songs , demanding to know if Spike sang " a breakaway pop hit , or a book number " , and asking Dawn if the pterodactyl she facetiously says she gave birth to also broke into song . Anya and Xander 's duet is the only song in the episode to address the audience directly . During the long single @-@ shot scene when she and Xander talk over each other insisting to Giles that evil must be at play , Anya refers to the audience , saying " It was like we were being watched ... Like there was a wall missing ... in our apartment ... Like there were only three walls and not a fourth wall . " Albright asserts that Anya 's constant preoccupation with her and others ' performances indicates that she has serious doubts about her future supporting role as Xander 's wife . 
 Giles 's truth , according to Whedon , is that he realizes he must not " fight my kid 's battles or my kid will never grow up " , which he sings in " Standing " while he throws knives at Buffy as part of her training . Whedon remarked that this touch " is the kind of complete turnaround that is a staple of the Buffy universe " . Tara 's heartfelt love song also has an ironic subtext ; although she appears to mean that she is fulfilled by her relationship with Willow , the lyrics include multiple allusions to Willow working her manipulative will over Tara , overlaid with Tara 's euphoric singing about her pleasure in their union . In Sex and the Slayer , Lorna Jowett calls the song between Willow and Tara the transformational event in their relationship , from Tara 's subservient bearing towards Willow , into a relationship of equals . Two Buffy essayists note that Willow and Giles sing together at the start of the episode , but later Tara and Giles share a duet to express the diminished part each plays in their respective relationships . 
 Although " Once More , with Feeling " allows all the characters to confess truthfully , with the exception of Willow , it does not resolve the behavior that demanded confession in the first place . At the end of the episode , Buffy kisses Spike , initiating a romance that she hides from her friends . Their relationship lasts until the end of the series , marked for a time by Buffy 's loathing of him because he has no soul . Her relationship with Spike , however , allows her to feel lust and attraction , which she yearns for after being pulled back from a heavenly dimension . In The Psychology of Joss Whedon , Mikhail <unk> writes that , although Buffy 's first step toward re @-@ engaging with her life is telling the Scoobies the truth in the song " Something to Sing About " , she does not find meaning again until the end of the season . In his essay " A Kantian Analysis of Moral Judgment in Buffy the Vampire Slayer " , Scott Stroud explains that Buffy , as the central character throughout the series , is torn between her desires and her duty , in a Kantian illustration of free will vs. <unk> , symbolized by her responsibility as a Slayer and her adolescent impulses . In earlier seasons , this takes the form of simpler pleasures such as dating and socializing , interspersed with defeating evil forces . It reaches a climax in the ultimate sacrifice when Buffy offers to die to save the world . However , " Once More , with Feeling " , according to Stroud , is the turning point at which she begins to face her responsibility to the community , her friends and her family . Not only does she continue her Slaying despite a lack of inspiration , but for the rest of the season she works at a humiliating job to provide for her sister and friends . 
 = = Music and style = = 
 " Once More , with Feeling " was Joss Whedon 's first attempt at writing music , which he had always wanted to do . He learned how to play guitar to write several songs . Christophe Beck , a regular composer for the series , filled in the overture and coda and composed " Dawn 's Ballet " . Whedon is a fan of Stephen Sondheim , and used him as the inspiration for much of the music , particularly with the episode 's ambiguous ending . Cast member James Marsters ( Spike ) said , " Some of Joss 's music is surprisingly complicated . Maybe it 's a Beatles thing . He doesn 't know enough to know what he can 't do and he 's smashing rules . " 
 The episode 's musical style varies significantly . Buffy 's opening number , " Going Through the Motions " , was influenced heavily by the Disney song " Part of Your World " sung by Ariel in The Little Mermaid . Whedon wanted to use a similar opening in which the heroine explains her yearning . While singing her song , Buffy fights three vampires and a demon who themselves break into a choreographed dance ; Whedon wanted this to be fun but not distracting . The song ends with chord influences from Stephen Schwartz 's Pippin and a visual tribute to Disney : as Buffy stakes a vampire , it turns to dust that swirls around her face . 
 Whedon chose the most complicated scene , with the most dancers and choreography in the classic style of musical theater , to accompany an 18 @-@ second song ( " The Mustard " ) " to get it out of the way " for more personal numbers later in the episode . Stephanie Zacharek of Salon.com considers this " brilliant because it frees even people who hate musicals to settle into the story without getting hung up on the genre 's conventions " . The musical styles span from a jaunty 1950s sitcom arrangement of the Buffy theme in the opening credits — the only episode in the series to begin without the normal version of the theme song and full cast roll , signifying a genre shift — to Anya 's hard @-@ rock version of " Bunnies " . Whedon assigned Emma Caulfield the rock @-@ opera format because Caulfield often sang in such a way to him on the set . Spike 's " Rest in Peace " is also a rock song , which Whedon wrote after completing the episode 's first song , Tara 's " Under Your Spell " , a contemporary pop song with radio @-@ play potential . Xander and Anya 's duet — the most fun to shoot but difficult to write , according to Whedon — is inspired by Fred Astaire @-@ Ginger Rogers comedies as evidenced by the silken pajama costumes and art deco apartment setting . Musically , the song uses influences from Ira Gershwin , a Charleston rhythm , and jazz @-@ like chord slides . Giles ' " Standing " is a ballad to Buffy that she does not hear , unlike the songs revealing truths elsewhere in the episode . Whedon shot the scene so that Giles moves in real time while Buffy works out in slow motion , to accentuate Giles ' distance from her . Buffy 's not hearing his song was intentional ; Whedon explained , " you can sing to someone in musicals and they can never know how you feel or how much you love them , even if they 're standing right in front of you " . 
 " Under Your Spell " received attention from Buffy studies writers because it presents a frank and unflinching expression of lesbian romance . Buffy the Vampire Slayer was the first show in U.S. television history to portray a long @-@ term lesbian relationship among the core cast of characters . Previous televised depictions of lesbian relations were primarily limited to single " coming out " or " lesbian kiss " episodes , showing lesbian @-@ identified characters as affectionate but not erotic . Tara and Willow demonstrate throughout the series , and specifically in " Once More , with Feeling " , that they are " intensely sexual " , according to Buffy essayist Justine Larbalestier . Near the end of Tara 's song , she sings , " Lost in ecstasy / Spread beneath my Willow tree / You make me / Com — <unk> " , as Tara levitates off the bed while Willow tacitly performs cunnilingus on her . Lorna Jowett called the song " the most erotic scene " of the series . Whedon admitted on the DVD commentary for the episode that the song is " pornography " and " probably the dirtiest lyric I 've ever written , but also very , very beautiful " . 
 Buffy essayist Ian Shuttleworth writes that Amber Benson ( Tara ) has " the sweetest singing voice of all the lead players " , referring to " Under Your Spell " as " heavenly and salacious " ; author Nikki Stafford concurs , writing that Benson " has the most stunning voice , showing a surprising range " . Whedon acknowledged that the " lyrical , heavenly quality " of Benson 's voice led him to assign her the episode 's love song . Alyson Hannigan ( Willow ) was unwilling to sing much and her performance is " apprehensive " , according to Shuttleworth . He considers this an example of Tara 's quieter strength coming out in front of Willow 's showy demonstrations of powerful magic . Buffy studies scholar Rhonda Wilcox interprets Willow 's diminished role representing the show 's silence about Willow 's descent into addiction and darkness through the rest of the season . Benson remarked that Tara 's story arc is significant within the episode , starting out with ecstasy but soon recognizing the illusory circumstances surrounding her bliss and that " life can 't be perfect all the time " . 
 The most complicated song , " Walk Through the Fire " , leads all the characters to the climax from different locations for different reasons , reminiscent of the " Tonight Quintet " from West Side Story . When they all sing the chorus at once to the line " We will walk through the fire / And let it — burn " , two fire trucks race behind the Scoobies as they proceed to the Bronze . Whedon called the shot the " single greatest thing we ever did " . Each of the singers in this song , which " marries soft rock to the function of a dirge " , connects musically to earlier songs while foreshadowing Buffy 's next number and the final chorus , providing an ominous anxiety . 
 Buffy 's numbers are the most complex , changing key and tempo when she begins to reveal the secrets she swore she never would . This appears specifically in " Something to Sing About " , which starts with uptempo platitudes : " We 'll sing a happy song / And you can sing along : / Where there 's life , there 's hope / Every day 's a gift / Wishes can come true / Whistle while you work ... " While singing , she kills Sweet 's minions with a pool cue . Whedon attempted to make the song tuneful yet chaotic to express the main point of the episode . It transitions suddenly into her desire to be like normal girls , then changes again , slowing the tempo as she challenges Sweet not to give her a song , but " something to sing about " . Musicologist Amy Bauer categorizes the tempo shifts as " rock ballad to punk polka to hymn " that indicates Buffy 's turmoil . The key and tempo slow again , as Buffy finally reveals " I live in hell / ' Cause I 've been expelled from heaven / I think I was in heaven " with the chord changing from B minor to B diminished , each time she repeats " heaven " . When replying to her , Spike has the same shift from minor to diminished each time he repeats the word " living . " 
 The episode nears the end with " Where Do We Go from Here ? " , as the Scoobies stand dazed and disoriented , facing different directions . As they sing " Understand we 'll go hand in hand / But we 'll walk alone in fear " , they line up , hold hands , then fling each other 's hands away in a piece of what Whedon calls " literal choreography " . Each of the eight characters in this line wears a color in the visible spectrum , a conscious decision by the costume designer . The couples in the group wear opposite colors ( Giles in green and Buffy in red , Anya in blue and Xander in orange , Tara in yellow and Willow in purple ) , and Rhonda Wilcox interprets the color @-@ coding and choreography to represent the " tension between the individual and the group " . The characters as a chorus sing " The curtains close on a kiss , God knows / We can tell the end is near " , moments before Buffy runs out to kiss Spike and the show closes with actual curtains . As Spike and Buffy kiss , a swell of music accompanies them , similar to the ending of Gone with the Wind . Lyrics sung moments before , however , forecast the uncertainty of the relationship between Spike and Buffy . 
 = = Reception = = 
 When the episode was originally broadcast in the United States on UPN on November 6 , 2001 , it received a Nielsen rating of 3 @.@ 4 and a share of 5 . This placed the episode in sixth place in its timeslot , and 88th among broadcast television for the week of November 5 – 11 , 2001 . It was the most watched program on UPN that night , and the third most watched program that week , trailing episodes of Star Trek : Enterprise and WWF SmackDown . This was a decrease from the 3 @.@ 7 rating received by the previous episode a week prior . 
 " Once More , with Feeling " received positive praise from media and critics when it aired , during overseas syndication , and in reminiscences of the best episodes of Buffy after the series ended . Although Salon.com writer Stephanie Zacharek states " ( t ) he songs were only half @-@ memorable at best , and the singing ability of the show 's regular cast ranged only from the fairly good to the not so great " , she also asserts that it works " beautifully " , paces itself gracefully , and is " clever and affecting " . Zacharek 's unenthusiastic assessments of the music and cast 's singing abilities were not shared by other writers . Debi Enker in Australia 's The Age writes , " Giles ( Anthony Stewart Head ) and Tara ( Amber Benson ) are terrific , Xander ( Nicholas Brendon ) and Dawn ( Michelle Trachtenberg ) struggle valiantly , and Willow ( Alyson Hannigan ) barely sings a note " . Tony Johnston in The Sunday Herald Sun writes that Gellar " struggles on some of her higher notes , but her dance routines are superb , Michelle Trachtenberg 's Dawn reveals sensual dance moves way beyond her tender years , and James Marsters ' Spike evokes a sort of Billy Idol yell to disguise his lack of vocal proficiency [ ... ] The rest of the cast mix and match like ready @-@ made Broadway <unk> . " Johnston counts " I 'll Never Tell " as one of the episode 's " standout moments " . Connie Ogle in The Miami Herald calls the songs " better and far more clever than most of the ones you 'll hear on Broadway these days " . 
 Writers agree that the episode was risky and could have failed spectacularly . Jonathan Bernstein in the British newspaper The Observer writes " What could have been , at best , an eccentric diversion and , at worst , a shuddering embarrassment , succeeded on every level [ ... ] It provided a startling demonstration that creator Joss Whedon has a facility with lyrics and melody equal to the one he 's demonstrated for the past six seasons with dialogue , character and plot twists . Rather than adopt the ' Hey , wouldn 't it be wacky if we suddenly burst into song ? ' approach practised by Ally McBeal , the Buffy musical was entirely organic to the series ' labyrinthine progression . " Johnston in the Sunday Herald Sun says , " There is just so much to this marvellously cheeky episode that suggests the show can take any route it pleases and pull it off " , while Debi Enker in The Age comments , " Whedon demonstrates yet again what Buffy aficionados have known and appreciated for years : that his wit , playfulness and readiness to take a risk make his television efforts rise way above the pack . " Steve Murray in The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution characterizes the episode as " scary in a brand @-@ new way " , saying " Once More , with Feeling " is " as impressive as Whedon 's milestone episodes ' Hush ' and ' The Body ' " ; the episode is " often hilarious " , according to Murray , and acts as " ( b ) oth spoof and homage , [ parodying ] the <unk> of musicals while also capturing the guilty pleasure and surges of feeling the genre inspires " . 
 Writing in the Toronto Star , Vinay Menon calls " Once More , with Feeling " " dazzling " and writes of " Joss Whedon 's inimitable genius " ; he goes on to say " ( f ) or a show that already violates conventions and morphs between genres , its allegorical narrative <unk> and zagging seamlessly across chatty comedy , drama and over @-@ the @-@ top horror , ' Once More , with Feeling ' is a towering achievement [ ... ] The show may be anchored by existential <unk> , it may be painted with broad , supernatural brushstrokes , but in the end , this coming @-@ of @-@ age story , filled with angst and alienation , is more real than any other so @-@ called teen drama [ ... ] So let 's add another line of gushing praise : ' Once More , with Feeling ' is rhapsodic , original , deeply affecting , and ultimately , transcendental . Quite simply , television at its best . " 
 The episode was nominated for an Emmy Award for Outstanding Musical Direction , but the National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences ( NATAS ) neglected to include the title on the ballots for Emmy nominations in 2002 . NATAS attempted to remedy this by mailing a postcard informing its voters that it should be included , but the episode did not win . NATAS ' oversight , according to the Washington Post , was " another example of the lack of industry respect afforded one of television 's most consistently clever shows " . Ogle in The Miami Herald vigorously protests this omission , writing , " [ T ] he most astonishing , entertaining hour ( hour plus , actually ) of TV in the past year slips by virtually unnoticed . Nothing here is real ; nothing here is right . Buffy the Vampire Slayer 's musical episode , ' Once More , with Feeling ' , registers a paltry outstanding music direction nomination . Nice for the musical directors . A stake through the aspirations of writer / director Joss Whedon , the beating creative heart of Buffy , the only TV writer brave and clever enough to use horror as one great big wonderful metaphor for growing up [ ... ] ' Once More , with Feeling ' is TV of a different sort , something that comes along once in a lifetime and should not be buried but celebrated and rewarded . " The episode was also nominated for a Best Dramatic Presentation Hugo Award and a Best Script Nebula Award , both given for excellence in science fiction and fantasy writing . In 2009 TV Guide ranked the episode # 14 on its list of " TV 's Top 100 Episodes of All Time " . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 An album including all 14 songs in the episode , with Christophe Beck 's scores for three other Buffy episodes , was released by Rounder Records in September 2002 as season seven premiered . John <unk> , president and chief executive of Rounder Records , told the Los Angeles Times , " I remember watching the episode when it aired last October , and after it was over , I said to my wife , ' That 's the best hour of TV I 've ever seen . Someone should put that [ soundtrack ] out . ' I inquired at Fox , just following up , and they said , ' Well , we tried , it didn 't happen . If you want to take a run at it , feel free . ' " AllMusic gives the album five out of five stars , stating that the music is " every bit as fun as the episode itself " , praising the voices of Benson , Marsters and Head . Reviewer Melinda Hill states it is " a must @-@ have for Buffy fans , but it wouldn 't be out of place in anyone 's collection " . 
 = = = DVD releases = = = 
 In addition to featuring on the sixth season box set , " Once More , with Feeling " was individually released on DVD in Region 2 format on April 14 , 2003 , the only episode to be individually released . In Region 1 , the episode was released on the sixth season box set on May 25 , 2004 , over a year later than the Region 2 release . 
 = = = Influence on television = = = 
 Since the musical episode of Buffy aired , several other series have worked musical format into episodes , including Scrubs , ( " My Musical " ) in 2007 , an episode of Grey 's Anatomy entitled " Song Beneath the Song " in 2011 and Batman : The Brave and the Bold , ( " Mayhem of the Music Meister ! " ) in 2009 . The musical television episode was declared a genre , a gimmick , according to Mary Williams at Salon.com , for series that had run out of interesting story lines and characters . Both Williams and Margaret Lyons at New York magazine , however , declared " Once More , with Feeling " the " gold standard " for musical episodes . Despite this , Joss Whedon recognized the influence " Once More , with Feeling " has had on other shows , but denied that it was primarily responsible for the rise in musical television episodes or series such as Glee , citing the popularity of High School Musical instead . 
 = = Public showings = = 
 Buffy the Vampire Slayer developed an enthusiastic fan following while it aired . Following its series finale , fans continued their appreciation in theater showings of " Once More , with Feeling " where attendees are encouraged to dress like the show 's characters , sing along to the musical numbers , and otherwise interact in the style of The Rocky Horror Picture Show . Clinton McClung , a New York @-@ based film programmer , got the idea for a sing @-@ along from audience @-@ participation showings of The Sound of Music in 2003 . The next year , he began putting on sing @-@ alongs to " Once More , with Feeling " in Boston 's Coolidge Corner Theater , which became so popular that it went on the road . Audience members received props to use during key scenes , as well as directions ( for example , to yell " Shut up , Dawn ! " at Buffy 's younger sister ) , and a live cast performed the episode alongside the screen . 
 Buffy sing @-@ alongs received growing media attention as they spread . At the 2007 Los Angeles Film Festival , a special screening and sing @-@ along was held that featured both Marti Noxon and Joss Whedon giving brief speeches to the audience . In October 2007 , after a dispute with the Screen Actors Guild over unpaid residuals , 20th Century Fox pulled the licensing for public screenings of " Once More , with Feeling " , effectively ending official Buffy sing @-@ alongs . Whedon called the cancellation " hugely depressing " and attempted to influence the studio to allow future showings . 
 = West Liberty Foods = 
 West Liberty Foods , L.L.C. is a US meat processing company owned by the Iowa Turkey Growers Cooperative and formed in 1996 by a group of Iowa turkey growers , and now owns four meat processing plants . The company mainly produces products for customers to sell under their own brand names . As of 2006 , West liberty Foods was the 12th largest turkey company in the United States . 
 Each plant , located in the three Iowa towns of West Liberty , Mount Pleasant , and Sigourney as well as Tremonton , Utah , focuses on specific aspects of the meat packing process . The West Liberty plant participates in the entire process by slaughtering animals , further processing meats into products , and packaging finished products , and the Sigourney plant focuses on the further processing step only , and the Mount Pleasant plant only packages finished product . 
 While West Liberty Foods has experienced growth and received industry recognition since its inception , it initially faced a difficult market for turkeys , and has experienced problems with labor discontent . Employees remain with the company for an average of nine years , with more than 1 @,@ 500 employed . 
 = = Information = = 
 The company primarily provides meat for other marketing brands , producing 90 % of its product for customers while selling only 10 % under the West Liberty Foods brand name . In addition to slaughtering turkeys , the company produces prepared beef , chicken , pork , and turkey products . Company revenue has grown rapidly with US $ 65 million in sales during 1997 , US $ 120 million in 2000 , and US $ 200 million in 2003 . Most recently , West Liberty Foods posted US $ 442 million in revenue for 2006 , making the company the 56th largest meat packing company by sales in the United States . Much of the company 's sales come from large nationwide foodservice customers , and , as of 2006 , was Subway 's largest supplier of sliced sandwich meat , providing the franchise with more than 1 million pounds per week . As a result of servicing national customers , the company is inspected more than other food manufacturers . West Liberty Foods ' three plants have been ISO 14001 certified for meeting environmental management standards , and the West Liberty plant was the first turkey processing plant in the United States to receive this certification . 
 West Liberty Foods maintains separate facilities for research and development and laboratory testing services . They are housed in adjacent buildings several blocks from the plant in West Liberty . The R & D facility includes testing space for both raw and cooked product , and can create test products from start to finish , including initial formulation , final slicing , and packaging . The lab conducts product quality testing for the three production facilities and uses polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) technology for rapid bacteriological testing . This system can return results within 30 hours of production . 
 = = History = = 
 Prior to 1996 , Louis Rich , the brand name for Oscar Mayer 's turkey division , owned the processing plant in West Liberty , IA . In early 1996 , Oscar Mayer 's parent company , Kraft Foods , announced that they would close the plant that December if no buyer purchased it . The Iowa turkey growers who sold to Kraft discussed purchasing the plant to ensure that demand for their birds remained . In May 1996 , forty @-@ seven of the turkey growers formed the Iowa Turkey Growers Cooperative ( ITGC ) . ITGC purchased the plant from Kraft and took control of it in December . The growers hired meat industry veteran Ken Rutledge to be President and COO of the company . Oscar Mayer helped West Liberty Foods by promising to purchase half of the plant 's output in 1997 and a quarter of the output in 1998 to help the startup company . 
 Production under ITGC ownership began in January 1997 . The company faced financial difficulty because the turkey market was oversupplied and prices hit historic lows . While financial projections assumed a price of US $ 1 @.@ 92 per pound for turkey , prices averaged US $ 1 @.@ 46 per pound in 1997 . During this time period , four of the growers left ITGC . Turkey prices eventually rebounded , and the company was bolstered by sales to Sara Lee near the end of 1998 . 
 Since the rebound , West Liberty Foods ’ sales have grown steadily . In 2000 , the company acquired a second plant in Sigourney , IA from Pinnacle Foods to meet rising <unk> facility was sold in 2012 . The company grew again in April 2003 when it opened a processing plant in Mount Pleasant , IA which was later expanded in 2004 . Company leadership changed in 2004 as Ed Garrett was named president and COO when Rutledge resigned to take a position with another growers ' organization . In 2006 the company entered into a marketing alliance agreement with Midvale , Utah based <unk> Foods . 
 = = Labor episode = = 
 In 2004 , workers at the West Liberty plant considered joining the United Food and Commercial Workers International Union ( UFCW ) . On July 1 , 2004 the workers voted on whether they would be represented by UFCW Local 431 . An initial tally of votes came out 301 in favor and 299 against union representation . However , the count did not include 13 ballots which were disputed by UFCW . The ballots were challenged on claims that they were cast by management personnel who would not be union members . 
 A National Labor Relations Board ( NLRB ) hearing to confirm or invalidate the vote was scheduled for January 5 , 2005 but then postponed until February 16 , 2005 . On February 1 , 2005 the company and UFCW settled their dispute . UFCW withdrew its objections , and West Liberty Foods posted a notice that they would not close the plant or fire workers if employees unionized . This resulted in a final vote count of 303 to 308 against union representation . 
 UFCW Local 431 held a second vote at the West Liberty plant on July 15 , 2005 . The vote was 231 to 322 against unionization . 
 In 2009 , the company paid US $ 58 @,@ 613 @.@ 75 to Labor Information Services , an anti @-@ union management services company connected to The Burke Group , to provide consultants who met directly with workers " either individually or in group meetings ... regarding union issues . " 
 = = Plants = = 
 West Liberty Foods ' three plants combined can convert 4 @.@ 5 million turkeys into product annually . This equals approximately 180 million pounds of product per year . 
 = = = West Liberty plant = = = 
 The West Liberty Plant is a 270 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 25 @,@ 000 m2 ) facility which slaughters and further processes turkey products . The slaughter operation converts approximately 20 @,@ 000 turkeys per workday . 
 Louis H. Rich , purchased the West Liberty plant , a former tomato canning facility , in 1943 , when he decided to expand the operations of the Rock Island Produce Company , located on 9th Street in Rock Island , Illinois . The plant was converted to a poultry , including chickens and turkeys , slaughter facility in 1946 and refocused by Rich 's sons , Norman and Martin , on turkey in 1949 . The plant was first expanded in 1960 . Oscar Mayer acquired the plant , through its purchase of Louis Rich , Inc . , in 1979 and used it for turkey production until selling the plant in 1996 . 
 = = = Mount Pleasant plant = = = 
 The Mount Pleasant plant is a 85 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 7 @,@ 900 m2 ) facility that is used for slicing cooked cheese , turkey , chicken , beef , pork and other products . The plant employs approximately 500 people working in three shifts . A 68 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 6 @,@ 300 m2 ) Millard Refrigerated Services facility is located adjacent to the Mount Pleasant plant . The two facilities are connected , and product is immediately transferred by conveyor from the plant to cold storage when packaging is complete . 
 The design and operation of the Mount Pleasant plant to are intended decrease potential hazards to food safety . WLF representatives have stated that the goal of the Mount Pleasant plant is to create a pathogen @-@ free environment . Because company officials believe that the food safety aspects of the plant are unique in the meat industry , they submitted the plant design for patent approval through the U.S. Patent Office . The Mount Pleasant plant is located approximately 50 miles ( 80 km ) from either the West Liberty or Sigourney plants . This reduces the likelihood that pathogens will be carried either by air or foot traffic from a raw production area to Mount Pleasant 's ready to eat production . 
 The Mount Pleasant facility consists of approximately 20 individual processing cells that are separated from one another and are set up so that they could operate as individual meat slicing facilities . Before anti @-@ microbial flooring was poured , the cells were erected with stainless steel anti @-@ microbial walls that are built into the floor . Each processing cell has independent refrigeration and drainage systems . The refrigeration systems filter the cell 's air and maintain positive air pressure at 38 ° F ( 3 ° C ) , and the drainage systems are sealed off and flooded with <unk> nightly . 
 During operation , fully cooked meat or cheese logs arrive sealed in impermeable casings . The logs go through a casing sanitation step that involves being treated with a sanitizing liquid before the casings are removed from the logs . The logs then undergo a post @-@ lethality treatment by passing through an infrared pasteurization tunnel to kill pathogens on the logs . The logs are then mechanically transferred to <unk> , sliced , and placed in sealed packages that are transferred out of the processing cell . The mechanical transfers decrease the risk of product contamination by reducing handling of product by personnel . 
 Food safety is a factor in hiring employees at the Mount Pleasant facility . Before applying , potential employees must complete a 16 @-@ hour food safety training course through Iowa State University . The class includes written tests which each applicant must pass before completing the course . On the job , employees must don a sealed clean room suit before entering slicing cells . The suits are cleaned and sealed in a clean room laundry facility in North Carolina by the uniform company Cintas . Employees replace the clean suit each time they leave the cell so each employee averages five suits per day . 
 = = = Sigourney plant = = = 
 The Sigourney plant is no longer active , and has been closed . The remaining employees were released as of Wed . March 18 , 2009 . West Liberty sold the facility in 2012 . 
 = = = Tremonton , Utah plant = = = 
 As of 2006 , West Liberty Foods plans to build a plant in Tremonton , Utah . The plant will not slaughter , but the 200 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 19 @,@ 000 m2 ) facility will allot 93 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 8 @,@ 600 m2 ) for processing and 74 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 6 @,@ 900 m2 ) for slicing a variety of meat products . The company broke ground for the facility in October 2006 . It is expected to begin production in July 2007 . When completed , the plant will be the first in North America to slice 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) slicing logs . The plant will initially have ten slicing cells allowing production of 150 million pounds per year and will eventually add ten more cells to double the plant 's <unk> . At full capacity , the plant will employ more than 500 people . Similar to the Mount Pleasant plant , a 50 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 4 @,@ 600 m2 ) Millard Refrigerated Services facility will be built adjacent to the Tremonton plant for warehouse storage of refrigerated and frozen products . 
 Initially , the company investigated sites for the new plant in Utah , Nevada , and Arizona . It requested US $ 5 @.@ 2 million in tax incentives Utah to build in Pleasant View , Utah . On April 26 , 2006 Utah 's Department of Community and Economic Development approved a US $ 2 million tax @-@ rebate over 10 years . The incentives were conditioned on the new jobs paying a certain level above the county median wage , offering health insurance , and the company staying in Utah for 10 years . Pleasant View offered another US $ 1 @.@ 4 @-@ US $ 1 @.@ 8 million in incentives . However , construction in Pleasant View became impossible when it was discovered that much of the site consisted of wetland areas . After this development , the state held the incentive offer open provided that West Liberty Foods could find another suitable site that met Utah 's requirements . 
 On July 29 , 2006 , the company announced that they would build the new plant in Tremonton , Utah . The tax incentives will total an 80 % property tax break , but Tremonton is projected to experience a US $ 508 thousand financial benefit over 12 years after the plant is completed . Of the 500 jobs at the plant , 300 are expected to pay between US $ 21 @,@ 500 and US $ 26 @,@ 875 . The rest of the jobs will pay more with about 100 paying around US $ 37 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Awards = = 
 West Liberty Foods has received a number of awards from various organizations . 
 2001 – Subway Supplier of the Year 
 2003 – Paul Hill honored by the National Council of Farmer Cooperatives 
 2005 – Economic Vision Award from USDA Rural Development , Best Business Recycling Program award from Iowa Recycling Association , Dedicated Services Award from Subway 
 2006 – Ed Garrett named " Executive of the Year " by The National Provisioner , Mount Pleasant and Sigourney plants receive Safety Awards from Iowa @-@ Illinois Safety Council , a chapter of the National Safety Council 
 2007 – Quality Gold Standard Award from Subway 
 Hormel Spirit of Excellence Award in 1998 , 1999 , 2000 , 2001 , and 2002 . 
 2008 – Subway Supply Chain Partner Award – Iowa @-@ Illinois Safety Council Safety Award <unk> Quality Award 
 = The Boat Race 1962 = 
 The 108th Boat Race took place on 7 April 1962 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Umpired by former Blue , Ran Laurie , it was won by Cambridge by five lengths in a time of 19 minutes 46 seconds . The race featured the heaviest oarsman since the 1829 race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1961 race by four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lengths , and led led overall with 58 victories to Oxford 's 48 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Cambridge were coached by J. R. F. Best , James Crowden ( who rowed twice for Cambridge , in the 1951 and 1952 races ) , Charles Lloyd ( a three @-@ time Blue , rowing in the 1949 , 1950 and 1951 races ) and Harold Rickett ( who rowed in the 1930 , 1931 and 1932 races ) . Oxford 's coaches were Jumbo Edwards ( who rowed for Oxford in the 1926 and 1930 races ) , Ronnie Howard ( who represented Oxford in the 1957 and 1959 races ) and Antony Rowe ( who had rowed in the 1948 and 1949 races ) . Although the Cambridge crew were favourites on their arrival at Putney , and were reckoned to be " one of the best Boat Race crews for ten years " , their early performances in practice did not impress the critics . However , in their final row before the race , Cambridge took four seconds off the record time from the Mile Post to Putney Bridge , covering the distance in 4 minutes 6 seconds . 
 The race was umpired by Ran Laurie who had rowed for Cambridge in the 1934 , 1935 and 1936 races , and had gone on to win a gold medal for Great Britain at the 1948 Summer Olympics . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 13 st 2 @.@ 75 lb ( 83 @.@ 6 kg ) , 2 @.@ 75 pounds ( 1 @.@ 2 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . The Cambridge crew saw two former Blues return , bow R. Nicholson , and number four A. J. Collier . Similarly , Oxford 's crew contained two rowers with Boat Race experience , including C. M. Davis who was rowing at stroke for the third consecutive year . Two non @-@ British participants were registered in the race , both in the Cambridge crew : John Lecky , rowing at number five was a Canadian Olympic oarsman while American Harold Budd occupied the six seat . Budd , at 15 st 1 lb ( 95 @.@ 5 kg ) was the heaviest oarsman to feature in the Boat Race since J. J. Toogood who rowed for Oxford in the inaugural race in 1829 . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Oxford . The race commenced at <unk> , with the Dark Blues making a better start and quickly held the lead , as Cambridge had a " sticky second stroke " . With both crews rating 34 strokes per minute , the Light Blues quickly restored parity before taking the lead and holding a one @-@ length advantage by Craven Steps . A spurt from Oxford reduced the deficit to half a length but Cambridge began to pull away again , despite being outrated by the Dark Blues . Another spurt at the Crab Tree saw the two crews level by Harrods Furniture Depository , and as they passed below Hammersmith Bridge . 
 There , the Cambridge cox succeeded in forcing the Oxford boat wide and into rough water , and took advantage , drawing clear above Chiswick Eyot . To avoid the breaking waves , Oxford pulled in behind the Light Blue boat and as such , the race as a contest was effectively ended . Cambridge continued to pull away and passed the finishing post with a lead of five lengths in a time of 19 minutes 46 seconds , the slowest winning time since the 1954 race . It was Cambridge 's second consecutive victory and their largest winning margin since the 1955 race . According to the rowing correspondent for The Times , " for Cambridge this was a most convincing though not unexpected victory " . 
 = Blur ( Blur album ) = 
 Blur is the eponymous fifth studio album by the English rock band Blur , released on 10 February 1997 by Food Records . Blur had previously been broadly critical of American popular culture and their previous albums had become associated with the Britpop movement , particularly Parklife ( 1994 ) , which had helped them become one of Britain 's leading pop acts . After their previous album , The Great Escape , the band faced media backlash and relationships between the members became strained . 
 Under the suggestion of the band 's guitarist , Graham Coxon , the band underwent a stylistic change , becoming influenced by American indie rock bands such as Pavement and Sonic Youth . Recording took place in London as well as in Reykjavík , Iceland . Drummer Dave Rowntree described the music on the album as being more aggressive and emotional than their previous work . Producer Stephen Street claimed that lead singer @-@ songwriter Damon Albarn had started writing about more personal experiences while Coxon revealed that listening to his lyrics it was clear to him that " he 'd obviously gone off his head a bit more " . 
 Despite worries from Blur 's label , EMI , and the music press that the change in style would alienate the band 's predominantly teenage fanbase and that the album would flop as a result , Blur , as well as lead single , " Beetlebum " , reached the top of the UK charts and the album was certified platinum . The album also reached the top 20 in six other countries . The success of " Song 2 " led to Blur becoming the band 's most successful album in the US where the Britpop scene had been largely unsuccessful . The album received positive and mixed reviews from most music critics , many praising the stylistic change as well as Albarn 's improved songwriting . 
 = = Background = = 
 Despite Blur 's previous album , The Great Escape being released to positive reviews , and entering the UK charts at number one , the album 's success was left in the shadows compared to ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? by Britpop rivals Oasis which went quadruple platinum in the US . Blur became perceived as an " inauthentic middle class pop band " in comparison to the " working class heroes " Oasis , which made lead singer @-@ songwriter , Damon Albarn feel " stupid and confused " . Bassist Alex James later summarised , " After being the People 's Hero , Damon was the People 's Prick for a short period ... basically , he was a loser — very publicly . " 
 An early 1996 Q magazine interview revealed that relations between Blur members had become very strained ; journalist Adrian <unk> wrote that he found them " on the verge of a nervous breakup " . Guitarist Graham Coxon , in particular , began to resent his bandmates ; James for his playboy lifestyle and Albarn for his control over Blur 's musical direction and public image . In February 1996 , when Coxon and James were absent for a lip @-@ synced Blur performance broadcast on Italian television , they were replaced by a cardboard cutout and a roadie , respectively . Blur biographer Stuart Maconie later wrote that , at the time , " Blur were sewn together very awkwardly . " 
 Coxon struggled with drinking problems and , in a rejection of the group 's former Britpop aesthetic , made a point of listening to noisy American alternative rock bands such as Pavement . In the 2010 documentary on the band , No Distance Left to Run , Coxon stated that he was getting more influenced by American guitarists as " a lot of them were doing very interesting stuff with guitars and I needed to be nourished . I suppose as a guitar player and there was none of that happening in English music although English music was now more popular [ so ] I started listening to more stuff from the States from smaller labels . " 
 Although he had previously dismissed it , Albarn grew to appreciate Coxon 's tastes in Lo @-@ fi and underground music , and recognised the need to significantly change Blur 's musical direction once again . " I can sit at my piano and write brilliant observational pop songs all day long but you 've got to move on " , he said . He subsequently approached Street , and argued for a more stripped @-@ down sound on the band 's next record . Coxon , recognising his own personal need to , as drummer Dave Rowntree put it , " work this band " , wrote a letter to Albarn , describing his desire for their music " to scare people again . " 
 = = Recording = = 
 Recording sessions for the album started in June 1996 at Mayfair studios in London . After the initial sessions , the band left to record the rest of the album in Reykjavík , Iceland , away from the Britpop scene . It was in Iceland that the vocals to " Strange News from Another Star " , " Essex Dogs " , " Beetlebum " , and " On Your Own " were recorded . " We just recorded some vocals there , " Albarn revealed in an Addicted To Noise interview . " I have a house there and it 's the perfect place to write because of the light [ The sun doesn 't rise until midday ] . Not good during the summer because it 's sunshine all the time , 24 hours a day . " 
 Apart from a change in musical style , the band changed the way they recorded . " It was the first time we sort of jammed , " Coxon revealed . " We 've never really jammed before . We 've been quite white @-@ <unk> , overall about recording , like in a laboratory . Yeah , we did actually feel our way through just playing whatever came to our minds and editing , which was really exciting . " " We just played together for two weeks in a way we hadn 't done since 1991 , " Dave recalls . " We wanted to purify the sound , to not have anything there not played by us . We reasoned that if we made small changes at the input end , we could effect large changes in the output . " According to producer Stephen Street , " Blur had decided that commercial pressures and writing hit singles wasn 't going to be the main consideration any more . The mood in the studio was very different to when I 'd first worked with them . " " In the studio , once we got past those first few days , where I felt everyone was treading on eggshells , there was a great atmosphere . I think it was because they didn 't want to be competing with anyone on this record , they wanted to make a record that would help keep the band together . " Street had acquired a new piece of hardware , described as " <unk> @-@ ish to talk about but really useful " which enabled him to sample loops and otherwise cut @-@ and @-@ paste entire sections of the band 's jam sessions . 
 = = Music = = 
 Rowntree stated that the band decided to give Coxon a much freer hand on Blur . Street also observed a change of Albarn 's writing style , as he " was much more prepared to write in the first person , rather than about interesting characters . I think [ Albarn had ] grown a bit and was prepared to start writing about his own experiences rather than transposing them on to a character like Tracy Jacks or Dan Abnormal . " Coxon agreed , and felt " Damon 's songs were revealing more to me than to him " and said that when he heard some of his home demos he realised " he 'd obviously gone off his head a bit more " . The album features the first song to appear on a studio album in which Coxon not only wrote the lyrics , but also sang lead vocal — " You 're So Great " . 
 According to Mark Redfern of Under the Radar , Blur eschewed Britpop in favour of American indie rock . NME magazine similarly argued that it favoured lo @-@ fi and alternative rock over Britpop . By contrast , Margaret Moser of The Austin Chronicle characterised its music as " a punchy brand of muscular Brit @-@ pop " , while AllMusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine said it " may superficially appear to be a break from tradition " but is a " logical progression " from Britpop rather than an abandonment of it . Album opener " Beetlebum " has been described as a " Beatles tribute " by several publications ; Erlewine wrote that the song " [ runs ] through the White Album in the space of five minutes . " Q magazine 's Andrew Collins compared the song to The Auteurs as well as a " slightly menacing Free as a Bird " , due to " a slight drone undulating in the foreground " and a " sweet , elongated coda busied by what sounds like an invasion of turkeys . " Albarn admitted that " Beetlebum " was about heroin and the drug experiences he had with his then @-@ girlfriend , Justine Frischmann of Elastica . Albarn also stated that the song describes a complicated emotion , sort of " sleepy " and sort of " sexy " . The song 's title is a reference to the phrase " Chasing the beetle " which refers to inhaling the smoke from heated heroin , morphine , or opium that has been placed on a piece of tin @-@ foil . " Song 2 " is notable for its hook which features Albarn yelling " woo @-@ hoo ! " The song 's intro has been called Coxon 's " finest moment . " 
 Erlewine described " Country Sad Ballad Man " as a bizarrely affecting , strangled lo @-@ fi psychedelia , whilst Collins claimed that " the seated intro is a rustic mess from which arises a simply beautiful , lazy riff . " " <unk> " was described by James Hunter of Rolling Stone as a homage to Mott the Hoople . The song borrows the chord progression from David Bowie 's " Boys Keep Swinging " and " Fantastic Voyage " , the latter of which was co @-@ written by Brian Eno . " On Your Own " is notable for its usage of a Roland TR @-@ 606 <unk> , a 1980s drum machine . Erlewine described the song as " an incredible slice of singalong pop spiked with winding , fluid guitar and synth eruptions . " " There 's a terrace singalong in here somewhere " , Collins claimed , " undermined by its indistinct drum sound . " " Theme From Retro " was described as " obligatory space @-@ rock trip @-@ hop " by The Austin Chronicle , whilst Collins claimed that it " presents Blur in dub " , referring to it as " an unyielding , lovely row . Like , say , a Blur B @-@ side . " " You 're So Great " , performed only by Coxon , was described by Collins as " the most American of all " as " [ Coxon 's ] voice – faraway badly recorded , wavering but heartfelt – belongs to anyone but Old Blur . " Tom Sinclair of Entertainment Weekly described the song as recalling the " whacked @-@ out <unk> of Midwestern lo @-@ fi heroes Guided By Voices . " 
 Lindsay Zoladz 's review of the album ( as part of Blur 21 ) for Pitchfork claimed that " Death of a Party " is the album 's highlight , speculating that it influenced Gorillaz – another musical project which features Albarn as the chief songwriter . Collins claimed that it sounded like Blur 's " second homage " to The Specials ' " Ghost Town " , speculating that the lyrics , " Why did we bother ? / Should 've stayed away " reflected Blur 's recent withdrawal from the public eye despite the song being written years before , and summarised the track as " a genuinely creepy piece . " Sinclair described " Chinese Bombs " as sounding like a " Lower East Side mosh @-@ pit den , " while Zoladz felt that " I 'm Just a Killer for Your Love " was " exquisitely bleary @-@ eyed . " In " Look Inside America " , Albarn recalls the band waking up from a previous night 's show , <unk> Pepsi to find the energy to do a local TV show . Hunter called the song a " classic ' 90s road ballad . " The song contains the refrain " Look inside America , she 's all right ; she 's all right , " which was said by Erlewine to " cleverly subvert the traditional Blur song , complete with strings . " Collins described " Strange News From Another Star " as " Blur 's Space Oddity " , stating that the " acoustic guitar , quiet intro , nutty mood @-@ change into a darker passage [ and ] a melancholy report whose central thrust ( " I don 't believe in me " ) [ express ] further doubt from the troubled Albarn . " Originally performed as a poem at the Albert Hall in July 1996 , the studio version of " Essex Dogs " was described by Erlewine as a " six @-@ minute slab of free verse and rattling guitar noise . " Collins revealed that " here it 's set to a starter @-@ motor riff so berserk even its author , Coxon , confesses to find it hard to listen to . " Collins also described it as " a fitting ending ( all eight exploratory minutes of it ) to a challenging , barbed masterwork . " The song is followed by " Interlude " , a hidden track which was described by Collins as " a distressed instrumental sign @-@ oft that goes nowhere . " 
 In a November 1996 video interview , Rowntree claimed , " It 's a much more aggressive record in many ways as well as a more emotional record . I think the music we 're making now is the music that we 've always wanted to make but got distracted from in a way . " 
 = = Artwork and packaging = = 
 The artwork for Blur , as well the album 's associated singles , was designed by design company Yacht Associates , which consists of Chris Thomson and Richard Bull . The pair had also been involved in the design process for Blur 's previous album covers as part of Stylorouge . The cover @-@ art depicts a patient being rushed into an emergency ward . Searching for an image which conveyed " both optimism and scariness " , Yacht Associates chose the stock photo from Tony Stone Images , describing it as " an anaesthetic dream . " In 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die , reviewer Mark Bennett speculates that the cover @-@ art represented the band 's critical status prior to the album . 
 The back cover and inside sleeve by Paul Postle depict sulphur fields in Iceland , where much of the album was recorded . Postle also took photos of the band rehearsing for the gatefold . Blur is also the group 's first album not to have lyrics and chords printed in the liner notes , instead having a composite photo of the band in the studio spread out over three panels . When questioned on this decision , Albarn revealed they " didn 't wanna have to go through explaining what the lyrics are about because they 're quite odd to explain , " although he stated that " ' Death of a Party ' and ' Strange News From Another Star ' are [ both ] pretty clear . " 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The music press predicted that the lo @-@ fi sonic experimentation would alienate Blur 's fan @-@ base . These fears were also shared by James who revealed that the front rows of the gigs that the band were performing at during the Britpop years were primarily attracting 15 @-@ year @-@ old girls and that he thought the change in style was a " fucking big balls move . " Andy Ross , who was running Food Records at the time , admitted that when he first heard it he was " taken aback . We 'd won Brits , we 'd won two consecutive Q magazine Albums of the Year and my initial reaction was it 's awkward and difficult . My immediate reaction was will you sell as many records ? Where 's my royalties ? Everyone 's first reaction to it was that it was a departure : that ’ s clear from the artwork onwards . " Albarn dismissed the EMI 's concerns calling them " The usual thing — ' It 's got no singles on it ' . Meanwhile , they 're giving Radiohead the full marketing works . That hurt for a while because we 've done so well for them . We were trying to be really brave . But it was all made up pretty quickly . " Parlophone MD Tony Wadsworth was enthusiastic however as Coxon recalls , " We played him " Song 2 " as a bit of a test of whether he was on our wavelength . We told him this was the second single . Course , we had no idea that it would be . He sat there , grinning — ' Definitely ! Definitely a single ! ' " 
 Worries of " commercial suicide " were eased when the lead single , " Beetlebum " , debuted at number one on the UK Singles Chart . Blur topped the UK Albums Chart when it was released in February , knocking White on Blonde by Texas off the <unk> . Blur eventually went on to be certified Platinum . Although the album could not match the sales of their previous albums in the UK , Blur became the band 's most successful internationally , reaching the Top Twenty in Switzerland , France , Norway , New Zealand , Sweden and Japan . In the US , the album peaked at number sixty @-@ one on the Billboard 200 , Blur 's highest charting album at the time , and was certified gold . The album 's US success has been attributed partially to the popularity of " Song 2 " , which peaked at number six on the Modern Rock chart . After " Song 2 " was licensed for use in soundtracks , advertisements and television shows — it became the most @-@ recognisable Blur song in the US . After the success of Blur , the band embarked on a nine @-@ month world tour . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 According to AllMusic , Blur received generally positive reviews from music critics but at the time of its release , according to Q , the reviews were mixed in the UK press . David Cavanagh reported that The Guardian praised it , whereas The Times was more " ambivalent " and The Independent was negative . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic said the album highlights " the band 's rich eclecticism and sense of songcraft . Certainly , they are trying for new sonic territory , bringing in shards of white noise , gurgling electronics , raw guitars , and druggy psychedelia , but these are just extensions of previously hidden elements of Blur 's music . " Margaret Moser of The Austin Chronicle praised the album for " unveiling a punchy brand of muscular Brit @-@ pop that dances around raucous , Kinks @-@ like garage @-@ pop ( " Movin ' On , " " <unk> " ) , tender , Beatles @-@ like harmonies ( " Beetlebum , " " Look Inside America " ) , punky quirk ( " Chinese Bombs " ) , soulful balladry ( " Country Sad Ballad Man " ) , obligatory space @-@ rock trip @-@ hop ( " Theme from Retro , " " I 'm Just a Killer for Your Love " ) , and a raise @-@ yer @-@ mug singalong ( " On Your Own " ) . " Jonathan Bernstein of Spin also felt that , " despite their traitorous pronouncements , Blur 's highlights are consistently British @-@ bred . " James Hunter , writing for Rolling Stone , claimed that " what still makes [ Blur ] great is their deep grasp of style and genre . What they haven 't done on Blur is roll out of bed , strum a few chords and loudly free @-@ associate about the first thing that pops into their heads . This is a record that inhabits current American rock biases as cogently and intelligently as Parklife corralled the last few decades of British rock . " 
 Many praised lyrics such as the ones in " Look inside America / She 's alright " , and noting Albarn 's " obligatory nod to Beck , [ and promotion of ] the new Pavement album as if paid to do so " , reviewers felt the band had come to accept American values during this time — an about @-@ face of their attitude during the Britpop years . Erlewine wrote that " Blur might be self @-@ consciously eclectic , but Blur are at their best when they are trying to live up to their own pretensions , because of Damon Albarn 's exceptional sense of songcraft and the band 's knack for detailed arrangements that flesh out the songs to their fullest . " Alternative Press called it " a whirl of weird esotericism , precious , precocious and impressively " . Robert Christgau of The Village Voice was less enthusiastic and cited only " Song 2 " as a " choice cut " , indicating " a good song on an album that isn 't worth your time or money " . 
 At the 1998 NME Awards , Blur received a nomination for Best Album . However , it lost to Radiohead 's OK Computer . In 2013 , NME ranked it at number 137 in its list of 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . The album was also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 Unlike some of Blur 's previous albums , praise from the band members has remained . " I 'm really fond of that record , " Coxon said in 2009 . " I think it 's one of our best . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Damon Albarn , Graham Coxon , Alex James and Dave Rowntree , except where noted . 
 Notes 
 The length of track 14 on the American version of the album is 11 : 24 , with " Dancehall " as a hidden track in between " Essex Dogs " and " Interlude " . 
 The European version came with a live CD recorded in The Netherlands ( also with selected B @-@ sides from the " Blur " singles ) that was also released separately in The Netherlands as simply " Blur Live E.P. " 
 The Australian version came with a second CD featuring the complete Peel Acres sessions ( as released in the UK on the " On Your Own " singles ) 
 The Japanese version of the album has " Dancehall " as a separate , listed track ( 15 ) , which includes " Interlude . " 
 " Death of a Party " was demoed in 1992 . That recording was released to the fan club prior to the version which appears on the album . The 7 " remix version appears on Midlife : A Beginner 's Guide to Blur . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Damon Albarn – lead vocals , piano , keyboards , Hammond organ , acoustic guitar 
 Graham Coxon – electric and acoustic guitars , backing vocals , vocals on " You 're So Great " , theremin , additional drums on " Song 2 " 
 Alex James – bass guitar , lead and rhythm basses on " Song 2 " 
 Dave Rowntree – drums , percussion 
 Produced by Stephen Street , except for " I 'm Just a Killer for Your Love " produced by Blur 
 John Smith – engineer ( all tracks except for " I 'm Just a Killer for Your Love " ) 
 Jason Cox – engineer ( " I 'm Just a Killer for Your Love " ) 
 <unk> " Addi 800 " <unk> – additional engineering 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Casino Royale ( 2006 film ) = 
 Casino Royale ( 2006 ) is the 21st film in the Eon Productions James Bond film series and the first to star Daniel Craig as the fictional MI6 agent James Bond . Directed by Martin Campbell and written by Neal Purvis & Robert Wade and Paul Haggis , the film marks the third screen adaptation of Ian Fleming 's 1953 novel of the same name . Casino Royale is set at the beginning of Bond 's career as Agent 007 , just as he is earning his licence to kill . After preventing a terrorist attack at Miami International Airport , Bond falls in love with Vesper Lynd , the treasury employee assigned to provide the money he needs to bankrupt a terrorist financier , Le Chiffre , by beating him in a high @-@ stakes poker game . The story arc continues in the following Bond film , Quantum of Solace ( 2008 ) , with explicit references to characters and events in Spectre ( 2015 ) . 
 Casino Royale reboots the series , establishing a new timeline and narrative framework not meant to precede or succeed any previous Bond film , which allows the film to show a less experienced and more vulnerable Bond . Additionally , the character Miss Moneypenny is , for the first time in the series , completely absent . Casting the film involved a widespread search for a new actor to portray James Bond , and significant controversy surrounded Craig when he was selected to succeed Pierce Brosnan in October 2005 . Location filming took place in the Czech Republic , the Bahamas , Italy and the United Kingdom with interior sets built at Barrandov Studios and Pinewood Studios . Although part of the storyline is set in Montenegro , no filming took place there . Casino Royale was produced by Eon Productions for Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer and Columbia Pictures , making it the first Eon @-@ produced Bond film to be co @-@ produced by the latter studio . 
 Casino Royale premiered at the Odeon Leicester Square on 14 November 2006 . It received positive critical response , with reviewers highlighting Craig 's reinvention of the character and the film 's departure from the tropes of previous Bond films . It earned almost $ 600 million worldwide , becoming the highest @-@ grossing James Bond film until the release of Skyfall in 2012 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Prague , James Bond kills traitorous MI6 station chief Dryden and his terrorist contact , thus earning his license to kill and becoming a 00 agent . 
 In Uganda , the mysterious Mr. White introduces warlord Steven Obanno to Le Chiffre , a French financier of terrorism . Obanno entrusts Le Chiffre with a large sum of money , which Le Chiffre uses to short @-@ sell stock in the aerospace company Skyfleet , thus betting Obanno 's money on the company 's failure . 
 In Madagascar , Bond pursues bomb maker Mollaka to an African embassy . Bond kills Mollaka and blows up the building . In London , MI6 chief M admonishes Bond for his rashness , and advises him to rethink his future as an agent . 
 Clues from Mollaka point to corrupt Greek official Alex Dimitrios . Bond finds Dimitrios in the Bahamas and pursues him to Miami . Bond kills Dimitrios and follows his henchman to the airport . He thwarts the destruction of Skyfleet 's airliner , costing Le Chiffre his investment . To recoup the money , Le Chiffre sets up a high @-@ stakes Texas hold ' em tournament at the Casino Royale in Montenegro . MI6 enters Bond in the tournament , believing a defeat will force Le Chiffre to aid the British government in exchange for protection from his creditors . On the train to Montenegro , Bond meets Vesper Lynd , a British Treasury agent there to protect the government 's $ 10 million buy @-@ in . 
 In Montenegro , Bond and Vesper meet their MI6 contact , René Mathis . When the tournament begins , Bond appears to have the upper hand . In Le Chiffre 's suite , Obanno ambushes him , furious over the loss of his money . Bond engages Obanno , and in an ensuing struggle , kills him and his henchmen . Vesper is traumatized , but Bond comforts her . When the tournament resumes , Bond loses his initial stake , and Vesper refuses to fund further playing . Frustrated , Bond is about to assassinate Le Chiffre when he meets Felix Leiter , a fellow player and CIA agent . Leiter stakes Bond in exchange for custody of Le Chiffre . 
 Le Chiffre 's girlfriend <unk> poisons Bond 's martini . Bond throws up the poison and escapes to his Aston Martin , where he injects an antidote . MI6 instructs him to use the defibrillator , but he finds that one of the wires is disconnected . Vesper saves Bond by connecting the wires and pushing the button . Bond returns to the game , and wins with a straight flush . 
 Le Chiffre captures Vesper and Bond , and reveals that Mathis is working for him . Le Chiffre tortures Bond for the password to the account containing his money , but Bond refuses to give in . As Le Chiffre prepares to castrate Bond , Mr. White bursts in and kills him . Bond awakens in a hospital on Lake Como and Mathis is taken in by MI6 . Bond and Vesper fall in love , and he decides to resign from MI6 to be with her . 
 Bond and Vesper travel to Venice . M calls Bond and tells him the money was never deposited , and Bond realizes Vesper has stolen the money . He pursues her and her clients into a building under renovation . In the ensuing struggle , the building is damaged and begins sinking into the Grand Canal . Bond kills Vesper 's accomplices and tries to rescue her , but she drowns herself as the building sinks . Mr. White , watching nearby , walks away with the money . 
 Bond rejoins MI6 , and copes with Vesper 's death by renouncing her as a traitor . M informs him the same organisation behind Le Chiffre had kidnapped Vesper 's lover , and threatened to kill him unless she became a double agent . During the torture sessions with Le Chiffre , Vesper had made a deal : the money in exchange for Bond 's life . Bond discovers a text message left for him by Vesper with Mr. White 's name and phone number . 
 At his estate in Lake Como , Mr. White receives a phone call , and is shot in the leg when he answers . Bond strolls into his path holding a machine gun , and introduces himself : " The name 's Bond ... James Bond " . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Daniel Craig as James Bond : A British MI6 officer who , after being assigned 00 @-@ status , is sent on a mission to arrest a bomb @-@ maker in Madagascar , where he stumbles upon Le Chiffre 's terrorist cell and is then sent to defeat him in a high @-@ stakes poker game at Casino Royale . 
 Eva Green as Vesper Lynd : An agent for HM Treasury assigned to supervise Bond and finance him in a high @-@ stakes poker game . 
 Mads Mikkelsen as Le Chiffre : A banker who services many of the world 's terrorists . He is a mathematical genius and expert chess player and uses these skills when playing poker . 
 Judi Dench as M : The head of MI6 . Although she feels she has promoted Bond too soon and chides him for his rash actions , she acts as an important maternal figure in his life . Dench was the only cast member carried through from the Pierce Brosnan films . 
 Giancarlo Giannini as René Mathis : Bond 's contact in Montenegro . 
 Jeffrey Wright as Felix Leiter : A CIA operative participating in the poker tournament while assisting Bond . This is the first Eon @-@ produced Bond film in which Leiter is played by a black actor . ( The only other black actor to portray Leiter was Bernie Casey in Never Say Never Again , which was not produced by Eon . ) 
 Simon <unk> as Alex Dimitrios : Another contractor in the international terrorist underworld and associate of Le Chiffre , based in the Bahamas . 
 Caterina <unk> as Solange Dimitrios : Dimitrios ' wife , whom Bond seduces , causing her unintentionally to reveal one of his plans . After Bond kills Dimitrios , she is found tortured and killed . 
 Ivana Miličević as <unk> : Le Chiffre 's girlfriend and henchwoman , who accompanies him to the poker game . 
 Isaac de Bankolé as Steven Obanno : A leader of the Lord 's Resistance Army , introduced to Le Chiffre by Mr. White to account his finances . 
 Jesper Christensen as Mr. White : A liaison for an unnamed criminal organisation . 
 Sébastien Foucan as Mollaka : A bomb @-@ maker pursued by Bond through a construction site in Madagascar . 
 Tobias Menzies as Villiers : M 's young secretary at MI6 Headquarters . The character 's last name is a reference to James Villiers , who portrayed Bill Tanner in For Your Eyes Only , and to the character of Amherst Villiers in the original novel . 
 Ludger Pistor as Mendel : A Swiss banker responsible for all monetary transactions during and after the poker tournament . 
 Claudio Santamaria as Carlos : A terrorist employed by Le Chiffre to blow up an aircraft . 
 Richard <unk> as Gettler : An assassin who works for an unnamed criminal organisation and contacts Vesper in Venice . 
 Clemens Schick as <unk> : Le Chiffre 's bodyguard , who often accompanies his boss wherever he travels . 
 Joseph Millson as Carter : An MI6 agent who accompanies Bond in Madagascar . 
 Ben Cooke as Williams : An MI6 agent who <unk> Bond in London . 
 Malcolm Sinclair as Dryden : A corrupt MI6 Section Chief , and Bond 's second official target . 
 Darwin Shaw as Fisher : Dryden 's underground contact . M sends Bond to kill him , his first official target . Bond tracks him down ( in Lahore , Pakistan in deleted scenes ) , nearly drowns him , and then shoots him dead . 
 Tom Chadbon as a stockbroker , briefly seen having a telephone conversation with Le Chiffre . 
 Tsai Chin as Madame Wu : A professional veteran poker player . Chin portrayed Ling , a Bond girl in You Only Live Twice . 
 <unk> as Gräfin von Wallenstein : a countess participating in the poker tournament . 
 Alessandra Ambrosio as Tennis Girl . 
 Christina Cole as Ocean Club <unk> . 
 Diane Hartford as Card Player . 
 Casino Royale includes a cameo by British entrepreneur Richard Branson ( seen being frisked at Miami International Airport ) . The cameo was cut out of the in @-@ flight versions shown on British Airways ' in @-@ flight entertainment systems , as was a shot of the Virgin Atlantic aircraft Branson supplied . 
 = = Production = = 
 Casino Royale was previously produced as a 1954 television episode and a 1967 satirical film . Eon Productions gained the rights to Casino Royale in 1999 after Sony Pictures Entertainment exchanged them for Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer 's rights to Spider @-@ Man . In March 2004 , Neal Purvis and Robert Wade began writing a screenplay for Pierce Brosnan as Bond , aiming to bring back the flavour of Ian Fleming 's original Bond novels . Paul Haggis ' main contribution was to rewrite the climax of the film . He explained , " the draft that was there was very faithful to the book and there was a confession , so in the original draft the character confessed and killed herself . She then sent Bond to chase after the villains ; Bond chased the villains into the house . I don 't know why but I thought that Vesper had to be in the sinking house and Bond has to want to kill her and then try and save her . " 
 Director Quentin Tarantino expressed interest in directing an adaptation of Casino Royale , but Eon were not interested . He claims to have worked behind the scenes with the Fleming family , and believed this was the reason why filmmakers finally went ahead with Casino Royale . Tarantino also said , he would have set it in the 1960s and would have only made it with Pierce Brosnan as Bond . In February 2005 , Martin Campbell was announced as the film 's director . Later in 2005 , Sony led a consortium that purchased MGM , allowing Sony to gain distribution rights starting with the film . 
 Eon believed that they had relied too heavily on CGI effects in the more recent films , particularly Die Another Day , and were keen to accomplish the stunts in Casino Royale " the old fashioned way " . In keeping with this drive for more realism , screenwriters Purvis , Wade and Haggis wanted the script to follow as closely as possible to the original 1953 novel , keeping Fleming 's darker storyline and characterisation of Bond . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Pierce Brosnan had signed a deal for four films when he was cast in the role of James Bond . This was fulfilled with the production of Die Another Day in 2002 . At this stage , Brosnan was approaching his 50th birthday . Brosnan kept in mind fans and critics were not happy with Roger Moore playing Bond until he was 58 and speculation began the producers were seeking to replace Brosnan with a younger actor . Brosnan officially announced he was stepping down in February 2004 . At one point , producer Michael G. Wilson claimed there was a list of over 200 names being considered for his replacement . Croatian actor Goran Višnjić auditioned for the role the same day as Craig , but was reportedly unable to master a British accent . New Zealander Karl Urban was considered , but was unable to make the screen test due to filming commitments . According to Martin Campbell , Henry Cavill was the only actor in serious contention for the role , but at 22 years old , was considered too young . Australian actor Sam Worthington and Scottish actor Dougray Scott were also considered . 
 In May 2005 , English actor Daniel Craig stated MGM and producers Michael G. Wilson and Barbara Broccoli had assured him he would get the role of Bond , and Matthew Vaughn told reporters MGM offered him the opportunity to direct the new film , but Eon Productions at that point had not approached either of them . A year beforehand , Craig rejected the idea of starring , as he felt the series had descended into formula : only when he read the script did he become interested . Craig read all of Fleming 's novels to prepare for the part , and cited Mossad and British Secret Service agents who served as advisors on the set of Munich as inspiring because , " Bond has just come out of the service and he 's a killer . [ ... ] You can see it in their eyes , you know immediately : oh , hello , he 's a killer . There 's a look . These guys walk into a room and very subtly they check the perimeters for an exit . That 's the sort of thing I wanted . " 
 On 14 October 2005 Eon Productions , Sony Pictures Entertainment and MGM announced at a press conference in London that Craig would be the sixth actor to portray James Bond . A tuxedo @-@ clad Craig boarded a Royal Marines Rigid Raider from HMS Belfast before travelling to HMS President where he was introduced to the world 's press . Significant controversy followed the decision , with some critics and fans expressing doubt the producers had made the right choice . Throughout the entire production period , Internet campaigns such as " <unk> " expressed their dissatisfaction and threatened to boycott the film in protest . Craig , unlike previous actors , was not considered by the protesters to fit the tall , dark , handsome and charismatic image of Bond to which viewers had been accustomed . The Daily Mirror ran a front page news story critical of Craig , with the headline , The Name 's Bland – James Bland . 
 The next important casting was that of the lead Bond girl , Vesper Lynd . Casting director Debbie McWilliams acknowledged Hollywood actresses Angelina Jolie and Charlize Theron were " strongly considered " for the role and Belgian actress Cécile de France had also auditioned , but her English accent " wasn 't up to scratch . " French actress Audrey <unk> was also considered , but not chosen because of her role in The Da Vinci Code , which was released in May 2006 . It was announced on 16 February 2006 French actress Eva Green would play the part . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography for Casino Royale commenced on 3 January 2006 and concluded on 20 July 2006 . The film was primarily shot at Barrandov Studios in Prague , with additional location shooting in the Bahamas , Italy and the United Kingdom . The shoot concluded at Pinewood Studios . 
 Michael G. Wilson had stated Casino Royale would either be filmed or take place in Prague and South Africa . However , Eon Productions encountered problems in securing film locations in South Africa . After no other locations became available , the producers had to reconsider their options . In September 2005 , Martin Campbell and director of photography Phil <unk> were scouting Paradise Island in the Bahamas as a possible location for the film . On 6 October 2005 , Martin Campbell confirmed Casino Royale would film in the Bahamas and " maybe Italy " . In addition to the extensive location filming , studio work including choreography and stunt co @-@ ordination practice was performed at the Barrandov Studios in Prague , and at Pinewood Studios , where the film used several stages , the paddock tank and the 007 Stage . Further shooting in the UK was scheduled for Dunsfold Aerodrome in Surrey , the cricket pavilion at Eton College ( although that particular scene was cut from the completed movie ) and the Millbrook Vehicle Proving Ground in Bedfordshire . 
 After Prague , the production moved to the Bahamas . Several locations around New Providence were used for filming during February and March , particularly on Paradise Island . Footage set in <unk> , Uganda , was filmed at Black Park , a Country Park in Buckinghamshire , on 4 July 2006 . Additional scenes took place at Albany House , an estate owned by golfers Ernie Els and Tiger Woods . The crew returned to the Czech Republic in April , and continued there , filming in Prague , <unk> and <unk> , before completing in the town of Karlovy Vary in May . A famous Czech spa , Karlovy Vary was used as the exterior of the Casino Royale , with the <unk> Pupp serving as " Hotel <unk> " . The main Italian location was Venice , where the majority of the film 's ending is set . Other scenes in the latter half of the film were shot in late May and early June at the Villa del <unk> on the shores of Lake Como . Further exterior shooting for the movie took place at properties such as the Villa la Gaeta , near the lakeside town of <unk> . 
 A recreation of the Body Worlds exhibit provided a setting for one scene in the film . Among the Body Worlds <unk> featured in that scene were the Poker Playing Trio ( which plays a key role in one scene ) and Rearing Horse and Rider . The exhibition 's developer and promoter , German anatomist Gunther von <unk> , also has a cameo appearance in the film , although only his trademark hat is actually visible on screen . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 In designing the credit sequence for the film , graphic designer Daniel Kleinman was inspired by the cover of the 1953 British first edition of Casino Royale , which featured Ian Fleming 's original design of a playing card bordered by eight red hearts dripping with blood . Kleinman said , " The hearts not only represent cards but the tribulations of Bond 's love story . So I took that as inspiration to use playing card graphics in different ways in the titles , " like a club representing a puff of gun smoke , and slashed arteries spurting thousands of tiny hearts . In creating the shadow images of the sequence , Kleinman digitised the footage of Craig and the film 's stuntmen on the Inferno visual effects system , at Framestore CFC in London ; the actors ' silhouettes were incorporated into more than 20 digitally animated scenes depicting intricate and innovative card patterns . Kleinman decided not to use the female silhouettes commonly seen throughout the Bond title sequences , considering that the women did not fit with both the film 's spirit and the storyline following Bond falling in love . 
 For the rest of the film , Chris Corbould , the special effects and miniature effects supervisor , returned to a more realistic style of film making and significantly reduced digital effects . According to Corbould , " CGI is a great tool and can be very useful , but I will fight to the tooth and nail to do something for real . It 's the best way to go " . Three scenes involving primarily physical effects in the film were the chase at a building site in Madagascar , the Miami Airport chase sequence , and the sinking Venetian house , with sets located on the Grand Canal and in Pinewood Studios . 
 First on the schedule were the scenes on the Madagascar building site , shot in the Bahamas on the site of a derelict hotel which Michael G. Wilson had become acquainted with in 1977 during the filming of The Spy Who Loved Me . In the scene , Bond drives a digger toward the building , slamming into the concrete plinth on which Mollaka is running . The stunt team built a model and put forward several ways in which the digger could conceivably take out the concrete , including taking out the pillar underneath . A section of the concrete wall was removed to fit the digger and reinforced with steel . 
 The sequence at Miami International Airport was partly shot at the Dunsfold Aerodrome , in Surrey , which is known from British car show Top Gear , with some footage from the Prague and Miami airports . In filming the scene in which the engine thrust of the moving aircraft blows the police car high into the air , second unit directors Ian Lowe , Terry Madden and Alex Witt used a crane with a strong lead cable attached to the rear bumper of the vehicle to move it up and backwards at the moment of full extension away from the plane . 
 The Skyfleet <unk> aircraft in the film was an ex @-@ British Airways 747 @-@ 200B G @-@ <unk> which had its engines removed and was modified for its appearance in the film . The modified aircraft had the outboard engines replaced by external fuel tanks , while the inboard engines were replaced by a mock @-@ up pair of engines on each inboard pylon . The cockpit profile was altered to make the 747 look like a prototype of an advanced airliner . The plane used can be seen on the BBC motoring programme Top Gear on the Test Track . 
 The sinking of the Venetian house at the climax of the film featured the largest rig ever built for a Bond film . For the scene involving Bond following Vesper into the house undergoing renovation supported by inflatable balloons , a tank was constructed at the 007 stage at Pinewood , consisting of a Venetian piazza and the interior of the three @-@ story dilapidated house . The rig , weighing some 90 tons , incorporated electronics with hydraulic valves which were closely controlled by computer because of the dynamic movement within the system on its two axes . The same computer system also controlled the exterior model which the effects team built to one @-@ third scale to film the building eventually collapsing into the Venetian canal . The model elevator within the rig could be immersed in 19 feet ( 5 @.@ 8 m ) of water , and used banks of compressors to strictly regulate movement . 
 At the time of filming , Aston Martin were still in the final phases of designing the DBS . The scene involving the car crash was devised using an Aston Martin <unk> that was especially modified to look like Bond 's Aston Martin DBS V12 and reinforced to withstand the impact . Due to the low centre of gravity of the vehicle , an 18 @-@ inch ( 450 mm ) ramp had to be implemented on the road tarmac at Millbrook Proving Grounds and Adam <unk> , the stunt driver who performed the stunt , had to use an air cannon located behind the driver 's seat to propel the car into a roll at the precise moment of impact . At a speed exceeding 70 mph ( 113 km / h ) , the car rotated seven times while being filmed , and was confirmed by the Guinness Book of Records on 5 November 2006 as a new world record . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The soundtrack of Casino Royale , released by Sony Classical on 14 November 2006 , featured music composed by veteran composer David Arnold , his fourth soundtrack for the Bond film series , while Nicholas Dodd orchestrated and conducted the score . Producers Michael G. Wilson and Barbara Broccoli announced on 26 July 2006 Chris Cornell , then @-@ former lead singer of Soundgarden and former lead singer of Audioslave , composed and would perform the title song , " You Know My Name " . The song 's main notes are played throughout the film as a substitute for the James Bond theme , to represent Bond 's youth and inexperience . The classic theme only plays during the end credits to signal the climax of his character arc . 
