 The beginning of the episode , in which Homer has a dream of himself as an ape , is a reference to the Dawn of Man sequence from the 1968 science @-@ fiction film 2001 : A Space Odyssey . The Simpsons director David Silverman had difficulties with making the ape resemble Homer and struggled with the design for several hours . After hurting Lisa 's feelings at talent show , Homer watches old home movies of him and Lisa , including one in which a young Homer is seen watching Fantasy Island on television instead of paying attention to Lisa 's taking her first steps . The scene in which Lisa wakes up in her bed and discovers the pony lying next to her is a reference to a scene in the 1972 film The Godfather , in which a character awakens to discover the severed head of his favorite horse placed in his bed . The musical chords used in the episode are the same as in the film but shortened . While driving home from the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart , Homer falls asleep behind the wheel and dreams that he is in Slumberland , drawn in the style of Winsor McCay 's Little Nemo in Slumberland . The song " Golden Slumbers " by The Beatles plays during the sequence . 
 One of the children at the talent show performs the song " My Ding @-@ a @-@ Ling " by Chuck Berry . According to Jean , it was a " huge difficulty " to clear the rights for the song so that it could be used on the show . John Boylan , who produced the album The Simpsons Sing the Blues , personally appealed to Berry to clear the song for them . The lyrics to " My Ding @-@ a @-@ Ling " , with their sly tone and innuendo , caused many radio stations to ban the song . This is parodied in the episode when Principal Skinner rushes the child off the stage before he is able to finish the first line of the refrain . The man who owns the music shop Homer visits is based on actor Wally Cox . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Lisa 's Pony " finished 35th in the ratings for the week of November 4 – 10 , 1991 , with a Nielsen rating of 13 @.@ 8 , equivalent to approximately 12 @.@ 7 million viewing households . It was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week . " Lisa 's Pony " was released with the episode " Treehouse of Horror II " on a Video Home System ( VHS ) collection in 1999 , called Best of the Simpsons . Homer 's voice actor , Dan Castellaneta , received a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance in 1992 for his performance in the episode . 
 Since airing , the episode has received positive reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , called the episode " good stuff " and praised the " nice flashbacks to Lisa as a baby . " Bill Gibron of DVD Verdict said " Lisa 's Pony " is a " priceless part " of the show because of its " meshing of old storylines with new experiences , combined with some of the best jokes in the series . " Gibron gave the episode a perfect score of 100 . Cinema Blend 's Bryce Wilson called " Lisa 's Pony " one of the best Lisa episodes , and added that the only words to describe it are " funny as hell . " Nate Meyers of Digitally Obsessed gave the episode a 5 / 5 rating , praising it for its references to The Godfather and 2001 : A Space Odyssey that " film buffs will find uproarious . " Meyers added that Homer and Lisa 's relationship is " the heart of the episode , showing Homer to be more than just a brute . " The episode 's reference to The Godfather was named the seventh greatest film reference in the history of the show by Total Film 's Nathan Ditum . The Star @-@ Ledger named this episode 's reference to 2001 : A Space Odyssey one of their favorite references to Stanley Kubrick on The Simpsons . 
 Niel Harvey of The Roanoke Times called the episode a " classic bit of Simpsonia , " and The Baltimore Sun 's Kevin Valkenburg named it one of the " truly classic " The Simpsons episodes . The Guardian 's David <unk> said episodes such as " Lisa 's Pony " and " Stark Raving Dad " make season three " pretty much [ the ] best season of any television show , ever . " In addition , Molly Griffin of The Observer commented that " Lisa 's Pony " is one of the season three episodes that " make the show into the cultural force it is today . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson , however , gave the episode a less positive review , commenting that episodes " in which Homer has to redeem himself to others aren 't a rarity , and ' Lisa 's Pony ' falls in the middle of that genre 's pack . Homer 's escapades at the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart definitely add life to the proceedings , and some of his other antics make the show good . I like ' Lisa 's Pony ' but don 't consider it to offer a great program . " 
 According to Greg Suarez of The Digital Bits , " Lisa 's Pony " is considered a fan favorite . In a list of the show 's top 10 episodes , compiled by the webmaster of the fan site The Simpsons Archive and published by USA Today , this episode was listed in seventh place . Paul Cantor , a professor of English at the University of Virginia , utilized " Lisa 's Pony " as an example that The Simpsons does not promote negative morals and values , which some critics have criticized the show for . 
 = Battle of Austerlitz = 
 The Battle of Austerlitz ( 2 December 1805 / 11 <unk> An XIV FRC ) , also known as the Battle of the Three Emperors , was one of the most important and decisive engagements of the Napoleonic Wars . In what is widely regarded as the greatest victory achieved by Napoleon , the Grande Armée of France defeated a larger Russian and Austrian army led by Tsar Alexander I and Holy Roman Emperor Francis II . The battle occurred near the village of Austerlitz in the Austrian Empire ( modern @-@ day Slavkov u <unk> in the Czech Republic ) . Because of the near @-@ perfect execution of a calibrated but dangerous plan , the battle is seen as a tactical masterpiece of the same stature as Cannae , the celebrated triumph by Hannibal some 2 @,@ 000 years before . Austerlitz brought the War of the Third Coalition to a rapid end , with the Treaty of Pressburg signed by the Austrians later in the month . 
 After eliminating an Austrian army during the Ulm Campaign , French forces managed to capture Vienna in November 1805 . The Austrians avoided further conflict until the arrival of the Russians bolstered Allied numbers . Napoleon sent his army north in pursuit of the Allies , but then ordered his forces to retreat so he could feign a grave weakness . Desperate to lure the Allies into battle , Napoleon gave every indication in the days preceding the engagement that the French army was in a pitiful state , even abandoning the dominant Pratzen Heights near Austerlitz . He deployed the French army below the Pratzen Heights and deliberately weakened his right flank , enticing the Allies to launch a major assault there in the hopes of rolling up the whole French line . A forced march from Vienna by Marshal Davout and his III Corps plugged the gap left by Napoleon just in time . Meanwhile , the heavy Allied deployment against the French right weakened their center on the Pratzen Heights , which was viciously attacked by the IV Corps of Marshal Soult . With the Allied center demolished , the French swept through both enemy flanks and sent the Allies fleeing chaotically , capturing thousands of prisoners in the process . 
 The Allied disaster significantly shook the faith of Emperor Francis in the British @-@ led war effort . France and Austria agreed to an armistice immediately and the Treaty of Pressburg followed shortly after , on 26 December . Pressburg took Austria out of both the war and the Coalition while reinforcing the earlier treaties of Campo Formio and of Lunéville between the two powers . The treaty confirmed the Austrian loss of lands in Italy and Bavaria to France , and in Germany to Napoleon 's German allies . It also imposed an indemnity of 40 million francs on the defeated Habsburgs and allowed the fleeing Russian troops free passage through hostile territories and back to their home soil . Critically , victory at Austerlitz permitted the creation of the Confederation of the Rhine , a collection of German states intended as a buffer zone between France and Central Europe . The Confederation rendered the Holy Roman Empire virtually useless , so the latter collapsed in 1806 after Francis abdicated the imperial throne , keeping Francis I of Austria as his only official title . These achievements , however , did not establish a lasting peace on the continent . Prussian worries about growing French influence in Central Europe sparked the War of the Fourth Coalition in 1806 . 
 = = Prologue = = 
 Europe had been in turmoil since the start of the French Revolutionary Wars in 1792 . In 1797 , after five years of war , the French Republic subdued the First Coalition , an alliance of Austria , Prussia , Great Britain , Spain , and various Italian states . A Second Coalition , led by Britain , Austria and Russia , and including the Ottoman Empire , Portugal and Naples , was formed in 1798 , but by 1801 , this too had been defeated , leaving Britain the only opponent of the new French Consulate . In March 1802 , France and Britain agreed to end hostilities under the Treaty of Amiens . For the first time in ten years , all of Europe was at peace . 
 But many problems persisted between the two sides , making implementation of the treaty increasingly difficult . The British government resented having to return the Cape Colony and most of the Dutch West Indian islands to the Batavian Republic . Napoleon was angry that British troops had not evacuated the island of Malta . The tense situation only worsened when Napoleon sent an expeditionary force to crush the Haitian Revolution . In May 1803 , Britain declared war on France . 
 = = = Third Coalition = = = 
 In December 1804 , an Anglo @-@ Swedish agreement led to the creation of the Third Coalition . British Prime Minister William Pitt spent 1804 and 1805 in a flurry of diplomatic activity geared towards forming a new coalition against France , and by April 1805 , Britain and Russia had signed an alliance . Having been defeated twice in recent memory by France , and being keen on revenge , Austria joined the coalition a few months later . 
 = = Forces = = 
 = = = French Imperial army = = = 
 Before the formation of the Third Coalition , Napoleon had assembled an invasion force , called the Armée d 'Angleterre ( Army of England ) around six camps at Boulogne in Northern France . He intended to use this invasion force to strike at England , and was so confident of success that he had commemorative medals struck to celebrate the conquest of the English . Although they never invaded , Napoleon 's troops received careful and invaluable training for any possible military operation . Boredom among the troops occasionally set in , but Napoleon paid many visits and conducted lavish parades in order to boost morale . 
 The men at Boulogne formed the core for what Napoleon would later call La Grande Armée . At the start , this French army had about 200 @,@ 000 men organized into seven corps , which were large field units that contained 36 to 40 cannon each and were capable of independent action until other corps could come to the rescue . A single corps ( properly situated in a strong defensive position ) could survive at least a day without support , giving the Grande Armée countless strategic and tactical options on every campaign . 
 In addition to these forces , Napoleon created a cavalry reserve of 22 @,@ 000 organized into two cuirassier divisions , four mounted dragoon divisions , one division of dismounted dragoons and one of light cavalry , all supported by 24 artillery pieces . By 1805 , the Grande Armée had grown to a force of 350 @,@ 000 men , who were well equipped , well trained , and led by competent officers . 
 = = = Russian Imperial army = = = 
 The Russian army in 1805 had many characteristics of Ancien Régime organization . There was no permanent formation above the regimental level , and senior officers were mostly recruited from aristocratic circles ; commissions were generally given to the highest bidder , regardless of competence . The Russian infantry was considered one of the most efficient in Europe , however , and there was fine Russian artillery manned by soldiers who regularly fought hard to prevent their pieces from falling into enemy hands . 
 = = = Austrian Imperial army = = = 
 Archduke Charles , brother of the Austrian Emperor , had started to reform the Austrian army in 1801 by taking away power from the Hofkriegsrat , the military @-@ political council responsible for the armed forces . Charles was Austria 's best field commander , but he was unpopular at court and lost much influence when , against his advice , Austria decided to go to war with France . Karl Mack became the new main commander in Austria 's army , instituting reforms on the eve of the war that called for a regiment to be composed of four battalions of four companies , rather than three battalions of six companies . Austrian cavalry was considered the best in Europe , and one of the best of the time anywhere . 
 = = Preliminary moves = = 
 In August 1805 , Napoleon , Emperor of the French since December of the previous year , turned his sights from the English Channel to the Rhine in order to deal with the new Austrian and Russian threats . On 25 September after a feverish march in great secrecy , 200 @,@ 000 French troops began to cross the Rhine on a front of 260 km ( 160 mi ) . Mack had gathered the greater part of the Austrian army at the fortress of Ulm in Swabia ( modern day southern Germany ) . 
 Napoleon swung his forces southward in a wheeling movement that put the French at the Austrian rear . The Ulm Maneuver was well @-@ executed and on 20 October Mack and 23 @,@ 000 Austrian troops surrendered at Ulm , bringing the number of Austrian prisoners of the campaign to 60 @,@ 000 . Although this spectacular victory was soured by the defeat of the Franco @-@ Spanish fleet at the Battle of Trafalgar the following day , French success on land continued as Vienna fell in November . The French gained 100 @,@ 000 muskets , 500 cannon , and intact bridges across the Danube . 
 Meanwhile , Russian delays prevented them from saving the Austrian armies ; the Russians then withdrew to the northeast , to await reinforcements and link up with surviving Austrian units . Tsar Alexander I appointed general Mikhail <unk> Kutuzov commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the combined Russo @-@ Austrian force . On 9 September 1805 , Kutuzov arrived at the battlefield , quickly contacting Francis I of Austria and his courtiers to discuss strategy and logistics . Under pressure from Kutuzov , the Austrians agreed to supply munitions and weapons in a timely manner . Kutuzov also spotted shortcomings in the Austrian defense plan , which he called " very dogmatic . " He objected to Austrian annexation of the land recently under Napoleon 's control , because this would make the local people distrust the allied force . 
 The French followed after Kutuzov , but soon found themselves in a difficult position . Prussian intentions were unknown and could be hostile , the Russian and Austrian armies had converged , and French lines of communication were extremely long , requiring strong garrisons to keep them open . Napoleon realized that to capitalize on the success at Ulm , he had to force the Allies to battle and defeat them . 
 On the Russian side , Kutuzov also realized Napoleon needed to do battle ; so instead of clinging to the " suicidal " Austrian defense plan , Kutuzov decided to retreat . He ordered Pyotr Bagration to contain the French at Vienna with 600 soldiers , and instructed Bagration to accept Murat 's ceasefire proposal so that the Allied Army could have more time to retreat . It was later discovered that the proposal was false and had been used in order to launch a surprise attack on Vienna . Nonetheless , Bagration was able to hold off the French assault for a time by negotiating an armistice with Murat , thereby providing Kutuzov time to position himself with the Russian rearguard near <unk> . 
 Murat initially refrained from an attack , believing the entire Russian army stood before him . Napoleon soon realized Murat 's mistakes and ordered him to pursue quickly ; but the allied army had already retreated to Olmutz . According to Kutuzov 's plan , the Allies would retreat further to the Carpathian region and " at Galicia , I will bury the French . " 
 Napoleon did not stay still . The French Emperor decided to set a psychological trap in order to lure the Allies out . Days before any fighting , Napoleon had been giving the impression that his army was weak and that he desired a negotiated peace . About 53 @,@ 000 French troops — including Soult , Lannes and Murat 's forces — were assigned to take Austerlitz and the Olmutz road , occupying the enemy 's attention . The Allied forces , numbering about 89 @,@ 000 , seemed far superior and would be tempted to attack the outnumbered French army . However , the Allies did not know that Bernadotte , Mortier and Davout were already within the supported distance , and could be called in by forced marches from Iglau and Vienna respectively , raising the French number to 75 @,@ 000 troops . 
 Napoleon 's lure did not stop at that . On 25 November , General Savary was sent to the Allied headquarters at Olmutz to deliver Napoleon 's message expressing his desire to avoid a battle , while secretly examining the Allied forces ' situation . As expected , the overture was seen as a sign of weakness . When Francis I offered an armistice on the 27th , Napoleon accepted enthusiastically . On the same day , Napoleon ordered Soult to abandon both Austerlitz and the Pratzen Heights and , while doing so , to create an impression of chaos during the retreat that would induce the enemy to occupy the Heights . 
 The next day ( 28 November ) , the French Emperor requested a personal interview with Alexander I and received a visit from the Tsar 's most impetuous aide , Count <unk> . The meeting was another part of the trap , as Napoleon intentionally expressed anxiety and hesitation to his opponents . <unk> reported to the Tsar an additional indication of French weakness . 
 The plan was successful . Many of the Allied officers , including the Tsar 's aides and the Austrian Chief of Staff Franz von Weyrother , strongly supported an immediate attack and appeared to sway Tsar Alexander . Kutuzov 's plan to retreat further to the Carpathian region was rejected , and the Allied forces soon fell into Napoleon 's trap . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The battle began with the French army outnumbered . Napoleon had some 72 @,@ 000 men and 157 guns for the impending battle , with about 7 @,@ 000 troops under Davout still far to the south in the direction of Vienna . The Allies had about 85 @,@ 000 soldiers , seventy percent of them Russian , and 318 guns . 
 At first , Napoleon was not totally confident of victory . In a letter written to Minister of Foreign Affairs Talleyrand , Napoleon requested Talleyrand not tell anyone about the upcoming battle because he did not want to disturb Empress Joséphine . According to Frederick C. <unk> , the French Emperor 's chief worry was how he could explain to Joséphine a French defeat . 
 = = = Battlefield = = = 
 The battle took place about six miles ( ten kilometers ) southeast of the town of Brno , between that town and Austerlitz ( Czech : Slavkov u <unk> ) in what is now the Czech Republic . The northern part of the battlefield was dominated by the 700 @-@ foot ( 210 @-@ meter ) Santon Hill and the 880 @-@ foot ( 270 @-@ meter ) <unk> ( <unk> ) Hill , both overlooking the vital Olomouc / Brno road , which was on an east / west axis . To the west of these two hills was the village of <unk> ( <unk> ) , and between them the <unk> ( <unk> ) stream went south to link up with the Goldbach ( <unk> ) stream , the latter flowing by the villages of <unk> ( <unk> ) , Sokolnitz ( <unk> ) , and Telnitz ( <unk> ) . 
 The centerpiece of the entire area was the Pratzen ( <unk> ) Heights , a gently sloping hill about 35 to 40 feet ( 10 to 12 meters ) in height . An aide noted that Napoleon repeatedly told his marshals , " Gentlemen , examine this ground carefully , it is going to be a battlefield ; you will have a part to play upon it . " 
 = = = Allied plans and dispositions = = = 
 An Allied council met on 1 December to discuss proposals for the battle . Most of the Allied strategists had two fundamental ideas in mind : making contact with the enemy and securing the southern flank that held the communication line to Vienna . Although the Tsar and his immediate entourage pushed hard for a battle , Emperor Francis of Austria was more cautious and , as mentioned , he was seconded by Kutuzov , the Commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Russians and the Allied troops . The pressure to fight from the Russian nobles and the Austrian commanders , however , was too strong , and the Allies adopted the plan of the Austrian Chief @-@ of @-@ Staff , Franz von Weyrother . This called for a main drive against the French right flank , which the Allies noticed was lightly guarded , and diversionary attacks against the French left . The Allies deployed most of their troops into four columns that would attack the French right . The Russian Imperial Guard was held in reserve while Russian troops under Bagration guarded the Allied right . The Russian Tsar rudely stripped the authority of Commander @-@ in @-@ chief M. I. Kutuzov and gave it to Franz von Weyrother . In the battle , Kutuzov could only command the IV Corps of the Allied army , although he was still the de jure commander because the Tsar was afraid to take over in case his favoured plan failed . 
 = = = French plans and dispositions = = = 
 Napoleon was hoping that the Allied forces would attack , and to encourage them , he deliberately weakened his right flank . On 28 November Napoleon met with his marshals at Imperial Headquarters , who informed him of their qualms about the forthcoming battle . He shrugged off their suggestion of retreat . 
 Napoleon 's plan envisioned that the Allies would throw many troops to envelop his right flank in order to cut the French communication line from Vienna . As a result , the Allies ' center and left flank would be exposed and become vulnerable . To encourage them to do so , Napoleon abandoned the strategic position on the Pratzen Heights , faking the weakness of his forces and his own caution . Meanwhile , Napoleon 's main force was to be concealed in a dead ground opposite the Heights . According to the plan , the French troops would attack and recapture the Pratzen Heights , then from the Heights they would launch a decisive assault to the center of the Allied army , cripple them , and encircle them from the rear . 
 If the Russian force leaves the Pratzen Heights in order to go to the right side , they will certainly be defeated . 
 The massive thrust through the Allied center was conducted by 16 @,@ 000 troops of Soult 's IV Corps . IV Corps ' position was cloaked by dense mist during the early stage of the battle ; in fact how long the mist lasted was vital to Napoleon 's plan : Soult 's troops would become uncovered if the mist dissipated too soon , but if it lingered too long , Napoleon would be unable to determine when the Allied troops had evacuated Pratzen Heights , preventing him from timing his attack properly . 
 Meanwhile , to support his weak right flank , Napoleon ordered Davout 's III Corps to force march all the way from Vienna and join General Legrand 's men , who held the extreme southern flank that would bear the heaviest part of the Allied attack . Davout 's soldiers had 48 hours to march 110 km ( 68 mi ) . Their arrival was crucial in determining the success of the French plan . Indeed , the arrangement of Napoleon on the right flank was very risky as the French had only minimal troops garrisoning there . However , Napoleon was able to use such a risky plan because Davout — the commander of III Corps — was one of Napoleon 's best marshals , because the right flank 's position was protected by a complicated system of streams and lakes , and because the French had already settled upon a secondary line of retreat through Brunn . The Imperial Guard and Bernadotte 's I Corps were held in reserve while the V Corps under Lannes guarded the northern sector of the battlefield , where the new communication line was located . 
 By 1 December 1805 , the French troops had been shifted in accordance with the Allied movement southward , as Napoleon expected . 
 = = = Battle is joined = = = 
 The battle began at about 8 a.m. with the first allied column attacking the village of Telnitz , which was defended by the 3rd Line Regiment . This sector of the battlefield witnessed heavy fighting in this early action as several ferocious Allied charges evicted the French from the town and forced them onto the other side of the Goldbach . The first men of Davout 's corps arrived at this time and threw the Allies out of Telnitz before they too were attacked by hussars and <unk> the town . Additional Allied attacks out of Telnitz were checked by French artillery . 
 Allied columns started pouring against the French right , but not at the desired speed , so the French were mostly successful in curbing the attacks . Actually , the Allied deployments were mistaken and poorly timed : cavalry detachments under Liechtenstein on the Allied left flank had to be placed in the right flank and in the process they ran into and slowed down part of the second column of infantry that was advancing towards the French right . At the time , the planners thought this slowing was disastrous , but later on it helped the Allies . Meanwhile , the leading elements of the second column were attacking the village of Sokolnitz , which was defended by the 26th Light Regiment and the Tirailleurs , French skirmishers . Initial Allied assaults proved unsuccessful and General <unk> ordered the bombardment of the village . This deadly barrage forced the French out , and at about the same time , the third column attacked the castle of Sokolnitz . The French , however , counterattacked and regained the village , only to be thrown out again . Conflict in this area ended temporarily when Friant 's division ( part of III Corps ) retook the village . Sokolnitz was perhaps the most fought over area in the battlefield and would change hands several times as the day progressed . 
 While the allied troops attacked the French right flank , Kutuzov 's IV Corp stopped at the Pratzen Heights and stayed still . Just like Napoleon , Kutuzov realized the importance of Pratzen and decided to protect the position . But the young Tsar did not , so he expelled the IV Corp from the Heights . This act quickly pushed the Allied army into her grave . 
 = = = " One sharp blow and the war is over " = = = 
 At about 8 : 45 a.m. , satisfied at the weakness in the enemy center , Napoleon asked Soult how long it would take for his men to reach the Pratzen Heights , to which the Marshal replied , " Less than twenty minutes , sire . " About 15 minutes later , Napoleon ordered the attack , adding , " One sharp blow and the war is over . " 
 A dense fog helped to cloud the advance of St. Hilaire 's French division , but as they went up the slope the legendary ' Sun of Austerlitz ' ripped the mist apart and encouraged them forward . Russian soldiers and commanders on top of the heights were stunned to see so many French troops coming towards them . Allied commanders moved some of the delayed detachments of the fourth column into this bitter struggle . Over an hour of fighting destroyed much of this unit . The other men from the second column , mostly inexperienced Austrians , also participated in the struggle and swung the numbers against one of the best fighting forces in the French army , eventually forcing them to withdraw down the slopes . However , gripped by desperation , St. Hilaire 's men struck hard once more and bayoneted the Allies out of the heights . To the north , General Vandamme 's division attacked an area called <unk> Vinohrady ( " Old Vineyards " ) and , through talented skirmishing and deadly volleys , broke several Allied battalions . 
 The battle had firmly turned in France 's favour , but it was far from over . Napoleon ordered Bernadotte 's I Corps to support Vandamme 's left and moved his own command center from <unk> Hill to St. Anthony 's Chapel on the Pratzen Heights . The difficult position of the Allies was confirmed by the decision to send in the Russian Imperial Guard ; Grand Duke Constantine , Tsar Alexander 's brother , commanded the Guard and counterattacked in Vandamme 's section of the field , forcing a bloody effort and the only loss of a French standard in the battle ( a battalion of the 4th Line Regiment was defeated ) . Sensing trouble , Napoleon ordered his own heavy Guard cavalry forward . These men pulverized their Russian counterparts , but with both sides pouring in large masses of cavalry , no victory was clear . 
 The Russians had a numerical advantage but soon the tide swung as Drouet 's Division , the 2nd of Bernadotte 's I Corps , deployed on the flank of the action and allowed French cavalry to seek refuge behind their lines . The horse artillery of the Guard also inflicted heavy casualties on the Russian cavalry and fusiliers . The Russians broke and many died as they were pursued by the reinvigorated French cavalry for about a quarter of a mile . The casualties of the Russians in Pratzen included Kutuzov ( severely wounded ) and his son @-@ in @-@ law Ferdinand von <unk> ( KIA ) . 
 = = = Endgame = = = 
 I was ... under fierce and continuous canister fire ... Many soldiers , now incessantly engaged in battle from 7 a.m. to 4 p.m. , had no cartridges left . I could do nothing but retreat ... 
 Meanwhile , the northernmost part of the battlefield was also witnessing heavy fighting . Prince Liechtenstein 's heavy cavalry began to assault Kellerman 's lighter cavalry forces after eventually arriving at the correct position in the field . The fighting initially went well for the French , but Kellerman 's forces took cover behind General Caffarelli 's infantry division once it became clear Russian numbers were too great . Caffarelli 's men halted the Russian assaults and permitted Murat to send two cuirassier divisions ( one commanded by d 'Hautpoul and the other one by Nansouty ) into the fray to finish off the Russian cavalry for good . The ensuing mêlée was bitter and long , but the French ultimately prevailed . Lannes then led his V Corps against Bagration 's men and after hard fighting managed to drive the skilled Russian commander off the field . He wanted to pursue , but Murat , who was in control of this sector in the battlefield , was against the idea . 
 Napoleon 's focus now shifted towards the southern end of the battlefield where the French and the Allies were still fighting over Sokolnitz and Telnitz . In an effective double @-@ pronged assault , St. Hilaire 's division and part of Davout 's III Corps smashed through the enemy at Sokolnitz and persuaded the commanders of the first two columns , Generals Kienmayer and <unk> , to flee as fast as they could . <unk> , the commander of the Allied left and the man responsible for leading the attack , was completely drunk and fled as well . Kienmayer covered his withdrawal with the O 'Reilly light cavalry , who gallantly managed to defeat five of six French cavalry regiments before they too had to retreat . 
 General panic now seized the Allied army and it abandoned the field in all possible directions . A famous episode occurred during this retreat : Russian forces that had been defeated by the French right withdrew south towards Vienna via the <unk> frozen ponds . French artillery pounded towards the men , and the ice was broken due to the bombardment . The men drowned in the cold ponds , dozens of Russian artillery pieces going down with them . Estimates of how many guns were captured differ : there may have been as few as 38 or more than 100 . Sources also differ about casualties , with figures ranging between 200 and 2 @,@ 000 dead . Many drowning Russians were saved by their victorious foes . However , local evidence , only later made public , suggests that Napoleon 's account of the catastrophe may have been totally invented ; on his instructions the lakes were drained a few days after the battle and the corpses of only two or three men , with some 150 horses , were found . 
 = = Military and political results = = 
 Allied casualties stood at about 36 @,@ 000 out of an army of 85 @,@ 000 , which represented about 40 % of their effective forces . The French lost around 9 @,@ 000 out of an army of 73 @,@ 000 , or about 12 % of their forces . The Allies also lost some 180 guns and about 50 standards . The great victory was met by sheer amazement and delirium in Paris , where just days earlier the nation had been teetering on the brink of financial collapse . Napoleon wrote to Josephine , " I have beaten the Austro @-@ Russian army commanded by the two emperors . I am a little weary .... I embrace you . " Tsar Alexander perhaps best summed up the harsh times for the Allies by stating , " We are babies in the hands of a giant . " The Holy Roman Emperor Francis II is remembered to have said after the allied defeat in the Battle of Austerlitz : " The British are dealers of human flesh . They pay others to fight in their place . " 
 After hearing the news of Austerlitz William Pitt referred to a map of Europe , " Roll up that map ; it will not be wanted these ten years . " 
 France and Austria signed a truce on 4 December and the Treaty of Pressburg 22 days later took the latter out of the war . Austria agreed to recognize French territory captured by the treaties of Campo Formio ( 1797 ) and Lunéville ( 1801 ) , cede land to Bavaria , Wurttemberg , and Baden , which were Napoleon 's German allies , and pay 40 million francs in war indemnities , and Venice was given to the Kingdom of Italy . It was a harsh end for Austria , but certainly not a catastrophic peace . The Russian army was allowed to withdraw to home territory and the French ensconced themselves in Southern Germany . The Holy Roman Empire was effectively wiped out , 1806 being seen as its final year . Napoleon created the Confederation of the Rhine , a string of German states meant to serve as a buffer between France and Prussia . Prussia saw these and other moves as an affront to its status as the main power of Central Europe and it went to war with France in 1806 . 
 = = Rewards = = 
 Napoleon 's words to his troops after the battle were full of praise : <unk> ! Je suis content de vous ( English : Soldiers ! I am pleased with you ) . The Emperor provided two million golden francs to the higher officers and 200 francs to each soldier , with large pensions for the widows of the fallen . Orphaned children were adopted by Napoleon personally and were allowed to add " Napoleon " to their baptismal and family names . This battle is one of four that Napoleon never awarded a victory title , the others being Marengo , Jena , and Friedland . 
 = = Popular conceptions = = 
 Artists and musicians on the side of France and her conquests expressed their sentiment in populist and elite art of the time . Prussian music critic E.T.A. Hoffmann , in his famous review of Beethoven 's 5th Symphony , " singles out for special abuse a certain Bataille des trois <unk> , a French battle symphony by Louis Jadin celebrating Napoleon 's victory at Austerlitz . " 
 = = Historical views = = 
 Napoleon did not succeed in defeating the Allied army as thoroughly as he wanted , but historians and enthusiasts alike recognize that the original plan provided a significant victory , comparable to other great tactical battles such as Cannae . Some historians suggest that Napoleon was so successful at Austerlitz that he lost touch with reality , and what used to be French foreign policy became a " personal Napoleonic one " after the battle . In French history , Austerlitz is acknowledged as an impressive military victory , and in the 19th century , when fascination with the First Empire was at its height , the battle was revered by the likes of Victor Hugo , who " in the depth of [ his ] thoughts " was hearing the " noise of the heavy cannon rolling towards Austerlitz . " In the 2005 bicentennial , however , controversy erupted when neither French President Jacques Chirac nor Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin attended any functions commemorating the battle . On the other hand , some residents of France 's overseas departments protested against what they viewed as the " official commemoration of Napoleon , " arguing that Austerlitz should not be celebrated since they believed that Napoleon committed genocide against colonial people . 
 After the battle , Tsar Alexander I laid all the blame on M. I. Kutuzov , Commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Allied Army . However , it is clear that Kutuzov 's plan was to retreat farther to the rear where the Allied Army had a sharp advantage in logistics . Had the Allied Army retreated further , they might have been reinforced by Archduke Charles 's troops from Italy , and the Prussians might have joined the coalition against Napoleon . A French army at the end of her supply lines , in a place which had no food supplies , might have faced a very different ending from the one they achieved at the real battle of Austerlitz . This essentially was Kutuzov 's successful strategy in 1812 , after the Battle of Borodino . 
 = Baseball and Bloomers = 
 Baseball and Bloomers , also known as Baseball in Bloomers , is a 1911 American silent short sports film produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film stars William Garwood and is the debut of Marguerite Snow . The film focuses on a female seminary which organizes a baseball club and challenges another school to a game . The boys accept to the game with amusement and find that the women are not good at baseball . Two Harvard University baseball stars join the ranks of the girls in disguise and defeat the boys team . The script may have been written by Lloyd Lonergan and the film may have been directed by Barry O 'Neil or Lucius J. Henderson . The film was released on January 6 , 1911 and it received positive reviews . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from January 7 , 1911 . It states , " Miss Street 's Seminary for Girls has a very ambitious class of pupils . The young athletes , not content with basketball and tennis , aspire to shine in the great American game , and organize a baseball club . They are so satisfied with themselves that they finally send a challenge to Adair College , which has a crowd of husky young athletes in a club that thinks it amounts to something . When the challenge is received , the boys are first angry , then amused . They decide to accept it , to have fun with the girls . The young women , after some practice , realize that their team , while it may be pretty to look at , is of little real use on the diamond . And the prospect makes them weep . Fortunately for the girls , Jack , the brother of the president , arrives from Harvard . His chum , Jim , is with him . These two young men are baseball stars themselves , and when they are told of the predicament of the girls , they <unk> offer to help them out . The university men disguise themselves as girls , act as battery for the young women , and the college boys , who had looked for a laughable victory , are mowed down , inning after inning , because of the work of pitcher Jack and catcher Jim . The other members of the ' girl ' team have nothing to do except look pretty . When the boy athletes have retired from the field vanquished , the girls reward their battery with one kiss - only one - from each of the other seven players . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 William Garwood 
 Marguerite Snow 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The film director may have been Barry O 'Neil or Lucius J. Henderson . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions though cameramen employed by the company during this era included Blair Smith , Alfred H. Moses , Jr. and Carl Louis Gregory . The other cast credits are unknown , but many Thanhouser productions are fragmentary . In late 1910 , the Thanhouser company released a list of the important personalities in their films . The list includes G.W. Abbe , Justus D. Barnes , Frank H. Crane , Irene Crane , Marie Eline , Violet Heming , Martin J. Faust , Thomas Fortune , George Middleton , Grace Moore , John W. Noble , Anna Rosemond , and Mrs. George Walters . 
 This film is important for being the debut of Marguerite Snow , who would become one of the most important actresses for the company . In an interview by Johnson Briscoe , Snow said that her career as an actress was an accidental one . A girl friend of hers suggested she come to the studio to see how motion pictures are made . There at the studio , Edwin Thanhouser asked her if she wanted to be in the film . Snow accepted and she took part in the production until the director asked them to go outside to shoot another scene . Snow then protested about going outside in such a costume and in winter and proceeded home . A week later she received a phone call and ended up working for six more months before temporarily returning to the stage . Another baseball related film would be released later that year by the Thanhouser Company , The Baseball Bug . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel comedy , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on January 6 , 1911 . The film had a wide national release ; advertising theaters are known in Indiana , North Carolina , South Dakota , Iowa , Pennsylvania , and Texas . In Arizona , the film would be advertised by one theatre as Baseball Bloomers and it appears to also have been the case in another Kansas theater . The film would also be shown in Hawaii in August 1912 . 
 The New York Dramatic Mirror gave a brief summary and review of the film and gave minor praise for the production . The reviewer wrote , " The details of this comedy are well worked out , and it is good for a portion of genuine laughs . The girls of Miss Street 's Seminary become so elated over their success in the gymnasium that they feel impelled to branch out , and accordingly they challenge the boys of Adair College to a game of ball . At the last moment the girls feel like backing out , when two of Cornell 's star baseball players arrive in town . They agree to pitch and catch for the girls , who give them bloomers and rats from their hair for disguise . At the eighth inning the score was 0 to 0 . By the ninth it was 0 to 2 , in favor of Miss Street 's Seminary for Girls . The nine girls then showed their gratitude by giving the pitcher and catcher a round of kisses , while the Adair College boys stood off at a respectful distance . The actors were equal to the occasion . " The Billboard affirmed by stating , " Thanhouser producers have again placed a picture of originality on the market in Baseball and Bloomers . It is a farce pure and simple , but it offers many laughable situations . The acting is generally good , but in a few instances scenes were overacted . " 
 = Drexel 4257 = 
 Drexel 4257 , also known by an inscription on its first page , " John Gamble , his booke , amen 1659 " is a music manuscript commonplace book . It is the largest collection of English songs from the first half to the middle of the 17th century , and is an important source for studying vocal music in its transition from Renaissance music to Baroque music in England . Many songs also provide commentary on contemporary political events leading up to the Restoration . 
 Belonging to the New York Public Library , it forms part of the Music Division 's Drexel Collection , located at the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts . Following traditional library practice , its name is derived from its call number . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 Before researchers took active interest in it , the field of 17th @-@ century British song had not been investigated . Music historian Charles Burney had a negative opinion towards British vocal music in this period . That attitude was carried through the beginning of the 20th century , where in the first edition of the Oxford History of Music , Hubert Parry stated that English composers ' sense of musical line was deficient . 
 Vincent Duckles thought one reason for the negative attitude might have been the lack of published sources : Between 1627 ( the publication date of John Hilton 's Ayres or Fa @-@ las ) and 1651 ( John Playford 's Musical Banquet ) , there appeared only a single publication of British vocal music : Walter Porter 's <unk> and Ayres of 1632 . 
 Scholarly work on Drexel 4257 was one of the major reasons for a change in attitude . With over 320 songs , 250 of which contain music , it is " the largest single body of early 17th @-@ century English songs that we know . " " The composers ... all belonged to the small world of court musicians that suffered disruption during the English Civil War and the Commonwealth of England . Some began their careers late in the reign of James I , most saw service in court of Charles I , and a few survived to return to their posts at the invitation of Charles II . " For the most part , their active careers were over by 1660 or shortly thereafter . 
 The compiler ( or compilers ) was not an antiquarian : this collection of songs was intended for practical use , and represents the generation of English composers active between 1630 <unk> . As such , Drexel 4257 " stands as the record of English musical and literary taste as it developed over a period of some thirty years , " moving from the late Jacobean era to Restoration periods . Though its musical contents may sometimes be variable , its main interest is that , as a document of its time , it reflects contemporary taste , offering comments on contemporary events and references to the past . 
 By virtue of its repertoire and of the period covered , Drexel 4257 is closely related to other 17th @-@ century English music manuscripts : 2240 ( British Library Deposit ) , Drexel <unk> ( New York Public Library ) , <unk> ( Bodleian Library ) , Add . 29 @,@ 396 ( British Library ) , Add . 11 @,@ 608 ( British Library ) , MS B.1 ( Bodleian Library ) , Add . <unk> ( British Library ) , Add . 10337 ( British Library ) , <unk> ( Trinity College , Dublin ) , Egerton 2013 ( British Library ) , Drexel <unk> ( New York Public Library ) , Add <unk> ( British Library ) , MS 1041 ( Lambeth Palace Library ) , and MS 87 ( Christ Church Library ) . 
 = = General and physical description = = 
 The binding of Drexel 4257 measures 30 @.@ 3 × 20 × 4 @.@ 7 centimetres ( 11 @.@ 9 × 7 @.@ 9 × 1 @.@ 9 in ) . It contains 227 leaves which measure 29 @.@ 5 × 19 centimetres ( 11 @.@ 6 × 7 @.@ 5 in ) ( the leaves ' varying length can add or subtract several millimeters to their respective measurement ) . As the image at left indicates , the volume was rebound on December 6 , 1944 by Neumann Leathers of Hoboken , New Jersey . The folios are not numbered , but each song is numbered . Using different methods of enumeration , scholars have disagreed on how many songs are contained in the manuscript . Hughes wrote that the collection contained 246 songs , 146 of which are by unidentified composers , but he was only counting songs with " a musical setting sufficiently complete to make identification possible . " Duckles claimed there were 325 different songs numbered 1 through 329 : two songs occur twice ( " <unk> on yor <unk> and hide yor Eye " nos . 134 and 237 , and " If thou wilt loue me I 'le loue thee " nos . 174 and 215 ) . Additionally , nos . 275 ( " Stay , stay , <unk> noe more " ) and 324 ( " I haue reason to Fly thee " ) are satirical replies to anti @-@ Royalist lyrics not included in the manuscript . No. 206 is blank and not identified in the index , and the song " Why <unk> <unk> thou her whome I <unk> " is both nos . 222 and 223 . There are also two songs listed in the index for which no space was allotted . For Duckles , eighty @-@ five of the 325 songs are lacking music and have either just titles , or titles and lyrics only . Elise Bickford Jorgens counted 327 songs , including songs listed in at least one of the two tables of contents but for which there is no music . ( This article and the table below uses Jorgens ' enumeration . ) 
 The breakdown of the 97 songs by known composers is as follows : John Gamble ( 28 ) , Henry Lawes ( 28 ) , William Lawes ( 10 ) , John Wilson ( 11 ) , William Webb ( 8 ) , Thomas Brewer ( 3 ) , Robert Smith ( 2 ) , Nicholas Lanier ( 2 ) , Walter <unk> ( 2 ) , Robert Johnson ( 1 ) , John Withy ( 1 ) , and Charles Coleman ( 1 ) . 
 Folio 1 verso contains a bawdy lyric followed by the inscription written twice , " John Gamble his booke amen 1 @-@ 6 @-@ 5 @-@ 9 an [ n ] o Domini . " The material on Folio 2 recto is from a later date . The upper half of the page contains an engraved portrait of Gamble , printed by W. Richardson in 1795 , pasted in . The lower portion contains a brief biographical inscription concerning Gamble in the hand of the former owner , Edward F. Rimbault . A note giving a brief description of the contents has been tipped in near the center of the binding . 
 There are two tables of contents . The first , with the heading " The Cattalogue " on folios 3r @-@ <unk> , is a numbered list of songs from 1 through 266 . Starting with song no . 201 , the style of enumeration varies inconsistently : no . 201 is listed as 2001 , 220 is listed as <unk> . Additionally , there is a group of songs incorrectly altered to 300s . The second table , on folios <unk> @-@ <unk> , has no heading but is an alphabetical grouping of songs where in each letter the songs are listed sequentially . This list was apparently compiled after the manuscript was completed and includes all songs except nos . 314 @-@ 317 . It is written by the same hand as the enumerator of songs 177 @-@ 266 in " The Cattalogue . " 
 The manuscript as currently bound ( the date accompanying the binding information on the inside rear cover is stamped Dec. 6 , 1944 ) has some songs out of sequence ( nos . 331 @-@ 340 ) , surrounded by no . 311 and 312 . 
 = = Dating = = 
 The date of 1659 ( from Gamble 's inscription on 1v ) has been a source of puzzlement to those who have studied the manuscript . Willa McClung Evans , consulting Edward Heawood 's study of watermarks ( used to date paper ) , noted the watermark , a fleur @-@ de @-@ lis , was of undetermined origin , but was also used in Fuller 's " Holy State " of 1652 , and Denis <unk> " History of the World " of 1659 . Charles W. Hughes believed the book was begun around the turn of the 17th century - a hypothesis rejected by Jorgens who notes that it contains works by Henry Lawes , born in 1596 . Hughes believed the terminal date was at least 1660 , as some of the songs refer to Charles II who assumed the throne in 1660 . Duckles noted that the earliest lyrics were from England 's Helicon ( 1600 ) and Davison 's Poetical Rhapsody ( 1602 ) . Duckles felt that 1659 is close to the terminal date , noting that no songs had been added after the Commonwealth period , and no younger composers were included in the collection . 
 = = Provenance = = 
 Though writers disagree on details of the handwriting ( see the section on handwriting below ) , they all agree that the handwriting of the latter portion of Drexel 4257 is probably that of John Gamble , given that there is a concentration of his work in that part of the manuscript . This suggests that the book was begun by someone else ( whom Lynn Hulse recognized as Thomas Jordan ; see below ) . Duckles surmised that Gamble came into possession of the book in 1642 – 43 when the musicians of the Royal Chapel were dispersed as a result of the English Civil War . Although Gamble lost most of his possessions in a fire in 1666 , this book appears to have survived . He made out his will on June 30 , 1680 in which he bequeathed his grandson ( also named John Gamble ) all his books of music . 
 After Gamble 's death in 1687 , nothing is known of the manuscript for over 150 years . The first published reference to it comes in 1846 , where it is mentioned in volume 19 of the Percy Society 's Early English Poetry , Ballads , and Popular Literature of the Middle Ages as being in the possession of one of the editors of the series , Edward Francis Rimbault . An organist and musicologist , Rimbault took a keen interest in English music and voraciously collected rare books , scores , and valuable manuscripts . Upon his death , his extensive and valuable library was auctioned by Sotheby 's over the course of five days . The Rimbault auction catalog entry for the Gamble manuscript reads : 
 A collection of upwards of 300 songs by Wilson , Lawes , Johnson , Gamble , and other English composers , containing also the autograph inscription , " John Gamble his book , Amen . 1659 Anno Domini " 
 Hughes quotes a contemporaneous report of the hammer price and comment : " Thirteen guineas , for America . " The reference was to the Philadelphia @-@ born financier Joseph W. Drexel who had already amassed a large music library and purchased about 300 lots from the Rimbault auction . Upon Drexel 's death , he bequeathed his music library to The Lenox Library . When the Lenox Library merged with the Astor Library to become the New York Public Library , the Drexel Collection became the basis for one of its founding units , the Music Division . Today , Drexel 4257 is part of the Drexel Collection in the Music Division , now located at the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center . 
 = = Organization = = 
 Duckles noted that there are subsidiary groups organized by composer : Henry Lawes ( nos . 26 @-@ 36 ) , William Webb ( nos . 160 @-@ 166 ) , Robert Smith ( nos . 237 @-@ 238 ) , Thomas Brewer ( nos . 244 @-@ 245 ) , Robert Johnson ( nos . 108 @-@ 109 ) , and John Gamble ( nos . 292 @-@ 319 ) . Similarly is the group of three songs set by John Wilson for Richard Brome 's play " The Northern Lass " ( nos . 45 , 46 , and 47 ) . 
 The first 47 songs are love lyrics by poets of the Jacobean Court including Ben Jonson , William Shakespeare , Robert Herrick , Thomas Carew , John Suckling , Beaumont and Fletcher . After no . 47 a new spirit is suggested by song no . 48 " You <unk> of England that merry will make , " a lusty drinking song that indicates a political shift after 1640 . Deliberate segregation is in evidence between songs nos . 48 and 80 , where there are a series of 32 ballads and popular songs , in contrast to the art lyrics of the first few songs . There is a brief return to the elevated nature in songs nos . 154 @-@ 76 . Thereafter , popular and sophisticated songs are mixed . 
 = = Handwriting = = 
 Hughes and Duckles both believed that the manuscript was written by at least two individuals . Hughes characterized the first hand as a " neater , older hand " dating from either at the end of the 16th century or beginning of the 17th century ( a date disputed by subsequent writers - see above ) . The second hand copied the newer songs ( including some by Gamble ) and were written in a more careless hand . Hughes believed that this evidence suggested that the manuscript was begun by an unidentified person and was continued by John Gamble himself commencing with song no . 177 . 
 Following Hughes 's view , Duckles also believed the manuscript was written in two hands . In his view , the first hand wrote the titles for songs nos . 1 @-@ 176 of the Cattalogue , and the second hand , probably that of Gamble himself , wrote of nos . 177 @-@ 266 ( leaving space left to accommodate future additions ) as well as the alphabetical index . Duckles described the writing style of Hand 1 as favoring " round , compact letter forms , vertical alignment , calligraphic flourishes on capitals and heavy down strokes , " when writing with a broad pen . Duckles admits that Hand 1 has " two forms " : " When the hand writes with a finer quill , the letter forms are more loosely connected , the flourishes a little more pronounced , and there is a slight inclination to the right . " Hand no . 2 has a " pronounced slant to the right , letter forms are thin and elongated and the pen is a fine one . " Duckles observed that hand no . 2 participated slightly in the preparation of part 1 ( nos . 1 @-@ 176 ) with only six songs , but all of the text incipits . Likes Hughes , Duckles also felt that Hand 2 is probably that of Gamble . 
 Duckles hypothesized that the first hand might have been that of Ambrose <unk> , with whom Gamble apprenticed and is believed to have been his teacher . Lynn Hulse refutes this , saying that the handwriting does not match existing <unk> manuscripts . 
 Jorgens disagreed with both Hughes and Duckles and saw three different hands . Based on the two tables of contents , Jorgens surmised that all three copyists had access to the book at one time . She characterized the first hand as " firm , bold but well @-@ controlled secretary hand , " the second hand as " looser and somewhat lighter secretary hand " beginning with song no . 38 , and a third hand , " rougher , slanted , inclined towards the Italian style " that begins with song no . 46 . All three roughly equal ; by no . 177 the first two have dropped out . Hand Three has entered all of Gamble 's songs and is probably his . It also has entered text incipits . Since these incipits do not correspond with other known songs , they are probably the work of Gamble . 
 Hulse identified the first hand of the Gamble manuscript is probably that of poet Thomas Jordan ( ca . 1612 – 1685 ) , the same hand as manuscript <unk> in the University of Nottingham , as well as other Jordan manuscripts in Harvard University and Bodleian Library . Hulse showed that Jordan and Gamble were involved in the same London circle of theatre musicians and composers for many years , culminating in Jordan 's preface for Gamble 's A Defence for Musick published in 1659 . She identifies songs nos . 4 , 16 , 32 , 45 , 47 , 99 , 154 , 155 , 169 , 170 , 175 , 176 and the text incipit of 96 as being copied by Jordan . 
 = = Politics = = 
 The lyrics to a number of songs have references to contemporary politics and events . " Since <unk> hath bin lately <unk> high Treason " ( no . 313 ) carries a strong suggestion of reaction to contemporary British history . One song , " Beat on , proud billows , " was known to have been written by Roger L 'Estrange while he was imprisoned in Newgate Prison during Oliver Cromwell 's rule ( 1645 – 1648 ) . 
 Some songs express regret for a better past . " Listen <unk> gentlemen Listen & be merry " ( no . 63 ) praises the reign of Charles I ( indirectly criticizing the then @-@ current regime ) . The lyric of " <unk> all England " contrasts the 13th @-@ century hero Guy of Warwick with current rulers . One song alludes to the marital difficulties between Charles II and his Portuguese wife , Catherine of Braganza . Another example of distrust of foreigners can be seen in the lyric " Harke <unk> Ile tell you news from the Cort ... all ye french ... now are all sent back to France . " Charles II also figures in " God bless our noble king , " which comically describes the king 's progress from Whitehall to St Paul 's Cathedral . 
 " You <unk> of England " describes frivolous English soldiers at the Siege of La Rochelle , including characters named " Wentworth " ( referring to Thomas Wentworth , 1st Earl of Strafford ) and " Murrey " ( referring to Robert Moray ) . Other names mentioned include : Wilmot , Weston , George Symon , <unk> , Hugh <unk> , and " Game " possibly John Gamble . 
 Some songs reveal prejudice against Puritans . No. 92 , " " Cock <unk> <unk> ye <unk> his <unk> , " concerns Cock <unk> , known as a rogue and highway robber , as friends with the devil . " The <unk> of the Citty " ( no . 70 ) is an exception , praising a Protestant service . 
 Duckles took note of the bold lyrics to song no . 73 : 
 Ye giddy poets that <unk> 
 from sea and land the greatest store 
 to deck her <unk> wenches fine , 
 what would you do with such a whore ? 
 Duckles clarified the meaning : " The outspoken vulgarity was not necessarily result of personal taste but a reflection of Royalist protest against Puritan morality , intended to shock the taste of Parliamentarians . " 
 = = Topical or literary content = = 
 Hughes argued that , unlike a textbook compilation of exemplars , Drexel 4257 shows a variety of good and mediocre poetry . Most songs deal with love , and range from flowery rhetoric to frank accounts of love @-@ making . A few , however , deal with topical matters . There are two songs related to Christmas : " Beate upp a <unk> " depicts <unk> in a mock battle with the cold in which the <unk> win , and " Christmas is my name <unk> have I gone " was a popular ballad which appeared in a number of 17th @-@ century sources . In this song , the personification of Christmas comes from far away to discover that his friends and other residents have deserted the country in favor of the city . The song concludes with a lament that universal welcome is gone because the Protestants and Puritans disassociate themselves from Christmas . Similarly ( with fewer political overtones ) , the song " Ladies you loose yor time " expresses preference for city life over that of the country . 
 The song " Oh yt mine eyes " , a graphic meditation on the Crucifixion of Jesus , is the only song in the collection to deal with a religious subject . 
 The song " Nor loue nor fate dare I " by John Wilson bears the inscription " composed for the comedy The Northern Lass " . Although this is the only song that the manuscript indicates is from a drama , at least 26 songs have texts from dramas or masques , attesting to Gamble 's association with the theatre . 
 The songs composed by Gamble are best characterized as drolls . <unk> were collections of " cavalier wit , much of it trivial , repetitious and derivative , but at the same time containing some work of genuine literary value . Their tone was seldom dignified , often frankly sexual , and characterized by a persistent undertone of anti @-@ Puritan feeling . " Similar examples can be found in the work of Ben Jonson , Thomas Carew and John Suckling . 
 = = Musical content and style = = 
 Hughes cursorily observed that Drexel 4257 contains no naturals — sharps are used to cancel flats , and flats are used to cancel sharps . He noted that technical blunders such as parallel fifths and octaves are to be found as well as other kinds of mistakes . 
 Duckles 's dissertation explores the transition from the lute song , representing an older style of composition appropriate to the waning of Renaissance music , to the continuo song , reflecting newer Baroque music practice . It 's not always an easy form of composition to assess : lutes were not always used for songs , and sometimes were used even after ascendancy of the continuo song . General characteristics of the lute song are smooth , flowing , and restrained lines , while the continuo song is more vigorous , abrupt and discontinuous . The harmonies in lute songs are an outgrowth of their melodic lines , while in continuo songs they define the structure . Lute songs tend to be loose and melismatic with frequent repetitions of verse fragments , while continuo songs are more closely tied to the rhythm of the text . Dissonance and chromaticism are used sparingly in lute songs while continuo songs show increasing use of chromaticism for more dramatic rather than pictorial underscoring . Generally , English composers were more concerned with capturing verbal rhythms than producing dramatic effects . ( Hughes noted that Restoration lyrics typified Baroque figures of speech in their use of florid lyrics . ) Use of these techniques in England indicate their adoption from Italy , where they were first used . Previously , it had been thought that English composers either didn 't know about them , or weren 't interested . But a comparison of Drexel 4257 with another of Gamble 's books in the British Library , Additional <unk> , where some of the songs appear in an embellished form , indicate that British composers and singers did occasionally adopt a more florid style . 
 Duckles examined the song " If <unk> <unk> truth then <unk> doe not loue " by Thomas Campion which appears as no . 10 of Drexel 4257 and was also published in Campion 's Third Book of Ayres from about 1617 . Campion was generally a conservative composer . In the version present in Drexel 4257 , the melody is slightly altered to provide greater sensitivity to the declamatory text , so that the speed of the verse accelerates naturally , an alteration which Duckles finds an improvement over the original . Many songs are recitative @-@ like . In some of these songs , the bar is enlarged as it approaches the cadence , suggesting a ballad singer who briefly pauses to catch his breath . The <unk> a consistent practice in English music of this time . 
 Many songs are 6 / 4 meter , while some suggest that they are adaptations from violin tunes . Yet , the barline does not always reflect the verbal rhythm . In comparing the song " <unk> my babe lye still and <unk> " , no . 46 of Drexel 4257 , with the version that appears in Elizabeth Roger 's Virginal Book , Duckles notes that the ( earlier ) virginal version is in duple meter with no trace of <unk> , while the version in the Gamble manuscript has them , suggesting a modernization of an older song . Another example of continuo style is " Like <unk> poore in <unk> place obscure " ( no . 15 ) , a lyric attributed to Sir Walter Raleigh and dating from 1591 . In comparing Alfonso <unk> 's setting from his Ayres of 1609 to one by Nicolas Lanier in Drexel 4257 , Duckles admits the possibility that Lanier 's may have been inspired by that of <unk> . But the musical characteristics of the Lanier setting , including simplicity of texture , distinct phrases , use of an <unk> , and the suggestion of a rhythmic motif through use of a recurring pattern of eighth notes , point to contemporary text setting techniques . The song " <unk> sun , why <unk> thou stay " by Thomas Brewer ( no . 253 ) shows expressive false relations and harmonic word painting , foreshadowing later developments in British sacred music . Brewer 's songs are among the earliest examples of the Italian pathetic style in English music and represent the mature style of continuo song . Devices such as an octave leap look away from lute song to continuo song . 
 Not all songs with recitative @-@ like musical lines indicate <unk> are dance songs that contain elements of an ostinato bass , <unk> antico and the <unk> — all characteristics of Renaissance rather than Baroque periods . Several tunes and texts are of 16th @-@ century origin had long been in the repertoire , among them : " Greensleeves , " " O mistress mine , " and " Back and sides go bare . " With these exceptions , the earliest songs date from Jacobean period . A comparison with anthologies published by John Playford in 1652 , 1653 and 1659 indicates particular songs were popular . That selections were copied into the book attests to their popularity even after tastes had changed due to the Restoration . Similarly , the song " I went from England into <unk> , " a satirical narrative , refers to the song " John Dory , " indicating that song 's continued popularity . ( It had appeared in Thomas Ravenscroft 's " <unk> " of 1609 , though probably dates earlier ) . " When ye Chill <unk> <unk> " is a song containing both declamatory and tuneful styles . It is a drinking song , whose erratic harmony suggests frequent cadences , and whose angular melody which " moves with great vigor , " This is in contradistinction to the lute song that emphasized continuous flow and smooth melodic motion . 
 Duckles identifies two styles of songs of the collection : " The declamatory air " ( reflecting modern style ) , and " the tuneful air " ( reflecting the older style , a vestige of Renaissance musical practice ) . The tuneful air could be composed based on a preexisting tune or a tune intended to be a dance form . In examining lyric forms , Duckles identified the ballad as one type of lute song . The ballads found in Drexel 4257 are all of a sophisticated type in which satire and parody are important elements . The ballad as simple narrative or topical ballad are not represented . 
 Warning that one must be wary of the fluid nature of musical genres , Duckles categorized the following songs from Drexel 4257 as ballads : 46 , 48 , 49 , 51 , 53 , 55 , 56 , 58 , 59 , 60 , 62 , 63 , 64 , 66 , 67 , 68 , 70 , 74 , 76 , 79 , 92 , 103 , 104 , 105 , 116 , 119 , 120 , 121 , 123 , 131 , 142 , 144 , 145 , 146 , 147 , 186 , 214 , 271 , 272 . 
 Duckles identified these songs as being in the declamatory style : 4 , 12 , 15 , 20 , 22 , 26 , 30 , 31 , 33 , 83 , 89 , 108 , 132 , 160 , 161 , 162 , 164 , 168 , 172 , 182 , 188 , 198 , 206 , 238 , 239 , 240 , 243 , 247 , 249 , 253 , 256 , 260 , 261 , 262 , 269 , 274 , 277 , 280 , 284 , 285 , 292 , 299 , 306 , 311 , 315 , 316 , 317 , 323 , 326 . 
 Duckles observes that by 1651 , the transition from the lute song to the continuo song was complete . Printed versions of songs can not be entirely trusted to represent what was sung , since , in order to keep engraving costs manageable , they would economize on written vocal embellishments . That 's why manuscript sources are crucial to our understanding of transition to Baroque vocal styles . Duckles concludes by warning that those who study early 17th century lyric poetry must do so in conjunction with their intended musical settings , since words and music are inseparable . 
 = = Significance = = 
 In his dissertation , Duckles summed up Gamble and his manuscript : 
 There seems to be little doubt but that Gamble 's fame will rest upon his work as a compiler of an important song collection , not on his work as a composer . As a musician he was distinctly second @-@ rate , but one can appreciate him as a man with a keen sense of the musical currents ( page 138 ) of his time , an opportunist , who knew what the public wanted and how to turn public taste to his own professional uses ... By shrewdness and wit he managed to establish a place for himself in the rough @-@ and @-@ tumble world of mid @-@ 17th century music . His songs were soon forgotten , but in his " Commonplace book , " compiled without any thought for posterity , he succeeded in presenting one of the most valuable sources we have of the musical taste and musical thought of his time . It is for this reason that an obscure court musician of some 300 years ago remains very much alive in the minds of students of English music history . 
 = = List of songs = = 
 This table is based on the table of contents listed in Jorgens , supplemented with composer , lyricist attributions and other remarks from Duckles 1953 . 
 = = Facsimile = = 
 A facsimile of the manuscript was published as Drexel Ms. 4257 : John Gamble , " His booke , amen 1659 " , in English Song , 1600 – 1675 : Facsimiles of Twenty @-@ Six Manuscripts and an Edition of the Texts , vol . 10 ( ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8240 @-@ 8240 @-@ 6 ) , by Garland Publishing of New York in 1987 , with an introduction by Elise Bickford Jorgens . 
 = Somerhill House = 
 Somerhill House is a Grade I listed Jacobean mansion situated near Tonbridge , Kent , United Kingdom . It was built for Richard de Burgh in 1611 – 13 . The estate was sequestrated by Parliament in 1645 , and restored to its rightful owner in 1660 . The building had become derelict by the mid @-@ eighteenth century but was later restored . Somerhill was painted by Turner in 1811 . It was bought by a member of the Goldsmid family in 1849 and greatly extended between 1879 and 1897 , making it the second largest house in Kent , after Knole House , Sevenoaks . 
 Somerhill housed a Prisoner of War camp , Prisoner of War Camp No. 40 , during the Second World War , following which it became the home of the d 'Avigdor @-@ <unk> and was visited by many celebrities of the time . Somerhill was sold by the d 'Avigdor @-@ <unk> in 1980 , and again went into decline , being damaged by vandalism and storms . In 1993 , The Schools at Somerhill moved in , as of July 2016 the building is used as a school . 
 = = Location = = 
 Somerhill House lies 1 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) south of Tonbridge at grid reference TQ 6086 <unk> , in the civil parish of <unk> @-@ cum @-@ Capel , which falls under Tunbridge Wells Borough Council . 
 = = Description = = 
 Somerhill is built of sandstone . The stone also contains iron , which gives it a red colour . This stone is known as Calverley Stone . The house is in the shape of a letter " H " , with the main hall forming the bar of the " H " . The main elevation of the house faces west . The building is three storeys high , with a half @-@ basement . It has five gables on the main elevation . The roof is of an A @-@ frame construction , clad in Kentish peg tiles . The south wing houses the library , the second longest room in Kent at 93 feet ( 28 m ) long , exceeded only by the Gallery at Knole House , Sevenoaks . The main staircase is in the south wing . The north wing housed service rooms and the kitchen , with a parlour at the rear . 
 As built , the house measured almost 100 feet ( 30 m ) in depth internally . The hall measures 23 feet ( 7 @.@ 0 m ) by 47 feet ( 14 @.@ 3 m ) . To its north was a 22 feet ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) by 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) drawing room . The dining room , located to the right of the hall measured 22 feet ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) by 33 feet ( 10 m ) . As extended , Somerhill provides around 49 @,@ 000 square feet ( 4 @,@ 600 m2 ) of floorspace . 
 The house shows the transition from medieval architecture , in which the hall was the main living and entertaining room , to the more modern plan , where the hall became a reception room . Somerhill is one of the earliest examples of this . When built , this was an innovative design . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 17th century = = = 
 The land that Somerhill was built on originally formed part of the estate of South Frith , one of two deer parks in the Lowey of Tonbridge . At one time the estate covered 6 @,@ 500 acres ( 2 @,@ 600 ha ) . Built on the site of an earlier mansion , and designed by John Thorpe , the house was built between 1611 and 1613 , dates which are to be found on the surviving leaden rainwater heads . Somerhill was built for Richard de Burgh . The design was based on that of the Villa <unk> , <unk> , Italy , which was designed by Palladio . 
 De Burgh died in 1636 , and Somerhill passed to his son Ulick . Following the Battle of Naseby in 1645 , Somerhill was sequestrated by Parliament , which gave it to Robert , Earl of Essex . On his death in September 1646 , Parliament gave Somerhill to John Bradshaw . John Evelyn , who visited Somerhill on 29 May 1652 , described Somerhill as " situated on an eminent hill , with a park , but has nothing else extraordinary " . 
 Following the Restoration of Charles II to the throne in 1660 , Somerhill was given to Margaret , Viscountess Muskerry , the daughter of Ulick de Burgh . Lady Muskerry had extravagant tastes , and gradually sold off much of the lands of South Frith to various people . She died in 1698 , and Somerhill passed to her son , John Villiers , who styled himself the Earl of Buckingham . Villers sold the Manor of South Frith to one <unk> . Some 1 @,@ 200 acres ( 490 ha ) of grounds was sold separately to Abraham Hill of Sutton at Hone , Kent . Somerhill itself had been let to a warrener . 
 = = = 18th century = = = 
 <unk> sold Somerhill to one Cave , who sold it in 1712 to John Woodgate of Penshurst . Woodgate lived in the house , and on his death it passed to his son Henry , who lived at Somerhill until 1769 , and then within the town of Tonbridge until his death in 1787 . On 5 August 1752 , the house was visited by Horace Walpole , who described its setting as commanding " a vast landscape , beautifully wooded and has quantities of large old trees to shelter itself " . By 1766 , Somerhill was in a " ruinous " state . It was to remain derelict throughout the century . In 1787 , Somerhill passed to William Woodgate , who was Henry Woodgate 's nephew and had been living at Somerhill . In 1792 , Woodgate was one of three partners who set up The Tonbridge Bank . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 In the spring of 1810 , J. M. W. Turner made a drawing of Somerhill , and then in 1811 he painted it for the <unk> , choosing a view across the lake in the grounds , with the house in the distance . The painting , which was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1811 , is now in the National Galleries of Scotland , and the sketchbook containing his earlier drawing is at the Tate . 
 Following the end of the Napoleonic Wars and the subsequent agricultural depression , coupled with the collapse of the Tonbridge Bank in 1812 , Woodgate was declared bankrupt in 1816 . In that year , Woodgate offered Somerhill for sale to the Duke of Wellington , who declined to buy it as the foxhunting was not good enough for his liking . Somerhill was bought from the descendants of William Woodgate in November 1819 by James Alexander , MP . By 1830 , Somerhill had been substantially repaired , and new landscaping was undertaken . In 1832 , Anthony Salvin was engaged to make improvements to the house , but retaining its original style . During the severe winter of 1835 @-@ 36 , skating was possible on the lake at Somerhill for four weeks . 
 In 1842 , Tonbridge Priory was demolished to make way for the building of the first railway station . A stone coffin from the priory was bought by Alexander and taken to Somerhill , where it can still be seen . In 1849 , Somerhill was bought by Sir Isaac Goldsmid , who passed it on to his son Frederick in 1859 . 
 The lake at Somerhill , which Turner had painted in 1811 , was used to supply ice for the house , as a watering place for the estate 's cattle , and for recreational boating . The lake was fed by the Calverley Stream , which flowed through the grounds of Somerhill . In 1860 , the stream became polluted by sewage discharged upstream from a sewage works owned by the Tunbridge Wells Improvement Commissioners , rendering the water in the lake unfit for use . Frederick Goldsmid tried to get the Commissioners to stop fouling the stream , but they refused to act and the situation worsened . Finally , in 1865 , Goldsmid sued the Commissioners . They denied responsibility , claiming that the pollution was not caused by their sewage works but by a farm downstream . The court rejected their claim and ruled in Goldsmid 's favor . 
 In 1866 , Somerhill passed to Frederick 's son Sir Julian Goldsmid ( later known as d 'Avigdor @-@ Goldsmid ) . Sir Julian returned the house to something nearer its original condition . In 1879 , Somerhill was extended as more room was needed to accommodate Goldsmid 's large family – he had eight daughters . The stable courtyard was rebuilt at this time , with the date 1879 being cast in the rainwater heads . The building work took until 1897 to complete . The expansion made Somerhill the second largest house in Kent , after Knole House , Sevenoaks . Somerhill House itself covers an area of 2 ½ acres ( 1 ha ) . 
 A ghost in the form of a lady in white is said to haunt the Julian staircase , located in the Victorian part of the house . D 'Avigdor @-@ Goldsmid allowed people to drive their carriages through the grounds of Somerhill , although the house was not open to the public . Sir Julian died in 1896 , and Somerhill passed to Sir Osmond d 'Avigdor @-@ Goldsmid . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 In 1912 , there was an army camp held in the grounds of Somerhill . The soldiers were housed in bell tents . On Sir Osmond 's death in 1940 , it then passed to his eldest son Sir Henry . During the Second World War , Somerhill was the site of a Prisoner of War camp , known as POW Camp No. 40 . Italian POWs were amongst those housed at Somerhill . The Army were in possession of Somerhill from 1940 – 49 . Squatters occupied some of the 40 @-@ plus huts in 1948 , they were locked in by the Colonel in charge of the camp at the time . 
 Post @-@ war , the house was the scene of much lavish entertaining . Lady Rosemary d 'Avigdor @-@ Goldsmid likened it to a hotel , " except that the guests didn 't pay ! " Amongst the distinguished visitors were John Betjeman , Hugh Casson , David Niven and Enoch Powell . The house was listed on 20 October 1954 . It is assessed as Grade I. On 19 September 1963 , the d 'Avigdor @-@ Goldsmid 's daughter Sarah was drowned in an accident , which occurred off Rye , East Sussex . Artist Marc Chagall was commissioned to design a set of stained glass windows in All Saints ' Church , <unk> , in her memory . 
 In 1976 , Somerhill passed to Sir Henry 's surviving daughter Chloe , who lived at Hadlow Place Farm , Hadlow . She sold Somerhill in 1980 , and it was sold thrice more in the next eight years . The house was damaged in a storm and also by neglect and vandalism . Somerhill was bought by Mr & Mrs Weir in 1979 . The <unk> removed the carved wooden hall screen and also large areas of panelling in the entrance hall and the salon upstairs . A sale of the contents of Somerhill was held by Sotheby 's on 23 and 24 June 1981 . Somerhill was advertised for sale in May 1984 at a price in excess of £ 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 . Beginning in 1988 , the house was extensively restored with assistance from English Heritage . The works were undertaken by R. <unk> & Sons of <unk> , who celebrated their 400th anniversary in 1991 with a party held at Somerhill as the restoration was completed . Fielden and Mawson were the architects for the work . 
 In 1993 , The Schools at Somerhill moved to Somerhill House , having previously been at Tunbridge Wells . The Schools at Somerhill comprise three schools in one location . Somerhill Pre @-@ Prep is for boys and girls aged 3 – 6 . Derwent Lodge is for girls aged 6 – 11 and Yardley Court is for boys aged 6 – 13 . In 1998 , the attic rooms were converted to provide classrooms and art room . A former granary has also been converted to classrooms , whilst some stables have been converted to workshops . Also in that year , a bridge over the lake in the grounds of Somerhill was added to the Buildings at Risk Register by Tunbridge Wells Borough Council , in whose area Somerhill falls . In 2000 , the central span between the old stable courtyard and the stable courtyard was reinstated at a cost of £ 720 @,@ 000 to provide accommodation for Somerhill Pre @-@ Prep School and administrative offices . Also in that year , planning permission was granted for the building of a sports hall on the top sports terrace . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 The reinstated central span opened in January 2001 . The new sports hall was completed in 2002 at a cost of £ 1 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 . An artificial turf pitch was added in 2003 . In 2004 , the bridge over the lake was repaired at a cost of £ 170 @,@ 000 , aided by a grant of £ 32 @,@ 000 from Tunbridge Wells Borough Council . In 2006 , planning permission was granted for the conversion of the walled garden into a dining hall and indoor swimming pool . Work began the next year and was completed in January 2009 . The dining room and swimming pool were given a Design Award by Tonbridge Civic Society in 2009 . As a working school , Somerhill House is not normally open to the public . It has been open as part of Heritage Open Days . Somerhill House was open in 2006 , and also in 2010 . The grounds of Somerhill contain 152 acres ( 62 ha ) of land . 
 = = Listed buildings = = 
 The table below shows the status of the various listed buildings in the grounds of Somerhill House . 
 = John McCauley = 
 Air Marshal Sir John Patrick Joseph McCauley , KBE , CB ( 18 March 1899 – 3 February 1989 ) was a senior commander in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . He served as Chief of the Air Staff from 1954 to 1957 . A Duntroon graduate , McCauley spent four years in the Australian Military Forces before transferring to the RAAF in 1924 . He was Director of Training from 1936 to 1938 , and commanded engineering and flying training schools for the first eighteen months of World War II . Having been promoted to group captain in 1940 , he was posted to Singapore in June 1941 to take charge of all RAAF units defending the area . He earned praise for his efforts in attacking invading Japanese forces before the fall of Singapore , and for his dedication in evacuating his men . After serving as Deputy Chief of the Air Staff in 1942 – 44 , he was appointed to a senior operational role with the Royal Air Force 's 2nd Tactical Air Force in Europe , where he saw out the rest of the war . 
 Following the end of hostilities , McCauley again became Deputy Chief of the Air Staff . In 1947 he was promoted to air vice marshal and appointed Chief of Staff at British Commonwealth Occupation Force Headquarters in Japan . Returning to Australia in June 1949 , he served as the last Air Officer Commanding ( AOC ) Eastern Area and the inaugural AOC Home Command ( now Air Command ) . Raised to air marshal , he took up the position of Chief of the Air Staff in January 1954 , and was knighted a year later . During his tenure in the RAAF 's senior role , McCauley focused on potential deployments to Southeast Asia — particularly Vietnam — and threats from the north , commencing redevelopment of RAAF Base Darwin and recommending purchase of a light supersonic bomber to replace the Air Force 's English Electric Canberra . After retiring from military life in March 1957 , he chaired various community and welfare organisations , serving as Federal President of the Air Force Association for ten years . He died in Sydney in 1989 , aged 89 . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Born in Sydney on 18 March 1899 , McCauley went to school at St Joseph 's College , Hunters Hill , before entering the Royal Military College , Duntroon , in 1916 . He graduated as a lieutenant in 1919 , and spent the next four years in staff positions with the Permanent Military Forces , including a posting to Britain . In January 1924 , he transferred to the Royal Australian Air Force as a flying officer , undertaking the pilots ' course at RAAF Point Cook , Victoria . He was nicknamed " Black Jack " in tribute to his dark looks , but a " shaky reputation " as an aviator also earned him the epithet " Crasher " . On 10 November 1925 , he married <unk> Burke ; the couple had a son and two daughters . By 1926 , McCauley was back in Britain , studying at the Royal Navy College , Greenwich , and the RAF Armament and Gunnery School . He returned to Australia in 1928 , and was assigned to the staff of RAAF Headquarters , Melbourne . 
 Promoted to squadron leader , McCauley was posted a third time to Britain in 1933 , graduating from RAF Staff College , Andover , and qualifying as a flight instructor at Central Flying School , Wittering . The following year he was attached to the Air Ministry in London . Returning to Australia in 1935 , McCauley joined the RAAF 's Directorate of Training . That September , he initiated a requirement for all air bases to draw up plans for local defence . He also inaugurated operational @-@ level policy for the Air Force , ordering units to draft doctrine relevant to their combat roles , such as " Striking " for No. 1 Squadron and " Army Co @-@ operation " for No. 3 Squadron . Described as " a great leader , with a great deal of force " , McCauley took over as Director of Training in 1936 . He gained his Bachelor of Commerce degree at Melbourne University the same year , having studied part @-@ time since 1929 . His tertiary qualification was unusual for a general duties officer in the pre @-@ war Air Force , whose pilots generally " valued little beyond flying ability " . By 1939 he had been raised to wing commander and was commanding officer and chief flying instructor of the cadet wing at Point Cook . 
 = = World War II = = 
 McCauley 's seniority and instructional experience kept him in Australia on training assignments for the first eighteen months of World War II . From March to October 1940 , he served as the inaugural commander of No. 1 Engineering School at Ascot Vale , Victoria . Promoted to group captain , he then took over No. 1 Service Flying Training School at Point Cook until July 1941 , when he handed over to Wing Commander Elwyn King . During McCauley 's tenure , the number of aircraft operated by the school doubled from its initial complement of 52 , and monthly flying hours increased from fewer than 1 @,@ 000 to more than 1 @,@ 800 . 
 During the Malayan Campaign in 1941 – 42 , McCauley was in charge of RAAF units under Britain 's Far East Air Force ( FEAF ) . As station commander at RAF Sembawang in north @-@ east Singapore from August 1941 , he personally supervised the training and operations of Nos. 1 and 8 Squadrons , flying Lockheed Hudson light bombers . He also warned Air Chief Marshal Sir Robert Brooke @-@ Popham , the FEAF 's Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , of the weaknesses of the Allied air defences . Deployed to forward bases on the Malay Peninsula , McCauley 's Hudsons were the first Allied aircraft to spot Japanese troop transports converging off Indochina on 6 December , and they attacked the fleet in the face of heavy defensive fire . By Christmas , as the Allies retreated from Malaya , Sembawang was " the busiest airfield on Singapore island " , with two Dutch Glenn Martin bomber squadrons in addition to the remnants of the Hudson units , along with Nos. 21 and 453 Squadrons ( merged due to losses as No. 21 / 453 Squadron ) , operating obsolescent Brewster Buffalos . On 29 January 1942 , McCauley took over airfield <unk> near Palembang in Sumatra , commanding all Commonwealth air operations emanating from the base . With his available aircraft augmented by Hawker Hurricanes and Bristol Blenheims , he conducted attacks on enemy convoys before evacuating the area on 15 February 1942 , the day that Singapore surrendered . After communications between himself and local RAF group headquarters were cut , McCauley was left to his own devices to make final arrangements for the demolition of equipment and departure of staff . He had earlier intervened to prevent RAF headquarters from dissolving No. 21 Squadron and using its personnel as a labour force on Sumatra , instead arranging their transport as a unit to Batavia , where they subsequently embarked for Australia . McCauley led the last party to depart Palembang , and was praised for organising the safe passage back to Australia of many Commonwealth air force personnel . 
 After his return to Australia late in February 1942 , McCauley briefly served as Senior Air Staff Officer at North @-@ Western Area Headquarters in Darwin , Northern Territory . He took up the position of Deputy Chief of the Air Staff ( DCAS ) in May , and was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) in the 1943 King 's Birthday Honours , promulgated on 2 June . The honour recognised the " courage , ability , and qualities of leadership " he displayed under " trying and difficult conditions during a period of service in the Far East " . The following month , he was promoted to temporary air commodore . During an inspection of No. 10 Group at Nadzab in March 1944 , McCauley learned that unless the Australian formation was able to increase its operational rate of effort , its units would be withdrawn from their forward airfields . As a result , RAAF Headquarters increased the supply of pilots and equipment to the group , which was then able to meet , and later exceed , the rate of effort achieved by comparable US Fifth Air Force units . At around this time , he also instigated a research program to determine a suitable formula for rotating and relieving ground staff , as well as aircrew , in the tropics . 
 Completing his term as DCAS , McCauley was posted to the European theatre in November 1944 , serving for the remainder of the war as Air Commodore ( Operations ) , 2nd Tactical Air Force RAF ( 2nd TAF ) . The British had actively sought him for this particular appointment , which he commenced in December at the formation 's Brussels headquarters . The role involved him in the direction of over 70 Commonwealth and European squadrons in operations against Germany , and was " unique " for an RAAF officer during the war . He left 2nd TAF in July 1945 and returned to Australia later that year . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 Among a small coterie of wartime RAAF commanders earmarked for further senior roles , McCauley retained his rank of air commodore following the cessation of hostilities . He served again as Deputy Chief of the Air Staff in 1946 – 47 . Promoted to air vice marshal , he was Chief of Staff to Lieutenant General Horace Robertson at British Commonwealth Occupation Force Headquarters in Japan from June 1947 to June 1949 . In this post he was preceded and succeeded by two other Duntroon graduates , Air Vice Marshals Frank Bladin and Alan Charlesworth respectively . Upon his return to Australia , McCauley was made Air Officer Commanding Eastern Area . During the Malayan Emergency , he formed RAAF aircraft assigned for deployment into No. 90 ( Composite ) Wing , as directed by Chief of the Air Staff Air Marshal George Jones , to ensure that they would operate with a degree of autonomy rather than be dispersed throughout other Allied groups . He was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath ( CB ) in the 1951 Birthday Honours . 
 In January 1952 , Air Marshal Jones was succeeded by Air Marshal Sir Donald Hardman of the Royal Air Force . The decision by Prime Minister Robert Menzies to appoint a British officer as CAS caused controversy in Australia , compounded by his stated reason that there was " no RAAF officer of sufficient age , or operational experience , to take the post of Chief of the Air Staff " , which ignored the wartime records of figures like McCauley . Hardman changed the structure of the Air Force from one based on geographical area to one based on function , hence McCauley 's Eastern Area Command evolved into Home Command ( now Air Command ) in 1953 . Promoted to air marshal , McCauley took over from Hardman as Chief of the Air Staff when the latter 's two @-@ year appointment ended in January 1954 . According to official RAAF historian Alan Stephens , McCauley was " just as ready to become CAS in 1952 as he was in 1954 " , while a contemporary observer declared that " seldom has a better @-@ equipped officer led a branch of the Australian services " . He was the first of four former Duntroon cadets to successively head up the Air Force between 1954 and 1969 , followed by Air Marshals Frederick Scherger , Valston Hancock , and Alister Murdoch . 
 McCauley was raised to Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( KBE ) in the 1955 New Year Honours . In October 1956 , he gave a presentation on air power concepts that was attended by Prime Minister Menzies , as well as the other Australian service chiefs . McCauley identified Malaya and Indochina , particularly Vietnam , as likely areas for future RAAF deployments , advocating a continued presence in Singapore in view of its strategic importance to the defence of Australia , as he had witnessed first @-@ hand during World War II . He also recommended that a supersonic light bomber replace the straight @-@ winged and obsolescent English Electric Canberra , primarily for interdiction in Southeast Asia . McCauley 's tenure as CAS saw the beginning of a trend for the RAAF to equip with US aircraft types in preference to British types , with recommendations being put forward for the F @-@ 104 Starfighter ( though in the event the French Dassault Mirage III was purchased ) and C @-@ 130 Hercules . This stemmed partly from his inspection of Allied air force units during the Korean War , when he observed that those employing American hardware were far better served with spare parts and replacement aircraft than those with British equipment . Some of his senior commanders had urged replacing the Canberra with Avro Vulcan heavy bombers , but McCauley did not pursue this option , preferring to concentrate in the short term on new fighter technology . He also made a point of supporting the Australian aircraft industry wherever feasible . 
 McCauley instigated the redevelopment of RAAF Base Darwin in the Northern Territory as the first stage of a forward defence strategy . He aimed to make Darwin the " main Australian base for war " and a launching point for deployments to Southeast Asia , rather than simply a transit station . Over the next ten years , No. 5 Airfield Construction Squadron transformed the base 's runways , buildings and other infrastructure into a modern facility capable of handling major operations . This concept was taken another step by McCauley 's successor as CAS , Air Marshal Scherger , who conceived a series of front @-@ line " bare bases " across Northern Australia , beginning with plans for RAAF Base Tindal in 1959 . Alan Stephens later described McCauley and Scherger as " among the RAAF 's better chiefs " . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After his retirement from the RAAF on 18 March 1957 , McCauley became active in community welfare organisations , chairing campaigns for the National Heart Foundation , Freedom From Hunger , the Royal Humane Society , and the Cancer Council in the late 1950s and early 1960s . From 1964 until 1974 , he served as Federal President of the Air Force Association . In this role he endorsed the initial proposal , featuring monumental statues of airmen and ground crew , for the Royal Australian Air Force Memorial to be located on ANZAC Parade , Canberra . The design ultimately approved by the final selection panel , however , was an abstract sculpture that was subsequently described as reflecting a " comprehensive failure to understand the nature of air force service " . McCauley visited RAAF units in Vietnam in October 1966 . In 1970 , he played a leading role in organising the Australian Services Council ( later the Australian Veterans and Defence Services Council ) to co @-@ ordinate lobbying efforts for various veterans ' groups , and became its first chairman . He was also President of the Good Neighbour Council of New South Wales from 1966 to 1975 . Aged 89 , McCauley died in Sydney 's St Vincent 's Hospital on 3 February 1989 , following a stroke . He was survived by his three children ; his wife had died two years earlier . 
 = George Formby = 
 George Formby , OBE ( born George Hoy Booth ; 26 May 1904 – 6 March 1961 ) , was an English actor , singer @-@ songwriter and comedian who became known to a worldwide audience through his films of the 1930s and 1940s . On stage , screen and record he sang light , comical songs , usually playing the ukulele or <unk> , and became the UK 's highest @-@ paid entertainer . 
 Born in Wigan , Lancashire , he was the son of George Formby Sr , from whom he later took his stage name . After an early career as a stable boy and jockey , Formby took to the music hall stage after the early death of his father in 1921 . His early performances were taken exclusively from his father 's act , including the same songs , jokes and characters . In 1923 he made two career @-@ changing decisions – he purchased a ukulele , and married Beryl Ingham , a fellow performer who became his manager and transformed his act . She insisted that he appear on stage formally dressed , and introduced the ukulele to his performance . He started his recording career in 1926 and , from 1934 , he increasingly worked in film to develop into a major star by the late 1930s and 1940s , and became the UK 's most popular entertainer during those decades . The media historian Brian McFarlane writes that on film , Formby portrayed gormless Lancastrian innocents who would win through against some form of villainy , gaining the affection of an attractive middle @-@ class girl in the process . 
 During the Second World War Formby worked extensively for the Entertainments National Service Association ( ENSA ) , and entertained civilians and troops , and by 1946 it was estimated that he had performed in front of three million service personnel . After the war his career declined , although he toured the Commonwealth , and continued to appear in variety and pantomime . His last television appearance was in December 1960 , two weeks before the death of Beryl . He surprised people by announcing his engagement to a school teacher seven weeks after Beryl 's funeral , but died in Preston three weeks later , at the age of 56 ; he was buried in Warrington , alongside his father . 
 Formby 's biographer , Jeffrey Richards , considers that the actor " had been able to embody simultaneously Lancashire , the working classes , the people , and the nation " . Formby was considered Britain 's first properly home @-@ grown screen comedian . He was an influence on future comedians — particularly Charlie Drake and Norman Wisdom — and , culturally , on entertainers such as the Beatles , who referred to him in their music . Since his death Formby has been the subject of five biographies , two television specials and two works of public sculpture . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life : 1904 – 21 = = = 
 George Formby was born George Hoy Booth at 3 Westminster Street , Wigan , Lancashire , on 26 May 1904 . He was the eldest of seven surviving children born to James Lawler Booth and his wife Eliza , née Hoy , although this marriage was bigamous because Formby Sr was still married to his first wife , Martha Maria Salter , a twenty @-@ year @-@ old music hall performer . Booth was a successful music hall comedian and singer who performed under the name George Formby ( he is now known as George Formby Sr ) . Formby Sr suffered from a chest ailment , identified variously as bronchitis , asthma or tuberculosis , and would use the cough as part of the humour in his act , saying to the audience , " <unk> , I 'm a bit tight tonight " , or " coughing better tonight " . One of his main characters was that of John Willie , an " archetypal Lancashire lad " . In 1906 Formby Sr was earning £ 35 a week at the music halls , which rose to £ 325 a week by 1920 , and Formby grew up in an affluent home . Formby Sr was so popular that Marie Lloyd , the influential music hall singer and actress , would only watch two acts : his and that of Dan Leno . 
 Formby was born blind owing to an obstructive caul , although his sight was restored during a violent coughing fit or sneeze when he was a few months old . After briefly attending school — at which he did not prosper , and did not learn to read or write — Formby was removed from formal education at the age of seven and sent to become a stable boy , briefly in Wiltshire and then in Middleham , Yorkshire . Formby Sr sent his son away to work as he was worried Formby would watch him on stage ; he was against Formby following in his footsteps , saying " one fool in the family is enough " . After a year working at Middleham , he was apprenticed to Thomas Scourfield at Epsom , where he ran his first professional races at the age of 10 , when he weighed less than 4 stone ( 56 lb ; 25 kg ) . 
 In 1915 Formby Sr allowed his son to appear on screen , taking the lead in By the Shortest of Heads , a thriller directed by Bert Haldane in which Formby played a stable boy who outwits a gang of villains and wins a £ 10 @,@ 000 prize when he comes first in a horse race . The film is now considered lost , with the last @-@ known copy having been destroyed in 1940 . Later in 1915 , and with the closure of the English racing season because of the First World War , Formby moved to Ireland where he continued as a jockey until November 1918 . Later that month he returned to England and raced for Lord Derby at his Newmarket stables . Formby continued as a jockey until 1921 , although he never won a race . 
 = = = Beginning a stage career : 1921 – 34 = = = 
 On 8 February 1921 Formby Sr succumbed to his bronchial condition and died , at the age of 45 ; he was buried in the Catholic section of Warrington Cemetery . After his father 's funeral Eliza took the young Formby to London to help him cope with his grief . While there , they visited the Victoria Palace Theatre — where Formby Sr had previously been so successful — and saw a performance by the Tyneside comedian Tommy Dixon . Dixon was performing a copy of Formby Sr 's act , using the same songs , jokes , costumes and mannerisms , and billed himself as " The New George Formby " , a name which angered Eliza and Formby even more . The performance prompted Formby to follow in his father 's profession , a decision which was supported by Eliza . As he had never seen his father perform live , Formby found the imitation difficult and had to learn his father 's songs from records , and the rest of his act and jokes from his mother . 
 On 21 March 1921 Formby gave his first professional appearance in a two @-@ week run at the Hippodrome in Earlestown , Lancashire , where he received a fee of £ 5 a week . In the show he was billed as George Hoy , using his mother 's maiden name — he explained later that he did not want the Formby name to appear in small print . His father 's name was used in the posters and advertising , George Hoy being described as " Comedian . ( son of George Formby ) " . While still appearing in Earlestown Formby was hired to appear at the Moss Empire chain of theatres for £ 17 10s a week . His first night was unsuccessful and he later said of it , " I was the first turn , three minutes , died the death of a dog " . He toured around venues in Northern England , although he was not well received , and was booed and hissed while performing in Blyth , Northumberland . As a result he experienced frequent periods of unemployment — up to three months at one point . Formby spent two years as a support act touring round the northern halls , and although he was poorly paid , his mother supported him financially . 
 In 1923 Formby started to play the ukulele , although the exact circumstances of how he came to play the instrument are unknown , and he introduced it into his act during a run at the Alhambra Theatre in Barnsley . When the songs — still his father 's material — were well received , he changed his stage name to George Formby , and stopped using the John Willie character . Another significant event was his appearance in Castleford , West Yorkshire , where appearing on the same bill was Beryl Ingham , an Accrington @-@ born champion <unk> and actress who had won the All England Step Dancing title at the age of 11 . Beryl , who had formed a dancing act with her sister , May , called " The Two Violets " , had a low opinion of Formby 's act , and later said that " if I 'd had a bag of rotten tomatoes with me I 'd have thrown them at him " . Formby and Beryl entered into a relationship and married two years later , on 13 September 1924 , at a register office in Wigan , with Formby 's aunt and uncle as witnesses . Upon hearing the news , Eliza insisted on the couple having a church wedding , which followed two months later . 
 Beryl took over as George 's manager , and changed aspects of his act , including the songs and jokes . She instructed him on how to use his hands , and how to work his audience . She also persuaded him to change his stage dress to black tie — although he appeared in a range of other costumes too — and to take lessons in how to play the ukulele properly . By June 1926 he was proficient enough to earn a one @-@ off record deal — negotiated by Beryl — to sing six of his father 's songs for the Edison Bell / Winner label . Formby spent the next few years touring , largely in the north , but also appearing at the Shepherd 's Bush Empire , his official London debut . Although he had a further recording session in October 1929 , performing two songs for Dominion Records , " Beryl 's avaricious demands would prevent any serious contract from coming George 's way " , according to David Bret , Formby 's biographer . That changed in 1932 , when Formby signed a three @-@ year deal with Decca Records . One of the songs he recorded in July was " Chinese Laundry Blues " , telling the story of Mr Wu , which became one of his standard songs , and part of a long @-@ running series of songs about the character . Over the course of his career Formby went on to record over 200 songs , around 90 of which were written by Fred Cliffe and Harry Gifford . In the 1932 winter season Formby appeared in his first pantomime , Babes in the Wood , in Bolton , after which he toured with the George Formby Road Show around the north of England , with Beryl acting as the <unk> ; the show also toured in 1934 . 
 = = = <unk> film career : 1934 – 40 = = = 
 With Formby 's growing success on stage , Beryl decided it was time for him to move into films . In 1934 she approached the producer Basil Dean , the head of Associated Talking Pictures ( ATP ) . Although he expressed an interest in Formby , he did not like the associated demands from Beryl . She also met the representative of Warner Bros. in the UK , Irving Asher , who was dismissive , saying that Formby was " too stupid to play the bad guy and too ugly to play the hero " . Three weeks later Formby was approached by John E. Blakeley of Blakeley 's Productions , who offered him a one @-@ film deal . 
 The film , Boots ! Boots ! , was shot on a budget of £ 3 @,@ 000 in a one @-@ room studio in Albany Street , London . Formby played the John Willie character , while Beryl also appeared , and the couple were paid £ 100 for the two weeks ' work , plus 10 per cent of the profits . The film followed a revue format , and Jo Botting , writing for the British Film Institute , describes it as having a " wafer @-@ thin plot " that is " almost incidental " . Botting also considers the film has " poor sound quality , static scene set @-@ ups and [ a ] lack of sets " , and while it did not impress the critics , audience figures were high . Formby followed this up with Off the Dole in 1935 , again for Blakeley , who had re @-@ named his company Mancunian Films . The film cost £ 3 @,@ 000 to make , and earned £ 80 @,@ 000 at the box office . As with Boots ! Boots ! , the film was in a revue format , and Formby again played John Willie , with Beryl as his co @-@ star . According to Formby 's biographer , Jeffrey Richards , the two films for Blakeley " are an invaluable record of the pre @-@ cinematic Formby at work " . 
 The success of the pictures led Dean to offer Formby a seven @-@ year contract with ATP , which resulted in the production of 11 films , although Dean 's fellow producer , Michael Balcon , considered Formby to be " an odd and not particularly loveable character " . The first film from the deal was released in 1935 . No Limit features Formby as an entrant in the Isle of Man annual Tourist Trophy ( TT ) motorcycle race . Monty Banks directed , and Florence Desmond took the female lead . According to Richards , Dean did not try " to play down Formby 's Lancashire character " for the film , and employed Walter Greenwood , the Salford @-@ born author of the 1933 novel Love on the Dole , as the scriptwriter . Filming was troubled , with Beryl being difficult to everyone present . The writer Matthew Sweet describes the set as " a battleground " because of her actions , and Banks unsuccessfully requested that Dean bar Beryl from the studio . The Observer thought that parts of No Limit were " pretty dull stuff " , but the race footage was " shot and cut to a maximum of excitement " . Regarding the star of the film , the reviewer thought that " our Lancashire George is a grand lad ; he can gag and clown , play the banjo and sing with authority ... Still and all , he doesn 't do too bad . " The film was so popular it was reissued in 1938 , 1946 and 1957 . 
 The formula used for No Limit was repeated in his following works : Formby played " the urban ' little man ' defeated — but refusing to admit it " . He portrayed a good @-@ natured , but accident @-@ prone and incompetent Lancastrian , who was often in a skilled trade , or the services . The plots were geared to Formby trying to achieve success in a field unfamiliar to him ( in horse racing , the TT Races , as a spy or a policeman ) , and by winning the affections of a middle @-@ class girl in the process . Interspersed throughout each film is a series of songs by Formby , in which he plays the banjo , <unk> or ukulele . The songs are , in the words of the academic Brian McFarlane , " unpretentiously skilful in their balance between broad comedy and action , laced with ... [ Formby 's ] shy ordinariness " . 
 No Limit was followed by Keep Your Seats , Please in 1936 , which was again directed by Banks with Desmond returning as the co @-@ star . Tensions arose in pre @-@ production with Banks and some of the cast requesting to Dean that Beryl be banned from the set . Tempers had also become strained between Formby and Desmond , who were not on speaking terms except to film scenes . The situation became so bad that Dean avoided visiting his studios for the month of filming . The film contained the song " The Window Cleaner " ( popularly known as " When I 'm Cleaning Windows " ) , which was soon banned by the BBC . The corporation 's director John Reith stated that " if the public wants to listen to Formby singing his disgusting little ditty , they 'll have to be content to hear it in the cinemas , not over the nation 's airwaves " ; Formby and Beryl were furious with the block on the song . In May 1941 Beryl informed the BBC that the song was a favourite of the royal family , particularly Queen Mary , while a statement by Formby pointed out that " I sang it before the King and Queen at the Royal Variety Performance " . The BBC relented and started to broadcast the song . 
 When production finished on Keep Your Seats , Please , Beryl insisted that for the next film there should be " no Eye @-@ Ties [ sic ] and stuck @-@ up little <unk> involved " , referring to Banks and Desmond , respectively . Dean had tired of the on @-@ set squabbles , and for the third ATP film , Feather Your Nest , he appointed William Beaudine as the director , and Polly Ward , the niece of the music hall star Marie Lloyd , as the female lead . Bret describes the songs in the film as " comparatively bland " , but " with the exception of the one which would become immortal " : " Leaning on a Lamp @-@ post " . 
 By the time of the next production , Keep Fit in 1937 , Dean had begun to assemble a special team at Ealing Studios to help develop and produce the Formby films ; key among the members were the director Anthony Kimmins , who went on to direct five of Formby 's films . Kay Walsh was cast as the leading lady and , in the absences of Beryl from the set , Formby and Walsh had an affair , after she fell for his " flirtatious behaviour off @-@ camera " . Although Beryl was furious with Walsh , and tried to have her removed from the film , a showdown with Dean proved fruitless . Dean informed her that Walsh was to remain the lead in both Keep Fit , and in Formby 's next film ( I See Ice , 1938 ) ; to mollify her Dean raised Formby 's fee for the latter film to £ 25 @,@ 000 . 
 When filming concluded on I See Ice , Formby spent the 1937 summer season performing in the revue King Cheer at the Opera House Theatre , Blackpool , before appearing in a 12 @-@ minute slot in the Royal Variety Performance at the London Palladium that November . The popularity of his performances meant that in 1937 he was the top British male star in box office takings , a position he held every subsequent year until 1943 . Additionally , between 1938 and 1942 he was also the highest @-@ paid entertainer in Britain , and by the end of the 1930s was earning £ 100 @,@ 000 a year . In early 1938 Dean informed the Formbys that in the next film , It 's in the Air , Banks would return to direct and Walsh would again be the leading lady . Beryl objected strongly , and Kimmins continued his directorial duties , while Ward was brought in for the female lead . Beryl , as she did with all Formby 's female co @-@ stars , " read the ' keep @-@ your @-@ hands @-@ off @-@ my @-@ husband ' riot act " to the actress . In May , while filming It 's in the Air , Formby purchased a Rolls @-@ Royce , with the personalised number plate GF 1 . Every year afterwards he would purchase either a new Rolls Royce or Bentley , buying 26 over the course of his life . 
 In the autumn of 1938 Formby began work on Trouble Brewing , released the following year with 19 @-@ year @-@ old Googie Withers as the female lead ; Kimmins again directed . Withers later recounted that Formby did not speak to her until , during a break in filming when Beryl was not present , he whispered out of the corner of his mouth " I 'm sorry , love , but you know , I 'm not allowed to speak to you " , something she thought was " very sweet " . His second release of 1939 — shortly after the outbreak of the Second World War — was Come On George ! , which cast Pat Kirkwood in the female lead ; the pair disliked each other intensely , and neither of the Formbys liked several of the other senior cast members . Come On George ! was screened for troops serving in France before being released in Britain . 
 = = = Second World War : service with ENSA = = = 
 At the outbreak of the Second World War Dean left ATP and became the head of the Entertainments National Service Association ( ENSA ) , the organisation that provided entertainment to the British Armed Forces . Over the course of five months Formby requested to sign up for ENSA , but was denied ; Dean relented in February 1940 , and Formby was signed on a fixed salary of £ 10 per week , although he still remained under contact to ATP . He undertook his first tour in France in March , where he performed for members of the British Expeditionary Force . 
 The social research organisation Mass @-@ Observation recorded that Formby 's first film of 1940 , Let George Do It ! , gave a particularly strong boost to early @-@ war British civilian morale . In a dream sequence after being drugged , Formby 's character parachutes into a Nuremberg Rally and punches Hitler . According to Richards , the scene provided " the visual encapsulation of the people 's war with the English Everyman flooring the Nazi Superman " . The scene was so striking that the film became Formby 's first international release , in the US , under the title To Hell With Hitler , and in Moscow — where it was released in 1943 under the title Dinky Doo — it was shown to packed houses and received record box @-@ office takings for over ten months . The critics also praised the film , and the Kinematograph Weekly called it Formby 's " best performance to date " , and the film , " a box office certainty " . 
 Formby 's ENSA commitments were heavy , touring factories , theatres and concert halls around Britain . He also gave free concerts for charities and worthy causes , and raised £ 10 @,@ 000 for the Fleetwood Fund on behalf of the families of missing <unk> . He and Beryl also set up their own charities , such as the OK Club for Kids , whose aim was to provide cigarettes for Yorkshire soldiers , and the Jump Fund , to provide home @-@ knitted balaclavas , scarves and socks to servicemen . Formby also joined the Home Guard as a dispatch rider , where he took his duties seriously , and fitted them around his other work whenever he could . 
 Formby continued filming with ATP , and his second film of 1940 , Spare a Copper , was again focused on an aspect of the war , this time combating fifth columnists and saboteurs in a Merseyside dockyard . Cinema @-@ goers had begun to tire of war films , and his next venture , Turned Out Nice Again returned to less contentious issues , with Formby 's character caught in a domestic battle between his new wife and mother . Early in the filming schedule , he took time to perform in an ENSA show that was broadcast on the BBC from Aldwych tube station as Let the People Sing ; he sang four songs , and told the audience , " Don 't forget , it 's wonderful to be British ! " Towards the end of 1940 Formby tried to enlist for active military service , despite Beryl informing him that by being a member of ENSA he was already signed up . The examining board rejected him as being unfit , because he had sinusitis and arthritic toes . He spent the winter season in pantomime at the Opera House Theatre , Blackpool , portraying Idle Jack in Dick Whittington . When the season came to an end the Formbys moved to London and , in May 1941 , performed for the royal family at Windsor Castle . He had commissioned a new set of inoffensive lyrics for " When I 'm Cleaning Windows " , but was informed that he should sing the original , uncensored version , which was enjoyed by the royal party , particularly Queen Mary , who asked for a repeat of the song . King George VI presented Formby with a set of gold cuff links , and advised him to " wear them , not put them away " . 
 With the ATP contract at an end , Formby decided not to renew or push for an extension . Robert Murphy , in his study of wartime British cinema , points out that Balcon , Formby 's producer at the time , " seems to have made little effort to persuade him not to transfer his allegiance " , despite the box office success enjoyed by Let George Do It and Spare a Copper . Numerous offers came in , and Formby selected the American company Columbia Pictures , in a deal worth in excess of £ 500 @,@ 000 to make a minimum of six films — seven were eventually made . Formby set up his own company , Hillcrest Productions , to distribute the films , and had the final decision on the choice of director , scriptwriter and theme , while Columbia would have the choice of leading lady . Part of Formby 's reasoning behind the decision was a desire for parts with more character , something that would not have happened at ATP . 
 At the end of August 1941 production began on Formby 's first film for Columbia , South American George , which took six weeks to complete . Formby 's move to an American company was controversial , and although his popular appeal seemed unaffected , his " films were treated with increasing critical hostility " , according to John Mundy in his 2007 examination of British musical film . The reviewer for The Times wrote that the story was " confused " and considered that " there is not sufficient comic invention in the telling " of it . Murphy writes that the criticism " had more to do with the inadequate vehicles which he subsequently appeared in than in any diminution of his personal popularity . " 
 In early 1942 Formby undertook a three @-@ week , 72 @-@ show tour of Northern Ireland , largely playing to troops but also undertaking fund @-@ raising shows for charity — one at the Belfast Hippodrome raised £ 500 . He described his time in Ulster as " the pleasantest tour I 've ever undertaken " . He returned to the mainland by way of the Isle of Man , where he entertained the troops guarding the internment camps . After further charity shows — raising £ 8 @,@ 000 for a tank fund — Formby was the associate producer for the Vera Lynn film We 'll Meet Again ( 1943 ) . In March he also filmed Much Too Shy which was released in October that year . Although the film was poorly received by the critics , the public still attended in large numbers , and the film was profitable . 
 In the summer of 1942 Formby was involved in a controversy with the Lord 's Day Observance Society , who had filed law suits against the BBC for playing secular music on Sunday . The society began a campaign against the entertainment industry , claiming all theatrical activity on a Sunday were unethical , and cited a 1667 law which made it illegal . With 60 leading entertainers already avoiding Sunday working , Dean informed Formby that his stance would be crucial in avoiding a spread of the problem . Formby issued a statement , " I 'll hang up my uke on Sundays only when our lads stop fighting and getting killed on Sundays ... as far as the Lord 's Day Observance Society are concerned , they can mind their own bloody business . And in any case , what have they done for the war effort except get on everyone 's nerves ? " The following day it was announced that the pressure from the society was to be lifted . 
 At the end of the year Formby started filming Get Cracking , a story about the Home Guard , which was completed in under a month , the tight schedule brought about by an impending ENSA tour of the Mediterranean . Between the end of filming Get Cracking and the release of the film in May 1943 , Formby undertook a tour of Northern Scotland and the Orkney Islands , and had nearly completed shooting on his next film , Bell @-@ Bottom George . The reviewer for The Times opined that " Get Cracking , although a distinct improvement on other films in which Mr Formby has appeared , is cut too closely to fit the demands of an individual technique to achieve any real life of its own " . 
 Bell @-@ Bottom George was described 60 years later by the academic Baz Kershaw as being " unashamedly gay and ... peppered with homoerotic scenes " ; Bret concurs , and notes that " the majority of the cast and almost every one of the male extras was unashamedly gay " , The film was a hit with what Bret describes as Formby 's " surprisingly large , closeted gay following " . The reviewer for The Manchester Guardian was impressed with the film , and wrote that " there is a new neatness of execution and lightness of touch about this production ... while George himself can no longer be accused of trailing clouds of vaudevillian glory " . The reviewer also considered Formby " our first authentic and strictly indigenous film comedian " . After completing filming , the Formbys undertook a further ENSA tour . Although Dean personally disliked the Formbys , he greatly admired the tireless work they did for the organisation . In August Formby undertook a 53 @-@ day tour in a significant portion of the Mediterranean , including Italy , Sicily , Malta , Gibraltar , Libya , Tunisia , Egypt , Lebanon and Palestine ; visiting 750 @,@ 000 troops in thirteen countries , touring 25 @,@ 000 miles ( 40 @,@ 000 km ) in the process and returning to England in October . The couple travelled around the countryside in a Ford Mercury that Formby had purchased from the racing driver Sir Malcolm Campbell , which had been converted to sleep two in the back . 
 In January 1944 Formby described his experiences touring for ENSA in Europe and the Middle East in a BBC radio broadcast . He said that the troops " were worrying quite a lot about you folks at home , but we soon put them right about that . We told them that after four and a half years , Britain was still the best country to live in " . Shortly after he began filming He Snoops to Conquer — his fifth picture for Columbia — he was visited on set by the Dance Music Policy Committee ( <unk> ) , an organisation responsible for vetting music for broadcast , which had also been given responsibility for checking if music was sympathetic towards the enemy during the war . The <unk> interviewed Formby about three songs that had been included in Bell @-@ Bottom George : " Swim Little Fish " , " If I Had a Girl Like You " and " Bell @-@ Bottom George " . Formby was summoned to the BBC 's offices to perform his three songs in front of the committee , with his song checked against the available sheet music . A week later , on 1 February , the committee met and decided the songs were innocuous , although Formby was told that he would have to get further clearance if the lyrics were changed . Bret opines that he had been the victim of a plot by a member of the Variety Artists ' Federation , following Formby 's scathing comments on entertainers who were too scared to leave London to entertain the troops . The comments , which appeared in the forces magazine Union Jack , were then widely reported in the press in Britain . The Variety Artists ' Federation demanded that Formby release names , and threatened him with action if he did not do so , but he refused to give in to their pressure . 
 Formby went to Normandy in July 1944 in the vanguard of a wave of ENSA performers . He and Beryl travelled over on a rough crossing to Arromanches giving a series of impromptu concerts to troops in improvised conditions , including on the backs of farm carts and army lorries , or in bomb @-@ cratered fields . In one location the German front line was too close for him to perform , so he crawled into the trenches and told jokes with the troops there . He then boarded HMS Ambitious for his first scheduled concert before returning to France to continue his tour . During dinner with General Bernard Montgomery , whom he had met in North Africa , Formby was invited to visit the glider crews of 6th Airborne Division , who had been holding a series of bridges without relief for 56 days . He did so on 17 August in a one @-@ day visit to the front line bridges , where he gave nine shows , all standing beside a sandbag wall , ready to jump into a slit trench in case of problems ; much of the time his audience were in foxholes . After the four @-@ week tour of France , Formby returned home to start work on I Didn 't Do It ( released in 1945 ) , although he continued to work on ENSA concerts and tours in Britain . Between January and March 1945 , shortly after the release of He Snoops to Conquer , he left on an ENSA tour that took in Burma , India and Ceylon ( the latter is now Sri Lanka ) . The concerts in the Far East were his last for ENSA , and by the end of the war it was estimated that he had performed in front of three million service personnel . 
 = = = Post @-@ war career : 1946 – 52 = = = 
 In 1946 " With My Little Stick of Blackpool Rock " , which Formby had recorded in 1937 , began to cause problems at the BBC for broadcasts of Formby or his music . The producer of one of Formby 's live television programmes received a letter from a BBC manager that stated " We have no record that " With My Little Stick of Blackpool Rock " is banned . We do however know and so does Formby , that certain lines in the lyric must not be broadcast " . Other sources , including the BBC , state that the song was banned from being broadcast . Between July and October 1946 Formby filmed George in <unk> Street , which would be his final film . The story concerns the rivalry between two pubs : the Unicorn , bequeathed to Formby 's character , and the Lion , which was owned by his childhood sweetheart — played by Rosalyn Boulter — but run by an unscrupulous manager . Richards considers the film to have " symbolic significance " ; at the end , with the marriage between the two pub owners , Formby " bowed out of films unifying the nation <unk> , communally and <unk> " . 
 The film was less successful at the box office than his previous works , as audience tastes had changed in the post @-@ war world . Fisher opines that because of his tireless war work , Formby had become too synonymous with the war , causing the public to turn away from him , much as they had from the wartime British Prime Minister , Winston Churchill . Bret believes that post @-@ war audiences wanted intrigue , suspense and romance , through the films of James Mason , Stewart Granger , David Niven and Laurence Olivier . Bret also indicates that Formby 's cinematic decline was shared by similar performers , including Gracie Fields , Tommy Trinder and Will Hay . Formby 's biographers , Alan Randall and Ray Seaton , opine that in his late 40s , Formby " was greying and thickening out " , and was too old to play the innocent young Lancashire lad . The slump in his screen popularity hit Formby hard , and he became depressed . In early 1946 Beryl checked him into a psychiatric hospital under her maiden name , Ingham . He came out after five weeks , in time for a tour of Scandinavia in May . 
 On his return from Scandinavia Formby went into pantomime in Blackpool ; while there , he learned of his appointment as Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) in the 1946 King 's Birthday Honours . Although delighted , he was upset that Beryl went without official recognition , and said " if somethin ' was comin ' our way , ah 'd like it to be somethin ' Beryl could have shared " . Later that year the Formbys toured South Africa shortly before formal racial apartheid was introduced . While there they refused to play racially @-@ segregated venues . When Formby was cheered by a black audience after embracing a small black girl who had presented his wife with a box of chocolates , National Party leader Daniel François Malan ( who later introduced apartheid ) phoned to complain . Beryl replied " Why don 't you piss off , you horrible little man ? " 
 Formby returned to Britain at Christmas and appeared in Dick Whittington at the Grand Theatre , Leeds for nine weeks , and then , in February 1947 , he appeared in variety for two weeks at the London Palladium . Reviewing the show , The Times thought Formby was " more than ever the mechanized perfection of naive jollity . His smile , though fixed , is winning , and his songs ... are catchy " . In September that year he went on a 12 @-@ week tour of Australia and New Zealand . On his return he was offered more film roles , but turned them down , saying " when I look back on some of the films I 've done in the past it makes me want to cringe . I 'm afraid the days of being a clown are gone . From now on I 'm only going to do variety " . He began suffering increasing health problems including a gastric ulcer , and was treated for breathing problems from his heavy smoking . He finished the year in pantomime , appearing as Buttons in Cinderella at the Liverpool Empire Theatre , with Beryl playing <unk> . 
 In September 1949 Formby went on a 19 city coast @-@ to @-@ coast Canadian tour , from which he returned unwell . While subsequently appearing in Cinderella in Leeds , he collapsed in his dressing room . The attending doctor administered morphine , to which Formby briefly became addicted . Further poor health plagued him into 1950 , with a bout of dysentery , followed by appendicitis , after which he recuperated in Norfolk , before giving another royal command performance that April . He undertook two further international tours that year : one to Scandinavia , and a second to Canada . His earnings of Ca $ 200 @,@ 000 were heavily taxed : Canadian taxes took up $ 68 @,@ 000 , and UK taxes took 90 % of the balance . Formby complained to reporters about the level of taxation , saying " That 's it . So long as the government keeps bleeding me dry , I shan 't be in much of a hurry to work again ! " ; he and Beryl spent the rest of the year resting in Norfolk , in temporary retirement . 
 Formby was tempted back to work by the theatrical impresario Emile Littler , who offered him the lead role of Percy Piggott in Zip Goes a Million , a play based on the 1902 novel Brewster 's Millions by G. B. McCutcheon ; Formby was offered £ 1 @,@ 500 , plus a share of the box @-@ office takings . The show premiered at the Coventry Hippodrome in September 1951 before opening at the Palace Theatre , London on 20 October . The Times commented unfavourably , saying that although the audience were appreciative of the play , they " could not conceivably have detected a spark of wit in either the lyrics or the dialogue " ; the paper was equally dismissive of Formby , writing that " he has a deft way with a song or a banjo , but little or no finesse in his handling of a comic situation " . 
 A month after the play opened in London , Formby was the guest star on Desert Island Discs , where one of his choices was his father 's " Standing on the Corner of the Street " . In early 1952 Formby 's health began to decline and , on 28 April , he decided to withdraw from Zip Goes a Million . On the way to the theatre to inform Littler , Formby suffered a heart attack , although it took the doctors five days to diagnose the coronary and admit him to hospital . He was treated for both the attack , and his morphine addiction . He stayed in hospital for nine weeks before returning home to Lytham St Annes , Lancashire , where he announced his retirement . 
 = = = Health problems and intermittent work : 1952 – 60 = = = 
 During his recuperation Formby contracted gastroenteritis and had a suspected blood clot on his lung , after which he underwent an operation to clear a <unk> that was stuck in his throat . He had recovered sufficiently by April 1953 to undertake a 17 @-@ show tour of Southern Rhodesia ( now Zimbabwe ) , before a special appearance at the Southport Garrick Theatre . That September he turned on the Blackpool Illuminations . 
 From October to December 1953 Formby appeared at the London Palladium in 138 performances of the revue Fun and the Fair , with Terry @-@ Thomas and the Billy Cotton band ; Formby appeared in the penultimate act of the evening , with Terry @-@ Thomas closing the show . Although Formby 's act was well @-@ received , the show was not as successful as had been hoped , and Terry @-@ Thomas later wrote that " Formby put the audience in a certain mood which made them non @-@ receptive to whoever followed ... Even though my act was the star spot , I felt on this occasion that my being there was an anti @-@ climax " . He requested that the order be changed to have Formby close the show , but this was turned down . Formby suffered from stage fright during the show 's run — the first time he had suffered from the condition since his earliest days on stage — and his bouts of depression returned , along with stomach problems . 
 Formby took a break from work until mid @-@ 1954 , when he starred in the revue Turned Out Nice Again , in Blackpool . Although the show was initially scheduled to run for 13 weeks , it was cut short after six when Formby suffered again from dysentery and depression . He again announced his retirement , but continued to work . After some television appearances on Ask Pickles and Top of the Town , in late 1954 and early 1955 respectively , Formby travelled to South Africa for a tour , where Beryl negotiated an agreement with the South African premier Johannes <unk> to play in venues of Formby 's choice , and then sailed to Canada for a ten @-@ day series of performances . On the return voyage he contracted bronchial pneumonia , but still joined the cast of the non @-@ musical play Too Young to Marry on his arrival in Britain . 
 In August 1955 Beryl felt unwell and went for tests : she was diagnosed with cancer of the uterus and was given two years to live . The couple reacted to the news in different ways , and while Beryl began to drink heavily — up to a bottle of whisky a day to dull the pain — George began to work harder , and began a close friendship with a school teacher , Pat Howson . 
 Too Young to Marry toured between September 1955 and November 1956 , but still allowed Formby time to appear in the Christmas pantomime Babes in the Wood at the Liverpool Empire Theatre . The touring production was well received everywhere except in Scotland , where Formby 's attempted Scottish accent is thought to have put people off . For Christmas 1956 he appeared in his first London pantomime , playing Idle Jack in Dick Whittington and His Cat at the Palace Theatre , although he withdrew from the run in early February after suffering from laryngitis . According to Bret , Formby spent the remainder of 1957 " doing virtually nothing " , although he appeared in two television programmes , Val Parnell 's Saturday Spectacular in July and Top of the Bill in October . 
 From March 1958 Formby appeared in the musical comedy Beside the Seaside , a Holiday <unk> in Hull , Blackpool , Birmingham and Brighton . By the time it reached Brighton the play was playing to increasingly small audiences , and the run was cut short as a result . The play may not have been to southern audiences ' tastes — the plot centres on a northern family 's holiday in Blackpool — and the Brighton audiences may have been too small , but those in the north , particularly Blackpool , thought highly of it and the show was a nightly sell @-@ out . When the show closed Formby was disappointed , and vowed never to appear in another stage musical . The year 1958 was professionally quiet for him ; in addition to Beside the Seaside , he also worked in one @-@ off appearances in three television shows . He began 1959 by appearing in Val Parnell 's Spectacular : The Atlantic Showboat in January , and in April hosted his own show , Steppin ' Out With Formby . During the summer season he appeared at the Windmill Theatre , Great Yarmouth , although he missed two weeks of performances when he was involved in a car crash on the August Bank Holiday . When doctors examined him , they were concerned with his overall health , partly as a result of his forty cigarettes @-@ a @-@ day smoking habit . He also had high blood pressure , was overweight and had heart problems . 
 Formby 's final year of work was 1960 . That May he recorded his last session of songs , " Happy Go Lucky Me " and " Banjo Boy " , the latter of which peaked at number 40 in the UK Singles Chart . He then spent the summer season at the Queen 's Theatre in Blackpool in The Time of Your Life — a performance which was also broadcast by the BBC . One of the acts in the show was the singer Yana , with whom Formby had an affair , made easier because of Beryl 's absence from the theatre through illness . His final televised performance , a 35 @-@ minute BBC programme , The Friday Show : George Formby , was aired on 16 December . Bret considers the programme to be Formby 's " greatest performance — it was certainly his most sincere " , although reviewing for The Guardian , Mary Crozier thought it " too slow " . She went on to say " George Formby is really a music @-@ hall star , and it needs the warmth and sociability of the theatre to bring out his full appeal " . Beryl 's illness was worsening . Worn down by the strain , and feeling the need to escape , Formby took the part of Mr Wu in Aladdin in Bristol , having turned down a more lucrative part in Blackpool . 
 = = = Final months : a new romance , death and family dispute = = = 
 Two hours before the premiere of Aladdin — on Christmas Eve — Formby received a phone call from Beryl 's doctor , saying that she was in a coma and was not expected to survive the night ; Formby went through with the performance , and was told early the next morning that Beryl had died . Her cremation took place on 27 December , and an hour after the service Formby returned to Bristol to appear in that day 's matinee performance of Aladdin . He continued in the show until 14 January when a cold forced him to rest , on doctors ' advice . He returned to Lytham St Annes and communicated with Pat Howson ; she contacted his doctor and Formby was instructed to go to hospital , where he remained for the next two weeks . 
 On Valentine 's Day 1961 , seven weeks after Beryl 's death , Formby and Howson announced their engagement . Eight days later he suffered a further heart attack which was so severe that he was given the last rites of the Catholic Church on his arrival at hospital . He was revived and , from his hospital bed , he and Howson planned their wedding , which was due to take place in May . He was still there when , on 6 March , he had a further heart attack and died at the age of 56 . The obituarist for The Times wrote that " he was the amateur of the old smoking concert platform turned into a music @-@ hall professional of genius " , while Donald Zec , writing in The Daily Mirror , called him " as great an entertainer as any of the giants of the music @-@ hall " . The Guardian considered that " with his ukulele , his songs , and his grinning patter , the sum was greater than any of those parts : a Lancashire character " , while in the eyes of the public , Formby 's " passing was genuinely and widely mourned " . 
 Formby was buried alongside his father in Warrington Cemetery with over 150 @,@ 000 mourners lining the route . The undertaker was Bruce Williams who , as Eddie Latta , had written songs for Formby . An hour after the ceremony the family read the will , which had been drawn up two weeks previously . Harry Scott — Formby 's valet and factotum — was to receive £ 5 @,@ 000 , while the rest was to go to Howson ; at probate Formby 's estate was valued at £ 135 @,@ 000 . Formby 's mother and siblings were angered by the will , and contested it . In the words of Bret " mourning ... [ Formby ] was marred by a greedy family squabbling over his not inconsiderable fortune " . 
 Because the will was contested , Formby 's solicitor insisted that a public auction was held for the contents of Formby 's house , which took place over three days in June . Howson offered to honour an earlier will by providing £ 5 @,@ 000 for Eliza and £ 2 @,@ 000 each for Formby 's sisters , but the offer was rejected , and the matter went to the High Court in London . The case was heard in May 1963 before Mr Justice Ormrod . At the end , Eliza was granted £ 5 @,@ 000 , and the sisters received £ 2 @,@ 000 each . Formby 's solicitor , John Crowther , acted for Howson , and explained that the bequest to Formby 's sisters from the older will was made " with reluctance " by Formby , who had described his family as " a set of scroungers " . The family appealed the decision and the matter lasted until September 1965 , when it was finally dismissed in Howson 's favour . 
 = = Screen persona and technique = = 
 Richards considers that Formby " had been able to embody simultaneously Lancashire , the working classes , the people , and the nation " ; Geoff King , in his examination of film comedy , also sees Formby as an icon , and writes that " [ Gracie ] Fields and Formby gained the status of national as well as regional figures , without sacrificing their distinctive regional personality traits " . While the national aspect was important for success outside the north , " the Lancashire accent remained to enhance his homely comic appeal " . The media historian Brian McFarlane writes that , on film , Formby portrayed " essentially gormless incompetents , aspiring to various kinds of professional success ... and even more improbably to a middle @-@ class girlfriend , usually in the clutches of some caddish type with a moustache . Invariably he scored on both counts " . 
 On an edition of ITV 's The South Bank Show in November 1992 , Richards commented that Formby " embodied qualities that people admired and found reassuring in the depression ... and you thought that here 's a man whom whatever is thrown at him , will come through and come out smiling — and people wanted that " . H.J. Igoe , writing in The Catholic Herald , thinks that " Formby has a common English touch . We warm to the kindly turnip face , the revolving eyes , the mouth like a slashed coconut , the silly little songs ... the melodiously tinny voice and twanging banjo . The comedian is the universal works — platoon and bar @-@ room simpleton — mother 's boy — the beloved <unk> — the father who cannot hang a picture and underlying his everyday folly there is the sublime wisdom of the ordinary fool who loves and trusts the world . His comedy is earthy , but never lascivious " . 
 Richards identifies in Formby " an innocence that was essentially childlike ... which explains why George was as popular with children as he was with adults " ; Igoe agrees , and writes that " we know he loves children , because himself he is a child " . Formby 's screen and stage persona of innocence and simplicity was not seen as ignorance or stupidity , although Basil Dean disagreed and thought that Formby " didn 't act gormless as many successful Lancashire comedians have done , he was gormless " . Much of the innocence in Formby 's performance is connected to sex , and the use of double entendres within his songs . John <unk> and Kevin Rockett , in their examination of British film , and Richards , see a connection between Formby 's approach to sex and the saucy seaside postcards of Donald McGill . Richards sees the function of Formby 's humour as being the same as McGill 's : " the harmless diffusion of a major source of tension in a deeply repressed and conventional society " . Formby 's delivery of the sexual content — what McFarlane identifies as being " sung with such a toothy grin and air of innocence " — negated any possible indignation , and this contrasts with the more overtly sexual delivery of other performers of the time , such as Max Miller and Frank Randle . 
 The ukulele expert Steven Sproat considers that Formby " was incredible ... There hasn 't really been a uke player since Formby — or even before Formby — who played quite like him " . Much of Formby 's virtuosity came from his right @-@ hand technique , the split stroke , and he developed his own fast and complicated syncopated musical style with a very fast right @-@ hand strum . Joe Cooper , writing in New Society , considered that " Nobody has ever reproduced the casual devastating right hand syncopation , which so delicately synchronised with deft left hand chord fingering " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Formby 's screen persona influenced Norman Wisdom in the 1950s and Charlie Drake in the following decade , although both these performers used pathos , which Formby avoided . 
 Shortly after Formby 's death a small group of fans formed the George Formby Society , which had its inaugural meeting at the Imperial Hotel Blackpool . George Harrison was a fan of Formby , a member of the Society and an advocate of the ukulele . The rest of the Beatles were also fans — they improvised with ukuleles during the recording breaks on Let It Be — and Formby 's influence can be heard in the song " Her Majesty " . The Beatles ' penultimate song , " Free as a Bird " , ends with a slight coda including a strummed ukulele by Harrison and the voice of John Lennon played backwards , saying " Turned out nice again " . 
 As of 2014 there are two public statues of Formby . The first , by the Manx artist Amanda Barton , is in Douglas , Isle of Man , and shows him leaning on a lamp @-@ post and dressed in the motorcycle leathers of a TT racer . Barton was also commissioned to provide a second statue for the Lancashire town of Wigan , which was unveiled in September 2007 in the town 's Grand Arcade shopping centre . 
 Formby has been the subject of five biographies as of 2014 . In the late 1960s Harry Scott published his reminiscences of Formby , The Fabulous Formby , in 14 issues of The Vellum , the magazine of the George Formby Society ; John Fisher published George Formby in 1975 before Alan Randall and Ray Seaton published their book in 1974 and David Bret produced George Formby : A Troubled Genius in 1999 . The last of the five to be published was by Sue Smart and Richard Bothway Howard in 2011 , It 's Turned Out Nice Again ! . There have also been two documentaries on British television , an edition of The South Bank Show in 1992 , and Frank Skinner on George Formby in 2011 . 
 In 2004 Formby was inducted into the Ukulele Hall of Fame , a non @-@ profit organisation for the preservation of ukulele history . His citation reads , in part : " He won such love and respect for his charismatic stage presence , technical skill and playful lyrics that he remains popular forty years after his death . " In June 2012 a Blackpool Boat Car tram , number 604 , was repainted and returned to service with sponsorship from the George Formby Society . The tram was named " George Formby OBE " and images of him are affixed within the trolley . 
 = Douglas MacArthur = 
 " General MacArthur " and " Douglas McArthur " redirect here . For the Canadian politician , see Douglas Francis McArthur . For the diplomat , see Douglas MacArthur II . For other uses , see General MacArthur ( disambiguation ) . 
 Douglas MacArthur ( 26 January 1880 – 5 April 1964 ) was an American five @-@ star general and field marshal of the Philippine Army . He was Chief of Staff of the United States Army during the 1930s and played a prominent role in the Pacific theater during World War II . He received the Medal of Honor for his service in the Philippines Campaign , which made him and his father Arthur MacArthur , Jr . , the first father and son to be awarded the medal . He was one of only five men ever to rise to the rank of General of the Army in the US Army , and the only man ever to become a field marshal in the Philippine Army . 
 Raised in a military family in the American Old West , MacArthur was valedictorian at the West Texas Military Academy , and First Captain at the United States Military Academy at West Point , where he graduated top of the class of 1903 . During the 1914 United States occupation of Veracruz , he conducted a reconnaissance mission , for which he was nominated for the Medal of Honor . In 1917 , he was promoted from major to colonel and became chief of staff of the 42nd ( Rainbow ) Division . In the fighting on the Western Front during World War I , he rose to the rank of brigadier general , was again nominated for a Medal of Honor , and was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross twice and the Silver Star seven times . 
 From 1919 to 1922 , MacArthur served as Superintendent of the U.S. Military Academy at West Point , where he attempted a series of reforms . His next assignment was in the Philippines , where in 1924 he was instrumental in quelling the Philippine Scout Mutiny . In 1925 , he became the Army 's youngest major general . He served on the court martial of Brigadier General Billy Mitchell and was president of the American Olympic Committee during the 1928 Summer Olympics in Amsterdam . In 1930 , he became Chief of Staff of the United States Army . As such , he was involved in the expulsion of the Bonus Army protesters from Washington , D.C. in 1932 , and the establishment and organization of the Civilian Conservation Corps . He retired from the US Army in 1937 to become Military Advisor to the Commonwealth Government of the Philippines . 
 MacArthur was recalled to active duty in 1941 as commander of United States Army Forces in the Far East . A series of disasters followed , starting with the destruction of his air forces on 8 December 1941 , and the invasion of the Philippines by the Japanese . MacArthur 's forces were soon compelled to withdraw to Bataan , where they held out until May 1942 . In March 1942 , MacArthur , his family and his staff left nearby Corregidor Island in PT boats and escaped to Australia , where MacArthur became Supreme Commander , Southwest Pacific Area . For his defense of the Philippines , MacArthur was awarded the Medal of Honor . After more than two years of fighting in the Pacific , he fulfilled a promise to return to the Philippines . He officially accepted Japan 's surrender on 2 September 1945 , aboard the USS Missouri anchored in Tokyo Bay , and oversaw the occupation of Japan from 1945 to 1951 . As the effective ruler of Japan , he oversaw sweeping economic , political and social changes . He led the United Nations Command in the Korean War until he was removed from command by President Harry S. Truman on 11 April 1951 . He later became Chairman of the Board of Remington Rand . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 A military brat , Douglas MacArthur was born 26 January 1880 , at the Arsenal Barracks in Little Rock , Arkansas , to Arthur MacArthur , Jr . , a U.S. Army captain , and his wife , Mary Pinkney Hardy MacArthur ( nicknamed " Pinky " ) . Arthur , Jr. was the son of jurist and politician Arthur MacArthur , Sr. , Arthur would later receive the Medal of Honor for his actions with the Union Army in the Battle of Missionary Ridge during the American Civil War , and be promoted to the rank of lieutenant general . Pinkney came from a prominent Norfolk , Virginia , family . Two of her brothers had fought for the South in the Civil War , and refused to attend her wedding . Arthur and Pinky had three sons , of whom Douglas was the youngest , following Arthur III , born on 1 August 1876 , and Malcolm , born on 17 October 1878 . The family lived on a succession of Army posts in the American Old West . Conditions were primitive , and Malcolm died of measles in 1883 . In his memoir , Reminiscences , MacArthur wrote " I learned to ride and shoot even before I could read or write — indeed , almost before I could walk and talk . " 
 This time on the frontier ended in July 1889 when the family moved to Washington , D.C. , where Douglas attended the Force Public School . His father was posted to San Antonio , Texas , in September 1893 . While there MacArthur attended the West Texas Military Academy , where he was awarded the gold medal for " scholarship and deportment " . He also participated on the school tennis team , and played quarterback on the school football team and shortstop on its baseball team . He was named valedictorian , with a final year average of 97 @.@ 33 out of 100 . MacArthur 's father and grandfather unsuccessfully sought to secure Douglas a presidential appointment to the United States Military Academy at West Point , first from President Grover Cleveland and then from President William McKinley . After these two rejections , he passed an examination for an appointment from Congressman Theobald <unk> , scoring 93 @.@ 3 on the test . He later wrote : " It was a lesson I never forgot . Preparedness is the key to success and victory . " 
 MacArthur entered West Point on 13 June 1899 , and his mother also moved there to a suite at Craney 's Hotel , overlooking the grounds of the Academy . Hazing was widespread at West Point at this time , and MacArthur and his classmate Ulysses S. Grant III were singled out for special attention by southern cadets as sons of generals with mothers living at Craney 's . When Cadet Oscar Booz left West Point after being hazed and subsequently died of tuberculosis , there was a congressional inquiry . MacArthur was called to appear before a special Congressional committee in 1901 , where he testified against cadets implicated in hazing , but downplayed his own hazing even though the other cadets gave the full story to the committee . Congress subsequently outlawed acts " of a harassing , tyrannical , abusive , shameful , insulting or humiliating nature " , although hazing continued . MacArthur was a corporal in Company B in his second year , a first sergeant in Company A in his third year and First Captain in his final year . He played left field for the baseball team , and academically earned <unk> @.@ 12 merits out of a possible 2470 @.@ 00 or 98 @.@ 14 , the third highest score ever recorded , graduating first in his 93 @-@ man class on 11 June 1903 . At the time it was customary for the top @-@ ranking cadets to be commissioned into the United States Army Corps of Engineers , so MacArthur was commissioned as a second lieutenant in that corps . 
 = = Junior officer = = 
 MacArthur spent his graduation furlough with his parents at Fort Mason , California , where his father , now a major general , was serving as commander of the Department of the Pacific . Afterward , he joined the 3rd Engineer Battalion , which departed for the Philippines in October 1903 . MacArthur was sent to Iloilo , where he supervised the construction of a wharf at Camp <unk> . He went on to conduct surveys at Tacloban City , <unk> City and Cebu City . In November 1903 , while working on Guimaras , he was ambushed by a pair of Filipino brigands or guerrillas ; he shot and killed both with his pistol . He was promoted to first lieutenant in Manila in April 1904 . In October 1904 , his tour of duty was cut short when he contracted malaria and <unk> itch during a survey on Bataan . He returned to San Francisco , where he was assigned to the California Debris Commission . In July 1905 , he became chief engineer of the Division of the Pacific . 
 In October 1905 , MacArthur received orders to proceed to Tokyo for appointment as aide @-@ de @-@ camp to his father . A man who knew the MacArthurs at this time wrote that : " Arthur MacArthur was the most flamboyantly egotistical man I had ever seen , until I met his son . " They inspected Japanese military bases at Nagasaki , Kobe and Kyoto , then headed to India via Shanghai , Hong Kong , Java and Singapore , reaching Calcutta in January 1906 . In India , they visited Madras , Tuticorin , Quetta , Karachi , the Northwest Frontier and the Khyber Pass . They then sailed to China via Bangkok and Saigon , and toured Canton , Tsingtao , Peking , Tientsin , Hankow and Shanghai before returning to Japan in June . The next month they returned to the United States , where Arthur MacArthur resumed his duties at Fort Mason , still with Douglas as his aide . In September , Douglas received orders to report to the 2nd Engineer Battalion at the Washington Barracks and enroll in the Engineer School . While there he also served as " an aide to assist at White House functions " at the request of President Theodore Roosevelt . 
 In August 1907 , MacArthur was sent to the engineer district office in Milwaukee , where his parents were living . In April 1908 , he was posted to Fort Leavenworth , where he was given his first command , Company K , 3rd Engineer Battalion . He became battalion adjutant in 1909 and then engineer officer at Fort Leavenworth in 1910 . MacArthur was promoted to captain in February 1911 and was appointed as head of the Military Engineering Department and the Field Engineer School . He participated in exercises at San Antonio , Texas , with the Maneuver Division in 1911 and served in Panama on detached duty in January and February 1912 . The sudden death of their father on 5 September 1912 brought Douglas and his brother Arthur back to Milwaukee to care for their mother , whose health had deteriorated . MacArthur requested a transfer to Washington , D.C. so his mother could be near Johns Hopkins Hospital . Army Chief of Staff , Major General Leonard Wood , took up the matter with Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson , who arranged for MacArthur to be posted to the Office of the Chief of Staff in 1912 . 
 = = Veracruz expedition = = 
 On 21 April 1914 , President Woodrow Wilson ordered the occupation of Veracruz . MacArthur joined the headquarters staff that was sent to the area , arriving on 1 May 1914 . He realized that the logistic support of an advance from Veracruz would require the use of the railroad . Finding plenty of railroad cars in Veracruz but no locomotives , MacArthur set out to verify a report that there were a number of locomotives in Alvarado , Veracruz . For $ 150 in gold , he acquired a handcar and the services of three Mexicans , whom he disarmed . MacArthur and his party located five engines in Alvarado , two of which were only switchers , but the other three locomotives were exactly what was required . On the way back to Veracruz , his party was set upon by five armed men . The party made a run for it and outdistanced all but two of the armed men , whom MacArthur shot . Soon after , they were attacked by a group of about fifteen horsemen . MacArthur took three bullet holes in his clothes but was unharmed . One of his companions was lightly wounded before the horsemen finally decided to retire after MacArthur shot four of them . Further on , the party was attacked a third time by three mounted men . MacArthur received another bullet hole in his shirt , but his men , using their handcar , managed to outrun all but one of their attackers . MacArthur shot both that man and his horse , and the party had to remove the horse 's carcass from the track before proceeding . 
 A fellow officer wrote to Wood recommending that MacArthur 's name be put forward for the Medal of Honor . Wood did so , and Chief of Staff Hugh L. Scott convened a board to consider the award . The board questioned " the advisability of this enterprise having been undertaken without the knowledge of the commanding general on the ground " . This was Brigadier General Frederick Funston , a Medal of Honor recipient himself , who considered awarding the medal to MacArthur " entirely appropriate and justifiable . " However the board feared that " to bestow the award recommended might encourage any other staff officer , under similar conditions , to ignore the local commander , possibly interfering with the latter 's plans " ; consequently , MacArthur received no award at all . 
 = = World War I = = 
 = = = Rainbow Division = = = 
 MacArthur returned to the War Department , where he was promoted to major on 11 December 1915 . In June 1916 , he was assigned as head of the Bureau of Information at the office of the Secretary of War , Newton D. Baker . MacArthur has since been regarded as the Army 's first press officer . Following the declaration of war on Germany on 6 April 1917 , Baker and MacArthur secured an agreement from President Wilson for the use of the National Guard on the Western Front . MacArthur suggested sending first a division organized from units of different states , so as to avoid the appearance of favoritism toward any particular state . Baker approved the creation of this formation , which became the 42nd ( " Rainbow " ) Division , and appointed Major General William A. Mann , the head of the National Guard Bureau , as its commander ; MacArthur was its chief of staff , with the rank of colonel . At MacArthur 's request , this commission was in the infantry rather than the engineers . 
 The 42nd Division was assembled in August and September 1917 at Camp Mills , New York , where its training emphasized open @-@ field combat rather than trench warfare . It sailed in a convoy from Hoboken , New Jersey , for France on 18 October 1917 . On 19 December , Mann was replaced as division commander by Major General Charles T. Menoher . 
 = = = Champagne @-@ Marne Offensive = = = 
 The 42nd Division entered the line in the quiet Lunéville sector in February 1918 . On 26 February , MacArthur and Captain Thomas T. Handy accompanied a French trench raid in which MacArthur assisted in the capture of a number of German prisoners . The commander of the French VII Corps , Major General Georges de <unk> , decorated MacArthur with the Croix de guerre . Menoher recommended MacArthur for a Silver Star , which he later received . The Silver Star Medal was not instituted until 8 August 1932 , but small Silver Citation Stars were authorized to be worn on the campaign ribbons of those cited in orders for gallantry , similar to the British mention in despatches . When the Silver Star Medal was instituted , it was retroactively awarded to those who had been awarded Silver Citation Stars . On 9 March , the 42nd Division launched three raids of its own on German trenches in the Salient du <unk> . MacArthur accompanied a company of the 168th Infantry . This time , his leadership was rewarded with the Distinguished Service Cross . A few days later , MacArthur , who was strict about his men carrying their gas masks but often neglected to bring his own , was gassed . He recovered in time to show Secretary Baker around the area on 19 March . 
 MacArthur was promoted to brigadier general on 26 June . In late June , the 42nd Division was shifted to Châlons @-@ en @-@ Champagne to oppose the impending German Champagne @-@ Marne Offensive . Général d 'Armée Henri Gouraud of the French Fourth Army elected to meet the attack with a defense in depth , holding the front line area as thinly as possible and meeting the German attack on his second line of defense . His plan succeeded , and MacArthur was awarded a second Silver Star . The 42nd Division participated in the subsequent Allied counter @-@ offensive , and MacArthur was awarded a third Silver Star on 29 July . Two days later , Menoher relieved Brigadier General Robert A. Brown of the 84th Infantry Brigade of his command , and replaced him with MacArthur . Hearing reports that the enemy had withdrawn , MacArthur went forward on 2 August to see for himself . He later wrote : 
 It was 3 : 30 that morning when I started from our right at <unk> . Taking runners from each outpost liaison group to the next , moving by way of what had been No Man 's Land , I will never forget that trip . The dead were so thick in spots we tumbled over them . There must have been at least 2 @,@ 000 of those sprawled bodies . I identified the insignia of six of the best German divisions . The stench was suffocating . Not a tree was standing . The moans and cries of wounded men sounded everywhere . Sniper bullets sung like the buzzing of a hive of angry bees . An occasional shellburst always drew an angry oath from my guide . I counted almost a hundred disabled guns various size and several times that number of abandoned machine guns . 
 MacArthur reported back to Menoher and Lieutenant General Hunter Liggett that the Germans had indeed withdrawn , and was awarded a fourth Silver Star . He was also awarded a second Croix de guerre and made a <unk> of the Légion d 'honneur . 
 = = = Battle of Saint @-@ Mihiel and Meuse @-@ Argonne Offensive = = = 
 The 42nd Division earned a few weeks rest , returning to the line for the Battle of Saint @-@ Mihiel on 12 September 1918 . The Allied advance proceeded rapidly and MacArthur was awarded a fifth Silver Star for his leadership of the 84th Infantry Brigade . He received a sixth Silver Star for his participation in a raid on the night of 25 – 26 September . The 42nd Division was relieved on the night of 30 September and moved to the Argonne sector where it relieved the 1st Division on the night of 11 October . On a reconnaissance the next day , MacArthur was gassed again , earning a second Wound Chevron . 
 The 42nd Division 's participation in the Meuse @-@ Argonne Offensive began on 14 October when it attacked with both brigades . That evening , a conference was called to discuss the attack , during which Charles Pelot Summerall , commander of the First Infantry Division and V Corps , telephoned and demanded that Châtillon be taken by 18 : 00 the next evening . An aerial photograph had been obtained that showed a gap in the German barbed wire to the northeast of Châtillon . Lieutenant Colonel Walter E. Bare — the commander of the 167th Infantry — proposed an attack from that direction , where the defenses seemed least imposing , covered by a machine @-@ gun barrage . MacArthur adopted this plan . He was wounded , but not severely , while verifying the existence of the gap in the barbed wire . 
 Summerall nominated MacArthur for the Medal of Honor and promotion to major general , but he received neither . Instead he was awarded a second Distinguished Service Cross . The 42nd Division returned to the line for the last time on the night of 4 – 5 November 1918 . In the final advance on Sedan . MacArthur later wrote that this operation " narrowly missed being one of the great tragedies of American history . " An order to disregard unit boundaries led to units crossing into each other 's zones . In the resulting chaos , MacArthur was taken prisoner by men of the 1st Division , who mistook him for a German general . His performance in the attack on the Meuse heights led to his being awarded a seventh Silver Star . On 10 November , a day before the armistice that ended the fighting , MacArthur was appointed commander of the 42nd Division . For his service as chief of staff and commander of the 84th Infantry Brigade , he was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal . 
 His period in command was brief , for on 22 November he , like other brigadier generals , was replaced , and returned to the 84th Infantry Brigade . The 42nd Division was chosen to participate in the occupation of the Rhineland , occupying the Ahrweiler district . In April 1919 , they entrained for Brest and Saint @-@ Nazaire , where they boarded ships to return to the United States . MacArthur traveled on the ocean liner SS Leviathan , which reached New York on 25 April 1919 . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 = = = Superintendent of the United States Military Academy = = = 
 In 1919 , MacArthur became Superintendent of the U.S. Military Academy at West Point , which Chief of Staff Peyton March felt had become out of date in many respects and was much in need of reform . Accepting the post allowed MacArthur to retain his rank of brigadier general , instead of being reduced to his substantive rank of major like many of his contemporaries . When MacArthur moved into the superintendent 's house with his mother in June 1919 , he became the youngest superintendent since Sylvanus Thayer in 1817 . However , whereas Thayer had faced opposition from outside the Army , MacArthur had to overcome resistance from graduates and the academic board . MacArthur 's vision of what was required of an officer came not just from his recent experience of combat in France but also from that of the occupation of the Rhineland in Germany . The military government of the Rhineland had required the Army to deal with political , economic and social problems but he had found that many West Point graduates had little or no knowledge of fields outside of the military sciences . During the war , West Point had been reduced to an officer candidate school , with five classes graduated in two years . Cadet and staff morale was low and hazing " at an all @-@ time peak of viciousness " . MacArthur 's first change turned out to be the easiest . Congress had set the length of the course at three years . MacArthur was able to get the four @-@ year course restored . 
 During the debate over the length of the course , The New York Times brought up the issue of the cloistered and undemocratic nature of student life at West Point . Also , starting with Harvard University in 1869 , civilian universities had begun grading students on academic performance alone , but West Point had retained the old " whole man " concept of education . MacArthur sought to modernize the system , expanding the concept of military character to include bearing , leadership , efficiency and athletic performance . He formalized the hitherto unwritten Cadet Honor Code in 1922 when he formed the Cadet Honor Committee to review alleged code violations . Elected by the cadets themselves , it had no authority to punish , but acted as a kind of grand jury , reporting offenses to the commandant . MacArthur attempted to end hazing by using officers rather than upperclassmen to train the plebes . 
 Instead of the traditional summer camp at Fort Clinton , MacArthur had the cadets trained to use modern weapons by regular army sergeants at Fort Dix ; they then marched back to West Point with full packs . He attempted to modernize the curriculum by adding liberal arts , government and economics courses , but encountered strong resistance from the Academic Board . In Military Art classes , the study of the campaigns of the American Civil War was replaced with the study of those of World War I. In History class , more emphasis was placed on the Far East . MacArthur expanded the sports program , increasing the number of intramural sports and requiring all cadets to participate . He allowed upper class cadets to leave the reservation , and sanctioned a cadet newspaper , The Brag , forerunner of today 's West Pointer . He also permitted cadets to travel to watch their football team play , and gave them an allowance of $ 5 @.@ 00 a month . Professors and alumni alike protested these radical moves . Most of MacArthur 's West Point reforms were soon discarded but , in the ensuing years , his ideas became accepted and his innovations were gradually restored . 
 = = = Army 's youngest major general = = = 
 MacArthur became romantically involved with socialite and multi @-@ millionaire heiress Louise Cromwell Brooks . They were married at her family 's villa in Palm Beach , Florida on 14 February 1922 . Rumors circulated that General Pershing , who had also courted Louise , had threatened to exile them to the Philippines if they were married . This was denied by Pershing as " all damn <unk> . " In October 1922 , MacArthur left West Point and sailed to the Philippines with Louise and her two children , Walter and Louise , to assume command of the Military District of Manila . MacArthur was fond of the children , and spent much of his free time with them . MacArthur 's marriage was not a happy one , and his wife was often made remarks at parties such as MacArthur was a general , but he was a " buck private in the boudoir " and that " Douglas doesn 't know what his penis is for except to pee with " . MacArthur was deeply humiliated by his wife 's behavior and her very public claims that he was unable to satisfy her sexually . 
 The revolts in the Philippines had been suppressed , the islands were peaceful now , and in the wake of the Washington Naval Treaty , the garrison was being reduced . MacArthur 's friendships with Filipinos like Manuel Quezon offended some people . " The old idea of colonial exploitation " , he later conceded , " still had its vigorous supporters . " In February and March 1923 MacArthur returned to Washington to see his mother , who was ill from a heart ailment . She recovered , but it was the last time he saw his brother Arthur , who died suddenly from appendicitis in December 1923 . In June 1923 , MacArthur assumed command of the 23rd Infantry Brigade of the Philippine Division . On 7 July 1924 , he was informed that a mutiny had broken out amongst the Philippine Scouts over grievances concerning pay and allowances . Over 200 were arrested and there were fears of an insurrection . MacArthur was able to calm the situation , but his subsequent efforts to improve the salaries of Filipino troops were frustrated by financial stringency and racial prejudice . On 17 January 1925 , at the age of 44 , he was promoted , becoming the Army 's youngest major general . 
 Returning to the U.S. , MacArthur took command of the IV Corps Area , based at Fort McPherson in Atlanta , Georgia , on 2 May 1925 . However , he encountered southern prejudice because he was the son of a Union Army officer , and requested to be relieved . A few months later , he assumed command of the III Corps area , based at Fort McHenry in Baltimore , Maryland , which allowed MacArthur and Louise to move to her Rainbow Hill estate near Garrison , Maryland . However , this relocation also led to what he later described as " one of the most distasteful orders I ever received " : a direction to serve on the court martial of Brigadier General Billy Mitchell . MacArthur was the youngest of the thirteen judges , none of whom had aviation experience . Three of them , including Summerall , the president of the court , were removed when defense challenges revealed bias against Mitchell . Despite MacArthur 's claim that he had voted to acquit , Mitchell was found guilty as charged and convicted . MacArthur felt " that a senior officer should not be silenced for being at variance with his superiors in rank and with accepted doctrine . " 
 In 1927 , MacArthur and Louise separated , and she moved to New York City . In August that year , William C. Prout — the president of the American Olympic Committee — died suddenly and the committee elected MacArthur as their new president . His main task was to prepare the U.S. team for the 1928 Summer Olympics in Amsterdam . MacArthur saw the team as representatives of the United States , and its task was to win medals . " We have not come 3 @,@ 000 miles , " he told them , " just to lose gracefully . " The Americans had a successful meet , earning 24 gold medals , and setting 17 Olympic records and seven world records . Upon returning to the U.S. , MacArthur received orders to assume command of the Philippine Department . In 1929 , while he was in Manila , Louise obtained a divorce , ostensibly on the grounds of " failure to provide " . In view of Louise 's great wealth , William Manchester described this legal fiction as " preposterous " . 
 = = = Chief of Staff = = = 
 By 1930 , MacArthur was still , at age 50 , the youngest of the U.S. Army 's major generals , and the best known . He left the Philippines on 19 September 1930 and for a brief time was in command of the IX Corps Area in San Francisco . On 21 November , he was sworn in as Chief of Staff of the United States Army , with the rank of general . While in Washington , he would ride home each day to have lunch with his mother . At his desk , he would wear a Japanese ceremonial kimono , cool himself with an oriental fan , and smoke cigarettes in a jeweled cigarette holder . In the evenings , he liked to read military history books . About this time , he began referring to himself as " MacArthur " . MacArthur had already hired a public relations staff to promote his image with the American public , and together with a set of ideas he was known to favor , namely ; a belief that America needed a strongman leader to deal with the possibility that Communists might lead all of the great masses of unemployed into a revolution , that America 's destiny was in the Asia @-@ Pacific region , and a strong hostility to the British Empire . One contemporary described MacArthur as the greatest actor to ever serve as a U.S Army general while another wrote that MacArthur had a court rather than a staff . 
 The onset of the Great Depression forced Congress to make cuts in the Army 's personnel and budget . Some 53 bases were closed , but MacArthur managed to prevent attempts to reduce the number of regular officers from 12 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 . MacArthur 's main programs included the development of new mobilization plans . He grouped the nine corps areas together under four armies , which were charged with responsibility for training and frontier defense . He also negotiated the MacArthur @-@ Pratt agreement with the Chief of Naval Operations , Admiral William V. Pratt . This was the first of a series of inter @-@ service agreements over the following decades that defined the responsibilities of the different services with respect to aviation . This agreement placed coastal air defense under the Army . In March 1935 , MacArthur activated a centralized air command , General Headquarters Air Force , under Major General Frank M. Andrews . 
 One of MacArthur 's most controversial acts came in 1932 , when the " Bonus Army " of veterans converged on Washington . He sent tents and camp equipment to the demonstrators , along with mobile kitchens , until an outburst in Congress caused the kitchens to be withdrawn . MacArthur was concerned that the demonstration had been taken over by communists and pacifists but the General Staff 's intelligence division reported that only three of the march 's 26 key leaders were communists . MacArthur went over contingency plans for civil disorder in the capital . Mechanized equipment was brought to Fort Myer , where anti @-@ riot training was conducted . 
 On 28 July 1932 , a clash between the District police and demonstrators resulted in two men being shot . President Hoover ordered MacArthur to " surround the affected area and clear it without delay . " MacArthur brought up troops and tanks and , against the advice of Major Dwight D. Eisenhower , decided to accompany the troops , although he was not in charge of the operation . The troops advanced with bayonets and sabers drawn under a shower of bricks and rocks , but no shots were fired . In less than four hours , they cleared the Bonus Army 's campground using tear gas . The gas canisters started a number of fires , causing the only death during the riots . While not as violent as other anti @-@ riot operations , it was nevertheless a public relations disaster . However , the defeat of the " Bonus Army " while unpopular with the American people at large , did make MacArthur into the hero of the more right @-@ wing elements in the Republican Party who believed that the general had saved America from a communist revolution in 1932 . 
 In 1934 , MacArthur sued journalists Drew Pearson and Robert S. Allen for defamation after they described his treatment of the Bonus marchers as " unwarranted , unnecessary , insubordinate , harsh and brutal " . In turn , they threatened to call Isabel Rosario Cooper as a witness . MacArthur had met Isabel , a Eurasian woman , while in the Philippines , and she had become his mistress . MacArthur was forced to settle out of court , secretly paying Pearson $ 15 @,@ 000 . 
 President Hoover was defeated in the 1932 election by Franklin D. Roosevelt . MacArthur and Roosevelt had worked together before World War I and , despite political differences , remained friends . MacArthur supported the New Deal through the Army 's operation of the Civilian Conservation Corps . He ensured that detailed plans were drawn up for its employment and decentralized its administration to the corps areas , which became an important factor in the program 's success . MacArthur 's support for a strong military , and his public criticism of pacifism and isolationism , made him unpopular with the Roosevelt administration . 
 Perhaps the most incendiary exchange between Roosevelt and MacArthur occurred over an administration proposal to cut 51 % of the Army 's budget . In response , MacArthur lectured Roosevelt that " when we lost the next war , and an American boy , lying in the mud with an enemy bayonet through his belly and an enemy foot on his dying throat , spat out his last curse , I wanted the name not to be MacArthur , but Roosevelt . " In response , Roosevelt yelled " you must not talk that way to the President ! " MacArthur offered to resign , but Roosevelt refused his request , and MacArthur then staggered out of the White House and vomited on the front steps . 
 In spite of such exchanges , MacArthur was extended an extra year as Chief of Staff , and ended his tour in October 1935 . For his service as chief of staff , he was awarded a second Distinguished Service Medal . He was retroactively awarded two Purple Hearts for his World War I service , a decoration that he authorized in 1932 based loosely on the defunct Military Badge of Merit . MacArthur also insisted on being the first recipient of the Purple Heart , which he had engraved with " # 1 . " 
 = = = Field Marshal of the Philippine Army = = = 
 When the Commonwealth of the Philippines achieved semi @-@ independent status in 1935 , President of the Philippines Manuel Quezon asked MacArthur to supervise the creation of a Philippine Army . Quezon and MacArthur had been personal friends since the latter 's father had been Governor @-@ General of the Philippines , 35 years earlier . With President Roosevelt 's approval , MacArthur accepted the assignment . It was agreed that MacArthur would receive the rank of field marshal , with its salary and allowances , in addition to his major general 's salary as Military Advisor to the Commonwealth Government of the Philippines . It would be his fifth tour in the Far East . MacArthur sailed from San Francisco on the SS President Hoover in October 1935 , accompanied by his mother and sister @-@ in @-@ law . He brought Eisenhower and Major James B. Ord along as his assistants . Another passenger on the President Hoover was Jean Marie Faircloth , an unmarried 37 @-@ year @-@ old socialite . Over the next two years , MacArthur and Faircloth were frequently seen together . His mother became gravely ill during the voyage and died in Manila on 3 December 1935 . 
 President Quezon officially conferred the title of field marshal on MacArthur in a ceremony at Malacañan Palace on 24 August 1936 , and presented him with a gold baton and a unique uniform . The Philippine Army was formed from conscription . Training was conducted by a regular cadre , and the Philippine Military Academy was created along the lines of West Point to train officers . MacArthur and Eisenhower found that few of the training camps had been constructed and the first group of 20 @,@ 000 trainees did not report until early 1937 . Equipment and weapons were " more or less obsolete " American cast offs , and the budget of six million was completely inadequate . MacArthur 's requests for equipment fell on deaf ears , although MacArthur and his naval advisor , Lieutenant Colonel Sidney L. Huff , persuaded the Navy to initiate the development of the PT boat . Much hope was placed in the Philippine Army Air Corps , but the first squadron was not organized until 1939 . 
 MacArthur married Jean Faircloth in a civil ceremony on 30 April 1937 . Their marriage produced a son , Arthur MacArthur IV , who was born in Manila on 21 February 1938 . On 31 December 1937 , MacArthur officially retired from the Army . He ceased to represent the U.S. as military adviser to the government , but remained as Quezon 's adviser in a civilian capacity . Eisenhower returned to the U.S. , and was replaced as MacArthur 's chief of staff by Lieutenant Colonel Richard K. Sutherland , while Richard J. Marshall became deputy chief of staff . The fact that MacArthur lived much of his life in the Philippines together with his belief that America 's destiny lay in the Asia @-@ Pacific region allowed him to present himself as an expert on Asia and Asians . The American Japanologist Michael Schaller stated in an interview : 
 " Most people have enough humility to realize that it 's hard to be an expert on the world 's largest continent , where people speak hundreds of languages , and there are many different cultures , religions , ethnicities ... MacArthur would , with little humility , describe himself throughout his life as America 's greatest Oriental expert , an expert in Oriental psychology . And by some measure you could argue he was familiar with the Orient as or more than many Americans . He had travelled there , he lived there . But yet his experience in Asia was really circumscribed by the Philippine islands , which were perhaps the least representative part of Asia . During his long tours of duty there , from the early twentieth century through the 1930s , he 'd lived in a Manila hotel , he socialized with Westernized Filipino leaders who spoke English , he really knew little about mainland Asia , the peasantry which was 90 percent of Asia , China , Japan , and continental Asia " . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Philippines Campaign ( 1941 – 42 ) = = = 
 On 26 July 1941 , Roosevelt federalized the Philippine Army , recalled MacArthur to active duty in the U.S. Army as a major general , and named him commander of U.S. Army Forces in the Far East ( USAFFE ) . MacArthur was promoted to lieutenant general the following day , and then to general on 20 December . On 31 July 1941 , the Philippine Department had 22 @,@ 000 troops assigned , 12 @,@ 000 of whom were Philippine Scouts . The main component was the Philippine Division , under the command of Major General Jonathan M. Wainwright . The initial American plan for the defense of the Philippines called for the main body of the troops to retreat to the Bataan peninsula in Manila Bay to hold out against the Japanese until a relief force could arrive . MacArthur changed this plan to one of attempting to hold all of Luzon and using B @-@ 17 Flying Fortresses to sink Japanese ships that approached the islands . MacArthur persuaded the decision @-@ makers in Washington that his plans represented the best deterrent to prevent Japan from choosing war and of winning a war if worse did come to worse . 
 Between July and December 1941 , the garrison received 8 @,@ 500 reinforcements . After years of parsimony , much equipment was shipped . By November , a backlog of 1 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 shipping tons of equipment intended for the Philippines had accumulated in U.S. ports and depots awaiting vessels . In addition , the Navy intercept station in the islands , known as Station CAST , had an ultra secret Purple cipher machine , which decrypted Japanese diplomatic messages , and partial codebooks for the latest JN @-@ 25 naval code . Station CAST sent MacArthur its entire output , via Sutherland , the only officer on his staff authorized to see it . 
 At 03 : 30 local time on 8 December 1941 ( about 09 : 00 on 7 December in Hawaii ) , Sutherland learned of the attack on Pearl Harbor and informed MacArthur . At 05 : 30 , the Chief of Staff of the U.S. Army , General George Marshall , ordered MacArthur to execute the existing war plan , Rainbow Five . MacArthur did nothing . On three occasions , the commander of the Far East Air Force , Major General Lewis H. Brereton , requested permission to attack Japanese bases in Formosa , in accordance with prewar intentions , but was denied by Sutherland . Not until 11 : 00 did Brereton speak with MacArthur about it , and obtained permission . MacArthur later denied having the conversation . At 12 : 30 , nine hours after the attack on Pearl Harbor , aircraft of Japan 's 11th Air Fleet achieved complete tactical surprise when they attacked Clark Field and the nearby fighter base at Iba Field , and destroyed or disabled 18 of Far East Air Force 's 35 B @-@ 17s , 53 of its 107 P @-@ 40s , three P @-@ 35s , and more than 25 other aircraft . Most were destroyed on the ground . Substantial damage was done to the bases , and casualties totaled 80 killed and 150 wounded . What was left of the Far East Air Force was all but destroyed over the next few days . 
 MacArthur attempted to slow the Japanese advance with an initial defense against the Japanese landings . MacArthur 's plan for holding all of Luzon against the Japanese collapsed as it spread out the American @-@ Filipino forces too thin . However , he reconsidered his confidence in the ability of his Filipino troops after the Japanese landing force made a rapid advance after landing at Lingayen Gulf on 21 December , and ordered a retreat to Bataan . Within two days of the Japanese landing at Lingayen Gulf , MacArthur had reverted to pre @-@ July 1941 plan of attempting to hold only Bataan while waiting for a relief force to come . Most of the American and some of the Filipino troops were able to retreat back to <unk> , but without most of their supplies , which were abandoned in the confusion . Manila was declared an open city at midnight on 24 December , without any consultation with Admiral Thomas C. Hart , commanding the Asiatic Fleet , forcing the Navy to destroy considerable amounts of valuable material . 
 On the evening of 24 December , MacArthur moved his headquarters to the island fortress of Corregidor in Manila Bay arriving at 21 : 30 , with his headquarters reporting to Washington as being open on the 25th . A series of air raids by the Japanese destroyed all the exposed structures on the island and USAFFE headquarters was moved into the <unk> Tunnel . Later , most of the headquarters moved to Bataan , leaving only the nucleus with MacArthur . The troops on Bataan knew that they had been written off but continued to fight . Some blamed Roosevelt and MacArthur for their predicament . A ballad sung to the tune of " The Battle Hymn of the Republic " called him " Dugout Doug " . However , most clung to the belief that somehow MacArthur " would reach down and pull something out of his hat . " 
 On 1 January 1942 , MacArthur accepted $ 500 @,@ 000 from President Quezon of the Philippines as payment for his pre @-@ war service . MacArthur 's staff members also received payments : $ 75 @,@ 000 for Sutherland , $ 45 @,@ 000 for Richard Marshall , and $ 20 @,@ 000 for Huff . Eisenhower — after being appointed Supreme Commander Allied Expeditionary Force ( AEF ) — was also offered money by Quezon , but declined . These payments were known only to a few in Manila and Washington , including President Roosevelt and Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson , until they were made public by historian Carol <unk> in 1979 . The revelation tarnished MacArthur 's reputation . 
 = = = = Escape to Australia and Medal of Honor = = = = 
 In February 1942 , as Japanese forces tightened their grip on the Philippines , MacArthur was ordered by President Roosevelt to relocate to Australia . On the night of 12 March 1942 , MacArthur and a select group that included his wife Jean , son Arthur , and Arthur 's Cantonese amah , Ah Cheu , fled Corregidor . MacArthur and his party reached Del Monte Airfield on Mindanao , where B @-@ 17s picked them up , and flew them to Australia . His famous speech , in which he said , " I came through and I shall return " , was first made on Terowie railway station in South Australia , on 20 March . Washington asked MacArthur to amend his promise to " We shall return " . He ignored the request . 
 Bataan surrendered on 9 April , and Corregidor on 6 May . George Marshall decided that MacArthur would be awarded the Medal of Honor , a decoration for which he had twice previously been nominated , " to offset any propaganda by the enemy directed at his leaving his command " . Eisenhower pointed out that MacArthur had not actually performed any acts of valor as required by law , but Marshall cited the 1927 award of the medal to Charles Lindbergh as a precedent . Special legislation had been passed to authorize Lindbergh 's medal , but while similar legislation was introduced authorizing the medal for MacArthur by Congressmen J. Parnell Thomas and James E. Van Zandt , Marshall felt strongly that a serving general should receive the medal from the President and the War Department . MacArthur chose to accept it on the basis that " this award was intended not so much for me personally as it is a recognition of the indomitable courage of the gallant army which it was my honor to command . " Arthur and Douglas MacArthur thus became the first father and son to be awarded the Medal of Honor . They remained the only pair until 2001 , when Theodore Roosevelt was awarded posthumously for his service during the Spanish – American War , Theodore Roosevelt , Jr. having received one posthumously for his service during World War II . MacArthur 's citation , written by George Marshall , read : 
 For conspicuous leadership in preparing the Philippine Islands to resist conquest , for gallantry and intrepidity above and beyond the call of duty in action against invading Japanese forces , and for the heroic conduct of defensive and offensive operations on the Bataan Peninsula . He mobilized , trained , and led an army which has received world acclaim for its gallant defense against a tremendous superiority of enemy forces in men and arms . His utter disregard of personal danger under heavy fire and aerial bombardment , his calm judgment in each crisis , inspired his troops , galvanized the spirit of resistance of the Filipino people , and confirmed the faith of the American people in their Armed Forces . 
 As the symbol of the forces resisting the Japanese , MacArthur received many other accolades . The Native American tribes of the Southwest chose him as a " Chief of Chiefs " , which he acknowledged as from " my oldest friends , the companions of my boyhood days on the Western frontier " . He was touched when he was named Father of the Year for 1942 , and wrote to the National Father 's Day Committee that : 
 By profession I am a soldier and take pride in that fact , but I am prouder , infinitely prouder to be a father . A soldier destroys in order to build ; the father only builds , never destroys . The one has the potentialities of death ; the other embodies creation and life . And while the hordes of death are mighty , the battalions of life are mightier still . It is my hope that my son when I am gone will remember me , not from battle , but in the home , repeating with him our simple daily prayer , " Our father , Who art in Heaven . " 
 = = = New Guinea Campaign = = = 
 = = = = General Headquarters = = = = 
 On 18 April 1942 , MacArthur was appointed Supreme Commander of Allied Forces in the Southwest Pacific Area ( SWPA ) . Lieutenant General George Brett became Commander , Allied Air Forces , and Vice Admiral Herbert F. Leary became Commander , Allied Naval Forces . Since the bulk of land forces in the theater were Australian , George Marshall insisted an Australian be appointed as Commander , Allied Land Forces , and the job went to General Sir Thomas Blamey . Although predominantly Australian and American , MacArthur 's command also included small numbers of personnel from the Netherlands East Indies , the United Kingdom , and other countries . MacArthur established a close relationship with the Prime Minister of Australia , John Curtin , although many Australians resented MacArthur as a foreign general who had been imposed upon them . MacArthur had little confidence in Brett 's abilities as commander of Allied Air Forces , and in August 1942 selected Major General George C. Kenney to replace him . Kenney 's application of air power in support of Blamey 's troops would prove crucial . 
 The staff of MacArthur 's General Headquarters ( GHQ ) was built around the nucleus that had escaped from the Philippines with him , who became known as the " Bataan Gang " . Though Roosevelt and George Marshall pressed for Dutch and Australian officers to be assigned to GHQ , the heads of all the staff divisions were American and such officers of other nationalities as were assigned served under them . Initially located in Melbourne , GHQ moved to Brisbane — the northernmost city in Australia with the necessary communications facilities — in July 1942 , occupying the AMP Insurance Society building . 
 MacArthur formed his own signals intelligence organization , known as the Central Bureau , from Australian intelligence units and American cryptanalysts who had escaped from the Philippines . This unit forwarded Ultra information to Willoughby for analysis . After a press release revealed details of the Japanese naval dispositions during the Battle of the Coral Sea , at which a Japanese attempt to capture Port Moresby was turned back , Roosevelt ordered that censorship be imposed in Australia , and the Advisory War Council granted GHQ censorship authority over the Australian press . Australian newspapers were restricted to what was reported in the daily GHQ communiqué . Veteran correspondents considered the communiqués , which MacArthur drafted personally , " a total farce " and " Alice @-@ in @-@ Wonderland information handed out at high level . " 
 = = = = Papuan Campaign = = = = 
 Anticipating that the Japanese would strike at Port Moresby again , the garrison was strengthened and MacArthur ordered the establishment of new bases at Merauke and Milne Bay to cover its flanks . The Battle of Midway in June 1942 led to consideration of a limited offensive in the Pacific . MacArthur 's proposal for an attack on the Japanese base at Rabaul met with objections from the Navy , which favored a less ambitious approach , and objected to an Army general being in command of what would be an amphibious operation . The resulting compromise called for a three @-@ stage advance . The first stage , the seizure of the Tulagi area , would be conducted by the Pacific Ocean Areas , under Admiral Chester W. Nimitz . The later stages would be under MacArthur 's command . 
 The Japanese struck first , landing at Buna in July , and at Milne Bay in August . The Australians repulsed the Japanese at Milne Bay , but a series of defeats in the Kokoda Track campaign had a depressing effect back in Australia . On 30 August , MacArthur radioed Washington that unless action was taken , New Guinea Force would be overwhelmed . He sent Blamey to Port Moresby to take personal command . Having committed all available Australian troops , MacArthur decided to send American forces . The 32nd Infantry Division , a poorly trained National Guard division , was selected . A series of embarrassing reverses in the Battle of Buna – Gona led to outspoken criticism of the American troops by the Australians . MacArthur then ordered Lieutenant General Robert L. Eichelberger to assume command of the Americans , and " take Buna , or not come back alive . " 
 MacArthur moved the advanced echelon of GHQ to Port Moresby on 6 November 1942 . After Buna finally fell on 3 January 1943 , MacArthur awarded the Distinguished Service Cross to twelve officers for " precise execution of operations " . This use of the country 's second highest award aroused resentment , because while some , like Eichelberger and George Alan Vasey , had fought in the field , others , like Sutherland and Willoughby , had not . For his part , MacArthur was awarded his third Distinguished Service Medal , and the Australian government had him appointed an honorary Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath . 
 = = = = New Guinea Campaign = = = = 
 At the Pacific Military Conference in March 1943 , the Joint Chiefs of Staff approved MacArthur 's plan for Operation Cartwheel , the advance on Rabaul . MacArthur explained his strategy : 
 My strategic conception for the Pacific Theater , which I outlined after the Papuan Campaign and have since consistently advocated , contemplates massive strokes against only main strategic objectives , utilizing surprise and air @-@ ground striking power supported and assisted by the fleet . This is the very opposite of what is termed " island hopping " which is the gradual pushing back of the enemy by direct frontal pressure with the consequent heavy casualties which will certainly be involved . Key points must of course be taken but a wise choice of such will obviate the need for storming the mass of islands now in enemy possession . " Island hopping " with extravagant losses and slow progress ... is not my idea of how to end the war as soon and as cheaply as possible . New conditions require for solution and new weapons require for maximum application new and imaginative methods . Wars are never won in the past . 
 In New Guinea , a country without roads , large @-@ scale transportation of men and materiel would have to be accomplished by aircraft or ships . A multi @-@ pronged approach was employed to solve this problem . <unk> landing craft were shipped to Australia , where they were assembled in Cairns . The range of these small landing craft was to be greatly extended by the landing ships of the VII Amphibious Force , which began arriving in late 1942 , and formed part of the newly formed Seventh Fleet . Since the Seventh Fleet had no aircraft carriers , the range of naval operations was limited by that of the fighter aircraft of the Fifth Air Force . 
 Lieutenant General Walter Krueger 's Sixth Army headquarters arrived in SWPA in early 1943 but MacArthur had only three American divisions , and they were tired and depleted from the fighting at Battle of Buna – Gona and Battle of Guadalcanal . As a result , " it became obvious that any military offensive in the South @-@ West Pacific in 1943 would have to be carried out mainly by the Australian Army . " The offensive began with the landing at Lae by the Australian 9th Division on 4 September 1943 . The next day , MacArthur watched the landing at Nadzab by paratroops of the 503rd Parachute Infantry . His B @-@ 17 made the trip on three engines because one failed soon after leaving Port Moresby , but he insisted that it fly on to Nadzab . For this , he was awarded the Air Medal . 
 The Australian 7th and 9th Divisions converged on Lae , which fell on 16 September . MacArthur advanced his timetable , and ordered the 7th to capture Kaiapit and Dumpu , while the 9th mounted an amphibious assault on Finschhafen . Here , the offensive bogged down , partly because MacArthur had based his decision to assault Finschhafen on Willoughby 's assessment that there were only 350 Japanese defenders at Finschhafen , when in fact there were nearly 5 @,@ 000 . A furious battle ensued . 
 In early November , MacArthur 's plan for a westward advance along the coast of New Guinea to the Philippines was incorporated into plans for the war against Japan . Three months later , airmen reported no signs of enemy activity in the Admiralty Islands . Although Willoughby did not agree that the islands had been evacuated , MacArthur ordered an amphibious landing there , commencing the Admiralty Islands campaign . He accompanied the assault force aboard the light cruiser Phoenix , the flagship of Vice Admiral Thomas C. Kinkaid , the new commander of the Seventh Fleet , and came ashore seven hours after the first wave of landing craft , for which he was awarded the Bronze Star . It took six weeks of fierce fighting before the 1st Cavalry Division captured the islands . 
 MacArthur had one of the most powerful PR machines of any Allied general during the war , which made him into an extremely popular war hero with the American people . In late 1943 @-@ early 1944 , there was a serious effort by the conservative faction in the Republican Party centered in the Midwest who regarded the two men most likely to win the Republican nomination to be the candidate for the presidency in the 1944 election , namely Wendell Willkie and Governor Thomas Dewy of New York as too liberal , to have MacArthur seek the Republican nomination . For a time , MacArthur , who long seen himself as a potential president was in the words of the U.S historian Gerhard Weinberg " very interested " in running as the Republican candidate in 1944 . However , MacArthur 's vow to " return " to the Philippines had not been fulfilled in early 1944 and he decided not to run for president until he had liberated the Philippines . 
 Furthermore , Weinberg had argued that it is probable that Roosevelt who knew of the " enormous gratuity " MacArthur had accepted from Quezon in 1942 had used his knowledge of this transaction to blackmail MacArthur into not running for president . Finally , despite the best efforts of the conservative Republicans to put MacArthur 's name on the ballot , on April 4 , 1944 , Governor Dewy won such a convincing victory in the Wisconsin primary ( regarded as a significant victory given that the Midwest was a stronghold of the conservative Republicans opposed to Dewy ) as to ensure that he would win the Republican nomination to be the GOP 's candidate for president in 1944 . 
 MacArthur now bypassed the Japanese forces at Hansa Bay and Wewak , and assaulted Hollandia and Aitape , which Willoughby reported to be lightly defended based on intelligence gathered in the Battle of Sio . MacArthur 's bold thrust by going 600 miles up the coast had surprised and confused the Japanese high command , who had not anticipated that MacArthur would take such risks . Although they were out of range of the Fifth Air Force 's fighters based in the Ramu Valley , the timing of the operation allowed the aircraft carriers of Nimitz 's Pacific Fleet to provide air support . Though risky , the operation turned out to be another success . MacArthur caught the Japanese off balance and cut off Lieutenant General Hatazō Adachi 's Japanese XVIII Army in the Wewak area . Because the Japanese were not expecting an attack , the garrison was weak , and Allied casualties were correspondingly light . However , the terrain turned out to be less suitable for airbase development than first thought , forcing MacArthur to seek better locations further west . While bypassing Japanese forces had great tactical merit , it had the strategic drawback of tying up Allied troops to contain them . Moreover , Adachi was far from beaten , which he demonstrated in the Battle of Driniumor River . 
 = = = Philippines Campaign ( 1944 – 45 ) = = = 
 = = = = Leyte = = = = 
 In July 1944 , President Roosevelt summoned MacArthur to meet with him in Hawaii " to determine the phase of action against Japan . " Nimitz made the case for attacking Formosa . MacArthur stressed America 's moral obligation to liberate the Philippines . In September , Admiral William Halsey , Jr . ' s carriers made a series of air strikes on the Philippines . Opposition was feeble and Halsey concluded , incorrectly , that Leyte was " wide open " and possibly undefended , and recommended that projected operations be skipped in favor of an assault on Leyte . 
 On 20 October 1944 , troops of Krueger 's Sixth Army landed on Leyte , while MacArthur watched from the light cruiser USS Nashville . That afternoon he arrived off the beach . The advance had not progressed far ; snipers were still active and the area was under sporadic mortar fire . When his whaleboat grounded in knee @-@ deep water , MacArthur requested a landing craft , but the beachmaster was too busy to grant his request . MacArthur was compelled to wade ashore . In his prepared speech , he said : 
 People of the Philippines : I have returned . By the grace of Almighty God our forces stand again on Philippine soil — soil consecrated in the blood of our two peoples . We have come dedicated and committed to the task of destroying every vestige of enemy control over your daily lives , and of restoring upon a foundation of indestructible strength , the liberties of your people . 
 Since Leyte was out of range of Kenney 's land @-@ based aircraft , MacArthur was dependent on carrier aircraft . Japanese air activity soon increased , with raids on Tacloban , where MacArthur decided to establish his headquarters , and on the fleet offshore . MacArthur enjoyed staying on Nashville 's bridge during air raids , although several bombs landed close by , and two nearby cruisers were hit . Over the next few days , the Japanese counterattacked in the Battle of Leyte Gulf , resulting in a near @-@ disaster that MacArthur attributed to the command being divided between himself and Nimitz . Nor did the campaign ashore proceed smoothly . Heavy monsoonal rains disrupted the airbase construction program . Carrier aircraft proved to be no substitute for land @-@ based aircraft , and the lack of air cover permitted the Japanese to pour troops into Leyte . Adverse weather and tough Japanese resistance slowed the American advance , resulting in a protracted campaign . 
 By the end of December , Krueger 's headquarters estimated that 5 @,@ 000 Japanese remained on Leyte , and on 26 December MacArthur issued a communiqué announcing that " the campaign can now be regarded as closed except for minor mopping up . " Yet Eichelberger 's Eighth Army killed another 27 @,@ 000 Japanese on Leyte before the campaign ended in May 1945 . On 18 December 1944 , MacArthur was promoted to the new five @-@ star rank of General of the Army , placing him in the company of Marshall , Eisenhower , Henry " Hap " Arnold , and the only four men to achieve the rank in World War II , and along with Omar Bradley , one of only five men to achieve the rank since the 5 August 1888 death of Philip Sheridan , as well as the only five American officers to hold the rank as a Five @-@ star general . MacArthur was senior to all but Marshall . The rank was created by an Act of Congress when Public Law 78 – 482 was passed on 14 December 1944 , as a temporary rank , subject to reversion to permanent rank six months after the end of the war . The temporary rank was then declared permanent 23 March 1946 by Public Law 333 of the 79th Congress , which also awarded full pay and allowances in the grade to those on the retired list . 
 = = = = Luzon = = = = 
 MacArthur 's next move was the invasion of Mindoro , where there were good potential airfield sites . Willoughby estimated , correctly as it turned out , that the island had only about 1 @,@ 000 Japanese defenders . The problem this time was getting there . Kinkaid balked at sending escort carriers into the restricted waters of the Sulu Sea , and Kenney could not guarantee land based air cover . The operation was clearly hazardous , and MacArthur 's staff talked him out of accompanying the invasion on Nashville . As the invasion force entered the Sulu Sea , a kamikaze struck Nashville , killing 133 people and wounding 190 more . Australian and American engineers had three airstrips in operation within two weeks , but the resupply convoys were repeatedly attacked by kamikazes . During this time , MacArthur quarreled with Sutherland , notorious for his abrasiveness , over the latter 's mistress , Captain Elaine Clark . MacArthur had instructed Sutherland not to be bring Clark to Leyte , due to a personal undertaking to Curtin that Australian women on the GHQ staff would not be taken to the Philippines , but Sutherland had brought her along anyway . 
 The way was now clear for the invasion of Luzon . This time , based on different interpretations of the same intelligence data , Willoughby estimated the strength of General Tomoyuki Yamashita 's forces on Luzon at 137 @,@ 000 , while Sixth Army estimated it at 234 @,@ 000 . MacArthur 's response was " Bunk ! " . He felt that even Willoughby 's estimate was too high . " Audacity , calculated risk , and a clear strategic aim were MacArthur 's attributes " , and he disregarded the estimates . In fact , they were too low ; Yamashita had more than 287 @,@ 000 troops on Luzon . This time , MacArthur traveled aboard the light cruiser USS Boise , watching as the ship was nearly hit by a bomb and torpedoes fired by midget submarines . His communiqué read : " The decisive battle for the liberation of the Philippines and the control of the Southwest Pacific is at hand . General MacArthur is in personal command at the front and landed with his assault troops . " 
 MacArthur 's primary concern was the capture of the port of Manila and the airbase at Clark Field , which were required to support future operations . He urged his commanders on . On 25 January 1945 , he moved his advanced headquarters forward to Hacienda Luisita , closer to the front than Krueger 's . He ordered the 1st Cavalry Division to conduct a rapid advance on Manila . It reached the northern outskirts of Manila on 3 February , but , unknown to the Americans , Rear Admiral Sanji Iwabuchi had decided to defend Manila to the death . The Battle of Manila raged for the next three weeks . To spare the civilian population , MacArthur prohibited the use of air strikes , but thousands of civilians died in the crossfire or Japanese massacres . He also refused to restrict the traffic of civilians who clogged the roads in and out of Manila , placing humanitarian concerns above military ones except in emergencies . For his part in the capture of Manila , MacArthur was awarded his third Distinguished Service Cross . 
 After taking Manila , MacArthur installed one of his Filipino friends , Manuel Roxas @-@ who also happened to be one of the few people who knew about the huge sum of money Quezon had given MacArthur in 1942 @-@ into a position of power that ensured Roxas was to become the next Filipino president . Roxas had been a leading Japanese collaborator serving in the puppet government of Jose Laurel , but MacArthur claimed that Roxas had secretly been an American agent all the long . About MacArthur 's claim that Roxas was really part of the resistance , the American historian Gerhard Weinberg wrote that " ... evidence to this effect has yet to surface " , and that by favoring the Japanese collaborator Roxas , MacArthur ensured there was no serious effort to address the issue of Filipino collaboration with the Japanese after the war . 
 After the Battle of Manila , MacArthur turned his attention to Yamashita , who had retreated into the mountains of central and northern Luzon . Yamashita chose to fight a defensive campaign , being pushed back slowly by Krueger , and was still holding out at the time the war ended , much to MacArthur 's intense annoyance as he had wished to liberate the entire Philippines before the war ended . On 2 September 1945 , Yamashita ( who had a hard time believing that the Emperor had ordered Japan to sign an armistice ) came down from the mountains to surrender with some 100 @,@ 000 of his men . 
 = = = = Southern Philippines = = = = 
 Although MacArthur had no specific directive to do so , and the fighting on Luzon was far from over , he committed his forces to liberate the remainder of the Philippines . In the GHQ communiqué on 5 July , he announced that the Philippines had been liberated and all operations ended , although Yamashita still held out in northern Luzon . Starting in May 1945 , MacArthur used his Australian troops in the invasion of Borneo . He accompanied the assault on Labuan , and visited the troops ashore . While returning to GHQ in Manila , he visited Davao , where he told Eichelberger that no more than 4 @,@ 000 Japanese remained alive on Mindanao . A few months later , six times that number surrendered . In July 1945 , he was awarded his fourth Distinguished Service Medal . 
 As part of preparations for Operation Downfall , the invasion of Japan , MacArthur became commander in chief U.S. Army Forces Pacific ( AFPAC ) , in charge of all Army and Army Air Force units in the Pacific , except the Twentieth Air Force , in April 1945 . At the same time , Nimitz became commander of all naval forces . Command in the Pacific therefore remained divided . During his planning of the invasion of Japan , MacArthur stressed to the decision @-@ makers in Washington that it was essential to have the Soviet Union enter the war as he argued it was crucial to have the Red Army tie down the Kwantung army in Manchuria . The invasion was pre @-@ empted by the surrender of Japan in August 1945 . On 2 September MacArthur accepted the formal Japanese surrender aboard the battleship USS Missouri , thus ending hostilities in World War II . In recognition of his role as a maritime strategist , the U.S. Navy awarded him the Navy Distinguished Service Medal . 
 = = Occupation of Japan = = 
 = = = Protecting the Emperor = = = 
 On 29 August 1945 , MacArthur was ordered to exercise authority through the Japanese government machinery , including the Emperor Hirohito . MacArthur 's headquarters was located in the Dai Ichi Life Insurance Building in Tokyo . Unlike in Germany , where the Allies had in May 1945 abolished the German state , the Americans chose to allow the Japanese state to continue to exist , albeit under their ultimate control . Unlike Germany , there was a certain partnership between the occupiers and occupied as MacArthur decided to rule Japan via the Emperor and the most of the rest of the Japanese elite . The Emperor was a living god to the Japanese people , and MacArthur found that ruling via the Emperor made his job in running Japan much easier than it would otherwise would have been . 
 As such , MacArthur took the view that a few " militarist " extremists had " hijacked " Japan starting in 1931 with the Mukden Incident , the Emperor was a pro @-@ Western " moderate " who had been powerless to stop the militarists , and thus he borne no responsibility for any of the war crimes committed by the Japanese between 1931 @-@ 45 . The American historian Herbert P. Bix described the relationship between the general and the Emperor as : " Henceforth the Allied commander would use the Emperor , and the Emperor would cooperate in being used . Their relationship become one of expediency and mutual protection , of more political benefit to Hirohito than to MacArthur because Hirohito had more to lose @-@ the entire panoply of symbolic , legitimizing properties of the imperial throne " . At the same time , MacArthur had attacked the imperial mystique when his staff released the famous picture of his first meeting with the Emperor , whose impact on the Japanese public was electric as the Japanese people for the first time saw the Emperor as a mere man overshadowed by the much taller MacArthur instead of the living god he always been portrayed as . Up to 1945 , the Emperor had been a remote , mysterious figure to his people , rarely seen in public and always silent , whose photographs were always taken from a certain angle to make him look more taller and more impressive than what he was really was . No Japanese photographer would had taken such a photo of the Emperor being overshadowed by MacArthur . The Japanese government immediately banned the photo of the Emperor with MacArthur under the grounds that it damaged the imperial mystique , but MacArthur rescinded the ban and ordered all of the Japanese newspapers to print it . The photo was intended as a message to the Emperor about who was going to be the senior partner in their relationship . 
 As he needed the Emperor , MacArthur protected him from any effort to hold accountable for his actions in the period 1931 @-@ 45 , and allowed him to issue statements that incorrectly portrayed the emerging democratic post @-@ war era as a continuation of the Meiji era reforms . MacArthur did not allow any investigations of the Emperor , and instead in October 1945 ordered his staff " in the interests of peaceful occupation and rehabilitation of Japan , prevention of revolution and communism , all facts surrounding the execution of the declaration of war and subsequent position of the Emperor which tend to show fraud , menace or duress be marshalled " . In January 1946 , MacArthur reported to Washington that the Emperor could not be indicted for war crimes under the grounds : 
 " His indictment will unquestionably cause a tremendous convulsion among the Japanese people , the repercussions of which cannot be overestimated . He is a symbol which unites all Japanese . Destroy him and the nation will disintegrate ... It is quite possible that a million troops would be required which would have to be maintained for an indefinite number of years " . 
 To protect the Emperor from being indicted , MacArthur had one of his staff , General Bonner Fellers on 6 March 1946 during a meeting at the Dai Ichi tell the genrō Admiral Mitsumasa Yonai : 
 " To counter this situation , it would be most convenient if the Japanese side could prove to us that the Emperor is completely blameless . I think the forthcoming trials offer the best opportunity to do that . Tōjo , in particular should be made to bear all responsibility at his trial . I want you to have Tōjo say as follows : " At the imperial conference prior to the start of the war , I already decided to push for war even if his majesty the emperor was against going to war with the United States . " " 
 From the viewpoint of both sides , having one especially evil figure in the form of General Hideki Tojo whom everything that went wrong could be blamed was most politically convenient . At a second meeting on 22 March 1946 , Fellers told Admiral Yonai as recorded by his interpreter Mizota Shuichi : 
 " The most influential advocate of un @-@ American thought in the United States is Cohen ( a Jew and a Communist ) , the top adviser to Secretary of State Byrnes . As I told Yonai ... it is extremely disadvantageous to MacArthur 's standing in the United States to put on trial the very Emperor who is cooperating with him and facilitating the smooth administration of the occupation . This is the reason for my request ... " I wonder whether I said to Admiral Yonai the other day has already been conveyed to Tōjo ? " " . 
 MacArthur 's attempts to shield the Emperor from indictment and to have all the blame taken by General Tōjo were successful , which as Bix commented " ... had a lasting and profoundly distorting impact on the Japanese understanding of the lost war " . 
 = = = Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers = = = 
 As Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers ( SCAP ) in Japan , MacArthur and his staff helped Japan rebuild itself , eradicate militarism and ultra @-@ nationalism , promote political civil liberties , institute democratic government , and chart a new course that ultimately made Japan one of the world 's leading industrial powers . The U.S. was firmly in control of Japan to oversee its reconstruction , and MacArthur was effectively the interim leader of Japan from 1945 until 1948 . In 1946 , MacArthur 's staff drafted a new constitution that renounced war and stripped the Emperor of his military authority . The constitution — which became effective on 3 May 1947 — instituted a parliamentary system of government , under which the Emperor acted only on the advice of his ministers . It included the famous Article 9 , which outlawed belligerency as an instrument of state policy and the maintenance of a standing army . The constitution also enfranchised women , guaranteed fundamental human rights , outlawed racial discrimination , strengthened the powers of Parliament and the Cabinet , and decentralized the police and local government . 
 A major land reform was also conducted , led by Wolf <unk> of General Douglas MacArthur 's SCAP staff . Between 1947 and 1949 , approximately 4 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 ha ) , or 38 % of Japan 's cultivated land , was purchased from the landlords under the government 's reform program , and 4 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 860 @,@ 000 ha ) was resold to the farmers who worked them . By 1950 , 89 % of all agricultural land was owner @-@ operated and only 11 % was tenant @-@ operated . MacArthur 's efforts to encourage trade union membership met with phenomenal success , and by 1947 , 48 % of the non @-@ agricultural workforce was unionized . Some of MacArthur 's reforms were rescinded in 1948 when his unilateral control of Japan was ended by the increased involvement of the State Department . During the Occupation , SCAP successfully , if not entirely , abolished many of the financial coalitions known as the <unk> , which had previously monopolized industry . Eventually , looser industrial groupings known as <unk> evolved . The reforms alarmed many in the U.S. Departments of Defense and State , who believed they conflicted with the prospect of Japan and its industrial capacity as a bulwark against the spread of communism in Asia . 
 During this period , MacArthur , never a modest man , grew more self @-@ important and egoistical . <unk> Bowers , one of MacArthur 's aides during this period recalled : 
 When I clapped eyes on MacArthur I fell madly in love . Here was a magnificence I 'd never known and I 'd never been close to . Here was a man who moved in the highest circles , who held in personal contempt presidents , who had met kings and queens , and who knew the world in a way that I had not known up to that time . He was so overwhelmingly impressive , he had a kind of magnetism , a kind of charm that could charm the birds off the wallpaper in the room . And it was so interesting ... One of the interesting things , one of the tragic things in a way , was that all of us who were in the inner sanctum were corrupted by him . All of us , me included , felt that the more we glorified him , the more we ourselves were deified in some way . And it was remarkable how he was surrounded by , well , what Eisenhower called <unk> , but we were like disciples to a Christ . And I remember one time before I put his mail on his desk , there was a card , an open card written in pencil and I read it . It was from Anthony Storey , Major Storey , who was his pilot , who 'd gone to the Philippines on some sort of business . And he wrote this card and it said : ' To one who walks and talks with God ' . And I thought , my God in heaven . That 's his what own pilot wrote " . 
 MacArthur 's tendency to surround himself with hero @-@ worshipping officers who held him in the highest awe meant he was never contradicted by his staff or given advice that was contrary to his own inclinations . 
 Much has been made of the apparent paradox between MacArthur , a man whose political inclinations were to the right of the Republican Party who acted as a liberal reformer when he ruled Japan . On one hand , MacArthur forced through a land reform , gave women the right to vote , removed the emphasis on militarism in the educational system , imposed a constitution that renounced the right to wage war , and sought to club the power of the zaibatsu . On the other hand , MacArthur 's intelligence chief General Charles A. Willoughby , whom MacArthur called " my lovable fascist " cultivated connections with former members of the Japanese military and secret police . Like Willoughby , MacArthur believed that Communism was part of a Jewish conspiracy to take over the world and he often complained that too many officials sent out by Washington to help govern Japan were Jewish and thus Communists . MacArthur told the British diplomat Sir <unk> Gascoigne in 1948 that Eisenhower could not be considered a potential president or even a " good Republican " because he had " Jewish blood in his veins " . Remarks like that led the American Japanologist Michael Schaller to comment : " Attacking a rival as a Jew was a frequent MacArthur tactic " . 
 Willoughby had developed an elaborate conspiracy theory that the spy network created by the Soviet spy Richard Sorge was still in existence and that members of the Sorge spy network were now occupying positions of power in Washington , who in turn were responsible for the fall of the Kuomintang government in China in 1949 . With MacArthur 's approval , <unk> leaked this theory about the Sorge spy network 's supposed power in Washington to House Un @-@ American Activities Committee in the late 1940s , leading to long investigations of the State Department officials whom Willoughby had accused of being part of the Sorge spy network . Schaller argued this paradox between MacArthur the liberal reformer vs. MacArthur the ultra @-@ conservative anti @-@ Semite can be easily explained by the fact that MacArthur 's primary aim was always to win the Republican nomination for presidency and he needed to be seen as a success in ruling Japan to win the nomination . Almost all Americans during the war believed that Japan needed drastic reforms after the war , and as such an American occupation of Japan that did not carry out reforms would be seen as a failure by the American people . MacArthur , despite all of his talk about leading a " revolution " in Japan shared many of the same assumptions promoted by former ambassador Joseph C. Grew who believed that pre @-@ war Japan had been an essentially normal society that had unfortunately been " hijacked " in the 1930s by a few " fanatics " , and as such , Japan really did not need radical reforms . Grew argued against those who claimed that Japan had carried out a flawed modernization with the Meiji Restoration and needed deep structural reforms that on the contrary , all that was needed was to remove the handful of " fanatics " and Japan would revert to the " normal " country it had been before 1931 . It was MacArthur 's political ambitions that drove him to carry out reforms in Japan , not a genuine belief in their desirability . <unk> wrote that MacArthur would oscillate between the conservative stance favored by Grew vs. the liberal stance favored by the " New Dealers " as the officials who favored deep reforms were known , and such shifts in emphasis had everything to do with his desire to be the Republican candidate for president , and nothing to do with the Cold War , what Washington wanted or the question of how much of a " normal " nation had Japan had been prior to World War II . 
 In 1948 , MacArthur made a bid to win the Republican nomination to be the GOP candidate for president , which was the most serious of several efforts he made over the years . MacArthur 's status as one of America 's most popular war heroes together with his reputation as the statesman who had " transformed " Japan gave him a strong basis for running for president , but MacArthur 's lack of connections within the GOP were a major handicap . MacArthur 's strongest supporters came from the quasi @-@ isolationist , Midwestern wing of the Republicans and embraced men such as Brigadier General Hanford MacNider , Philip La Follette , and Brigadier General Robert E. Wood , a diverse collection of " Old Right " and Progressive Republicans only united by a belief that the U.S. was too much involved in Europe for its own good . MacArthur declined to campaign for the presidency himself , but he privately encouraged his supporters to put his name on the ballot . MacArthur had always stated he would retire when a peace treaty was signed with Japan , and his push in the fall of 1947 to have the U.S sign a peace treaty with Japan was intended to allow him to retire on a high note , and thus campaign for the presidency . For the same reasons , Truman subverted MacArthur 's efforts to have peace treaty signed in 1947 , saying that more time was needed before the U.S could formally make peace with Japan . 
 Without a peace treaty , MacArthur decided not to resign while at the same time writing letters to his friend General Wood saying he would be more than happy to accept the Republican nomination if it were offered to him . In late 1947 @-@ early 1948 , MacArthur received several Republican grandees in Tokyo while General Robert Eichelberger wrote in his diary that MacArthur was obsessed with becoming president . On 9 March 1948 MacArthur issued a press statement declaring his interest in being the Republican candidate for president , saying he would be honored if the GOP were to nominate him , but would not resign from the Army to campaign for the presidency . The press statement had been forced by Wood , who told MacArthur that it was impossible to campaign for a man who was not officially running for president , and that MacArthur could either declare his candidacy or see Wood cease campaigning for him . MacArthur 's supporters made a major effort to win the Wisconsin Republican primary held on 6 April 1948 . MacArthur 's refusal to campaign badly hurt his chances and the 1948 Wisconsin primary was won to everybody 's surprise by Harold Stassen . The defeat in Wisconsin followed by defeat in Nebraska effectively ended MacArthur 's chances of winning the Republican nomination , but MacArthur refused to withdraw his name until the 1948 Republican convention which was won by Governor Thomas Dewy of New York . 
 In an address to Congress on 19 April 1951 , MacArthur declared : 
 The Japanese people since the war have undergone the greatest reformation recorded in modern history . With a commendable will , eagerness to learn , and marked capacity to understand , they have from the ashes left in war 's wake erected in Japan an edifice dedicated to the supremacy of individual liberty and personal dignity , and in the ensuing process there has been created a truly representative government committed to the advance of political morality , freedom of economic enterprise , and social justice . 
 MacArthur handed over power to the Japanese government in 1949 , but remained in Japan until relieved by President Harry S. Truman on 11 April 1951 . The San Francisco Peace Treaty , signed on 8 September 1951 , marked the end of the Allied occupation , and when it went into effect on 28 April 1952 , Japan was once again an independent state . The Japanese subsequently gave him the nickname <unk> Shogun ( " foreign military ruler " ) but not until around the time of his death in 1964 . 
 = = = War crimes trials = = = 
 MacArthur was responsible for confirming and enforcing the sentences for war crimes handed down by the International Military Tribunal for the Far East . In late 1945 , Allied military commissions in various cities of the Orient tried 5 @,@ 700 Japanese , Taiwanese and Koreans for war crimes . About 4 @,@ 300 were convicted , almost 1 @,@ 000 sentenced to death , and hundreds given life imprisonment . The charges arose from incidents that included the Rape of Nanking , the Bataan Death March and Manila massacre . The trial in Manila of Yamashita was criticized because he was hanged for Iwabuchi 's Manila massacre , which he had not ordered and of which he was probably unaware . Iwabuchi had killed himself as the battle for Manila was ending . 
 MacArthur gave immunity to Shiro Ishii and other members of the bacteriological research units in exchange for germ warfare data based on human experimentation . He also exempted the Emperor and all members of the imperial family implicated in war crimes , including Princes Chichibu , Asaka , Takeda , Higashikuni and Fushimi , from criminal prosecutions . MacArthur confirmed that the emperor 's abdication would not be necessary . In doing so , he ignored the advice of many members of the imperial family and Japanese intellectuals who publicly called for the abdication of the Emperor and the implementation of a regency . 
 = = Korean War = = 
 = = = South to the Naktong , North to the Yalu = = = 
 On 25 June 1950 , North Korea invaded South Korea , starting the Korean War . The United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 82 , which authorized a United Nations ( UN ) force to assist South Korea . The UN empowered the American government to select a commander , and the Joint Chiefs of Staff unanimously recommended MacArthur . He therefore became Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the United Nations Command ( <unk> ) , while remaining SCAP in Japan and Commander of the USAFFE . All South Korean forces were also placed under his command . As they retreated before the North Korean onslaught , MacArthur received permission to commit U.S. ground forces . All the first units to arrive could do was trade men and ground for time , falling back to the Pusan Perimeter . During the summer of 1950 , MacArthur exhibited wild mood swings , at one moment saying he could defeat the North Koreans with " one hand tied behind his back " , and at other moments being in the words of his staff " a dejected , completely despondent man " who talked about abandoning South Korea . By the end of August , the crisis subsided . North Korean attacks on the perimeter had tapered off . While the North Korean force numbered 88 @,@ 000 troops , Lieutenant General Walton Walker 's Eighth Army now numbered 180 @,@ 000 , and he had more tanks and artillery pieces . 
 In 1949 , the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , General of the Army Omar Bradley , had predicted that " large scale combined amphibious operations ... will never occur again , " but by July 1950 , MacArthur was planning just such an operation . MacArthur compared his plan with that of General James Wolfe at the Battle of the Plains of Abraham , and brushed aside the problems of tides , <unk> and terrain . In September , despite lingering concerns from superiors , MacArthur 's soldiers and marines made a successful landing at Inchon , deep behind North Korean lines . Launched with naval and close air support , the landing outflanked the North Koreans , recaptured Seoul and forced them to retreat northward in disarray . Visiting the battlefield on 17 September , MacArthur surveyed six T @-@ 34 tanks that had been knocked out by Marines , ignoring sniper fire around him , except to note that the North Korean marksmen were poorly trained . 
 On 11 September , Truman issued orders for an advance beyond the 38th parallel into North Korea . MacArthur now planned another amphibious assault , on Wonsan on the east coast , but it fell to South Korean troops before the 1st Marine Division could reach it by sea . In October , MacArthur met with Truman at the Wake Island Conference , with Truman emulating Roosevelt 's wartime meeting with MacArthur in Hawaii . On the day before the meeting , Truman who disliked MacArthur on the account of his ego said : " Tomorrow , I have to talk with God 's right @-@ hand man " . The president awarded MacArthur his fifth Distinguished Service Medal . Briefly questioned about the Chinese threat , MacArthur dismissed it , saying that he hoped to be able to withdraw the Eighth Army to Japan by Christmas , and to release a division for service in Europe in January . MacArthur called the possibility of Chinese intervention " pure bluff " . He regarded the possibility of Soviet intervention as a more serious threat . MacArthur reported to Washington that he " had plenty of troops to deal adequately with the Chinese and even with the Russians if they should prove so foolish as to enter the area at this stage " . 
 A month later , things had changed . The enemy were engaged by the UN forces at the Battle of Unsan in late October , which demonstrated the presence of Chinese soldiers in Korea and rendered significant losses to the American and other UN troops . Nevertheless , Willoughby downplayed the evidence about Chinese intervention in the war . He estimated that up to 71 @,@ 000 Chinese soldiers were in the country , while the true number was closer to 300 @,@ 000 . He was not alone in this miscalculation . On 24 November , the Central Intelligence Agency reported to Truman that while there could be as many as 200 @,@ 000 Chinese troops in Korea , " there is no evidence that the Chinese Communists plan major offensive operations . " 
 That day , MacArthur flew to Walker 's headquarters and he later wrote : 
 For five hours I toured the front lines . In talking to a group of officers I told them of General Bradley 's desire and hope to have two divisions home by Christmas ... What I had seen at the front line worried me greatly . The <unk> troops were not yet in good shape , and the entire line was deplorably weak in numbers . If the Chinese were actually in heavy force , I decided I would withdraw our troops and abandon any attempt to move north . I decided to reconnoiter and try to see with my own eyes , and interpret with my own long experience what was going on ... 
 MacArthur flew over the front line himself in his Douglas C @-@ 54 Skymaster but saw no signs of a Chinese build up and therefore decided to wait before ordering an advance or withdrawal . Evidence of the Chinese activity was hidden to MacArthur : the Chinese Army traveled at night and dug in during the day . For his reconnaissance efforts , MacArthur was nonetheless awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross and honorary combat pilot 's wings . 
 The next day , 25 November 1950 , Walker 's Eighth Army was attacked by the Chinese Army and soon the UN forces were in retreat . MacArthur provided the Chief of Staff , General J. Lawton Collins with a series of nine successive withdrawal lines . On 23 December , Walker was killed when his jeep collided with a truck , and was replaced by Lieutenant General Matthew B. Ridgway , whom MacArthur had selected in case of such an eventuality . Ridgway noted that MacArthur 's " prestige , which had gained an extraordinary luster after Incheon , was badly tarnished . His credibility suffered in the unforeseen outcome of the November offensive ... " 
 Collins discussed the possible use of nuclear weapons in Korea with MacArthur in December , and later asked him for a list of targets in the Soviet Union in case it entered the war . MacArthur testified before the Congress in 1951 that he had never recommended the use of nuclear weapons . He did at one point consider a plan to cut off North Korea with radioactive poisons ; he did not recommend it at the time , although he later broached the matter with Eisenhower , then president @-@ elect , in 1952 . In 1954 , in an interview published after his death , he stated he had wanted to drop atomic bombs on enemy bases , but in 1960 , he challenged a statement by Truman that he had advocated using atomic bombs . Truman issued a retraction , stating that he had no evidence of the claim ; it was merely his personal opinion . 
 In April 1951 , the Joint Chiefs of Staff drafted orders for MacArthur authorizing nuclear attacks on Manchuria and the Shantung Peninsula if the Chinese launched airstrikes originating from there against his forces . The next day Truman met with the chairman of the United States Atomic Energy Commission , Gordon Dean , and arranged for the transfer of nine Mark 4 nuclear bombs to military control . Dean was apprehensive about delegating the decision on how they should be used to MacArthur , who lacked expert technical knowledge of the weapons and their effects . The Joint Chiefs were not entirely comfortable about giving them to MacArthur either , for fear that he might prematurely carry out his orders . Instead , they decided that the nuclear strike force would report to the Strategic Air Command . 
 = = = Removal from command = = = 
 Within weeks of the Chinese attack , MacArthur was forced to retreat from North Korea . Seoul fell in January 1951 , and both Truman and MacArthur were forced to contemplate the prospect of abandoning Korea entirely . European countries did not share MacArthur 's world view , distrusted his judgment , and were afraid that he might use his stature and influence with the American public to re @-@ focus American policy away from Europe and towards Asia . They were concerned that this might lead to a major war with China , possibly involving nuclear weapons . Since in February 1950 the Soviet Union and China had signed a defensive alliance committing each to go to war if the other party was attacked , the possibility that an American attack on China would cause World War Three was considered to be very real at the time . In a visit to the United States in December 1950 , the British prime minister , Clement Attlee , had raised the fears of the British and other European governments that " General MacArthur was running the show . " 
 Under Ridgway 's command , the Eighth Army pressed north again in January . He inflicted heavy casualties on the Chinese , recaptured Seoul in March 1951 , and pushed on to the 38th Parallel . With the improved military situation , Truman now saw the opportunity to offer a negotiated peace but , on 24 March , MacArthur called upon China to admit that it had been defeated , simultaneously challenging both the Chinese and his own superiors . Truman 's proposed announcement was shelved . 
 On 5 April , Representative Joseph William Martin , Jr . , the Republican leader in the House of Representatives , read aloud on the floor of the House a letter from MacArthur critical of Truman 's Europe @-@ first policy and limited @-@ war strategy . The letter concluded with : 
 It seems strangely difficult for some to realize that here in Asia is where the communist conspirators have elected to make their play for global conquest , and that we have joined the issue thus raised on the battlefield ; that here we fight Europe 's war with arms while the diplomats there still fight it with words ; that if we lose the war to communism in Asia the fall of Europe is inevitable , win it and Europe most probably would avoid war and yet preserve freedom . As you pointed out , we must win . There is no substitute for victory . 
 In March 1951 secret United States intercepts of diplomatic dispatches disclosed clandestine conversations in which General MacArthur expressed confidence to the Tokyo embassies of Spain and Portugal that he would succeed in expanding the Korean War into a full @-@ scale conflict with the Chinese Communists . When the intercepts came to the attention of President Truman , he was enraged to learn that MacArthur was not only trying to increase public support for his position on conducting the war , but had secretly informed foreign governments that he planned to initiate actions that were counter to United States policy . The President was unable to act immediately since he could not afford to reveal the existence of the intercepts and because of MacArthur 's popularity with the public and political support in Congress . However , following the release on April 5 by Representative Martin of MacArthur 's letter , Truman concluded he could relieve MacArthur of his commands without incurring unacceptable political damage . 
 Truman summoned Secretary of Defense George Marshall , Chairman of the Joint Chiefs Omar Bradley , Secretary of State Dean Acheson and Averell Harriman to discuss what to do about MacArthur . They concurred MacArthur should be relieved of his command , but made no recommendation to do so . Although they felt that it was correct " from a purely military point of view , " they were aware that there were important political considerations as well . Truman and Acheson agreed that MacArthur was insubordinate , but the Joint Chiefs avoided any suggestion of this . Insubordination was a military offense , and MacArthur could have requested a public court martial similar to that of Billy Mitchell . The outcome of such a trial was uncertain , and it might well have found him not guilty and ordered his reinstatement . The Joint Chiefs agreed that there was " little evidence that General MacArthur had ever failed to carry out a direct order of the Joint Chiefs , or acted in opposition to an order . " " In point of fact , " Bradley insisted , " MacArthur had stretched but not legally violated any JCS directives . He had violated the President 's 6 December directive [ not to make public statements on policy matters ] , relayed to him by the JCS , but this did not constitute violation of a JCS order . " Truman ordered MacArthur 's relief by Ridgway , and the order went out on 10 April with Bradley 's signature . 
 In a 3 December 1973 article in Time magazine , Truman was quoted as saying in the early 1960s : 
 I fired him because he wouldn 't respect the authority of the President . I didn 't fire him because he was a dumb son of a bitch , although he was , but that 's not against the law for generals . If it was , half to three @-@ quarters of them would be in jail . 
 The relief of the famous general by the unpopular politician for communicating with Congress led to a constitutional crisis , and a storm of public controversy . Polls showed that the majority of the public disapproved of the decision to relieve MacArthur . By February 1952 , almost nine months later , Truman 's approval rating had fallen to 22 percent . As of 2014 , that remains the lowest Gallup Poll approval rating recorded by any serving president . As the increasingly unpopular war in Korea dragged on , Truman 's administration was beset with a series of corruption scandals , and he eventually decided not to run for re @-@ election . Beginning on May 3 , 1951 , a Joint Senate Committee — chaired by Democrat Richard Russell , Jr . — investigated MacArthur 's removal . It concluded that " the removal of General MacArthur was within the constitutional powers of the President but the circumstances were a shock to national pride . " 
 = = Later life = = 
 A day after his arrival in San Francisco from Korea on April 18 , 1951 , MacArthur had flown with his family to Washington , D.C. where he was scheduled to address a joint session of Congress . It was his and Jean 's first visit to the continental United States since 1937 , when they had been married ; Arthur IV , now aged 13 , had never been to the U.S. And , on April 19 , 1951 , MacArthur made his last official appearance in a farewell address to the U.S. Congress presenting and defending his side of his disagreement with Truman over the conduct of the Korean War . During his speech , he was interrupted by fifty ovations . MacArthur ended the address saying : 
 I am closing my 52 years of military service . When I joined the Army , even before the turn of the century , it was the fulfillment of all of my boyish hopes and dreams . The world has turned over many times since I took the oath on the plain at West Point , and the hopes and dreams have long since vanished , but I still remember the refrain of one of the most popular barrack ballads of that day which proclaimed most proudly that " old soldiers never die ; they just fade away . " 
 And like the old soldier of that ballad , I now close my military career and just fade away , an old soldier who tried to do his duty as God gave him the light to see that duty . 
 Good Bye . 
 MacArthur received public adulation , which aroused expectations that he would run for president , but he was not a candidate . MacArthur carried out a speaking tour in 1951 – 52 attacking the Truman administration for " appeasement in Asia " and for mismanaging the economy . Initially attracting large crowds , by early 1952 MacArthur 's speeches were attracting smaller and smaller numbers of people as many complained that MacArthur seemed more interested in settling scores with Truman and praising himself than in offering up a constructive vision for the nation . MacArthur felt uncomfortable campaigning for the Republican nomination , and hoped that at the Republican convention , a deadlock would ensue between Senator Robert Taft and General Eisenhower , which would end with the GOP nominating him as the best compromise . MacArthur 's unwillingness to campaign for the presidency seriously hurt his ability to win the nomination . In the end , MacArthur endorsed Senator Robert A. Taft , and was keynote speaker at the 1952 Republican National Convention . Taft lost the nomination to Eisenhower , who went on to win the 1952 election by a landslide . Once elected , Eisenhower consulted with MacArthur about ending the war in Korea . 
 Douglas and Jean MacArthur spent their last years together in the penthouse of the Waldorf Towers , a part of the Waldorf @-@ Astoria Hotel . He was elected Chairman of the Board of Remington Rand . In that year , he earned a salary of $ 68 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 612 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) , in addition to $ 20 @,@ 000 pay and allowances as a General of the Army . The Waldorf became the setting for an annual birthday party on 26 January thrown by the general 's former deputy chief engineer , Major General Leif J. Sverdrup . At the 1960 celebration for MacArthur 's 80th birthday , many of his friends were startled by the general 's obviously deteriorating health . The next day , he collapsed and was rushed into surgery at St. Luke 's Hospital to control a severely swollen prostate . 
 After his recovery , MacArthur methodically began to carry out the closing acts of his life . He visited the White House for a final reunion with Eisenhower . In 1961 , he made a " sentimental journey " to the Philippines , where he was decorated by President Carlos P. Garcia with the Philippine Legion of Honor . MacArthur also accepted a $ 900 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 7 @.@ 25 million in 2016 ) advance from Henry Luce for the rights to his memoirs , and wrote the volume that would eventually be published as Reminiscences . Sections began to appear in serialized form in Life magazine in the months before his death . 
 President John F. Kennedy solicited MacArthur 's counsel in 1961 . The first of two meetings was held shortly after the Bay of Pigs Invasion . MacArthur was extremely critical of the military advice given to Kennedy , and cautioned the young President to avoid a U.S. military build @-@ up in Vietnam , pointing out that domestic problems should be given a much greater priority . Shortly before his death , MacArthur gave similar advice to President Lyndon B. Johnson . 
 In 1962 , West Point honored the increasingly frail MacArthur with the Sylvanus Thayer Award for outstanding service to the nation , which had gone to Eisenhower the year before . MacArthur 's speech to the cadets in accepting the award had as its theme Duty , Honor , Country : 
 " The shadows are lengthening for me . The twilight is here . My days of old have vanished , tone and tint . They have gone glimmering through the dreams of things that were . Their memory is one of wondrous beauty , watered by tears , and coaxed and caressed by the smiles of yesterday . I listen vainly , but with thirsty ears , for the witching melody of faint bugles blowing reveille , of far drums beating the long roll . In my dreams I hear again the crash of guns , the rattle of musketry , the strange , mournful mutter of the battlefield . But in the evening of my memory , always I come back to West Point . Always there echoes and re @-@ echoes : Duty , Honor , Country . Today marks my final roll call with you , but I want you to know that when I cross the river my last conscious thoughts will be of The Corps , and The Corps , and The Corps . I bid you farewell . " 
 In 1963 , President Kennedy asked MacArthur to help mediate a dispute between the National Collegiate Athletic Association and the Amateur Athletic Union over control of amateur sports in the country . The dispute threatened to derail the participation of the United States in the 1964 Summer Olympics . His presence helped to broker a deal , and participation in the games went on as planned . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Douglas MacArthur died at Walter Reed Army Medical Center on 5 April 1964 , of biliary cirrhosis . Kennedy had authorized a state funeral before his own death in 1963 , and Johnson confirmed the directive , ordering that MacArthur be buried " with all the honor a grateful nation can bestow on a departed hero . " On 7 April , his body was taken on a funeral train to Union Station and transported by a funeral procession to the Capitol , where it lay in state . An estimated 150 @,@ 000 people filed by the bier . The body was finally laid to rest in the rotunda of the Douglas MacArthur Memorial in Norfolk , Virginia . 
 In 1960 , the mayor of Norfolk , Virginia , had proposed using funds raised by public contribution to remodel the old Norfolk City Hall as a memorial to General MacArthur and as a repository for his papers , decorations , and mementos he had accepted . Restored and remodeled , the MacArthur Memorial contains nine museum galleries whose contents reflect the general 's 50 years of military service . At the heart of the memorial is a rotunda . In its center lies a sunken circular crypt with two marble sarcophagi , one for MacArthur , the other for Jean , who continued to live in the Waldorf Towers until her own death in 2000 . 
 MacArthur has a contested legacy . In the Philippines in 1942 , he suffered a defeat that Gavin Long described as " the greatest in the history of American foreign wars . " Despite this , " in a fragile period of the American psyche when the general American public , still stunned by the shock of Pearl Harbor and uncertain what lay ahead in Europe , desperately needed a hero , they wholeheartedly embraced Douglas MacArthur — good press copy that he was . There simply were no other choices that came close to matching his mystique , not to mention his evocative lone @-@ wolf stand — something that has always resonated with Americans . " 
 MacArthur 's concept of the role of the soldier as encompassing a broad spectrum of roles that included civil affairs , quelling riots and low @-@ level conflict , was dismissed by the majority of officers who had fought in Europe during World War II , and afterwards saw the Army 's role as fighting the Soviet Union . Unlike them , in his victories in New Guinea in 1944 , the Philippines in 1945 and Korea in 1950 , he fought outnumbered , and relied on maneuver and surprise for success . The American Sinologist John Fairbank called MacArthur " our greatest soldier " . 
 On the other hand , Truman once remarked that he did not understand how the US Army could " produce men such as Robert E. Lee , John J. Pershing , Eisenhower and Bradley and at the same time produce <unk> , Pattons and MacArthur . " His relief of MacArthur cast a long shadow over American civil @-@ military relations for decades . When Lyndon Johnson met with William Westmoreland in Honolulu in 1966 , he told him : " General , I have a lot riding on you . I hope you don 't pull a MacArthur on me . " MacArthur 's relief " left a lasting current of popular sentiment that in matters of war and peace , the military really knows best , " a philosophy which became known as " <unk> . " 
 MacArthur remains a controversial and enigmatic figure . He has been portrayed as a reactionary , although he was in many respects ahead of his time . He championed a progressive approach to the reconstruction of Japanese society , arguing that all occupations ultimately ended badly for the occupier and the occupied . He was often out of step with his contemporaries , such as in 1941 when he contended that Nazi Germany could not defeat the Soviet Union , when he argued that North Korea and China were no mere Soviet puppets , and throughout his career in his insistence that the future lay in the Far East . This implicitly rejected White American contemporary notions of their own racial superiority . He always treated Filipino and Japanese leaders with respect as equals . At the same time , his Victorian sensibilities recoiled at leveling Manila with aerial bombing , an attitude the hardened World War II generation regarded as old fashioned . When asked about MacArthur , Blamey once said that " The best and the worst things you hear about him are both true . " 
 = = = Honors and awards = = = 
 During his lifetime , MacArthur earned over 100 military decorations from the U.S. and other countries including the Medal of Honor , the French Légion d 'honneur and Croix de guerre , the Order of the Crown of Italy , the Order of Orange @-@ Nassau from the Netherlands , the Honorary Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath from Australia , and the Order of the Rising Sun with Paulownia Flowers , Grand Cordon from Japan . 
 MacArthur was enormously popular with the American public . Streets , public works , and children were named after him . Even a dance step was named after him . In 1955 , his promotion to General of the Armies was proposed in Congress , but the proposal was shelved . 
 Since 1987 the General Douglas MacArthur Leadership Awards are presented annually by the United States Army on behalf of the General Douglas MacArthur Foundation to recognize company grade officers ( lieutenants and captains ) and junior warrant officers ( warrant officer one and chief warrant officer two ) who have demonstrated the attributes of " duty , honor , country " in their professional lives and in service to their communities . 
 The MacArthur Leadership Award at the Royal Military College of Canada in Kingston , Ontario is awarded to the graduating officer cadet who demonstrates outstanding leadership performance based on the credo of Duty @-@ Honor @-@ Country and potential for future military service . 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 Several actors have portrayed MacArthur on screen . Dayton Lummis played him in the 1955 picture The Court @-@ Martial of Billy Mitchell , Henry Fonda in the television movie Collision Course : Truman vs. MacArthur in 1976 , Gregory Peck in the 1977 film MacArthur , Laurence Olivier in Inchon in 1981 , and Daniel von Bargen in the 1995 HBO film Truman . In the 2013 film Emperor he is played by Tommy Lee Jones . 
 = No Mercy ( 2005 ) = 
 No Mercy ( 2005 ) was the eighth annual No Mercy professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . The event , presented by Sony 's PlayStation 2 , took place on October 9 , 2005 , at the Toyota Center in Houston , Texas and featured wrestlers and other talent from WWE 's SmackDown ! brand . Nine professional wrestling matches were scheduled on the event 's card . 
 Three of the four championships exclusive to the SmackDown ! brand were contested for ; one was lost while the other two were retained . The main event was a standard wrestling match , in which World Heavyweight Champion Batista defeated challenger Eddie Guerrero to retain his title . One of the featured preliminary matches was a Casket match between The Ortons ( Randy and " Cowboy " Bob ) and The Undertaker . The Ortons won the match after placing Undertaker inside the casket and closing it . Another primary preliminary match was a standard match between John " Bradshaw " Layfield ( JBL ) and Rey Mysterio , which JBL won . 
 The event received 219 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys , which was greater than the 193 @,@ 000 buys the previous year 's event received . The event was claimed to be " unmerciful " by Canadian Online Explorer 's professional wrestling section , as they rated none of the matches higher than a five out of ten . When the event was released on DVD , it reached a peak position of fourth on Billboard 's DVD sales chart for recreational sports . It remained on the chart for four consecutive weeks . 
 = = Background = = 
 Nine professional wrestling matches were featured on the event 's card , which were planned with predetermined outcomes by WWE 's script writers . The buildup to these matches and scenarios that took place before , during and after the event were also planned by the script writers . The event featured wrestlers and other talent from WWE 's SmackDown ! brand , a storyline expansion in which WWE assigned its employees . Wrestlers portrayed either a villainous or fan favorite gimmick , an on @-@ screen character , for the entertainment of the audience . 
 The main rivalry heading into No Mercy was between Batista and Eddie Guerrero over the World Heavyweight Championship . On the September 16 episode of SmackDown ! , Palmer Cannon , a miscellaneous on @-@ screen authority figure of SmackDown ! , a portrayed match maker and rules enforcer , announced that Guerrero was the next challenger to Batista 's World Heavyweight Championship . Guerrero , who had recently portrayed a manipulative character , came out and claimed he was now more about compassion than manipulation . Two weeks later , on the September 30 episode of SmackDown ! , Guerrero , as part of the scripted events , accidentally hit Batista with a folding chair while attempting to hit MNM tag team member Joey Mercury . The following week , Batista showed Guerrero the footage of him hitting Batista last week . Batista , as part of their storyline , then proclaimed that he would hurt Guerrero if he were to revert to his villainous character . 
 The feud between The Undertaker and Randy Orton and " Cowboy " Bob Orton began at SummerSlam . At the event , Randy faced off against Undertaker . During the match , " Cowboy " Bob ( disguised as a fan ) came into the ring and interrupted the match . Following this , Randy pinned Undertaker after he jumped and pulled Undertaker 's head down over his shoulders , a move dubbed the RKO , to win . After the match , Randy peeled off the latex mask of the fan and revealed him to be his father , " Cowboy " Bob . On the September 16 episode of SmackDown ! , Undertaker defeated Randy . During the match , " Cowboy " Bob drove a U @-@ Haul truck down to the ring and unloaded a casket . As Undertaker went to put Randy inside the casket , he opened it and found a mannequin of himself inside . Despite this distraction , Undertaker pinned Randy after he drove Randy 's head into the mat in an upside down position , a move called the Tombstone Piledriver . The following week , druids wheeled out a casket . Undertaker appeared on the <unk> and urged The Ortons to look inside . The Ortons opened the casket and found mannequins of themselves inside . Undertaker then proclaimed that this would be their fate at No Mercy . 
 At the previous SmackDown ! brand pay @-@ per @-@ view event , The Great American Bash , The Legion of Doom ( Road Warrior Animal and Heidenreich ) defeated MNM ( Joey Mercury and Johnny Nitro ) to win the WWE Tag Team Championship . After both teams got involved in a storyline between Melina ( Melina Perez ) , who was also a member of MNM , and Christy Hemme , The Legion of Doom and Hemme versus MNM was announced for No Mercy . 
 The storyline over the WWE United States Championship began when Booker T , Orlando Jordan , and Christian each explained why they thought they deserved a title match against the champion , Chris Benoit . Theodore Long , SmackDown ! ' s on @-@ screen general manager / authority figure , then announced that Benoit could choose who he wanted to face for the title . After Jordan won a standard wrestling match between three wrestlers , also involving Booker and Christian , Benoit decided that he would face all three men in a match between the four at No Mercy . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the live broadcast of the event began , William Regal and Paul Burchill defeated Paul London and Brian Kendrick in a tag team match that aired on the Sunday Night Heat pre @-@ show . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The first match of the event was The Legion of Doom ( Road Warrior Animal and Heidenreich ) and Christy Hemme versus MNM ( Joey Mercury , Johnny Nitro , and Melina ) in a six @-@ person tag team match . After a match predominately controlled by MNM , Hemme pinned Melina after executing a Doomsday Device , performed by one wrestler hoisting the opponent on their shoulders as another wrestler climbs the ring post to the top turnbuckle and delivers a flying attack onto the opponent , to win the match for her team . The next match on the card was Bobby Lashley , who was making his WWE pay @-@ per @-@ view debut , versus Simon Dean . Lashley won the match in under two minutes after pinning Dean following an inverted powerbomb , which is performed by lifting an opponent over one 's shoulders and slamming them down in a forward position . After the match , Lashley forced Dean to eat twenty double cheeseburgers as the show progressed , with Dean eventually running into the bathroom after finding a long hair in of the burgers . 
 The third contest was a match between four wrestlers for the WWE United States Championship . Chris Benoit defended his title against Booker T , Christian , and Orlando Jordan . After a match evenly controlled by all four men , Benoit forced Christian to submit with the sharpshooter submission hold to win the match and retain the title . The match that followed saw Mr. Kennedy face off against Hardcore Holly . Kennedy controlled most of the match , as he attacked and applied various submission holds on Holly 's arm . Kennedy pinned Holly after he performed a Green Bay Plunge off the top rope . The following match was between John " Bradshaw " Layfield ( JBL ) and Rey Mysterio . The match went back and forth , as each man was able to gain the advantage numerous times . JBL pinned Mysterio following a Clothesline from Hell to win . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The sixth bout on the card was a Casket match between The Ortons ( Randy and " Cowboy " Bob ) and The Undertaker . In order for The Undertaker to win the match , he had to put both Randy and " Cowboy " Bob in the casket , which was at ringside , and close it ; for The Ortons , they had to place Undertaker in the casket and close it . Near the end of the match , Undertaker had placed " Cowboy " Bob in the casket and was attempting to place Randy in it as well . After performing a Last Ride on Randy , Undertaker went to open the casket . As he did , however , " Cowboy " Bob sprayed a fire extinguisher in his eyes . Randy then hit Undertaker with a folding chair and placed him in the casket . The Ortons closed the casket to win the bout . After the match , The Ortons , as part of the scripted events , locked Undertaker in the casket and hit it numerous times with an axe . They then poured gasoline on the casket and lit it on fire . The next match saw WWE Cruiserweight Champion Nunzio defend his title against Juventud . After a back and forth match between the two , Juventud pinned Nunzio after a sit @-@ out body slam to win the match and the Cruiserweight Championship . 
 Next was the main event , which saw Batista defend the World Heavyweight Championship against Eddie Guerrero . Towards the end of the match , Guerrero executed three vertical suplexes , a move that is performed by vertically rotating the opponent 270 ° and slamming them onto the mat , and attempted to perform a Frog Splash . Batista , however , rolled out of the way and performed a Spinebuster . Batista pinned Guerrero afterwards to win the match and retain the World Heavyweight Championship . After the match , Batista and the crowd at the arena sang " Happy Birthday " to Guerrero . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The rivalry between Batista and Eddie Guerrero ended after Guerrero unexpectedly died due to heart failure on November 13 , 2005 . Their feud was planned to continue , as Guerrero would have gone back to his villainous character . 
 The Undertaker would not be seen on @-@ screen until Survivor Series after being burned inside a casket at the event . After being the sole survivor in his elimination match , Randy Orton celebrated his victory with his father , " Cowboy " Bob Orton , and wrestlers from the SmackDown ! brand . During the celebration , druids brought out a casket and set it up in an upright position . Lightning then struck the casket and set it on fire . Undertaker emerged from the flaming casket and attacked the SmackDown wrestlers . The Ortons , however , escaped the attack . This set up a Hell in a Cell match , a match that is contested in a roofed cage inside the ring , between Randy and Undertaker at Armageddon . Undertaker defeated Randy and ended their storyline that had lasted nearly one year . 
 After successfully retaining the WWE United States Championship at the event , Chris Benoit started a rivalry with Booker T. Booker defeated Benoit for the title on the edition of October 21 of SmackDown ! to begin their feud . The following month , on the edition of November 24 of SmackDown ! , a match between Benoit and Booker for the title ended in a no @-@ contest after both men 's shoulders were on the mat while pinning one another . Theodore Long then vacated the title and announced that the two would face off against one another in a " Best of Seven series " for the title , in which the winner would be the man who won four matches over the other first . Booker defeated Benoit in the first match at Survivor Series , and eventually won the vacant title after Randy Orton , Booker 's replacement due to a legitimate injury to his ankle at a house show , defeated Benoit in the seventh and final match in January . Booker began his fourth reign as United States Champion . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The event received 219 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys , which was greater than the 193 @,@ 000 buys the previous year 's event received . The promotion 's revenue was $ 18 @.@ 8 million , which was greater than the previous year 's revenue of $ 18 @.@ 5 million . Despite the general positive fan reception of the show , Canadian Online Explorer 's professional wrestling section claimed the event was " unmerciful " and that it left fans " begging for mercy " . They rated the overall event , as well as the main event , a five out of ten . None of the matches received a rating higher than a five out of 10 . The match between Bobby Lashley and Simon Dean was rated a three out of 10 , the lowest overall . 
 The event was released on DVD on November 8 , 2005 . The DVD reached a peak position of fourth on Billboard 's DVD sales chart for recreational sports on December 3 , 2005 . It remained on the chart for four consecutive weeks , until December 24 , when it ranked ninth . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Kirk McLean = 
 Kirk Alan McLean ( born June 26 , 1966 ) is a retired Canadian professional ice hockey goaltender who played in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) for the New Jersey Devils , Vancouver Canucks , Carolina Hurricanes , Florida Panthers and New York Rangers . He played in the style of a stand @-@ up goaltender . 
 McLean played major junior hockey with the Oshawa Generals of the Ontario Hockey League ( OHL ) and was drafted in the sixth round , 107th overall by the Devils in 1984 . He played with the Devils ' American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Maine Mariners , before being traded to the Canucks in 1987 . He is best known for his 10 and a half seasons with the Canucks , during which time he was a finalist for two Vezina Trophies in 1989 and 1992 , named to two NHL All @-@ Star Games and received Second All @-@ Star Team honours . In 1994 , he backstopped the Canucks to the seventh game of the Stanley Cup Finals against the Rangers . In 1998 , he was traded away and spent the final three seasons of his career with the Hurricanes , Panthers and Rangers , before retiring in 2001 . 
 Since retiring , McLean has been a goaltending coach for the Kamloops Blazers of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) , worked in broadcasting with the Canucks ' pay @-@ per @-@ view telecasts and became a part @-@ owner of the British Columbia Hockey League ( BCHL ) ' s Burnaby Express ( now Coquitlam Express ) . He has also become involved in the restaurant business in Vancouver . 
 = = Early life = = 
 McLean was born in Willowdale , Ontario , on June 26 , 1966 and is of Scottish and smaller Irish descent , in which his mask had his family 's Scottish tartan on it . He grew up dreaming of playing for the Toronto Maple Leafs and looked up to NHL star Bernie Parent as a role model . Playing minor hockey in the Metro Toronto Hockey League ( <unk> ) with the Don Mills Flyers , he recorded a 2 @.@ 01 goals against average ( GAA ) over 26 games in the 1982 – 83 season . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = New Jersey Devils ( 1985 – 87 ) = = = 
 McLean played major junior in the Ontario Hockey League ( OHL ) for three seasons with the Oshawa Generals . Following his rookie season with the Generals , he was drafted by the New Jersey Devils in the 1984 NHL Entry Draft with their sixth pick , 107th overall . He debuted with the Devils in 1985 – 86 , appearing in two games after being called up from Oshawa on April 2 , 1986 . McLean had to compete with numerous other goaltenders in the Devils ' system for ice time . Following the club 's 1987 training camp , he and Craig Billington were sent to their AHL affiliate , the Maine Mariners , while Karl Friesen and Chris Terreri were chosen to backup Alain Chevrier . Sean Burke was also in the Devils ' system , although he was playing for the Canadian National Team at the beginning of the season . 
 McLean was called up from Maine on December 19 , 1986 , after Friesen was released and Terreri was sidelined with the flu . He arrived in New Jersey three hours before game @-@ time against the Washington Capitals that day . He appeared in relief of Chevrier after the starter allowed three goals in the first 81 seconds . McLean allowed one goal on 24 shots for the rest of the game while earning the win in a 6 – 4 comeback victory . He appeared in four games during his call @-@ up before being reassigned on January 6 , 1987 . After his return to the AHL , McLean suffered an injury , damaging cartilage in his right knee during a game on February 15 . The injury required arthroscopic surgery . He finished the campaign in Maine with a 15 @-@ 23 @-@ 4 record and 3 @.@ 22 GAA in 45 games . While training in the off @-@ season , McLean injured his left knee and underwent his second arthroscopic surgery on July 29 , 1987 . 
 = = = Vancouver Canucks ( 1987 – 98 ) = = = 
 = = = = Arrival to Stanley Cup run ( 1987 – 94 ) = = = = 
 Leading up to the 1987 – 88 season , McLean was traded , along with Greg Adams and a second round choice ( Leif <unk> ) in the 1988 NHL Entry Draft , to the Vancouver Canucks for centre Patrik Sundström and the Canucks ' second- ( Jeff Christian ) and fourth @-@ round draft picks ( Matt <unk> ) in 1988 , on September 15 , 1987 . The deal constituted the first major transactions by newly appointed Vancouver Canucks and New Jersey Devils general managers Pat Quinn and Lou Lamoriello , respectively . McLean 's acquisition was an integral part of Vancouver 's rebuilding process , led by Quinn . Within the next two years , McLean was joined in the Canucks organization by additional franchise cornerstones Trevor Linden and Pavel Bure . He became known to fans as " Captain Kirk " , in reference to the Star Trek protagonist . 
 McLean made 14 saves in his Canucks debut , recording an 8 – 2 win over the St. Louis Blues in the season opener on October 8 , 1987 . He notched his first NHL career shutout later that season on February 17 , 1988 , making 27 saves in a 5 – 0 win against the Pittsburgh Penguins . McLean split playing time with long @-@ time Canucks starter Richard Brodeur in his first season in Vancouver , playing in 41 games with an 11 @-@ 27 @-@ 4 record , 3 @.@ 71 GAA and .875 save percentage . He won his first of three Molson Cups with the Canucks at the end of the season , having earned the most three stars selections on the team . 
 McLean emerged the following season in 1988 – 89 with a winning 20 @-@ 17 @-@ 3 record , 3 @.@ 08 GAA and .891 save percentage . Early in the season , he returned to New Jersey in a game against the Devils and recorded a shutout against his former team in a 4 – 0 Canucks win on October 20 , 1988 . He went on to receive his first Vezina Trophy nomination as the league 's best goaltender and finished third in voting , losing to Patrick Roy of the Montreal Canadiens . In 1989 – 90 , McLean appeared in his first NHL All @-@ Star Game in Pittsburgh and was the top goaltender at the Skills Competition by allowing the fewest goals against for the Breakaway Relay and Rapid Fire events . He led the league in games and minutes played with 63 and 3 @,@ 738 , respectively . McLean also set Canucks records with 1 @,@ 797 shots against and 1 @,@ 581 saves ( both marks have since been surpassed ) . <unk> the Canucks to 21 wins , 33 losses and 10 ties , he won his first Cyclone Taylor Trophy as Canucks MVP and second Molson Cup . 
 Early in the 1990 – 91 season , McLean re @-@ signed with the Canucks to a one @-@ year contract with a second year option on October 16 , 1990 . He was set to make $ 145 @,@ 000 prior to re @-@ organizing his contract for the season . McLean struggled in his fourth year with the Canucks , however , recording a career @-@ worst 3 @.@ 99 GAA with a 10 @-@ 22 @-@ 3 record in 41 games . 
 McLean bounced back the following season in 1991 – 92 , starting the season with five consecutive wins to be named league player of the week for October 3 to 13 , 1991 . He set an NHL record for wins in October with nine ( McLean 's mark was matched by the Toronto Maple Leafs ' Felix Potvin and Philadelphia Flyers ' Dominic Roussel in October 1993 and surpassed by the Detroit Red Wings ' Manny Legace 's 10 wins in October 2005 ) ; he was named player of the month . Another season highlight for McLean occurred on December 4 , when he stopped all 50 shots in a game against the Montreal Canadiens to earn his third shutout of the season in a 3 – 0 win ; the performance garnered a standing ovation from Canadiens fans at the Montreal Forum . McLean went on to lead the league with five shutouts ( tied with the Chicago Blackhawks ' Ed Belfour , the Canadiens ' Patrick Roy and the Winnipeg Jets ' Bob Essensa ) and 38 wins in 65 games ( tied with the Red Wings ' Tim <unk> ) , as Vancouver won their first Smythe Division title since 1975 . He appeared in his second All @-@ Star Game , won his second Cyclone Taylor Trophy and was named to the Second All @-@ Star Team . He earned his second Vezina Trophy nomination , finishing second in voting as Roy won the award once more . He recorded personal bests with a 2 @.@ 74 GAA and 38 wins , the latter of which set a Canucks single @-@ season goaltending record . ( The mark stood for 15 years before Roberto Luongo recorded 47 wins in 2006 – 07 . ) In the subsequent 1992 playoffs , McLean recorded his first post @-@ season shutout by stopping 33 shots in a 5 – 0 win against the Winnipeg Jets in game seven of the opening round . The win eliminated the Jets after the Canucks overcame a 3 – 1 series deficit . 
 McLean appeared in 54 games in 1992 – 93 , posting a 28 @-@ 21 @-@ 3 record . He recorded three shutouts , which included back @-@ to @-@ back <unk> in January 1993 . Playing against the Los Angeles Kings in the second round of the 1993 playoffs , McLean recorded his 15th playoff win in a 7 – 2 Game 4 victory , establishing himself as the winningest playoff goaltender in Canucks history . The Canucks were , however , eliminated in six games by Los Angeles , the eventual Western Conference champions . 
 Towards the end of the 1993 – 94 season , McLean became a part of hockey history in a game against the Los Angeles Kings on March 23 , 1994 , by allowing Wayne Gretzky 's 802nd career NHL goal . The goal broke Gordie Howe 's record of 801 , making Gretzky the all @-@ time leading goal @-@ scorer in NHL history . Despite allowing the historic goal , the Canucks won the game 6 – 3 . McLean finished the season with a losing 23 – 26 – 3 record , as the Canucks finished with the seventh seed in the Western Conference . 
 McLean 's peak with the Canucks came during the subsequent 1994 Stanley Cup playoffs , when he backstopped them to the seventh game of the Stanley Cup Finals . Facing the Calgary Flames in the opening round , he made one of the most memorable plays in Canucks and NHL playoff history – a series saving stop on Flames forward Robert Reichel during the first overtime of the seventh game . Reichel had one @-@ timed a pass from Theoren Fleury on a 3 @-@ on @-@ 1 when McLean threw out both his pads to make the stop and preserve the series . With McLean out of position and Reichel having had an open net to shoot at , the red light even came on at the Olympic Saddledome to signal a goal . The following overtime , Bure scored to eliminate the Flames and advance the Canucks to the second round . 
 Vancouver defeated the Dallas Stars the following round to advance to the semi @-@ finals against the Toronto Maple Leafs . McLean posted back @-@ to @-@ back shutouts against the Leafs in the third and fourth games to tie the NHL playoff record of four shutouts in a single year ( the New York Rangers ' Mike Richter also recorded four that year ; they became the seventh and eighth goaltenders to tie the record . Five more goaltenders went on to record four shutouts until the Red Wings ' Dominik Hasek broke the record with six in 2002 ) . He also became the first goaltender to record back @-@ to @-@ back shutouts in the semifinals since the Red Wings ' Terry Sawchuk did so against the Maple Leafs in 1952 . McLean 's shutout streak lasted a total of 143 minutes and 17 seconds . 
 The Canucks went on to capture the Clarence S. Campbell Bowl as Western Conference champions to meet the New York Rangers in the Finals . McLean opened the series with a 52 @-@ save performance , including 17 in overtime , to win the first game 3 – 2 . It was the second @-@ most saves by a goaltender in a Stanley Cup Finals game , coming within four stops of Canadiens goaltender Ken Dryden 's 56 saves in 1971 against the Chicago Blackhawks . It also remained the most saves by a Canucks goaltender in a playoff game until Luongo made 72 stops in 2007 . Canucks head coach Pat Quinn commented after the game that McLean 's performance should be sent " in an instructional package ... to young goaltender [ s ] . " Although the Canucks managed to force a game seven after falling 3 – 1 in the series , they eventually lost the Stanley Cup to the Rangers by a 3 – 2 score in the final game . McLean finished the 1994 playoffs with a 15 @-@ 9 record , a 2 @.@ 29 GAA and .928 save percentage . His 1 @,@ 544 minutes played , 820 shots against and 761 saves all set playoff records ( they have since been surpassed ) . 
 = = = = Post @-@ lockout to trade ( 1994 – 97 ) = = = = 
 The following lockout @-@ shortened 1994 – 95 season , McLean appeared in 40 of the Canucks 48 games , and recorded all the team 's 18 wins . Winning his third and final Molson Cup , he posted a career @-@ high .904 save percentage along with a 2 @.@ 75 GAA . Before the season ended , McLean signed a five @-@ year contract extension that included the 1994 – 95 season , worth an approximate $ 2 @.@ 4 million per season , on April 5 , 1995 . Vancouver failed to defend their Western Conference title of the previous year 's playoffs , however , as the Chicago Blackhawks swept them in the second round . 
 McLean 's play began to slip in 1995 – 96 as his GAA inflated to 3 @.@ 54 and he recorded a losing 15 @-@ 21 @-@ 9 record . He was sidelined for six weeks during the season , beginning in January 1996 , due to a cartilage tear in his left knee that required arthroscopic surgery . Rookie Corey Hirsch , who began the season as McLean 's backup , in comparison recorded a 2 @.@ 93 GAA and a 17 @-@ 14 @-@ 6 record . McLean was chosen to start in the opening series against the top @-@ seeded Colorado Avalanche , but was pulled in favour of Hirsch during Game 1 after allowing three goals on 12 shots . The game marked McLean 's final playoff appearance of his career as Hirsch played the remaining five games . The Avalanche eliminated Vancouver in six games and went on to win the Stanley Cup . 
 McLean reinjured his knee during the 1996 – 97 season during a game against the Dallas Stars on November 11 , 1996 . He missed approximately a month after undergoing his second arthroscopic surgery of the year in mid @-@ November 1996 . McLean and Hirsch continued to share starts in 1996 – 97 , as McLean appeared in 44 games with a 21 @-@ 18 @-@ 3 record and 3 @.@ 21 GAA . 
 = = = Post @-@ Vancouver ( 1998 – 2001 ) = = = 
 McLean 's tenure with the Canucks ended the following season in 1997 – 98 . Pat Quinn was dismissed as general manager early in the campaign and was replaced by a four @-@ man committee of team executives . On the recommendation of newly hired head coach Mike Keenan , the management team dealt McLean to the Carolina Hurricanes on January 3 , 1998 . He was sent in a trade , along with winger Martin Gélinas , in exchange for goaltender Sean Burke and wingers Geoff Sanderson and Enrico Ciccone . 
 After ten @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half seasons in Vancouver , McLean left as the franchise 's all @-@ time leader in regular season games played ( 516 ) , wins ( 211 ) and shutouts ( 20 ) , as well as playoff games played ( 68 ) , wins ( 34 ) and shutouts ( 6 ) . ( Luongo surpassed McLean 's regular season shutouts total with his 21st on October 26 , 2009 . ) McLean 's departure marked the beginning of an unstable period of time for Canucks goaltending . In the seven @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half seasons between the time McLean was traded away and Luongo was acquired by the Canucks , a total of 18 goaltenders played for the club . General manager Brian Burke , who succeeded the four @-@ man committee , coined the term " goalie graveyard " during his time in Vancouver to describe the club 's goaltending fortunes . 
 McLean entered his first game with the Hurricanes with the NHL 's worst GAA at 3 @.@ 68 , but helped his new club to a 4 – 1 win to record his first victory with Carolina . His tenure in Carolina was brief , as the Hurricanes traded him after eight appearances to the Florida Panthers for forward Ray Sheppard on March 24 , 1998 . He made his debut with the Panthers two days later on March 26 and recorded a 5 – 4 win against the Canadiens . The following season , McLean recorded his first shutout with the Panthers in a 1 – 0 win against the Nashville Predators . He went on to match his personal best 2 @.@ 74 GAA in his first and only full season with the Panthers in 1998 – 99 , playing in 30 games as Sean Burke 's backup . 
 The following off @-@ season , he signed a two @-@ year deal , worth an approximate $ 1 @.@ 64 million with bonus incentives for games played , as an unrestricted free agent with the New York Rangers on July 13 , 1999 . McLean was brought in to replace Dan Cloutier , who had been traded away , as Mike Richter 's backup . With Richter experiencing back problems early in the 1999 – 2000 season , McLean filled in as the Rangers ' starter during the first month . He made his Rangers debut in the season opener , making 25 saves in a 2 – 1 loss on October 5 , 1999 . He completed the season with a 2 @.@ 89 GAA in 22 games . The following campaign in 2000 – 01 , McLean 's GAA rose to 3 @.@ 49 GAA in 23 games . After two seasons in New York and 17 seasons in the NHL overall , McLean retired in 2001 . 
 = = International play = = 
 Over the course of his career , McLean represented Canada in international competition once . On March 28 , 1990 , McLean was among the players named to Canada 's roster for the 1990 World Championships in Bern and Fribourg , Switzerland . McLean was given the role of starting goaltender , with Ken <unk> serving as his backup . Canada won its first four round robin games with McLean in net , including an 8 – 0 shutout victory versus Norway in which McLean split goaltending duties with <unk> , thus clinching a spot in the medal round . As the round robin continued , Canada added to their perfect record with a 5 – 3 victory over Czechoslovakia in which McLean stopped 25 of 28 shots for the victory . McLean started Canada 's next game , a 3 – 1 victory versus Sweden , but was replaced in the second period by third string goaltender Bob Essensa who had yet to play in the tournament . Following a 3 – 3 tie with the Soviet Union , Canada clinched first place in the round robin . The game was one of McLean 's best of the tournament , as he managed to keep the Soviet Union at bay during the third period in which they had a 14 – 2 margin in shots on goal . 
 After suffering a 3 – 2 loss versus Czechoslovakia in the opening game of the medal round , Canada opted to start Essensa versus the Soviet Union . Essensa let in four early goals before being replaced by McLean , who let in another three in a 7 – 1 loss to move Canada out of contention for the gold medal . In the final game of the tournament versus Sweden , Canada suffered a 6 – 4 loss and finished fourth overall for the tournament , missing out on their opportunity for a bronze medal that would have come with a win versus Sweden . 
 = = Post @-@ playing career = = 
 Following McLean 's retirement , he was hired as a goaltending coach for the Kamloops Blazers of the WHL . He served in that capacity for one season , in 2002 – 03 . McLean also returned to the Canucks organization as a broadcaster for the team 's pay @-@ per @-@ view telecasts . 
 McLean has also pursued the restaurant business in Vancouver . He co @-@ owns McLean 's restaurant ( opened June 24 , 2010 ) , the result of buying out other owners of <unk> at Le Magasin , a restaurant in the Gastown neighbourhood that opened in April 2007 , with his former Canucks head coach , Bob McCammon . McLean is also a part @-@ owner in the Coquitlam Express , a Junior A team in the BCHL . The ownership group includes several other former NHLers , including Darcy Rota , Bill Ranford and Dave Lowry . 
 From Sept 3 , 2010 to May 14 , 2013 , McLean served as Colorado Avalanche 's goaltending consultant ; . During the 2010 – 11 season , McLean was honoured by the Canucks in a ceremony prior to a game against the Avalanche on November 25 , 2010 . The organization made him the second inductee of the Canucks ' Ring of Honour , commemorating the team 's best players of all @-@ time with plaques circling the Rogers Arena stands . 
 McLean was named to BC 's Hockey Hall of Fame on Jan 22 , 2014 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Following his retirement , McLean moved back to Vancouver , where he joined the Canucks ' alumni squad . The group is active in the local community , participating in fundraisers and working alongside Hockey Canada and BC Hockey for minor hockey associations . In September 2011 , his off @-@ ice efforts as a member of the Canucks ' alumni were recognized and he was presented the Jake Milford Award . 
 McLean has pursued various interests besides hockey during and after his playing career . An avid golfer , he is part of the Marine Drive Golf Club in Vancouver and the Nicklaus North Golf Club in Whistler . He was also accepted into the Royal Portrush Golf Club in Northern Ireland in 2008 . McLean began playing regularly at the age of 10 . 
 Involved in thoroughbred horse racing , he co @-@ owned Regal Discovery , a colt who won the 136th Queen 's Plate in 1995 , with his wife Lesley and her parents Anne and Ron . McLean and Lesley have since divorced . He was also briefly married to Canadian journalist Jane MacDougall , a columnist for the National Post newspaper . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 Bold denotes league @-@ leading statistic . 
 = = = All @-@ Star Games = = = 
 In the 1990 All @-@ Star Competition , Kirk led all goalies with the fewest goals ( 4 GA , 27 shots ) against throughout all of the events . 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = NHL = = = 
 = = = Vancouver Canucks = = = 
 = = Vancouver Canucks records = = 
 = = = All @-@ time = = = 
 Regular season games played , goaltender - 516 
 Regular season wins , goaltender - 211 
 Regular season losses , goaltender – 228 
 Playoff games played , goaltender - 68 
 Playoff wins , goaltender - 34 
 Playoff losses , goaltender – 34 
 Playoff shutouts - 6 
 = = = Single @-@ season = = = 
 Playoff wins – 15 ( 1994 ) 
 Playoff shutouts – 4 ( 1994 ) ( tied with Roberto Luongo , 2011 ) 
 Playoff shots against – 820 ( 1994 ) 
 Playoff saves – 761 ( 1994 ) 
 Playoff minutes played – 1 @,@ 543 ( 1994 ) 
 = = Transactions = = 
 June 9 , 1984 – Drafted in the sixth round , 107th overall by the New Jersey Devils in the 1984 NHL Entry Draft . 
 September 15 , 1987 – Traded by the New Jersey Devils with Greg Adams and the Devils ' second round selection ( Leif <unk> ) in the 1988 NHL Entry Draft to the Vancouver Canucks for Patrik Sundstrom , the Canucks ' second round selection ( Jeff Christian ) in the 1988 NHL Entry Draft , and the Canucks ' fourth round selection ( Matt <unk> ) in the 1988 NHL Entry Draft . 
 January 3 , 1998 – Traded by the Vancouver Canucks with Martin Gélinas to the Carolina Hurricanes for Sean Burke , Enrico Ciccone , and Geoff Sanderson . 
 March 24 , 1998 – Traded by the Carolina Hurricanes to the Florida Panthers for Ray Sheppard . 
 July 13 , 1999 – Signed as an unrestricted free agent by the New York Rangers . 
 = BootX ( Apple ) = 
 BootX is a software @-@ based bootloader designed and developed by Apple Inc. for use on the company 's Macintosh computer range . BootX is used to prepare the computer for use by loading all required device drivers and then starting @-@ up Mac OS X by booting the kernel on all PowerPC Macintoshes running the Mac OS X 10 @.@ 2 operating system or later versions . Using BootROM , a read @-@ only memory ( ROM ) computer chip containing OpenFirmware , a graphical <unk> is shown briefly on all compatible Macintosh computers as a grey Apple logo with a spinning cursor that appears during the startup sequence . The program is freely available as part of the Darwin operating system under the open source Apple Public Source License . BootX was superseded by another nearly identical bootloader named <unk> and an Extensible Firmware Interface ROM on the release of the Intel @-@ based Mac . 
 = = History = = 
 Older Macintoshes dating from 1983 until 1998 utilized a basic bootloader ; the bootloader was solely a ROM chip varying in sizes up to 4 megabytes ( MB ) , which contained both the computer code to boot the computer and to run the Mac OS operating system . This was known as the Macintosh Toolbox , or the Old World ROM , and differs greatly from design the modern Macintosh which generally use a hard drive of large capacity to store the operating system . This bootloader was used in all Macintosh computers until mid @-@ 1998 . 
 With the advent of the iMac series of Macintoshes , the firmware was updated . The ROM was reduced in size to 1 MB , called BootROM , and the remainder of the ROM was moved to the file Mac OS ROM in the Mac OS System Folder ; stored on the hard drive . This ROM used a full implementation of the OpenFirmware standard ( contained in BootROM ) and was named the New World ROM . 
 In 2001 , with the release of Mac OS X , the Mac OS ROM file was replaced with the BootX bootloader file , . In 2002 , with the release of Mac OS X 10 @.@ 2 , the historical " Happy Mac " start @-@ up picture was replaced with a grey apple logo . By introducing the Intel Mac in 2006 , BootROM was replaced by the near identical Extensible Firmware Interface ROM ( although Apple still calls it BootROM ) and the <unk> file . 
 = = Features = = 
 To make the boot loader appealing to other operating system developers , Apple added features to allow flexibility in the booting process such as network boot using <unk> and load Mach @-@ O and ELF formatted kernels . BootX can also boot from HFS , HFS + , UFS and <unk> formatted volumes . The boot loader can be manipulated at startup by holding down various key combinations to alter the booting process . Such functions include Verbose Mode , achieved by holding down the Command and V key at startup , which replaces the default Apple logo with text @-@ based information on the boot process and Single User Mode , achieved by holding down the Command and S , which , depending on the operating system , may boot into a more basic command @-@ line or text @-@ based version of the operating system , to facilitate maintenance and recovery action . The ROM can also be set to require a password to access these technical functions using the OpenFirmware interface . 
 = = Boot process = = 
 In PowerPC @-@ based Macintoshes , the boot process starts with the activation of BootROM , the basic Macintosh ROM , which performs a Power On Self Test to test hardware essential to startup . On the passing of this test , the startup chime is played and control of the computer is passed to OpenFirmware . OpenFirmware initializes the Random Access Memory , Memory Management Unit and hardware necessary for the ROM 's operation . The OpenFirmware then checks settings , stored in <unk> , and builds a list of all devices on a device tree by gathering their stored <unk> information . 
 On the completion of this task , BootX takes over the startup process configuring the keyboard and display , claiming and reserving memory for various purposes and checking to see if various key combinations are being pressed . After this process has been completed BootX displays the grey Apple logo , spins the spinning wait cursor , and proceeds to load the kernel and some kernel extensions and start the kernel . 
 = Family Gay = 
 " Family Gay " is the eighth episode of the seventh season of the animated television comedy series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on March 8 , 2009 . 
 The episode was written by Richard Appel and directed by series regular Brian Iles . Seth Rogen provided a guest @-@ voice as Peter under the effects of the " Seth Rogen gene " and Meredith Baxter provided a guest voice as herself . It received divided reviews from television sources and critics , in addition to receiving criticism from the Parents Television Council . " Family Gay " , along with two other episodes , was nominated in the " Outstanding Comedy Series " category for the 2009 61st Primetime Emmy Awards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Peter purchases a brain damaged horse who ends up causing a great deal of collateral damage at the horse racing track . The horse died after a heart attack , and Peter disposes it at Mort 's pharmacy . In order to pay for the damage , Peter decides to participate in a series of medical drug testing including one that makes him gay . He enters a relationship with another gay man called Scott , leaving his wife Lois and rest of the family heartbroken . After Stewie and Brian enroll Peter in straight camp , Lois breaks Peter out , deciding that Peter 's happiness is more important than his sexuality . Almost immediately afterwards , the gay gene wears off and Peter moves back in with his family . The episode ends when Mort threw the horse out the window yelling , " Take back your fucking horse ! " 
 = = Production = = 
 " Family Gay " was written by at the time Executive Producer and future co @-@ creator of the Family Guy spin @-@ off The Cleveland Show , Richard Appel . This episode being his first and to date his only writing credit on the show . John Viener worked as the executive story editor for the episode . MacFarlane found a list of plot ideas from the third season that says " Peter goes gay " and he decided to make an episode with that premise . The writers originally wanted to take " the high road " with the episode . In the first draft , Peter 's homosexuality was so subtle , that he just appeared a little more refined . When the writers could not come up with any high road jokes , they " went with what they know " . The writers had fun " gaying up the episode " by including Peter in a different outfit during every scene after he turned gay . The writers wanted to further the idea that sexuality is inborn , not chosen . 
 The episode was directed by Brian Iles . He was assisted by James Purdum and Peter Shin worked as the supervising directors for the episode . Other crew members that collaborated in the animation of the episode included Deborah Cone who directed the retake of the episode and Kenji Ono who was the assistant director of the episode . Iles sketched out several clothing ideas for Peter to wear . He got ideas by flipping through catalogs . The name of all the horses at the race track are named after canceled Fox shows from May 2005 until this episode aired . It is a tribute to a similar mentioning of canceled shows when Family Guy came back on the air in May 2005 in the episode " North by North Quahog " . When the episode got close to airing , MacFarlane kept thinking they should remove the cutaway gag with Matt Damon , due to MacFarlane liking Damon 's criticism of Sarah Palin . 
 " Family Gay " , along with the first eight episodes of the seventh season were released on DVD by 20th Century Fox in the United States and Canada on June 16 , 2009 , one month after it had completed broadcast on television . The " Volume 7 " DVD release features bonus material including deleted scenes , animatics , and commentaries for every episode . The DVD also includes four special features those being , Take me out to place tonight ; Family Guy <unk> ; Comic @-@ Con 2008 Family Guy panel and the Family Guy Art Show . 
 All the main Family Guy cast members lent their voices to the episode , along with writers Kirker Butler , John Viener , Alec Sulkin , Mark Hentemann , and Danny Smith , who all had minor speaking roles . Peter 's boyfriend Scott was voiced by recurring voice actor John G. Brennan , who voices him in the same way he voices gay The Jerky Boys character Jack Tors . Other guest stars included writer Wellesley Wild , actress Meredith Baxter @-@ Birney , and actor Seth Rogen . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode begins with Peter playing the 1983 video game Dragon 's Lair . Later in the episode , Peter names his horse " Till ' Death " , in reference to the show of the same name , highlighting shows that were all cancelled by Fox , including Arrested Development and The War at Home , amongst others . Peter also learns about a pomegranate martini from In Style magazine . " Family Gay " references , in a cutaway , James Bond 's iconic ability to persuade women to have sex with him despite their initial resistance . Peter and Brian watch the movie Wild Hogs , which Peter predicts will suck . The western spoof film Blazing Saddles is referenced when Peter and the other men are dancing and singing , " The French Mistake " . " Family Gay " makes two references to musicals . While in the doctor 's office , Peter 's doctor makes a reference to the song " Seasons of Love " from the musical Rent and while reading Flowers in the Attic by V. C. Andrews Peter listens to the song " Sixteen Going on Seventeen " from the musical The Sound of Music , sung by Charmian Carr . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode received a 4 @.@ 2 / 6 Nielsen rating , indicating that 4 @.@ 2 % of American households watched the episode , and that 6 % of all televisions in use at the time were tuned into it . " Family Gay " , along with " I Dream of Jesus " and " Road to Germany " , were nominated in the " Outstanding Comedy Series " category for the 2009 61st Primetime Emmy Awards . Series creator Seth MacFarlane commented " We picked three of our edgier shows as a choice . Ya know , we figured if we are going to be damned , let 's be damned for what we really are . " Much to the surprise of the writing staff , the series was ultimately nominated for the award , the first time in 48 years an animated series was nominated for the same category since The Flintstones in 1961 , but lost to The Jack Benny <unk> though The Simpsons were almost nominated in the year 1993 , but that changed since Emmy voters were hesitant to pit cartoons against live action programs . 
 The episode received divided reviews from critics . Ahsan Haque of IGN rated the episode a 7 @.@ 9 / 10 , saying , " Overall , while it 's far from being the funniest episode of the season , there were more than enough laughs and uncomfortable moments to make this episode entertaining . " He went on to say that the episode could have been more though , due to the fact that the show has used many clever gay jokes in the past . Likewise , Alex Rocha of TV Guide commented , " ' Family Gay ' fell way short of my expectations . Even with its traditional pop culture references and flashbacks , this week 's episode could not simply keep me tuned in . I 'll admit , I did manage to laugh at times , but as in previous times , Family Guy simply fell short again . " Steve Heisler from The A.V. Club gave the episode a negative review , calling it " yet another pointless exercise in Family Guy insider smugness " , and rating it C- . 
 In March 2009 , the Parents Television Council ( PTC ) , a conservative decency campaigning group , filed an indecency complaint to the Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) . PTC President Tim Winter stated , " Fox treated viewers to everything from an ' eleven @-@ way ' gay orgy to baby Stewie possibly eating a bowl of cereal with horse semen instead of milk . " Dan Isett , PTC director of public policy , said that this was the first time since last fall that the PTC had asked its members to send complaints to the FCC , although the PTC regularly discusses issues it has with shows . The PTC named " Family Gay " the " Worst TV Show of the Week " for the week of March 13 . MacFarlane responded to the PTC 's decrees against the show in an interview with The Advocate , " For an organization that prides itself on Christian values — I mean , I ’ m an atheist , so what do I know ? — they spend their entire day hating people . " 
 = Persoonia linearis = 
 Persoonia linearis , commonly known as the narrow @-@ leaved geebung , is a shrub native to New South Wales and Victoria in eastern Australia . It reaches 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) , or occasionally 5 m ( 16 ft ) , in height and has thick , dark grey papery bark . The leaves are , as the species name suggests , more or less linear in shape , and are up to 9 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) long , and 0 @.@ 1 to 0 @.@ 7 cm ( 0 @.@ 039 to 0 @.@ 276 in ) wide . The small yellow flowers appear in summer and autumn ( December to May ) , followed by small green fleshy fruit known as drupes . Within the genus Persoonia , it is a member of the Lanceolata group of 58 closely related species . P. linearis interbreeds with several other species where they grow together . 
 Found in dry sclerophyll forest on sandstone @-@ based nutrient @-@ deficient soils , P. linearis is adapted to a fire @-@ prone environment ; the plants resprout epicormic buds from beneath their thick bark after bushfires . The fruit are consumed by vertebrates such as kangaroo , possums and currawongs . As with other members of the genus , P. linearis is rare in cultivation as it is very hard to propagate , either by seed or cuttings . It adapts readily to cultivation , preferring acidic soils with good drainage and at least a partly sunny aspect . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 English botanist and artist Henry Charles Andrews described Persoonia linearis in 1799 , in the second volume of his Botanists Repository , Comprising Colour 'd Engravings of New and Rare Plants . He had been given a plant in flower by J. Robertson of Stockwell , who had grown it from seed in 1794 . The species name is the Latin linearis " linear " , referring to the shape of the leaves . 
 Meanwhile , German botanist Karl Friedrich von Gaertner had coined the name <unk> angustifolium in 1807 from a specimen in the collection of Joseph Banks to describe what turned out to be the same species . The genus name derived from the Greek <unk> " five " and dactyl " fingers " , and refers to the five @-@ lobed cotyledons . The horticulturist Joseph Knight described this species as the narrow @-@ leaved <unk> ( Persoonia angustifolia ) in his controversial 1809 work On the cultivation of the plants belonging to the natural order of Proteeae , but the binomial name is illegitimate as it postdated Andrews ' description and name . Carl Meissner described a population from the Tambo River in Victoria as a separate variety , Persoonia linearis var. <unk> in 1856 , but no varieties or subspecies are recognised . German botanist Otto Kuntze proposed the binomial name Linkia linearis in 1891 , from Cavanilles ' original description of the genus Linkia but the name was eventually rejected in favour of Persoonia . In 1919 , French botanist Michel Gandoger described three species all since reallocated to P. linearis ; P. <unk> from material collected at Mount Wilson sent to him by the herbarium at the Royal Botanic Gardens in Sydney , and P. walteri and P. <unk> from Melbourne @-@ based plant collector Charles Walter , whose records have been questioned . The short @-@ leaved material of P. <unk> was noted to have been collected in Queensland but this is now thought to have been incorrectly recorded . Gandoger described 212 taxa of Australian plants , almost all of which turned out to be species already described . 
 In 1870 , George Bentham published the first infrageneric arrangement of Persoonia in Volume 5 of his landmark Flora Australiensis . He divided the genus into three sections , placing P. linearis in P. sect . Amblyanthera , and recognising <unk> angustifolium as the same species , after examining the specimen in the <unk> Herbarium . He described a variety sericea from the Shoalhaven River region and also noted the discrepancy in Robert Brown 's description of the species . Brown had noted the bark to be smooth , in contrast to Ferdinand von Mueller and others who recorded the bark as layered . 
 The genus was reviewed by Peter Weston for the Flora of Australia treatment in 1995 , and P. linearis was placed in the Lanceolata group , a group of 54 closely related species with similar flowers but very different foliage . These species will often interbreed with each other where two members of the group occur , and hybrids with P. <unk> , P. <unk> , P. <unk> , P. lanceolata , P. media , five subspecies of P. mollis , P. myrtilloides subsp. cunninghamii , P. <unk> , P. pinifolia and P. sericea have been recorded . Robert Brown initially described the hybrid with P. levis as a species " Persoonia lucida " , which is now known as Persoonia × lucida , and has been recorded from the southeast forests of the New South Wales south coast . 
 Bentham wrote in 1870 that the name geebung , derived from the Dharug language word geebung or <unk> , which had been used by the indigenous people for the fruits of this species . It goes by the common names of narrow @-@ leaved geebung or narrow @-@ leaf geebung . Naam @-@ <unk> is an aboriginal name from the Illawarra region . 
 = = Description = = 
 Persoonia linearis grows as a tall shrub to small tree , occasionally reaching 5 m ( 16 ft ) in height but more commonly around 2 – 3 m ( 6 @.@ 6 – 9 @.@ 8 ft ) tall . The flaky soft bark is dark grey on the surface , while deeper layers are reddish . Within the bark are epicormic buds , which sprout new growth after bushfire . The new growth is hairy . The leaves are more or less linear in shape , measuring 2 to 9 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 to 3 @.@ 54 in ) in length and 0 @.@ 1 to 0 @.@ 7 cm ( 0 @.@ 039 to 0 @.@ 276 in ) wide , with slightly down @-@ rolled margins . 
 The yellow flowers appear in summer and autumn ( December to May ) , peaking over January and February . They are arranged in leafy racemes , and each stem may bear up to 50 flowers . P. linearis is described as auxotelic , which means each stalk bears an individual flower that is subtended by a leaf at its junction with the stem . Known as pedicels , these are covered in fine hair and measure 2 – 8 mm in length . Each individual flower consists of a cylindrical perianth , consisting of tepals fused for most of their length , within which are both male and female parts . The tepals are 0 @.@ 9 – 1 @.@ 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 35 – 0 @.@ 55 in ) long and covered in fine hair on the outside . The central style is surrounded by the anther , which splits into four segments ; these curl back and resemble a cross when viewed from above . They provide a landing area for insects visiting the stigma , which is located at the tip of the style . The flowers are followed by the development of smooth fleshy drupes , which are green and more or less round , measuring 1 @.@ 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) in diameter . Mature drupes may have purple blotches . Each bears one or two seeds within a woody " stone " and is shed once ripe , generally from September to November . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 One of the most common <unk> , Persoonia linearis is found from the Macleay River catchment on the New South Wales Mid North Coast to the Tambo River in eastern Victoria . It is found from sea level to altitudes of 1 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) with an average yearly rainfall of 700 to 1 @,@ 400 mm ( 28 to 55 in ) . It is a component of dry sclerophyll forest on both sandstone and clay soils . It grows in sunny to lightly shaded areas in open forest or woodland with a shrubby understory . In the Sydney Basin , it is associated with such trees as Sydney peppermint ( Eucalyptus piperita ) , silvertop ash ( E. sieberi ) , blue @-@ leaved stringybark ( E. <unk> ) , blackbutt ( E. pilularis ) , grey ironbark ( E. paniculata ) , snappy gum ( E. rossii ) , Sydney blue gum ( E. saligna ) , narrow @-@ leaved stringybark ( E. sparsifolia ) and smooth @-@ barked apple ( Angophora costata ) and shrubs such as Grevillea <unk> , G. phylicoides , <unk> hakea ( Hakea <unk> ) , long leaf smoke bush ( Conospermum longifolium ) and stiff geebung ( Persoonia rigida ) . In the vicinity of Nowra and Jervis Bay , it is an understory component of the widespread <unk> Lowlands Forest community , alongside such plants as gorse bitter pea ( <unk> <unk> ) , bearded heath ( Leucopogon <unk> ) and native daphne ( Pittosporum <unk> ) with spotted gum ( Corymbia maculata ) , white stringybark ( Eucalyptus <unk> ) and woollybutt ( E. longifolia ) as the dominant trees . The tall dry sclerophyll forest is on hilly terrain with good drainage . The underlying soil is a yellow loam originating from mudstone , siltstone and sandstone . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Persoonia linearis is one of several species of Persoonia that regenerate by resprouting from trunks or stems greater than 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) thick after bushfire , an adaptation to the fire @-@ prone habitat where it grows . However , only larger trunks of 12 – 16 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 – 6 @.@ 3 in ) diameter might survive to reshoot after very hot fires . The thick papery bark shields and insulates the underlying epicormic buds from the flames . The plant can reshoot from the base , but generally only if the stem or trunk is killed . 
 Colletid bees of the genus Leioproctus , subgenus Cladocerapis exclusively forage on and pollinate flowers of many species of Persoonia . Bees of subgenus Filiglossa in the same genus , which also specialise in feeding on Persoonia flowers , do not appear to be effective pollinators . Weighing 1900 mg ( 0 @.@ 07 oz ) , the fruit are adapted to be eaten by vertebrates , such as kangaroos , possums and currawongs and other large birds . Seeds have been recorded in the faeces of the brush @-@ tailed rock @-@ wallaby ( <unk> penicillata ) . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Persoonia linearis is useful as a hedging plant and responds well to pruning . Its foliage has been used in floral arrangements , and its colourful bark is a horticultural feature . It is a fairly easy plant to grow in gardens , but is rarely seen due to difficulties in propagation . Germination from seed is low , and can take many months . Once established it can tolerate extended dry periods and is hardy to frosts . Optimum growing conditions are part shade and a well @-@ drained acid soil , though P. linearis grows readily in full sun . <unk> in general are sensitive to excessive phosphorus , and grow without fertiliser or with low @-@ phosphorus slow @-@ release formulations . They can also become deficient in iron and manganese . First cultivated in England in 1794 from seed , it was also reportedly propagated from cuttings ; Andrews described it as a " handsome greenhouse plant , continuing to flower through the autumnal months and producing good seeds . " Joseph Knight reported that cuttings would be successful as long as material was " judiciously chosen " , and that plants had set seed on occasion . 
 A compound with antimicrobial activity was isolated from the ripening drupes of a hybrid of Persoonia linearis and P. pinifolia growing in the Australian National Botanic Gardens in 1994 , and identified as 4 @-@ hydroxyphenyl 6 @-@ <unk> [ ( 3R ) <unk> @-@ dihydroxy @-@ 2 @-@ <unk> ] -β @-@ D @-@ <unk> . 
 = Leicester Abbey = 
 The Abbey of Saint Mary de Pratis , more commonly known as Leicester Abbey , was an Augustinian religious house in the city of Leicester , in the English Midlands . The abbey was founded in the 12th century by the Robert de Beaumont , 2nd Earl of Leicester , and grew to become the wealthiest religious establishment within Leicestershire . Through patronage and donations the abbey gained the advowsons of countless churches throughout England , and acquired a considerable amount of land , and several manorial lordships . Leicester Abbey also maintained a cell ( a small dependent daughter house ) at Cockerham Priory , in Lancashire . The Abbey 's prosperity was boosted though the passage of special privileges by both the English Kings and the Pope . These included an exemption from sending representatives to parliament and from paying tithe on certain land and livestock . Despite its privileges and sizeable landed estates , from the late 14th century the abbey began to suffer financially and was forced to lease out its estates . The worsening financial situation was exacerbated throughout the 15th century and early 16th century by a series of incompetent , corrupt and extravagant abbots . By 1535 the abbey 's considerable income was exceeded by even more considerable debts . 
 The abbey provided a home to an average of 30 to 40 canons , sometimes known as Black Canons , because of their dress ( a white habit and black cloak ) . One of these canons , Henry Knighton , is notable for his Chronicle , which was written during his time at the abbey in the 14th century . In 1530 Cardinal Thomas Wolsey died at the abbey , whilst travelling south to face trial for treason . A few years later , in 1538 , the abbey was dissolved , and was quickly demolished , with the building materials reused in various structures across Leicester , including a mansion which was built on the site . The house passed through several aristocratic families , and became known as Cavendish House after it was acquired by the 1st Earl of Devonshire , in 1613 . The house was eventually looted and destroyed by fire in 1645 , following the capture of Leicester during the English Civil War . 
 Part of the former abbey precinct was donated to Leicester Town Council ( the predecessor of the modern City Council ) by the 8th Earl of Dysart . In 1882 it was opened by The Prince of Wales and became known as Abbey Park . The remaining 32 acres ( 13 ha ) , which included the abbey 's site and the ruins of Cavendish House , were donated to the council by the 9th Earl of Dysart in 1925 and , following archaeological excavations , opened to the public in the 1930s . Following its demolition , the exact location of the abbey was lost ; It was only rediscovered during excavations in the 1920s / 30s , when the layout was plotted using low stone walls . The abbey has been extensively excavated and was previously used for training archaeology students at the University of Leicester . Leicester Abbey is now protected as a scheduled monument and is Grade I Listed . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Foundation = = = 
 Leicester Abbey was founded during a wave of monastic enthusiasm that swept through western Christendom in the 11th and 12th centuries . This wave was responsible for the foundation of the majority of England 's monasteries , and very few were founded after the 13th century . These monasteries were often founded by a wealthy aristocratic benefactor who endowed and patronised the establishments in return for prayers for their soul , and often , the right to be buried within the monastic church . Leicester Abbey was founded in the Augustinian tradition . The monks at the abbey were known as canons , and followed the monastic rules set down by Saint Augustine of Hippo . Sometimes known as Black Canons , because of their dress ( a white habit and black cloak ) , Augustinian Canons lived a clerical life engaged in public ministry ; this is distinct to other forms of monasticism in which monks were cloistered from the outside world , and lived an isolated , contemplative life . 
 Leicester Abbey was founded in 1143 by Robert le Bossu , 2nd Earl of Leicester , and was dedicated to the Assumption of the Virgin Mary . It was not the first abbey Robert had established , having founded <unk> Abbey , also in Leicestershire , in 1133 . Robert 's father , Robert de Beaumont , 1st Earl of Leicester , had previously founded a college of secular canons in Leicester , known as The College of St Mary de Castro . The new abbey assumed control of the college and its possessions , which included all of the churches in Leicester . Robert added to this with the gift of numerous churches in Leicestershire , Berkshire and Northamptonshire . The abbey also gained the manor of <unk> from its merger with the college , and the manor of Knighton from its founder . 
 The earls of Leicester continued to patronise the abbey : Petronilla de <unk> , wife of the founder 's son , Robert de Beaumont , 3rd Earl of Leicester , financed the construction of the abbey 's Great Choir ; whilst her husband donated 24 virgates ( 720 acres ) of land at Anstey . 
 In 1148 , Pope Eugene III granted the abbey an exemption on paying tithe for their newly acquired land and livestock . This was granted on the condition that there was to be no impropriety or violence when electing an abbot , and that those who donated money to the abbey could be buried within it , regardless of whether they had been excommunicated . 
 = = = 14th century = = = 
 Though the abbey was a religious house , it was attacked in 1326 by the Earl of Lancaster 's soldiers , who seized property belonging to Hugh le Despenser , 1st Earl of Winchester , which was being kept there . 
 Under the <unk> of William Clowne ( tenure : 1345 – 1378 ) the abbey prospered , increasing their lands and endowments with acquisitions such as the manors of Ingarsby and Kirkby Mallory . Clowne is described as having " friendly relations " with King Edward III , and used this to gain further privileges for the abbey , including being exempted from having to send representatives to Parliament . However , by the late 14th century , the abbey had entered a difficult period , and its income began to fall . 
 It was during this period that the abbey was home to canon Henry of Knighton , who wrote Knighton 's Chronicon . The chronicle includes both Knighton 's contemporary experiences , between 1377 and 1395 , and a historical section recording events between 1066 and 1366 . Knighton chronicles the impact of John Wycliffe , the rise of the Lollards , and gives an unusually favourable account of John of Gaunt . Knighton 's chronicle is valued by historians for his contemporary account of the Black Death in Leicester , which has been compared with Giovanni Boccaccio 's Decameron , which chronicles the plague in Florence . His in depth account records the effects of the Black Death on Leicester . This includes the impact on the prices of food , grain , wine and cattle , and on changes in wages and the labour market . The chronicle also includes detailed death tolls for all of Leicester 's parishes , revealing that one @-@ third of the population of Leicester were killed by the disease . Following the deaths of canons within the abbey , Knighton theorises that it was punishment because of " the ordination of candidates ill @-@ prepared and but little suited for the sacred ministry " . The chronicle was not published until 1652 . 
 = = = 15th century = = = 
 In the 15th century the abbey began to lease out its land ( most probably as a solution to their falling income ) . By 1477 only the demesne lands in Leicester , Stoughton and Ingarsby remained un @-@ leased , and were directly farmed by the abbey . 
 Philip Repyngdon served as Abbot of Leicester Abbey from 1393 to 1405 , when he resigned to become " Chaplain and Confessor " to King Henry IV , and subsequently served as Bishop of Lincoln and as a Cardinal . Repyngdon 's successor , Richard of <unk> , was granted a Royal Licence permitting him to ask the Pope for to remove the abbey from the Bishop of Lincoln 's jurisdiction , as the abbot feared Repyngdon would interfere with his former abbey , which lay within that Diocese . It is unclear if the Pope ever agreed to this petition , as Repyngdon also petitioned the Pope ; receiving a declaration confirming that Leicester Abbey was " fully subject to him and his successors " . 
 Under the tenure of Abbot William Sadyngton ( 1420 — 42 ) the abbey 's fortunes fell further . A visit by William Alnwick , Bishop of Lincoln , in 1440 , revealed the number of canons had fallen from 30 to 40 to just 14 and that the number of boys in the almonry had fallen from 25 to 6 . Sadyngton was accused of various unsavory practices : of accepting unsuitable boys into the almonry in return for money , of " pocketing various minor revenues " , of " keeping the offices of treasurer and cellarer in his own hands " and of not disclosing the abbey 's accounts to his canons . Sadyngton was also known to keep servants and was even accused of practising magic , including divination . 
 Despite Abbot Sadyngton 's apparent financial corruption , the abbey appeared to be financially stable : the abbey 's monastic buildings had recently been extensively rebuilt and the abbey had a substantial annual income of £ 1180 . Perhaps because of the large income the Abbot was sustaining , Bishop Alnwick appears to have not taken strong measures against the Abbot 's indiscretions . He ordered that the number of canons should be increased to 30 and the number of boys in the almonry increased to 16 . The Bishop also ordered proper accounts to be kept and forbade the abbot from granting favours without the permission of both the Bishop and the Canons . 
 = = = 16th century = = = 
 In 1518 William Atwater , Bishop of Lincoln , visited to inspect the abbey . The Abbot , Richard Pescall , was , like Sadyngton , accused of financial impropriety , but also was thought to be too old to perform his duties . Pescall 's extravagances included an " excessive number of hounds " , which were known to roam freely " fouling church , chapter house and cloister " ; whilst the Bishop complained the boys in the almonry were being improperly educated . 
 A followup visit , in 1521 , by Bishop Atwater 's successor , John Longland , showed that things had not improved . Abbot Pescall rarely attended church services and , when he did , he would often bring his jester who " disturbed the services with his buffoonery " . The Abbot 's bad example had affected the canon 's behaviour , who ate and drank at improper times , failed to attend services ( an average of 11 of the 25 canons attended ) and roamed freely outside the abbey : visiting the town 's alehouses and frequently going hunting . Two canons were also accused of " incontinence " . This visit revealed the abbey was severely in debt , leading the Bishop to appoint two administrators to oversee the abbey 's finances . 
 The Chancellor of Lincoln Diocese visited the abbey in 1528 and found things had not improved . The abbot was still not attending services and was eating at unusual times and in unusual places , away from the other canons . The Chancellor also complained about the Abbot 's " excessive number " of servants . The 24 canons were also still in the habit of leaving the abbey without proper reason . 
 Bishop Longland saw no alternative but to remove Abbot Pescall , but the task was not simple as Pescall tried to secure his position by sending gifts and bribes to Thomas Cromwell , leading Bishop Longland to resort to " harassing " the Abbot by constantly interfering with affairs at the abbey . Abbot Pescall finally resigned 5 years later ( 10 years after his " failures " were first noticed ) and was granted a pension of £ 100 a year . Pescall 's retirement was far from quiet , however . Pescall frequently wrote to Thomas Cromwell complaining about affairs at the abbey , even bemoaning the fact that £ 13 of his undeservedly generous pension of £ 100 a year was being taken in tax , and asking that the tax be paid by the abbey . 
 It was during Abbot Pescall 's tenure , in 1530 , that Cardinal Thomas Wolsey visited the abbey . Wolsey was an influential minister in the government of King Henry VIII . He fell from favour after failing to secure papal permission for Henry to divorce his wife Katherine of Aragon , and on 4 November 1530 was arrested for treason . While en route from Yorkshire to London , where Wolsey would be held prisoner , he fell ill . The journey took Wolsey through Leicester , and he arrived at the abbey on 26 November , declaring : " Father <unk> , I ame come hether to leave my bones among you " . Wolsey died on 30 November and the public were allowed to view his remains before he was interred within the abbey 's church . 
 By the time Pescall was removed , the abbey 's financial position was poor : Despite being the richest monastery in Leicestershire ( with an income of £ 951 in 1534 ) , it owed a total of £ 1 @,@ 000 to debtors . John Bourchier , who would be the last abbot of the house , took control in 1534 and by 1538 had reduced the debt to £ 411 . Abbots were usually elected from among the canons of the abbey : Bourchier represented a departure from tradition . Bourchier most probably gained the position of abbot on the instigation of the influential Robert Fuller , Abbot of Waltham Abbey , and on the promise of a bribe for Henry VIII 's chief adviser , Thomas Cromwell . Exact details are unknown , but letters seem to suggest Cromwell was promised his nephew Richard Williams ( Cromwell ) would be given £ 100 and the lease of the abbey 's grange at Ingarsby ; the promise was only honoured in April 1536 , as Bourchier faced opposition from the canons of the abbey . Historians have suggested that in choices such as Bourchier , Cromwell may have been selecting abbots he felt would be more " pliable " his future changes to the church ( i.e. the future Dissolution of the Monasteries , of which Cromwell was the architect ) . 
 In 1527 King Henry VIII asked Pope Clement VII to annul his marriage to Katherine of Aragon , but the pope refused . This started a series of events known as English Reformation in which Henry broke away from the authority of the pope . In lieu of the pope , Henry assumed authority over the church : all priests and religious figures , including monks , were required to swear support to the royal supremacy over the church . Abbot Bourchier and the 25 canons at Leicester Abbey acknowledged the king 's royal supremacy on 11 August 1534 , thereby saving the abbey from immediate dissolution . 
 Thomas Cromwell , Henry 's Chief Minister , had long since had his eyes on the wealth of English monasteries ; at the time they owned approximately a quarter of all the realm 's landed wealth . Starting in 1534 , Cromwell had each of the monasteries inspected , with the establishment 's wealth and endowments recorded , along with frequent reports of impropriety , vice and excess . These reports were compiled into volumes known as the Valor Ecclesiasticus . Leicester abbey was inspected by Richard Layton , in 1535 , who complimented Abbot Bourchier as an honest man , but who tried to bring charges of " adultery and unnatural vice " against the abbey 's canons . Abbot Bourchier sought to gain Thomas Cromwell 's favour to protect his canons and abbey ; in 1536 sending him £ 100 and gifts of sheep and oxen . This was ultimately fruitless : Cromwell had convinced King Henry of the immoral behaviour within England 's monasteries and thus between 1536 and 1541 they were all suppressed and dissolved : their land , property and wealth transferred to the king . The abbot 's attempts at bribery could not save Leicester Abbey , and it was finally surrendered to the crown for dissolution in 1538 . 
 = = = After dissolution = = = 
 After dissolution in 1538 , the abbey buildings were demolished within a few years ; although the main gatehouse , boundary walls and farm buildings were left standing . The last abbot , John Bourchier , was granted the substantial pension of £ 200 a year , when the abbey was dissolved : the largest in the Diocese of Lincoln . Payments did not continue for very long , however , as in 1552 , in the reign of Henry VIII 's son King Edward VI , the national finance 's were so poor that all pensions over £ 10 were suspended , with Bourchier recorded as having not received payments for over six months . 
 Following the Dissolution , during a period in which religion was rapidly changing in England , Bourchier managed to adapt his beliefs to stay within the hierarchy in the church : twice becoming a candidate for a bishopric , before servings as rector of Church Langton , from 1554 . This benefice may have represented his true religious sympathies as the rectory was under the patronage of " zealous Catholic " Edward Griffin of Dingley Hall ; although it also had financial incentive with a " wage " ( income ) of £ 60 a year : the highest in Leicestershire . Henry VIII had personally considered Bourchier for the position of Bishop of the King 's proposed new bishopric of Shrewsbury but the king then decided against the bishopric 's creation . In 1554 Bourchier was in touching distance of becoming a Bishop when he was suggested by Edward Griffin as a candidate for the Bishopric of Gloucester . Bourchier was even granted the income of the Bishopric in preparation for being formally appointed by Queen Mary . Mary , however , died , and Bourchier was never appointed . Mary was Catholic , where as her sister and successor , Queen Elizabeth was Protestant ; Elizabeth therefore refused to appoint Mary 's favoured candidates for the 5 vacant bishoprics Mary had left . Bourchier may have gotten off lightly as two other candidates were arrested . 
 Bourchier felt unable to accept Queen Elizabeth 's Acts of Settlement and Uniformity , so whilst still serving as rector of Church Langton , he decided to lay low : A list , drawn up around 1569 , of pensioners of the Diocese of Lincoln lists him as " not known whether he lives or not " . This continued until 1570 , when his disobedience was noticed and he was deprived of the rectory . In June 1571 Bourchier sold the rights to his £ 200 a year pension to Sir Thomas Smyth for the sum of £ 900 , and quietly fled abroad , probably to France or Flanders . A wealthy , but very old man , wanted by the state as a " fugitive over the sea , contrary to statute " , Bourchier lived quietly abroad for his remaining years . His date and place of death is unknown , but he is thought to have lived until at least 1577 , when he would have been around 84 years old . 
 = = = Cavendish House = = = 
 Following the Dissolution of the Monasteries , Henry VIII began to lease out his newly acquired land and property to extract an income from them . Leicester Abbey was granted in 1539 , on a 21 @-@ year lease , to Dr. Francis Cave , one of the commissioners who had negotiated the surrender of the abbey . During this period the abbey was rapidly demolished with the stone sold to meet the high demand within the town of Leicester . 
 War with France and Scotland led Henry VIII to sell of some of the religious establishments and land to raise finances quickly . Later , they were granted or bestowed to leading families who were friends or supporters of the King . These former religious establishments were frequently developed into country homes by their new aristocratic owners . Notable examples of this include <unk> Abbey , Longleat House , Syon House , Welbeck <unk> and Woburn Abbey . 
 Leicester Abbey followed a similar format : Dr. Cave 's tenancy was cut short in 1551 , when King Edward VI granted the abbey to William Parr , 1st Marquess of Northampton , brother of the former Queen Catherine Parr . Much of the abbey stone was then used to create a new mansion on the site , for the Marquess . The Marquess only held the abbey for two years : after supporting Lady Jane Grey 's claim to the throne , in 1553 , on the accession of Bloody Mary , he was arrested and his lands were confiscated . Mary granted the abbey and mansion to her catholic supporter Edward Hastings , 1st Baron Hastings of Loughborough , however he too fell from favour when Mary 's sister Elizabeth I came to the throne . 
 The abbey was sold to Henry Hastings , 3rd Earl of Huntingdon , in 1572 , and then to his brother , Sir Edward Hastings , in 1590 . It was Sir Edward who is through to have been the first of these owners to have actually lived at the abbey permanently : living in the gatehouse whilst the site was developed . Sir Edward 's son Henry ( who inherited the abbey in 1603 ) sold it to in 1613 to William Cavendish , 1st Earl of Devonshire ; the mansion that had been built on the site thus became known as Cavendish House . The 1st Earl intended the abbey to be his main residence and so started to massively extend the mansion , with a new range added to the south and a large wing to the north . The family was massively wealthy with several other estates and stately homes ; following the death of the 1st Earl , the family decided to use Chatsworth House as their principle residence : Cavendish House thus was only used as a stopping point on the way to London . The house gained full @-@ time residency again in 1638 , however , when it was used as a Dower house by Christiana Cavendish ( née Bruce ) , widow of the 2nd Earl of Devonshire . 
 In 1645 , during the English Civil War , the house was used by King Charles I and the Royalist forces after they had besieging and captured Leicester . The house was looted and burned when the Royalist left and marched south towards Oxford ; meeting parliamentary forces at the Battle of Naseby . Cavendish House was never repaired . 
 The Cavendish family sold the abbey in 1733 , at which point , with Cavendish House in ruins , the precinct was being used as agricultural land . By the 19th century the abbey had come into the possession of the Earls of Dysart . Lionel Tollemache , 8th Earl of Dysart , sold the land east of the River Soar ( known as Abbey Meadows ) in 1876 ; this was to allow Leicester Town Council to undertake flood prevention work . The part of this land between the river and the Grand Union Canal was developed by the Town Council into a public space known as Abbey Park , which was opened by King Edward VII ( then Prince of Wales ) in 1882 . 
 The remaining 32 acres ( 13 ha ) of the abbey precinct , which included the abbey 's site and Cavendish House , were donated by William Tollemache , 9th Earl of Dysart , to Leicester Council in 1925 . Part of Cavendish House had to be demolished as it was found to be unsafe , however , nearly six @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years later the area was opened to the public as part of Abbey Park . 
 = = Archaeological excavations = = 
 The first excavations of the abbey took place in the 17th century , when the Dowager Countess , Christiana Cavendish , instructed her gardener to search for the body of Cardinal Wolsey and relics from the abbey ; although little was found . 
 With no above ground remains , the exact location of the abbey had been lost , and so in the 1840s , the editor of the Leicester Chronicle , James Thompson , tried , and failed , to attempt to locate the abbey church . In the 1850s the Leicester Architectural and Archaeological Society would also carry out excavations , but also failed to locate the abbey . Prior to the 9th Earl of Dysart 's donation of the abbey precinct , another attempt was undertaken , but again , no trace of the abbey was found . 
 In the interim period between the donation of the land in 1925 and opening of the abbey park , the abbey was the subject of numerous archaeological excavations , which continued into the following decade . By 1930 the abbey church , and many of its associated buildings had been finally located , and it was decided ( by the architect in charge of designing the new public park , William Bedingfield ) that the site of the abbey should be laid out with low stone walls . As the abbey 's stone was " robbed " , all that remained of many of the buildings were trenches : the remains of the former foundations . These trenches were " not always recognised " by the first excavators , which meant the layout of areas such as the chapter house , dormitory and kitchens was not clear . 
 In 2002 the University of Leicester Archaeological Services decided to excavate the presumed location of the abbey 's kitchens , to clarify the layout of that area of the abbey . These first excavations located both the north and south walls and a 15th – 16th @-@ century brick oven , confirming that it was indeed the kitchens . The area excavated was enlarged in 2003 , with the south @-@ west corner of the building and a second oven uncovered : this corner had not been entirely robbed of stone , with two courses of sandstone remaining . The second oven was found to contain charcoal , fragments of wheat and barley , fish @-@ bones and hazelnuts . A drain identified in the 1930s excavation was also located , and found to contain small bones , fish @-@ scales , and the bones of rats who had formerly lived in the drain . 
 This excavation confirmed the kitchen was a square building measuring 11 @.@ 88 metres ( 39 @.@ 0 ft ) square , with walls of between 1 @.@ 32 metres ( 4 ft 4 in ) and 1 @.@ 74 metres ( 5 ft 9 in ) thick . The ovens found in the corners of the room suggest the room was an octagonal shape internally : similar to the kitchens found at Glastonbury Abbey . 
 From 2000 until 2008 , the abbey ruins were used for training excavations for archaeology students at the School of Ancient History and Archaeology at the University of Leicester . 
 = = Layout = = 
 The archaeological excavations undertaken have allowed historians to calculate the layout and plan of the abbey : which were then plotted out with low stone walls , during the 1920s and 1930s . The abbey church was built on an artificially raised piece of land and is thought to have been richly decorated . It featured a tower at the west end , under which was the main entrance to the church ; two large transepts , which extended beyond the church 's aisles ; and large secondary side chapels , situated either beside the chancel , at the east @-@ end of the church . 
 The cloister lay to the south of the abbey church and was flanked by three ranges of building . The west range contained the " <unk> " , a room used for washing ; a vaulted undercroft , used for storage ; and , on the first floor , the abbey 's best residential accommodation , probably including that used by the Abbot . The East range contained the abbey 's chapterhouse ; a small room which is presumed to be either a library or a <unk> ; a second larger undercroft , again used for storage ; a corridor , known as the <unk> , leading to the graveyard ; and on the first floor were the canon 's dormitory and reredorter ( communal latrine ) . The south range contained a further undercroft ; a warming house , containing a large fire for the residents to warm themselves by ; and to the first floor the refectory , where the brethren ate . 
 To the south of the cloisters lay another three ranges of buildings which were formed around cobbled courtyard . The western range of this courtyard contained the abbey 's kitchens . South @-@ east of this courtyard was a large , separate , rectangular building with a small projection facing north : this building is believed to have been the " guest hall " , with the projection explained as an oriel window . 
 The abbey sat within a large walled precinct . The original precinct walls were constructed of sandstone in the 13th century , and featured both projecting corner towers , and smaller interval towers along its length . Much of this original wall was demolished when the enclosure was enlarged to the south around the turn of the 16th century . This work was thought to have been done under Abbot John Penny and what remains of the wall is now known as " Abbot Penny 's Wall " . This new wall was built using red brick , rather than stone , and is decorated by forty @-@ four different patterns or symbols , which include heraldic devices , simple patterns , and religious symbols , all of which were built into the wall using black bricks . 
 The abbey precinct was entered through an outer gateway on the north wall of the precinct . This led to a " halt @-@ way " which was around 60 metres ( 200 ft ) long , and was flanked either side by stone walls ; it was enclosed at the south end by the abbey 's formal Gatehouse . The original gatehouse was a single storey construction of two lodges flanking the gate ; but this was subsequently enlarged . The new gatehouse measured 21 metres ( 69 ft ) by 8 @.@ 5 metres ( 28 ft ) : it had round turrets at each corner , thought to contain stairs , and had " a couple of storeys " built above the gate itself . The gatehouse was then flanked to the west by what is thought to be a small , second kitchen . 
 On the eastern side of the precinct lay the abbey 's infirmary : a hospital used to care for ill or elderly canons . The infirmary was made up of two large buildings : one a chapel ; the other a hall ( with latrines to one end ) serving as a ward . The abbey precinct also contained an almonry , where poor boys received a free education in a type of boarding school ; a water mill ; a dovecote ; and a fishpond . 
 = = Possessions = = 
 = = = Controlled churches = = = 
 = = = = Churches in Leicestershire = = = = 
 = = = = Churches outside Leicestershire = = = = 
 = = = = Monastic cells = = = = 
 Cockerham Priory , Lancashire 
 = = = Manors and land = = = 
 = = List of abbots = = 
 A list of abbots of the abbey : 
