 = = = Subscribers and funding = = = 
 In a document entitled " A list of subscribers to the intended Bolton Bury and Manchester Canal Navigation " , now kept in the Greater Manchester County Record Office , some of the more notable subscribers are listed , along with the amounts invested by each . Many of the 95 investments on the list appear to have been made by proxy . The largest is £ 3 @,@ 000 , and the smallest £ 100 . The total sum of investments is £ 47 @,@ 700 . £ 5 per £ 100 share was initially paid , with an additional £ 10 call made by 10 August 1791 . Similar share calls were made at regular intervals over the following years . The first dividend of 4 % was paid in July 1812 , with regular payments following thereafter . 
 = = = Work begins = = = 
 Following a parliamentary survey of the route by Charles McNiven , the bill received Royal Assent on 13 May 1791 and became an Act of Parliament for the construction of the canal , by which " the proprietors were empowered to purchase land for a breadth of 26 yards on level ground , and wider where required for cuttings or embankments . " The Act allowed the company to raise £ 47 @,@ 000 , with shares of £ 100 . The intention was that at Prestolee the route would divide into two branches ( arms ) , with one branch towards Bolton and the other to Bury , but it would not , however , join the River Irwell . The proprietors were entitled to take water from any brooks within 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) of the canal , or within 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) of the canal summits at Bolton and Bury . 
 At a meeting in Manchester on 30 June 1791 , at the house of Alexander Patten , a committee was formed with the following members : 
 Lord Grey de Wilton , Heaton House , Lancashire 
 Sir John <unk> Heathcote , Longton , Newcastle , Staffordshire 
 Thomas Butterworth Bayley esq . — Hope , Salford 
 Robert Andrews esq — Rivington 
 James Wareing , Gentleman , Knowsley 
 Matthew Fletcher ( Mine owner , Clifton ) 
 Peter Wright , Gentleman , Manchester 
 William Marsden , Merchant , Manchester 
 Charles McNiven , Gentleman , Manchester 
 Hugh Henshall , <unk> , Staffordshire 
 John Pilkington , Merchant , Manchester 
 The meeting secured a resolution that " Matthew Fletcher and Mr McNiven shall dispatch or procure 100 wheelbarrows and as many planks as they shall think necessary for the use and accommodation of the canal navigation " . Further meetings took place from 26 – 29 July . Matthew Fletcher was ordered to meet with land owners to discuss the purchase of any land along the route of the canal , and with this in mind , on 30 July 1791 John Seddon of Sandy Lane was ordered to survey the line of the canal beginning within the estate of John <unk> Heathcote , and ending at the southern extremity of the Reverend <unk> 's estate . Fletcher and Henshall were ordered to contact people and companies in the building trade to discuss construction . 
 At a meeting on 16 August 1791 , " several persons " attended , and made offers for the contract to build the canal . A Mr John Seddon of Little Hulton , a labourer , agreed to a contract on Matthew Fletcher 's terms , for a " certain part of the canal " . Five other persons were rejected , their proposals not receiving the " approbation " of the committee . 
 With news of the planned Rochdale Canal link into Manchester , the company proposed to extend the canal from Bury through Littleborough , and to connect with the Rochdale Canal at Sladen . The new route , known as the Bury and Sladen Canal , was intended as a rival scheme to the proposed Rochdale link into Manchester . A survey was also carried out on a proposed extension from Sladen to Sowerby Bridge . The company also considered links to the Leeds and Liverpool Canal and the Mersey and Irwell Navigation . These plans would have substantially increased the trans @-@ Pennine traffic using the company 's canal , and caused a potential loss of traffic and revenue on the nearby Bridgewater Canal . With this in mind , the owner of the Bridgewater Canal , the Duke of Bridgewater , agreed to allow the Rochdale Canal Company to connect to his canal at Manchester . Despite the persistence of the canal company , the Rochdale Canal plan won the day and in 1797 the company abandoned the Bury and Sladen Canal plan . 
 After several years of construction , on 9 January 1794 an agreement was reached with the Leeds and Liverpool Canal Company to create a link from the Bolton arm of the canal to the Leeds and Liverpool Canal at Red Moss , near Horwich . This agreement required significant design changes to allow the canal to carry the wider boats used on the broad gauge Leeds and Liverpool Canal , which included a change to broad locks . Benjamin Outram was employed to inspect the works , and reported on the cost of this conversion as being £ 26 @,@ 924 . Although the necessary changes were implemented , the route of the Leeds and Liverpool Canal was altered and the link was not built . In the same year the Haslingden Canal link to the Leeds and Liverpool Canal was proposed , from the Bury arm of the canal . Although authorised by an Act of Parliament , it too was never built . The canal company remained hopeful of a link between the two canals , but all hope of this was lost when on 21 June 1819 an Act of Parliament was enacted to create a link between the Leigh extension of the Bridgewater Canal , and the Leeds and Liverpool Canal . 
 A report entitled " A Statement of the Situation of the Works of the Manchester , Bolton and Bury Canal , on the Eighteenth of December , 1795 . " gives details of the progress of the works , including details of bridges , cuttings , raised bankings and aqueducts . Much of the document details the work required to convert the canal to broad gauge . A 5 @.@ 75 @-@ mile ( 9 @.@ 25 km ) length between Oldfield Lane in Salford and Giants Seat Locks in Outwood was navigable with 3 ft 8 in ( 1 @.@ 12 m ) of water . The remaining work included strengthening work to the banks , an increase of water depth to 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) , and the gravelling of half of the towpath . Between Giants Seat locks and Ringley Bridge two locks had been erected , with a small section of canal to be broadened before becoming navigable . From Ringley Bridge to Prestolee Aqueduct one lock had been erected . Nob End Locks were still under construction but mostly complete , although the basin at the bottom had not yet been dug . The stretch to Bolton had at this time been widened , with several bridges requiring further work , incomplete embankments , construction of a weir , and gravelling of the towpath . On the Bury arm , almost the entire length had been dug , and walls to support the canal along the bank of the Irwell had been built . Some widening of previously narrow sections had yet to be undertaken , none of the towpath had been gravelled , and no fences had been erected along the towpath . 
 Significant parts of the canal were completed by 1796 , including the stretch up to Bury in October of that year . With the completion of the Bolton arm in the following year , much of the canal opened for business . The connection to Fletcher 's Canal was completed in 1800 , but with the failure of the scheme to connect the Bolton arm of the canal to the Leeds and Liverpool Canal , the canal remained isolated from any other navigable waterway . One proposed remedy involved the construction of an aqueduct over the River Irwell in Manchester , to connect directly to the Rochdale Canal between Castlefield and Piccadilly . A bill was proposed in 1799 but after strong objections from the Mersey and Irwell Navigation Company they eventually gave up and subsequently , over the following seven years , the canal company purchased enough land to build a canal link directly to the Irwell . 
 During construction the company , having spent all of the money allowed in the 1791 Act of Parliament , incurred a debt of £ 31 @,@ 345 . They therefore applied for a further Act to raise more money . This act , granted in 1805 , allowed them to raise an additional £ 80 @,@ 000 . This allowed them to repay the debt , and continue work to finish the canal . An inspection in June 1808 reported that by November 1808 the canal would be complete throughout . 
 A connection to the Rochdale Canal was eventually built in 1839 via the Manchester and Salford Junction Canal , which was funded in part by the proprietors of the MB & B canal . 
 = = = Traffic = = = 
 Most of the traffic along the canal transported coal from the many collieries that existed along its length , such as Outwood Colliery and Ladyshore Colliery . Some of these pits were linked to the canal by road , and some by short tramlines . In the late 19th century as much as 650 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 640 @,@ 000 long tons ) of coal and 43 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 42 @,@ 000 long tons ) of other materials including night soil and fruit were transported annually . The canal also enabled the transport of salt from Cheshire to the many bleach and dye works in its area – hence the name of Salt Wharf on the Bolton arm of the canal . Tolls were easily calculated as milestones were placed along the towpath at ¼ mile ( 400 m ) intervals . This was important as journeys were often quite short , the collieries being so close to industry along the canal 's length . 
 The boats used to transport coal were short and narrow , and each contained a row of boxes used for carrying coal . Each box had a base of two halves , hinged and held closed with chains . These boxes would be lifted out of the boats , positioned by crane over a bunker or cart and emptied by releasing the chains on the base . This design helped keep the canal competitive , as it increased the speed with which loading and unloading of the boats could be performed . 
 The canal would often freeze in winter , so an icebreaker was used to ensure the canal remained navigable during the cold weather . Named " Sarah Lansdale " and owned by James Crompton <unk> , it was towed by a team of horses while the crew stood astride the deck , secured to the handrails , rocking the boat from side to side and breaking the ice in the process . Often , ice would be encountered that was so thick the boat would rise up onto the surface of the ice . This boat did once reside at the boat museum in Ellesmere Port Dock but was later destroyed by fire . 
 Food and drink was made available to those using the canal in several places including Margaret Barlow 's Tea Gardens , Kilcoby Cottage and Rhodes Lock . A camping ground was also available at Kilcoby Cottage . The nearby Giant 's Seat House was for some time the home of the canal manager . 
 The canal also carried packet services , with passengers facing a three @-@ hour journey between Bolton and Manchester . The first passenger boat to Bolton was launched in 1796 from the Windsor Castle public house , and in 1798 a new packet boat was built for the use of the company . Fares were initially fixed by the canal company ( although from 1805 contracted @-@ out ) and based upon the service required ; a passenger using the state cabin from Bolton to Manchester would be charged one shilling six pence , and a single shilling on the return journey . Passengers would change boats at Prestolee to avoid delays at the lock flight and also to save water , and a purpose @-@ built covered walkway the length of the road was constructed for their benefit . Another passenger service ran along the two arms from Bolton to Bury , and over 60 @,@ 000 passengers per year travelled on the canal ; between July 1833 and June 1834 , 21 @,@ 060 made the journey from Bolton to Manchester , 21 @,@ 212 people travelled from Manchester to Bolton , and 20 @,@ 818 intermediary passengers hopped on and off the boats en route . In 1834 the Bolton to Manchester service earned £ 1 @,@ 177 and the Bolton to Bury service earned £ 75 . The service was quite luxurious compared to some packet boat services : central heating was provided in winter and drinks were served on board . This caused a tragedy in 1818 , however , when a party of twenty drunken passengers managed to capsize the boat and a number of passengers , including two children , were drowned . 
 Several fatal incidents combined with general passenger concern caused the canal company to improve passenger safety ; in 1802 a wall was built at the wharf at Oldfield Lane in Salford and in 1833 a gas lamp was installed at Ringley Wharf . 
 A parcel service was also offered , although this proved unpopular as it was unreliable . 
 = = = Railway proposal = = = 
 In March 1829 the idea of building a branch railway line from the Oldfield Road terminus in Salford to the new Liverpool and Manchester Railway was mooted , but nothing was built . In 1830 the canal company , led by chairman Sir John Tobin , began to promote a proposal to build a railway along the line of the canal , from Salford to Bolton . Alexander Nimmo was employed to report on the proposal and told that it was possible " so far as he expressed himself capable of judging from his present cursory view of the canal " . The shareholders then sought a bill for a railway from Bolton to Manchester and on 23 August 1831 obtained an Act of Parliament to become the " Company of Proprietors of the Manchester , Bolton and Bury Canal Navigation and Railway Company " . They were empowered to build a line from Manchester to Bolton and Bury , " upon or near the line of ... the Canal " , and a branch from Clifton Aqueduct through to Great Lever . In 1832 this company obtained an Act that allowed it to build the railway . Due mainly to the objections of local mine owners who would have lost access to the canal and supplies , and would not have had branch railways built for them , the company agreed to an amending bill which would keep the canal and allow the new railway to be constructed alongside it . Due to technical and financial constraints the branch to Bury was never built . The canal therefore survived , although locks 4 and 5 in Salford were moved and combined into a two @-@ rise staircase , with a second tunnel built underneath the line which became known as the Manchester and Bolton Railway . 
 The line opened on 28 May 1838 , and the company had purchased four locomotives from Bury , Curtis , and Kennedy , two from George Forrester and Company , and two from William Fairbairn & Sons . Between the opening date and 9 January 1839 the railway carried 228 @,@ 799 passengers – far more than had been carried on the canal . Shortly thereafter passenger services on the canal ceased and the boats were sold off . In 1846 the company was taken over by the Manchester and Leeds Railway , which itself became the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway ( L & YR ) the following year . In 1890 the L & YR widened the line through Salford . Locks 4 , 5 and 6 were moved slightly to the north and the tunnel under the railway was replaced by a bridge ( although it is still referred to as a tunnel ) . 
 In 1922 the L & YR amalgamated into the London and North Western Railway , and in 1923 this company amalgamated into the London , Midland and Scottish Railway . This company was nationalised in 1948 under the Transport Act 1947 and became part of British Railways . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 By 1924 the Bolton arm had experienced a significant fall in traffic , although until the 1930s , when colliery closures reduced traffic even further , coal trade remained brisk . By 1935 Fletcher 's Canal had fallen into disuse . Burst banks alongside the Irwell and Croal rivers ( caused largely by subsidence from mining activities ) were common . A major breach occurred in 1936 and was never repaired . 10 @.@ 45 acres ( 42 @,@ 300 m2 ) of land around this breach was purchased from the British Transport Commission by Cream 's Paper Mill , who subsequently built over part of the canal . 
 On 2 March 1937 the London , Midland and Scottish Railway held a Special General Meeting during which they proposed to abandon the canal from Clifton Aqueduct to Bailey Bridge , from Bailey Bridge to Bury , and the entire Bolton arm from Nob End Locks to Bolton . The proposal was not carried but four years later , under the London , Midland and Scottish Railway Act of 1941 , they abandoned 7 miles ( 11 km ) of the canal , including a section from Prestolee to Clifton and the entire Bolton arm . In 1939 , during the Second World War , the Ministry of Transport ordered a half @-@ mile section in Agecroft piped , to reduce the risk of German bomb damage damaging the adjacent Magnesium Elektron Company 's site . 
 Although it continued to generate revenue from the sale of water , tolls produced only a small proportion of the canal 's income . In 1946 , against expenses of £ 12 @,@ 500 , it earned a total of £ 7 @,@ 296 , of which only £ 471 was from tolls . In 1951 total income was £ 8 @,@ 815 against a total expenditure of £ 9 @,@ 574 . In the same year , the canal carried 3 @,@ 933 long tons ( 3 @,@ 996 t ) of coal and no other materials . 
 A British Transport Commission report of 1955 included the canal in its list of " Waterways having insufficient commercial prospects to justify their retention for navigation " . Following an Act of Parliament , in 1961 the canal was abandoned . A single coal delivery service between Sion Street and Bury Moors continued until 1968 , but this was the last commercial traffic to use the canal . 
 = = Features = = 
 There are several notable features along the canal , including Prestolee Aqueduct and Clifton Aqueduct , both of which are Grade II listed structures . Nob End Locks ( sometimes referred to as Prestolee Locks ) sit at the junction of the three arms of the canal at Nob End . They comprise two sets of three staircase locks , separated by a passing basin . These locks served to lower the level of the canal by 64 feet ( 20 m ) over a distance of 600 feet ( 183 m ) . The upper staircase is still visible , but most of the lower staircase was filled in at some point in the 1950s , and much of the stonework was removed . 
 A major breach of the canal along the Bury arm revealed the scale of the engineering used in the construction of the retaining wall . Railway rails , which were used to increase the strength of the walls , are still clearly visible at the site of the breach . 
 The Mount Sion steam crane ( a depiction of which is used as the logo of the Manchester Bolton & Bury Canal Society ) sits rusting and unused at Mount Sion , on the Bury arm . One of the earliest surviving cranes in England , it was built some time about 1875 – 1884 for Mount Sion Bleach Works by Thomas Smith & Sons of Rodley and was used to unload coal boxes from barges into the yard below the canal . It was granted Grade II listed status in 2011 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 The canal was originally supplied by the River Irwell in Bury , at the Weddell Brook tributary . This proved insufficient for local industry and in 1842 Elton Reservoir at Bury was built to become the canal 's principal supply . Although the Bury and Bolton arms are on one level , the Salford arm used seventeen broad locks , including some in staircases ( Nob End , for example ) , to descend 190 feet ( 58 m ) over 8 miles ( 13 km ) from the summit level to the lowest point at Salford . Robert Fulton had proposed an inclined plane at Nob End , but this design was rejected . The connection with Fletcher 's Canal near Clifton Aqueduct was made by a single lock 90 feet ( 27 m ) long by 21 feet ( 6 m ) wide , with a drop of 18 inches ( 46 cm ) . 
 Although the canal was originally designed to be a narrow canal with narrow locks for boats 7 feet ( 2 m ) wide , in 1794 an agreement was reached with the Leeds and Liverpool Canal company to create a link near Red Moss near Horwich , so broad locks were built to accommodate the 14 feet ( 4 m ) wide boats using that canal . This meant removing some of the narrow locks that had already been built . An extension to the original canal feeder was built at Weddell Brook in Bury , alongside the River Irwell . The route of the Leeds and Liverpool Canal was changed , however , and the planned link never materialised . The design changes to the canal were not completely without merit , since they allowed two narrowboats to use each lock simultaneously , saving passage time and water . 
 Much of the Bury arm of the canal runs alongside the River Irwell through the Irwell Valley , and eventually required the construction of huge retaining walls to prevent the canal bank from sliding down the hill . Similar strengthening , although on a smaller scale , was required on the Bolton arm where it ran alongside the River Croal . Through these sections the towpath is normally on the side of the canal closest to the river . 
 Six aqueducts were required to allow the canal to cross the River Irwell , the River Tonge and four roads . On the Bolton arm these were Hall Lane Aqueduct , Fogg 's Aqueduct and the larger <unk> Aqueduct , all of which have since been demolished . Hall Lane Aqueduct was damaged by mining subsidence and replaced in 1884 – 1885 . It was demolished in 1950 . The Salford arm flowed over Prestolee Aqueduct , then Clifton Aqueduct , and finally the smaller <unk> 's Lane Aqueduct ( since demolished ) . 
 Many bridges were also constructed , along the length of the canal . Most were of small design allowing access to farmland , although many are wide enough for a horse and cart . In places where the canal crossed important thoroughfares , such as Water Street in Radcliffe , Radcliffe Road in Darcy Lever and Agecroft Road in Pendlebury , larger bridges were constructed . 
 Cranes were used along the many wharfs on the canal to offload cargo . One of these , a steam crane at Mount Sion , still exists ( albeit in poor condition ) . At Bury Wharf a traversing steam crane positioned between the two arms of the terminus would offload cargo to be loaded into waiting lorries and a similar system was used at Radcliffe Wharf . 
 = = = Costs = = = 
 In 1795 costs of construction were detailed as follows : 
 The total cost of construction was £ 127 @,@ 700 . 
 = = Breaches = = 
 The canal has suffered several major breaches throughout its history . As early as 1799 a flood carried away large sections of the lower banks , and on 15 October 1853 two boats were swept through a 93 @-@ yard ( 85 m ) breach near the bottom of Nob End Locks ( no injuries were reported ) . Three breaches were reported from 1878 – 1879 , in Little Lever and Darcy Lever , the latter near Burnden Chemical Works . Subsidence , caused by mining activity , prompted a breach near Agecroft in 1881 . As a result of such incidents , from 1881 to 1888 engineer Edwin Muir was employed to reduce the subsidence caused by mining activity . Similar work was undertaken throughout the 1920s . Maps from the 1880s show that by then , to safeguard against further subsidence , the canal company had purchased areas of coal beneath the canal . In 1884 the canal 's owners , the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway , successfully sued colliery owners Knowles & Sons for losses incurred from damage caused by subsidence . Following this judgement , the railway company settled out of court with other colliery owners . Constant repairs were made , particularly through Pendleton , where the embankment was periodically raised . Some bridges were lifted far above their original supports , while others sank as low as 8 feet ( 2 m ) above head height . 
 One of the most serious breaches occurred on 6 July 1936 near Nob End , close to the junction of the canal 's three arms , reported by the Manchester Evening News the following day . It was never repaired and although the canal saw continued use between Ladyshore Colliery and Bury , it eventually closed in 1961 . 
 <unk> <unk> ITS <unk> - Barges Smashed and River <unk> " When the Bolton @-@ Manchester Canal burst its banks at Little Lever yesterday millions of gallons of water cascaded 300 feet into the River Irwell , carrying down hundreds of tons of earth and stones . The river rapidly became blocked on the Bury side and the banked @-@ up water flooded the surrounding land . " Like Niagara " was the description applied by one resident in the vicinity . Bricks and iron reinforcements of the side of the canal were torn away and carried into the river . Canal barges were smashed up as they too swept over the falls . Fortunately , there are no houses in the neighbourhood , and no one was hurt . It is feared that work at a paper mill and a chemical works which depend upon the canal for transport will be affected . Mr John W. Martin , of <unk> Street , Bolton , said : " I was cycling along the bank when I suddenly saw signs of a subsidence begin on a bend in the canal . I could not stop and my only chance was to ride furiously along the two feet of earth which remained . As I passed over the earth fell away behind the back wheel of my bicycle and I was thrown off . " The noise was deafening . A few yards from me tremendous quantities of water , rock , and earth were moving bodily from the canal . A gap about 100 yards long has been opened in the canal embankment . A few years ago there was a similar landslide near the spot . " 
 = = Current status = = 
 Almost 60 % of the canal 's original length is no longer in water . Bury Wharf is now covered by an industrial estate . A car park has been built on top of the canal , near <unk> Viaduct , but from there on the towpath remains accessible . The canal , in water but overgrown with weeds , is culverted under Water Street in Radcliffe . It continues in water up to a dam at Ladyshore , following which the foundations of a demolished paper mill , built in 1956 , may be found . 
 The 1936 breach was never repaired and presents a significant gap in the canal 's route . On the Salford arm , although in good condition , the top three locks at Prestolee are derelict ; the bottom three have been removed . The canal is in water from the bottom of the lock flight through to Ringley Locks . Ringley Bridge is infilled , as is the canal through Ringley Village and Giants Seat Locks . Kilcoby Bridge is missing and from there the canal is inaccessible until it reaches the M60 motorway . Overgrown , Rhodes Lock is still in reasonable condition . One or more electricity pylons straddle the infilled canal between Rhodes Lock and the motorway , which has been built over the line of the canal . A sludge lagoon built during the motorway 's construction blocks a short section toward Clifton Aqueduct . The canal does not take water again until beyond Clifton Aqueduct , where a short 900 @-@ foot ( 270 m ) length exists between the former Pilkington factory and the <unk> factory . <unk> 's Lane Aqueduct is missing but the canal is in water between there and Holland Street . Beyond this point the canal is infilled and in parts built over , especially through Pendleton . Its junction with the River Irwell in Salford has recently been restored and made navigable . 
 The Bolton arm of the canal is interrupted by the absence of Hall Lane Aqueduct at Little Lever , which was demolished in 1950 to make way for the widening of Hall Lane . In Darcy Lever , <unk> Aqueduct , which crossed Radcliffe Road and the Tonge River , is also missing , having been demolished in June 1965 . The route of St Peter 's Way has almost entirely destroyed a significant section of the canal as it heads into the centre of Bolton and Church Wharf no longer exists . The last section of the Bolton arm of the canal still in water is currently used for fishing . 
 The entire route of the canal is protected from any adverse development that would prevent its restoration , having been included in the unitary development plans of Salford City Council , Bolton Council and Bury Council . 
 = = Restoration = = 
 To help secure the canal 's future , in 1987 the Manchester Bolton & Bury Canal Society was formed . Despite the aforementioned problems , on 21 October 2005 British Waterways announced funding from European Objective Two Funding , the Northwest Regional Development Agency ( <unk> ) and Salford City Council for a restoration scheme at the newly named Middlewood Locks in Salford , which began in September 2006 . Restoration was halted briefly by the discovery of what was initially thought to be a Second World War bomb but which proved to be a wartime American mortar with no explosive content . <unk> for the tunnel under the Manchester to Preston Line were completed in 2008 . The missing Irwell towpath bridge , known as Bloody Bridge , which once crossed the canal 's entrance , was replaced with an arched timber structure incorporating elements of the old lock 1 . Much of the canal 's existing masonry has been re @-@ used and , where possible , the original <unk> were grouted and pointed . The original river locks 1 and 2 were replaced by a single deep lock . 
 Completion was scheduled for the end of July 2008 and marked with an opening ceremony on 19 September that year , during which the new Margaret Fletcher tunnel under the Manchester Inner Ring Road was formally named . Full restoration of the canal could create up to 6 @,@ 000 jobs and add an annual £ 6M to the local economy . The total cost is estimated at £ <unk> . The next planned major restoration may be along Salford Crescent . 
 Local volunteers under the guidance of the Manchester Bolton and Bury Canal Society have for years worked on sections of the canal , removing overgrowth and tidying up its general appearance . A new pedestrian footbridge , designed by artist Liam Curtin , was opened at Nob End Locks in April 2013 . Made entirely out of scaled @-@ up pieces of <unk> , it was built by society volunteers and other members of the public at a cost of about £ 90 @,@ 000 . Toward the end of 2015 , work began to restore water to the top lock at Nob End . Infill beneath the first bridge on the canal 's Bolton arm was excavated , exposing the towpath for the first time in decades . 
 = = Locations of features = = 
 = Milton Blockhouse = 
 Milton Blockhouse was an artillery fortification constructed as part of Henry VIII 's Device plan of 1539 , in response to fears of an imminent invasion of England . It was built at Milton , near Gravesend in Kent at a strategic point along the River Thames , and was operational by 1540 . Equipped with 30 pieces of artillery and a garrison of 12 men and a captain , it was probably a two @-@ storey , D @-@ shaped building , designed to prevent enemy ships from progressing further up the river or landing an invasion force . It was stripped of its artillery in 1553 and was demolished between 1557 and 1558 ; nothing remains of the building above ground , although archaeological investigations in the 1970s uncovered parts of the blockhouse 's foundations . 
 = = Background = = 
 Milton Blockhouse was built as a consequence of international tensions between England , France and the Holy Roman Empire in the final years of the reign of King Henry VIII . Traditionally the Crown had left coastal defences to the local lords and communities , playing only a modest role in building and maintaining fortifications , and while France and the Empire remained in conflict with one another , maritime raids were common but an actual invasion of England seemed unlikely . Modest defences , based around simple blockhouses and towers , existed in the south @-@ west and along the Sussex coast , as well as a few more impressive works in the north of England , but in general the fortifications were very limited in scale . 
 In 1533 , Henry broke with Pope Paul III in order to annul the long @-@ standing marriage to his wife , Catherine of Aragon , and remarry . Catherine was the aunt of Charles V , the Holy Roman Emperor , and he took the annulment as a personal insult . This resulted in France and the Empire declaring an alliance against Henry in 1538 , and the Pope encouraging the two countries to attack England . An invasion of England now appeared certain . 
 = = Device of 1539 = = 
 Henry issued an order , called a " device " , in 1539 , giving instructions for the " defence of the realm in time of invasion " and the construction of forts along the English coastline . Under this programme of work the River Thames was protected by a mutually reinforcing network of blockhouses at Gravesend , Milton , and Higham on the south side of the river , and Tilbury and East Tilbury on the opposite bank . 
 The fortifications were strategically placed . London and the newly constructed royal dockyards of Deptford and Woolwich were vulnerable to seaborne attacks arriving up the Thames estuary , which was then a major maritime route ; 80 percent of England 's exports passed through it . The village of Milton and the adjacent town of Gravesend , only 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) apart , formed a particularly important communications point along the river . They formed the centre of the " Long Ferry " traffic of passengers into the capital , and for the " Cross Ferry " over the river to Tilbury , resulting in the local riverbank becoming lined with wharfs . This was also the first point that an invasion force would be able to easily disembark along the Thames , as before this point the mudflats along the sides of the estuary would have made landings difficult . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Milton Blockhouse was designed by the Clerk of the King 's Works , James Nedeham , and the Master of Ordnance , Christopher Morice , with Robert Lorde serving as the paymaster for the project and Lionel Martin , John <unk> and Mr Travers acting as the local overseers . The fort was built on Chapel Field , which the Crown bought , along with the land for Gravesend Blockhouse , from William Burston for £ 66 ; the field had previously been part of Milton Chantry , dissolved by Henry VIII during the Reformation . The work was quickly completed , and by 1540 the blockhouse was in operation and equipped with 30 artillery guns , 6 handguns and various pikes and longbows . Initially commanded by Captain Sir Edward Cobham , it had a small garrison of 12 men , including a second in command , a porter , three soldiers and seven gunners ; these men would have been supported by reinforcements if the fort had ever come under attack . 
 Fresh fears of invasion after 1544 prompted further work being carried out on the blockhouse by Sir Richard Lee , a prominent military engineer , although peace was declared the following year . It is uncertain exactly what shape the fort took ; archaeological investigations suggest that it was probably D @-@ shaped , two storeys tall , with a circular bastion facing the river ; there would have been battery positions on either side of the main defences , and a more modern , angular bastion was added later on the landwards side . By 1546 the King 's accountants estimated that £ 1 @,@ 072 had been spent on building and developing the fortification . 
 = = Destruction = = 
 In 1553 , orders were issued for the artillery pieces to be removed from the blockhouse and taken to the Tower of London ; the fort was then demolished between 1557 and 1558 , the brick and stone from the site being reused to repair the Tower . The former site was probably rediscovered during excavations in 1826 , but was destroyed during the building of the Gravesend Canal Basin , Canal Road and the Gordon Pleasure Gardens later in the 19th century . Archaeological investigations between 1973 and 1978 uncovered the foundations of the blockhouse , now protected under UK law as a scheduled monument . 
 = Blackadder II = 
 Blackadder II is the second series of the BBC sitcom Blackadder , written by Richard Curtis and Ben Elton , which aired from 9 January 1986 to 20 February 1986 . The series is set in England during the reign of Queen Elizabeth I ( 1558 – 1603 ) , and sees the principal character , Edmund , Lord Blackadder , as a Tudor courtier attempting to win the favour of the Queen while avoiding execution by decapitation , a fate that befell many of her suitors . 
 The series saw a number of significant changes from the format of The Black Adder , notably Ben Elton replacing Rowan Atkinson as the second writer , filming in studio sets , rather than on location , the introduction of the more familiar Machiavellian " Blackadder " character and a less intelligent Baldrick . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The series is set during the Elizabethan era ( 1558 – 1603 ) . The principal character , Edmund , Lord Blackadder ( Rowan Atkinson ) , is the great @-@ grandson of the original Black Adder , and is now a member of the London aristocracy . Unlike his forefather , he is both dashing and intelligent , although he is still scheming and cynical in his outlook . The series follows his attempts to win the favour of the childish Queen Elizabeth I ( Miranda Richardson ) . As before he is aided , and often hindered , by two less @-@ than @-@ intelligent sidekicks , his servant Baldrick ( Tony Robinson ) , and Lord Percy Percy ( Tim McInnerny ) , heir to the Duchy of Northumberland , with whom Blackadder has a grudging friendship . 
 Throughout the series , Blackadder 's chief rival is Lord Melchett ( Stephen Fry ) , the Queen 's pretentious and grovelling Lord Chamberlain . Melchett is himself in fear of upsetting the Queen , and thus attempts to outdo Blackadder by supporting the Queen in whatever current fad she is interested in . Comic relief in the Court is provided by the Queen 's rather demented former nanny , <unk> ( Patsy Byrne ) . 
 Baldrick , who in the first series was the most intelligent of the main trio , became more stupid , an idea proposed by Ben Elton to make him " the stupidest person in the history of ... human beings " , and to act as a foil to Blackadder 's new @-@ found intelligence . The series was also the originator of Baldrick 's obsession with the turnip , although this apparently arose from a botanical error on the part of Elton , who confused the vegetable with the " amusingly shaped " parsnip . 
 Lord Percy remained similar in character to the original series , as a foolish sidekick in Blackadder 's plots and predicaments . In this respect , McInnerny has stated that the character bears a resemblance to Sir Andrew <unk> in Shakespeare 's Twelfth Night . Indeed , as with The Black Adder , the series featured many tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek references to Shakespeare 's plays ; Shakespeare is mentioned a number of times as a contemporary Elizabethan , and many of his famous quotations are twisted for comic effect . In particular the first episode " Bells " , follows a similar plot to Twelfth Night . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 The series aired for six episodes broadcast on Thursdays on BBC One at 9.30pm between 9 January 1986 and 20 February 1986 . 
 " Head " was originally intended to be the first episode , and was first to be filmed . This resulted in the small continuity error of Lord Percy still having a beard in " Head " which he shaves off in " Bells " . In addition , during the early scenes of " Head " , the principal characters are introduced to the audience with Baldrick 's stupidity highlighted . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Due to the high cost of the first series , Michael Grade ( the then controller of programming of BBC One ) was reluctant to sign off a second series without major improvements and cost @-@ cutting , leaving a gap of three years between the two series . 
 Rowan Atkinson did not wish to continue writing for the second series , so writer and stand @-@ up comedian Ben Elton was chosen to replace him . According to producer John Lloyd , Ben Elton was particularly keen on the choice of the Elizabethan age for the series , because it was " a sexy age that the kids can relate to . " As a stand @-@ up comic , Elton often acted as the studio warm @-@ up comic to amuse the audience before filming began . The scripts were also tightened up during principal rehearsals with the actors — according to Richard Curtis , a whole script for a murder mystery – style episode was dropped because the writers felt it did not work . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 To make the show more cost @-@ effective , it was principally filmed on specially designed small sets at BBC Television Centre created by designer Tony Thorpe . The sets were de @-@ constructed and rebuilt during the period of studio filming , as was normal for studio series then . In particular , the Queen 's throne room and Blackadder 's front room were featured in every episode , with only two further unique sets per episode , including an execution chamber in " Head " and a Spanish dungeon in " Chains " . Only one outside location shoot was used in the whole series , which took place before principal filming on Thursday 30 May 1985 at Wilton House , Wiltshire . These outdoor scenes were Blackadder 's courting scene in " Bells " and the end title sequences . Studio recordings shot in front of a live audience began on Sunday 9 June 1985 with the recording of " Head " . Subsequent episodes were filmed on a weekly basis in the sequence " Bells " , " Potato " , " Money " , " Beer " and " Chains " . Director <unk> Fletcher was keen for the action to be shot spontaneously and was averse to complex costume changes or special effects which required recording to be halted . She is reputed to have said filming it was " a bit like doing Shakespeare in front of an audience - it 's not at all like doing sitcom . " 
 = = = Cast = = = 
 The size of the principal cast was reduced compared to the previous series , with a fixed number of characters appearing in every episode . Richard Curtis has been quoted as saying that due to the familiar cast , the series was the happiest for him to work on , comparing it to a " friendly bunch of school chums " . 
 Rowan Atkinson as Lord Edmund Blackadder 
 Tim McInnerny as Lord Percy Percy , Heir to the Duchy of Northumberland 
 Tony Robinson as Baldrick 
 Miranda Richardson as Queen Elizabeth I of England 
 Stephen Fry as Lord Melchett , the Lord Chamberlain 
 Patsy Byrne as <unk> 
 The series also featured at least one significant cameo role per episode , with notable appearances from Rik Mayall , playing the debonair Lord <unk> in " Bells " , two figures famous for their roles in science fiction series - Tom Baker and Simon Jones - in " Potato " , Miriam Margolyes , who had appeared in the previous series , as the puritanical Lady <unk> , and Stephen Fry 's comedy partner Hugh Laurie appearing twice , first as the drunken Simon Partridge in " Beer " and in the final episode as the evil Prince Ludwig . Laurie was later given a larger role as George in the next two series . Also " Bob " , played by Gabrielle Glaister , a former classmate of Ben Elton 's , made " his " first appearance . Several of the characters were seen in similar guises in later series . 
 = = = Music and titles = = = 
 The opening titles are accompanied by a mock @-@ Elizabethan arrangement of Howard Goodall 's Blackadder theme played on a recorder and an electric guitar , and feature a black snake slithering about on a marble table . The snake , noncompliant to the wishes of its handler , is eventually removed and replaced with something related to the episode title , which in this series is always a single noun . The opening ominous string crescendo and imagery are a parody of the opening credits of the 1976 BBC television adaptation of Robert Graves ' I , Claudius . 
 The closing titles use a different arrangement of the theme , sung by countertenor Jeremy Jackman , with lyrics ( usually insulting Blackadder ) that reflect the events of the preceding episode . The song is played over a shot of Blackadder strolling through a formal garden and being annoyed by the lute @-@ wielding minstrel ( Tony Aitken ) . This sequence was incorporated as a separate subplot , with Blackadder constantly attempting to apprehend the musician each time with limited success . At the end of the final episode , Blackadder catches the minstrel and repeatedly dunks him in a fountain . 
 = = Releases = = 
 The complete series of Blackadder II is available as a Region 2 DVD from BBC Worldwide , as well as in a complete box @-@ set with the other series , most recently as a remastered edition including a commentary on selected episodes . An earlier VHS release of the series was also produced in 1996 . The series is also available in Region 1 DVD in a box @-@ set of the complete series . In addition , an audio recording taken from the television episodes is available on cassette and compact disc . 
 = = = VHS releases = = = 
 In about October 1989 , BBC Enterprises Ltd released all 6 episodes of Blackadder II on two single videos and on 7 September 1992 all 6 episodes of Blackadder II were re @-@ released on ' Complete ' double VHS releases . All 6 episodes were re @-@ released on a single video release on 2 October 1995 . 
 = = = DVD releases = = = 
 = Morpholino = 
 A morpholino , also known as a morpholino oligomer and as a phosphorodiamidate morpholino oligomer ( PMO ) , is type of oligomer molecule ( colloquially , an oligo ) used in molecular biology to modify gene expression . The molecular structure has a backbone of <unk> rings and phosphorodiamidate linkages . Morpholinos block access of other molecules to small ( ~ 25 base ) specific sequences of the base @-@ pairing surfaces of ribonucleic acid ( RNA ) . Morpholinos are used as research tools for reverse genetics by knocking down gene function . They are being studied for application in medicine . 
 This article discusses only the morpholino antisense oligomers , which are nucleic acid analogs . The word " morpholino " can occur in other chemical names , referring to chemicals containing a six @-@ membered morpholine ring . To help avoid confusion with other morpholine @-@ containing molecules , when describing oligos " Morpholino " is often capitalized as a trade name , but this usage is not consistent throughout the scientific literature . 
 Gene knockdown is achieved by preventing cells from making a targeted protein . Morpholinos can also modify the splicing of pre @-@ mRNA . Knocking down gene expression is a powerful method for learning about the function of a particular protein ; in a similar manner , causing a specific exon to be spliced out of a protein can help to determine the function of the protein moiety encoded by that exon or can sometimes knock down the protein activity altogether . These molecules have been applied to studies in several model organisms , including mice , zebrafish , frogs , and sea urchins . 
 Morpholinos are in development as pharmaceutical therapeutics targeted against pathogenic organisms such as bacteria or viruses and for amelioration of genetic diseases . These synthetic oligos were conceived by James E. Summerton ( Gene Tools ) and originally developed in collaboration with Dwight D. Weller at a biotech corporation ( formerly Antivirals , renamed AVI <unk> , renamed Sarepta Therapeutics ) . The experimental Morpholino drug <unk> from Sarepta Therapeutics is currently ( April 2016 ) in Phase III clinical trials for treatment of some mutations causing Duchenne muscular dystrophy . 
 = = Structure = = 
 Morpholinos are synthetic molecules that are the product of a redesign of natural nucleic acid structure . Usually 25 bases in length , they bind to complementary sequences of RNA by standard nucleic acid base @-@ pairing . In terms of structure , the difference between Morpholinos and DNA is that , while Morpholinos have standard nucleic acid bases , those bases are bound to morpholine rings instead of deoxyribose rings and linked through phosphorodiamidate groups instead of phosphates . This may be easiest to visualize by referring to the first figure and comparing the structures of the two strands depicted there , one of RNA and the other of a Morpholino . Replacement of anionic phosphates with the uncharged phosphorodiamidate groups eliminates ionization in the usual physiological pH range , so Morpholinos in organisms or cells are uncharged molecules . The entire backbone of a Morpholino is made from these modified subunits . 
 = = Function = = 
 Morpholinos do not degrade their target RNA molecules , unlike many antisense structural types ( e.g. , phosphorothioates , siRNA ) . Instead , Morpholinos act by " steric blocking " , binding to a target sequence within an RNA and simply getting in the way of molecules that might otherwise interact with the RNA . Morpholino oligos are often used to investigate the role of a specific mRNA transcript in an embryo . Developmental biologists inject Morpholino oligos into eggs or embryos of zebrafish , African clawed frog ( Xenopus ) , sea urchin , and killifish ( F. <unk> ) producing morphant embryos , or <unk> Morpholinos into chick embryos at later stages of development . With appropriate cytosolic delivery systems , Morpholinos are effective in cell culture . Vivo @-@ Morpholinos , in which the oligo is covalently linked to a delivery dendrimer , enter cells when administered systemically in adult animals . 
 = = = Normal gene expression in eukaryotes = = = 
 In eukaryotic organisms , pre @-@ mRNA is transcribed in the nucleus , introns are spliced out , then the mature mRNA is exported from the nucleus to the cytoplasm . The small subunit of the ribosome usually starts by binding to one end of the mRNA and is joined there by various other eukaryotic initiation factors , forming the initiation complex . The initiation complex scans along the mRNA strand until it reaches a start codon , and then the large subunit of the ribosome attaches to the small subunit and translation of a protein begins . This entire process is referred to as gene expression ; it is the process by which the information in a gene , encoded as a sequence of bases in DNA , is converted into the structure of a protein . A Morpholino can modify splicing or block translation , depending on the Morpholino 's base sequence . 
 = = = Blocking translation = = = 
 Bound to the 5 ' <unk> region of messenger RNA ( mRNA ) , Morpholinos can interfere with progression of the ribosomal initiation complex from the 5 ' cap to the start codon . This prevents translation of the coding region of the targeted transcript ( called " knocking down " gene expression ) . This is useful experimentally when an investigator wishes to know the function of a particular protein ; Morpholinos provide a convenient means of knocking down expression of the protein and learning how that knockdown changes the cells or organism . Some Morpholinos knock down expression so effectively that , after degradation of preexisting proteins , the targeted proteins become undetectable by Western blot ( e.g. , figure 1 in : ) . 
 = = = Modifying pre @-@ mRNA splicing = = = 
 Morpholinos can interfere with pre @-@ mRNA processing steps either by preventing splice @-@ directing small nuclear ribonucleoproteins ( snRNP ) complexes from binding to their targets at the borders of introns on a strand of pre @-@ mRNA , or by blocking the nucleophilic adenine base and preventing it from forming the splice lariat structure , or by interfering with the binding of splice regulatory proteins such as splice silencers and splice enhancers . Preventing the binding of snRNP U1 ( at the donor site ) or U2 / U5 ( at the <unk> moiety and acceptor site ) can cause modified splicing , commonly excluding exons from the mature mRNA . Targeting some splice targets results in intron inclusions , while activation of cryptic splice sites can lead to partial inclusions or exclusions . Targets of <unk> / U12 snRNPs can also be blocked . Splice modification can be conveniently assayed by reverse @-@ transcriptase polymerase chain reaction ( RT @-@ PCR ) and is seen as a band shift after gel electrophoresis of RT @-@ PCR products . 
 = = = Other applications : blocking other mRNA sites and use as probes = = = 
 Morpholinos have been used to block miRNA activity and maturation . <unk> tagged Morpholinos , combined with fluorescein @-@ specific antibodies , can be used as probes for in @-@ situ hybridization to miRNAs . Morpholinos can block ribozyme activity . U2 and U12 snRNP functions have been inhibited by Morpholinos . Morpholinos targeted to " slippery " mRNA sequences within protein coding regions can induce translational <unk> . Morpholinos can block editing of RNA . Activities of Morpholinos against this variety of targets suggest that Morpholinos can be used as a general @-@ purpose tool for blocking interactions of proteins or nucleic acids with mRNA . 
 = = Specificity , stability and non @-@ antisense effects = = 
 Morpholinos have become a standard knockdown tool in animal embryonic systems , which have a broader range of gene expression than adult cells and can be strongly affected by an off @-@ target interaction . Following initial injections into frog or fish embryos at the single @-@ cell or few @-@ cell stages , Morpholino effects can be measured up to five days later , after most of the processes of organogenesis and differentiation are past , with observed phenotypes consistent with target @-@ gene knockdown . Control oligos with irrelevant sequences usually produce no change in embryonic phenotype , evidence of the Morpholino oligo 's sequence @-@ specificity and lack of non @-@ antisense effects . The dose required for a knockdown can be reduced by <unk> of several Morpholino oligos targeting the same mRNA , which is an effective strategy for reducing or eliminating dose @-@ dependent off @-@ target RNA interactions . 
 mRNA rescue experiments can often restore the wild @-@ type phenotype to the embryos and provide evidence for the specificity of a Morpholino . In an mRNA rescue , a Morpholino is co @-@ injected with an mRNA that codes for the same protein that the <unk> is targeted to knock down . However , the rescue mRNA has a modified 5 ' -UTR ( untranslated region ) so that the rescue mRNA contains no target for the Morpholino but the rescue mRNA 's coding region encodes the protein of interest . Translation of the rescue mRNA replaces production of the protein that was knocked down by the Morpholino . Since the rescue mRNA would not affect phenotypic changes due to modulation of off @-@ target gene expression by the Morpholino , this return to wild @-@ type phenotype is further evidence of Morpholino specificity . 
 Because of their completely unnatural backbones , Morpholinos are not recognized by cellular proteins . Nucleases do not degrade Morpholinos , nor are they degraded in serum or in cells . Morpholinos do not activate toll @-@ like receptors and so they do not activate innate immune responses such as interferon induction or the NF @-@ κB @-@ mediated inflammation response . Morpholinos are not known to modify methylation of DNA . 
 Up to 18 % of Morpholinos appear to induce nontarget @-@ related phenotypes including cell death in the central nervous system and somite tissues of zebrafish embryos . Most of these effects have been shown to be due to activation of p53 @-@ mediated apoptosis , and can be suppressed by co @-@ injection of an anti @-@ p53 Morpholino along with the experimental Morpholino ; moreover , the p53 @-@ mediated apoptotic effect of a Morpholino knockdown has been <unk> using another antisense structural type , showing the p53 @-@ mediated apoptosis to be a consequence of the loss of the targeted protein and not a consequence of the oligo type used to knock down the protein . It appears that these effects are sequence @-@ specific ; as in most cases , if a Morpholino is associated with non @-@ target effects , the 4 @-@ base mismatch Morpholino will not trigger these effects . 
 A cause for concern in the use of Morpholinos is the potential for " off @-@ target " effects . Whether an observed morphant phenotype is due to the intended knockdown or an interaction with an off @-@ target RNA can often be addressed by running another experiment to confirm that the observed morphant phenotype results from the knockdown of the expected target . This can be done by recapitulating the morphant phenotype with a second , non @-@ overlapping Morpholino targeting the same mRNA or by confirmation of the observed phenotypes by use of a mutant strain or dominant @-@ negative methods . As mentioned above , rescue of observed phenotypes by <unk> a rescue mRNA is , when feasible , a reliable test of specificity of a Morpholino . 
 = = Delivery = = 
 For a Morpholino to be effective , it must be delivered past the cell membrane into the cytosol of a cell . Once in the cytosol , Morpholinos freely diffuse between the cytosol and nucleus , as demonstrated by the nuclear splice @-@ modifying activity of Morpholinos observed after microinjection into the cytosol of cells . Different methods are used for delivery into embryos , into cultured cells or into adult animals . A microinjection apparatus is usually used for delivery into an embryo , with injections most commonly performed at the single @-@ cell or few @-@ cell stage ; an alternative method for embryonic delivery is electroporation , which can deliver oligos into tissues of later embryonic stages . Common techniques for delivery into cultured cells include the Endo @-@ Porter peptide ( which causes the Morpholino to be released from endosomes ) , the Special Delivery system ( no longer commercially available , used a Morpholino @-@ DNA heteroduplex and an <unk> polyethylenimine delivery reagent ) , electroporation , or scrape loading . 
 Delivery into adult tissues is usually difficult , though there are a few systems allowing useful uptake of unmodified Morpholino oligos ( including the inherently leaky muscle cells caused by Duchenne muscular dystrophy or the vascular endothelial cells stressed during balloon angioplasty ) . Though they permeate through intercellular spaces in tissues effectively , unconjugated <unk> have limited distribution into the cytosol and nuclear spaces within healthy tissues following IV administration . Systemic delivery into many cells in adult organisms can be accomplished by using covalent conjugates of Morpholino oligos with cell @-@ penetrating peptides , and , while toxicity has been associated with moderate doses of the peptide conjugates , they have been used in vivo for effective oligo delivery at doses below those causing observed toxicity . An octa @-@ <unk> dendrimer attached to the end of a Morpholino can deliver the modified oligo ( called a Vivo @-@ Morpholino ) from the blood to the cytosol . Delivery @-@ enabled Morpholinos , such as peptide conjugates and Vivo @-@ Morpholinos , show promise as therapeutics for viral and genetic diseases . 
 = Bart the General = 
 " Bart the General " is the fifth episode of The Simpsons ' first season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 4 , 1990 . The episode deals with Bart 's troubles with the bully , Nelson Muntz . Bart chooses to go to war with Nelson uniting the neighborhood children against him . The episode was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by David Silverman . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Bart gets into a fight with Nelson Muntz , the school bully , while defending Lisa and the cupcakes that she baked for Miss Hoover 's birthday party . Nelson beats up Bart after school and warns him to expect the same treatment the following day . At home , Marge consoles and encourages Bart to reason with Nelson . Homer urges Bart to bend the rules and fight dirty . Taking Homer 's advice , Bart does so , but is beaten up again . Bart turns to the toughest member of the Simpson family , Grampa Simpson , who introduces Bart to Herman , the crazed one @-@ armed proprietor of an army surplus store . He instructs Bart on military tactics , then Bart declares war on Nelson and his sidekicks . 
 Bart enlists Nelson 's other victims in his army and trains them for combat . Herman commands from Bart 's treehouse as Bart leads his forces into battle . <unk> Nelson and his sidekicks , they commence saturation bombing with water balloons . Nelson 's thugs surrender , and Nelson is taken prisoner . He threatens to beat up Bart as soon as he is untied . Herman drafts the armistice treaty , which states that Nelson will retain his position and name , but will not hold any actual power . Then , Bart and Nelson sign the treaty . Then , Marge enters with cupcakes , and peace prevails . 
 = = Production = = 
 This episode was running too long to use the normal opening sequence . It therefore did not feature a chalkboard gag or a couch gag . Instead , it just cut to an image of the Simpson house . David Silverman was the director and was somewhat stressed , because he was doing storyboards for this episode while also directing " Bart the Genius " . Originally , he had planned to use the song " War " by Edwin Starr in the episode . The plans were dropped , when they decided that the song did not really fit the story . The episode had problems with the censors , who did not want the characters to say " family jewels " on prime time television . The producers ignored the notes and " family jewels " remained in the episode . This act of attempted censorship was reflected in the part where Grampa Simpson writes a letter complaining of how sexualized television has become and gives a list of words he never wants to hear on TV again , one of which is " family jewels " . 
 Two new characters were introduced in this episode . The first , Nelson Muntz , remains a frequently used recurring character , while the second , Herman , has been used far less . The design of Herman , with the exception of his missing arm , was inspired by writer John Swartzwelder . His voice , as performed by Harry Shearer , was partly inspired by George H. W. Bush . The original idea for Herman was for him to have a differing story for the loss of his arm with every appearance . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode featured several references to war films . Several lines of dialogue , Bart slapping one of his soldiers for " being a disgrace " , and the music was lifted directly from the film Patton from 1970 composed by Jerry Goldsmith . Fox owned the rights to this film , so it was no problem to use the soundtrack . The marching sequence is a nod to Stanley Kubrick 's Full Metal Jacket from 1987 . The Longest Day from 1962 is also referenced . The silhouettes of the children climbing the jungle gym against the setting sun are a reference to Stanley Kubrick 's 1987 film Full Metal Jacket . The episode parodies the famous sailor kissing a girl in Times Square photograph taken on V @-@ J Day , where a random boy in a sailor suit kisses Lisa , before she slaps him in the face . Bart concludes the episode by stating that the only " good wars " are the American Revolution , World War II , and the Star Wars trilogy . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Bart the General " finished 31st place in the weekly ratings for the week of January 29 - February 4 , 1990 with a Nielsen rating of 14 @.@ 3 . It was the highest rated show on the Fox Network that week . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , said : " Some good lines and setpieces aside - we love Bart 's fantasy of death at Nelson 's hands - this episode nevertheless feels a bit unsure of itself , particularly towards the end . " In a DVD review of the first season David B. Grelck gave the episode a rating of 3 / 5 and adds " Another episode that helped to propel Bart 's popularity into the stratosphere ... " . Colin Jacobson at DVD Movie Guide said in a review that the episode " remains a primitive example of The Simpsons , but it ’ s a reasonably amusing and entertaining experience . " and added that the episode " lacks the subtlety and cleverness found on later episodes , but it was onto something . " Matt Groening notes on the commentary track that he finds it strange how controversial this episode seemed at the time of its release . Today , they would go a lot further and to him this episode now seems harmless . The episode 's reference to Full Metal Jacket was named the eleventh greatest film reference in the history of the show by Nathan Ditum of Total Film . 
 = = = Use in scientific research = = = 
 " Bart the General " and Seinfeld 's " The Tape " were used in a Dartmouth College experiment to study brain activity in relation to humorous moments in television shows . The results were published in a 2004 issue of the academic journal <unk> . The researchers noted , " During moments of humor detection , significant [ brain ] activation was noted in the left posterior middle temporal gyrus ... and left inferior frontal gyrus " . 
 = = Home release = = 
 The episode was released first on home video in the United Kingdom , as part of a VHS release titled The Simpsons Collection ; the episode was paired with season one episode " There 's No Disgrace Like Home " . It was released in the US on the VHS release The Best of The Simpsons , Vol . 2 ( 1997 ) , paired with " Moaning Lisa " . It was later re @-@ released in the US in a collector 's edition boxed set of the first three volumes of The Best of The Simpsons collections . It was re @-@ released in the UK as part of VHS boxed set of the complete first season , released in November 1999 . The episode 's debut on the DVD format was as a part of The Simpsons season one DVD set , which was released on September 25 , 2001 . Groening , Brooks , and Silverman participated in the DVD 's audio commentary . A digital edition of the series ' first season was published December 20 , 2010 in the United States containing the episode , through Amazon Video and iTunes . 
 = Omak , Washington = 
 Omak ( / <unk> / o @-@ <unk> ) is a city located in the foothills of the Okanogan Highlands in north @-@ central Washington , United States . With an estimated 4 @,@ 854 residents as of 2015 , distributed over a land area of 3 @.@ 43 square miles ( 8 @.@ 9 km2 ) , Omak is the largest municipality of Okanogan County and the largest municipality in Central Washington north of Wenatchee . The Greater Omak Area of around 8 @,@ 229 inhabitants as of the 2010 census is the largest urban cluster in the Okanogan Country region , encompassing most of its twin city of Okanogan . The population has increased significantly since the 1910 census , reporting 520 residents just prior to incorporation in 1911 . 
 The land that is now Omak had been inhabited by various Native American tribes before the arrival of non @-@ indigenous settlers in the early 19th century . The city began to develop after the completion of the Okanogan Irrigation Project affecting the Grand Coulee Dam and other nearby electric facilities . The housing and municipal infrastructure , along with regional infrastructure connecting the new town to other municipalities , were built simultaneously in 1908 supported by the local agricultural industry . The name Omak comes from the Okanagan placename [ <unk> ] , or the Salishan term Omache — which is said to mean " good medicine " or " plenty " , referring to its favorable climate , with an annual high of around 88 ° F ( 31 ° C ) . Omak acts as the gateway to the Okanogan National Forest and consists of a central business district and residential neighborhoods . 
 Omak is a code city governed by a seven @-@ member council and the state 's 4th district . Omak 's economy is dominated by the primary industries of agriculture and forestry , although economic diversification has occurred with sawmills and recreational tourism . Nearby recreational destinations include walking trails , state parks and national forests , such as Conconully State Park , Bridgeport State Park and Osoyoos Lake State Park . The city is home to a weekly newspaper , the Omak – Okanogan County Chronicle , and a Wenatchee Valley College campus . Standards for education in Omak are higher than the state 's average , though drugs and alcohol remains a problem among students . The prominent U.S. Route 97 intersects in town , while Washington State Route 155 , as well as Washington State Route 215 , connects the city to Okanogan and Nespelem , respectively . By road , Omak is located approximately 235 miles ( 378 km ) from Seattle , Washington , 140 miles ( 230 km ) from Spokane , Washington and 125 miles ( 201 km ) from Kelowna , British Columbia . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 The Okanogan Valley was the traditional homeland of the Syilx ( also called Okanogan ) Native Americans , whose territory extended north into what is now Canada . The Syilx acquired horses in the mid @-@ 18th century , which helped them expand northward . They first met non @-@ native traders and missionaries in the early 19th century . The Syilx participated in trade fairs held at Kettle Falls and at the mouth of the Fraser River . Trading networks strengthened after the acquisition of horses in the mid @-@ 18th century . 
 In 1811 Fort Okanogan was built by the Pacific Fur Company at the confluence of the Okanogan and Columbia Rivers . The fort 's ownership passed to the North West Company , then the Hudson 's Bay Company . Fort <unk> , near Kettle Falls , was another important fur trading outpost . The Okanogan River was used by fur brigades traveling between Fort Okanogan and Kamloops . In the late 1850s this route became known as the Okanagan Trail and was widely used as an inland route to the Fraser Canyon Gold Rush . 
 In the 1850s , European @-@ Americans settled in the area that is now Omak and built houses and inaugurated mining , logging and agricultural activities . As more white settlers arrived , a dispute about land ownership arose between them and the Native Americans . 
 In response , a treaty stating that an Indian reservation would be formed on some of the disputed land while the European @-@ Americans would own the remaining land was signed . The Indian land was later reduced to about 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ha ) . Colville Indian Reservation was developed around 1872 by President Ulysses S. Grant . In 1887 , the Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation , a federally recognized tribe , was formed by executive order from 12 individual bands as per the General <unk> Act of 1887 . The federal government decided to move Colville Indian Reservation 's location west of Columbia River , reducing its area to 2 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 ha ) . It would continue to be reduced for the next 60 years . 
 Nearby Alma was platted as an unincorporated community around 1886 . Alma was renamed Pogue in honor of orchardist J.I. Pogue , and was later renamed Okanogan — the present name . J.I. Pogue was upset that his name was replaced , and requested that surveyor , civil engineer and settler Ben Ross establish another town 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) to the north . Born in Bureau County , Illinois , Ross worked for the Great Northern Railroad shortly before moving to Okanogan County . He decided to found a new community at Pogue 's proposed location during 1907 . It was named Omak , supposedly for the Salishan word Omache — said to mean " good medicine " or " plenty " — and referring to the town 's favorable climate ; although according to William Bright the name comes from the Okanagan placename [ <unk> ] . Ross sold various items on the present townsite , trying to have his town recognized , and built a cabin in 1907 to provide shelter for his daughter , son and grandchildren — becoming one of the first white men to settle the area . 
 = = = Growth = = = 
 The town began to develop after the completion of the Okanogan Irrigation Project , which was designed to facilitate farming . At this time , many farmers came to Omak looking for homes . Fruits including apples , berries , peaches , plums and watermelons were cultivated after 1910 . Omak served as a census @-@ designated place ( CDP ) in 1910 , and incorporated as a city on February 11 , 1911 . Omak and Okanogan have shared a rivalry in high school sports . During the Great Depression of 1933 , several residents of Omak were forced to work in nearby communities . As a result , the United States Bureau of Reclamation promoted work which was available as part of an improvement project at Grand Coulee Dam in nearby Coulee Dam , which employed approximately 5 @,@ 000 people between 1933 and 1951 when the megaproject ended . By 1950 , the city was home to various buildings and structures including the St. Mary Mission church , which satisfied residential needs . 
 In the 1910s , Omak was chosen as the location for a sawmill to expand economic growth . Omak Fruit Growers controlled the mill and a nearby orchard processing factory . The Biles @-@ Coleman Lumber Company bought out the organization and built a sawmill outside municipal boundaries on the nearby Omak Mountain in 1924 . A secondary sawmill was constructed in the Omak area . The company and their mills were purchased in 1975 by Crown <unk> and thus an associated organization — <unk> Forest Industries — acquired the mills . The company ultimately went bankrupt , and in response , employees purchased the mill for 45 million dollars and renamed it Omak Wood Products in an attempt to save their jobs . Omak Woods Products ' payroll decreased to 480 in the early 1990s and later went bankrupt themselves , along with Quality <unk> , who later owned the property for 19 million dollars until 2000 . The Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation later purchased the mill for 6 @.@ 6 million dollars , having closed in 2009 because of low demand , ending over 130 jobs . As of 2013 , there are proposals to reopen the mills during the summer season . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Topography = = = 
 The Canada – United States border — with an official crossing into Osoyoos , British Columbia from Oroville — lies approximately 45 miles ( 72 km ) to the north . The Idaho border lies about 160 miles ( 260 km ) southeast . The state 's largest city , Seattle , lies 237 miles ( 381 km ) southwest of Omak . The Okanogan River , coming out of the town of Riverside , defines the city 's northern border , while the southern border is defined by the city of Okanogan ; the terrain here is mountainous and forested . The nearest primary statistical area is the Wenatchee – East Wenatchee metropolitan area . A CDP located northeast of the city was named North Omak because of its proximity to Omak . It is part of two census county divisions : Omak ( western half ) and Colville Reservation ( eastern half ) . 
 Omak , situated in the foothills of the Okanogan Highlands in central Okanogan County , is part of the Okanogan Country region , extending into British Columbia . It also lies within the Inland Northwest , centered on Spokane , and the Columbia Plateau ecoregion near the Okanogan Drift Hills . The Okanogan River , a 115 @-@ mile ( 185 km ) tributary of the Columbia River , flows through the central portion of the city , and receives Omak Creek from the east just outside municipal boundaries . Known for its balancing Omak Rock , the 3 @,@ 244 @-@ acre ( 1 @,@ 313 ha ) Omak Lake — 950 feet ( 290 m ) above sea level — is the largest saline endorheic lake in Washington . The 80 @-@ acre ( 32 ha ) Crawfish Lake is located about 15 miles ( 24 km ) northeast of Omak at the border of the Colville Indian Reservation and Okanogan National Forest . The 1 @,@ 499 @,@ 023 @-@ acre ( 6 @,@ 066 @.@ 33 km2 ) forest comprises varied terrain and several mountain peaks . 
 Elevations around the area range from 780 feet ( 240 m ) above sea level at the mouth of the Okanogan River to 6 @,@ 774 feet ( 2 @,@ 065 m ) above sea level at the Moses Mountain . The average elevation is 843 feet ( 257 m ) above sea level according to the United States Geological Survey ( USGS ) . The Moses Mountain , with a summit , sits east of the city , while Little Moses Mountain , located 5 @,@ 963 feet ( 1 @,@ 818 m ) above sea level , and Omak Mountain , located 5 @,@ 749 feet ( 1 @,@ 752 m ) above sea level , are adjacent to the Moses Mountain . West of the city are the North Cascades , anchored by the Cascade Range . Mountain peaks on the western portion of the Omak area range between 6 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) and 8 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 400 m ) . The Coleman Butte mountain summit — 1 @,@ 450 feet ( 440 m ) above sea level — is located directly adjacent to municipal boundaries . 
 According to the United States Census Bureau , the city encompasses a total area of 3 @.@ 5 square miles ( 9 @.@ 06 km2 ) , including 0 @.@ 07 square miles ( 0 @.@ 18 km2 ) of water , accounting for two percent of the overall area . The area expanded in April 2010 , when 0 @.@ 56 square miles ( 1 @.@ 5 km2 ) of land formerly within the city of Okanogan was accumulated . Omak is the fourth largest settlement in Okanogan County by area after Nespelem Community ( 23 sq mi ; 60 km2 ) , North Omak ( 11 @.@ 2 sq mi ; 29 km2 ) and <unk> ( 3 @.@ 80 sq mi ; 9 @.@ 8 km2 ) . Omak covers 0 @.@ 07 percent of the county 's total area . Its 4 @.@ 83 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 12 @.@ 5 km2 ) urban cluster , the Greater Omak Area , includes the city of Okanogan and the CDP of North Omak . The surrounding metropolitan region comprises a total area of 1 @,@ 037 square miles ( 2 @,@ 690 km2 ) , although it has not officially been designated as a statistical area . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The city experiences a semi @-@ arid climate ( Köppen climate classification BSk ) , with little precipitation , hot summers and cold winters . Average temperatures in Omak range from 16 @.@ 6 ° F ( − 8 @.@ 6 ° C ) in January to 88 @.@ 8 ° F ( 31 @.@ 6 ° C ) in July . The lowest temperature recorded was − 26 ° F ( − 32 ° C ) on February 1 , 1950 and the highest was 114 ° F ( 46 ° C ) on July 26 , 1928 . The annual daily mean temperature is 48 @.@ 6 ° F ( 9 @.@ 2 ° C ) . Average monthly precipitation ranges from 0 @.@ 49 inches ( 12 mm ) in August to 1 @.@ 66 inches ( 42 mm ) in December . Despite its geographical location further south , the city of Wenatchee maintains almost the same average annual temperature as Omak , as well as several other southern communities . 
 Omak experiences four distinct seasons . Summers are hot and relatively dry , with a daily average of 72 @.@ 2 ° F ( 22 @.@ 3 ° C ) in July , while winter is the wettest season of the year , with 22 @.@ 3 inches ( 570 mm ) of snowfall between November and February . Spring and autumn are mild seasons with little precipitation . The city is located in plant hardiness zone 6a , according to the United States Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) . In July 2012 , a severe thunderstorm occurred in Omak , producing heavy rainfall , gusty winds and hail , and forced the temporary closure of U.S. Route 97 and requiring repairs to public streets . Omak was affected by the 1872 North Cascades earthquake — the state 's largest historical earthquake — which occurred on December 14 , 1872 . The epicenter was at Omak Lake . The earthquake had a magnitude of between 6 @.@ 5 and 7 @.@ 0 and was followed by an aftershock . Another earthquake with minor shaking affected the city in November 2011 . 
 = = = Cityscape = = = 
 Omak is a planned city . Throughout the 20th century , Ross designed what would become the city of Omak . Within a year of its establishment , the town had a central business district with a public bank and hotel supported by the local agricultural industry . The town was provided with a post office , previously known as <unk> . Ross founded Omak School District in 1906 ; soon after this its first school , Omak Schoolhouse , was built . In 1910 , a meat market , hardware shop , law office , stationery and confectionery store were constructed in Downtown Omak . A steel bridge built the following year collapsed into the Okanogan River upon initial use . It was quickly rebuilt with no further problems . 
 The city consists of a central business district and residential areas . Downtown Omak , the central business district , is the economic center for Omak and Okanogan County . There are several functional churches in the city . The post office in Omak — managed by United States Postal Service ( USPS ) — is the city 's only listing of the National Register of Historic Places ( NRHP ) . The Breadline Cafe is a notable restaurant and music venue in Downtown Omak . The City of Omak maintains the Omak Memorial Cemetery , comprising around 3 @,@ 747 graves in a region located adjacent to Washington State Route 215 , having been formerly known as <unk> Cemetery . The 118 @-@ acre ( 48 ha ) North Omak Business Park , the city 's business park , is bordered by U.S. Route 97 from the east . The city 's residential neighborhoods are encompassed by East Omak and South Omak . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The 1910 United States Census , before the city 's incorporation , recorded 520 residents . The following 1920 census — the first to define Omak as a distinct subdivision — counted 2 @,@ 500 residents , making it the most populous municipality of Okanogan County , having surpassed Okanogan ( 1 @,@ 519 residents ) . Subsequent census counts documented an increase to 4 @,@ 000 residents before a shrink in population at the 1980 census , when fruit prices rose , land was lost , and major employers were shut down . After this decline , the population steadily increased , approaching approximately 5 @,@ 000 residents by the 2000 census . Between 1990 and 2000 , the city 's population experienced a boom of 14 @.@ 7 percent , while between 2000 and 2010 , the population increased by around 2 @.@ 6 percent . The United States Census Bureau estimated that there were 4 @,@ 792 residents in 2013 , representing a 0 @.@ 6 percent increase over the 2010 census , while an estimate from Office of Federal Financial Management in 2013 documented a population decrease of 0 @.@ 3 percent to 4 @,@ 830 people . A 2011 study from the United States Census Bureau showed that there were 4 @,@ 881 residents , a 0 @.@ 7 percent increase over the 2010 census . 
 According to the 2010 census , Omak had 4 @,@ 845 residents living in 2 @,@ 037 households , with 1 @,@ 412 @.@ 5 inhabitants per square mile ( 545 @.@ 4 / km2 ) . These residents created an average age of 38 — one year higher than that of the entire state . About 15 percent of residents were single and 13 percent were lone @-@ parent households . With 2 @,@ 168 housing units at an average density of 632 @.@ 1 inhabitants per square mile ( 244 @.@ 1 / km2 ) , the city 's populace consisted of 2 @,@ 540 females and 2 @,@ 305 males , giving it a gender balance close to national averages with 14 @.@ 8 percent male and 11 @.@ 9 percent female . The racial makeup was dominated by white people , with 71 percent of the population . Between the 2000 and 2010 censuses , Omak had an increase of 10 families to 1 @,@ 230 and a decrease of 21 lone @-@ parent families . Omak had an urbanized population of 8 @,@ 229 people , with 1 @,@ 737 inhabitants per square mile ( 670 @.@ 7 / km2 ) and around 20 percent of the county 's residents . The last complete census in 2000 found that the average household consisted of around two residents and the average family consisted of approximately three people . 
 Approximately 89 @.@ 5 percent of residents over the age of five spoke English at home , according to the 2007 – 2011 American Community Survey . It was then estimated that 889 people , comprising 18 @.@ 5 percent of local inhabitants have German ancestry — the largest ethnicity in Omak — and 15 @.@ 3 percent have Irish ancestry . The Omak area has a relatively high percentage of people of American Indian and Mexican ancestries ; there were over 80 American Indians and over 535 Mexican immigrants , with a combined percentage of 28 percent of residents . Conversely , the city has a small Asian population , making up less than one percent of <unk> . The 2010 census showed that approximately 35 percent of residents lived alone , most of whom were female . Those over the age of 65 comprised about 16 percent of the population . There have been several efforts to provide service to the homeless people of Omak , although official population figures have not been released . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Omak is the commercial center for the rural communities of Okanogan County and other nearby settlements . It is the regional center for services and trade in the county . As of 2007 , the city 's economy is experiencing significant growth , according to the County of Okanogan . It is an agricultural community with a reliant forestry industry . In the late 1990s and early 2000s , almost 90 percent of Omak 's manufacturing jobs were in the city 's two sawmills . Infrastructure services and retail trades were also major industries . About 425 private firms employed a total of 3 @,@ 332 workers in local industries including manufacturing , retail and infrastructure , at this time . Located within Greater Omak , the adjacent city of Okanogan serves as the administrative center for Okanogan County , the region 's largest employer . 
 As of 2010 , there are 1 @,@ 859 civilians over the age of 16 employed in the city of Omak . Despite its recognition as an agricultural community , there were only 26 inhabitants employed in the agriculture and forestry industries , but the surrounding area has more agricultural jobs . Office and sale services were the largest occupation in Omak , comprising approximately 30 percent of the city 's total employees , followed by business occupations , with 26 @.@ 5 percent . Majority of residents work in public services . Approximately seven percent of people in Omak are unemployed , while 25 percent live below the poverty line , including 34 percent of those under 18 and 10 percent of those aged 65 or over . The cost of living rate is 85 @.@ 5 per unit , less than state and national averages . During the 2007 – 2011 American Community Survey , the city had a per capita income of $ 17 @,@ 785 and an average income of $ 31 @,@ 649 per household . Omak 's <unk> zip code maintained 265 businesses in 2011 , with an average payroll of $ 78 @,@ 884 . 
 The city has a Walmart store , which was built in 1993 as the state 's first such store , serving over 60 @,@ 000 residents . The process of opening the retail facility took various discussions and approvals . Proposals in Omak began around 1992 , in which 93 @,@ 188 square feet ( 8 @,@ 657 @.@ 4 m2 ) of land were expropriated from the Omak Planning Commission . Local retailers feared that the chain would devastate their businesses , although other people felt that it would increase business at other shopping regions in the city . Shortly after its opening , numerous shoppers came to the Omak area looking for items . Walmart hired approximately 200 employees , boosting the city 's economy significantly and becoming among Okanogan County 's largest retailer for a short period . The store was later allowed to remain open for 24 hours per day . 
 Omak 's economy is also driven by a mixture of tourism . Nearby recreational destinations , with their mild climate , increase the local economy significantly . The local Ace Hardware , Big 5 Sporting Goods , Big R and Walmart retail stores maintain license vendors for recreational activities . There is a 1 @,@ 541 @,@ 470 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 143 @,@ 207 m2 ) shopping mall , the Omache Shopping Center , located in North Omak Business Park along U.S. Route 97 , which attracts residents from nearby rural communities . Established in 1987 , the mall is home to 12 stores and services . Hotels in Omak include Best Western , <unk> Inn , Omak Inn , and Motel Nicholas . Omak is the headquarters of two infrastructure organizations : Okanogan County Transportation & Nutrition and Cascade and Columbia River Railroad . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Nicknames = = = 
 The municipality has been named a " tree city " for ten consecutive years since April 2007 . The Washington Department of Natural Resources announced on April 11 , 2013 , that Omak had again been named a " tree city " because of their continuous efforts to " keep urban forests healthy and vibrant " for 15 years . The City of Omak brands itself as the " Heart of the Okanogan " — referring to its significant economic importance in the Okanogan . The Okanogan County Tourism Council uses the same branding to define the Greater Omak region . It is officially recognized as the City of Omak ; Omak residents are known as <unk> . 
 = = = Tourism = = = 
 The Omak Stampede , which operates the Suicide Race , has been hosted at a local rodeo facility , the Stampede Arena — renovated in 2009 — since 1933 . The Omak Stampede occurs annually on the second weekend of August . During the event , the city has an estimated population of approximately 30 @,@ 000 people . As part of the Suicide Race , horses and riders run down Suicide Hill — a 62 @-@ degree slope that runs for 225 feet ( 69 m ) to the Okanogan River . Horses must pass a veterinarian examination to ensure they are physically healthy , and a swim test to ensure they can cross the river , to demonstrate their ability to run the race and navigate the river . Several animal rights groups , including Progressive Animal Welfare Society ( <unk> ) , In Defense of Animals and Humane Society of the United States ( HSUS ) , have expressed concerns about the horses ' welfare and have opposed the specific event . 
 Other significant events include the Omak Film Festival , inclusive of a variety of films at the Wenatchee Valley College and Omak Theater , the Okanogan County Fair , an annual carnival at the County Fairgrounds and the Omak Western and Native Art Show , a Native American carnival . In an attempt to increase tourism , the City of Omak operates a Main Street Historical Tour in the central business district . A local recreational complex comprises a Native American wooden sculpture area . Two functional movie theaters , the single screen Omak Theater , built in 1928 , and the Mirage Theater with three screens , built in 2004 , service the city . A drive @-@ in theater , with a capacity of 250 automobiles , was proposed in 1948 , but never built . 
 The Omak Visitor Information Center — deemed the " best little information center in the west " — has historical images and a gift shop offering pamphlets regarding Okanogan County and surrounding regions . The Okanogan County Historical Museum comprises a historic fire hall , research center , genealogical area and a display of historical photographs or the area . The Omak Performing Arts Center — a 500 @-@ seat venue which hosts presentations , ceremonies , and performances — was built by Omak School District in 1989 . There is a 58 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 5 @,@ 400 m2 ) casino operated by the Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation since 2008 , incorporating over 400 gaming machines , a convention center , and an arcade . Nearby Okanogan Bingo Casino , along U.S. Route 97 , also primarily serves Omak , consisting of approximately 360 gaming machines . 
 = = = Recreation = = = 
 The area 's mild climate and its close proximity to lakes , rivers , and mountains make Omak an outdoor recreational destination . The city maintains eight general recreational complexes , of which the 76 @.@ 6 @-@ acre ( 31 @.@ 0 ha ) Eastside Park , with an enclosed skate park , municipal pool , seven baseball diamonds , four soccer fields and tennis courts , and two basketball courts , is the largest . Civic League Park is the municipality 's oldest park , while Dalton <unk> Park is the newest . The Omak City Park Board has been formed to protect these public spaces . Omak has several beaches at the north @-@ south shores of Omak Lake on the Colville Indian Reservation , comprising over 100 acres ( 40 ha ) of sandy land . Fishing and boating are available at Omak Lake , and at the Fry Lake and Duck Lake — near the city 's local airport — and Conconully Lake , Crawfish Lake and the Okanogan River , all of which are home to several species . The Valley Lanes bowling alley serves the city and has hosted intrastate competitions , while the Okanogan Valley Golf Club — a country club with 334 @-@ and @-@ 284 @-@ yard ( 305 and 260 m ) golf courses — is located in Omak . 
 The Okanogan National Forest , the largest forest on the West Coast , provides residents with trails for walking , hiking and cycling close to home and encompasses several skiing regions . It received approximately 397 @,@ 000 visitors in 2005 , most of whom came from over 50 miles ( 80 km ) away . Numerous general recreational opportunities , such as hunting and rock scenery , are available nearby . There are various hiking trails in nearby hilly areas , including Omak Mountain and its look @-@ out tower , and Moses Mountain . The Granite Mountain Trail is located between the forests about 33 miles ( 53 km ) away from the city . There is skiing available about 25 miles ( 40 km ) west of town at the Loup Loup Ski Bowl . Nearby state parks include Conconully State Park ( 17 mi or 27 km northwest ) , Bridgeport State Park ( 36 mi or 58 km south ) , Osoyoos Lake State Park ( 41 mi or 66 km north ) , and Alta Lake State Park ( 47 mi or 76 km southwest ) , Birdwatchers can see quail , <unk> , turkey buzzard , wild turkey and bald eagles in the Omak area . 
 Camping is available at local recreational vehicle parks ( RV parks ) , including Carl <unk> Memorial RV Park , Sunset Lakes RV Park ( adjacent to Duck Lake ) , and Margie 's R.V. Park . There are over a half @-@ dozen campgrounds in proximity to Omak . The Omak – Okanogan region has been well known for its rock climbing structures since the early 1970s . Nearby communities in Okanogan County offer horseback riding and hunting . Fishing and boating is achievable within short distance , at the nearby Omak Lake . The Omak Pioneers represent Omak High School as their baseball , basketball , football , soccer , volleyball , and wrestling teams . There are separate teams based on age and gender . There are all @-@ terrain vehicle ( ATV ) courses located nearby , specifically in the Loup Loup Ski Bowl . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 In 1910 , <unk> established the Omak Chronicle . Three years later , it was renamed the Omak – Okanogan County Chronicle and expanded its coverage to the whole county as its primary newspaper . In February 1998 , an online version was established , which had approximately 170 @,@ 000 viewers in April 2013 . He later became the owner and publisher . Since then , the newspaper has been expanded to serve nearby Ferry County . The Okanogan Valley Gazette – Tribune , based in Oroville , and The Wenatchee World , based in Wenatchee , with an administration office in nearby Okanogan , also serve Omak as alternative publications . 
 <unk> Becki and John P. <unk> own three licensed radio stations in the city . Branded as " Radio Okanogan " , <unk> broadcasts a middle @-@ of @-@ the @-@ road format and serves the entire Okanogan County , while country music station <unk> features programming from Citadel Media and Dial Global . <unk> also broadcasts programming from Dial Global in the hot adult contemporary format , while <unk> operates from Washington State University as Northwest Public Radio . <unk> rebroadcasts <unk> @-@ FM from Spokane . Spokane stations including <unk> and <unk> , and <unk> @-@ FM , commonly known as Sun FM , from Penticton , British Columbia are receivable in the Omak area . 
 Omak is well @-@ served by television and radio , with all major U.S. networks and at least five other English @-@ language stations available . Omak cable viewers can also receive <unk> @-@ DT ( Global Television Network ) from Vancouver , British Columbia . The nearest major television market area is based in the Seattle metropolitan area . The Omak – Okanogan market area includes several broadcast television stations that can be received in the city . <unk> @-@ D , channel 17 — a broadcast translator of <unk> @-@ TV — is branded as Public Broadcasting Service ( PBS ) , while <unk> , channel 7 , rebroadcasts <unk> , a CBS affiliate , in the municipality . An American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) affiliate , KXLY @-@ TV is translated as <unk> in Omak . <unk> , channel 11 , is a translator of National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) ' s <unk> @-@ TV , Community television stations , <unk> @-@ D and the Fox Broadcasting Company translator at <unk> @-@ D , are owned by Mountain Licenses and operate from Omak , in addition to a Three Angels Broadcasting Network @-@ owned station , <unk> @-@ D. The Riverside market area is nearby and contains three licensed television stations which can be received , including <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 = = Government and politics = = 
 The City of Omak 's mayor – council government comprises a mayor — who also represents north @-@ central Washington 's separate economic development district — and a seven @-@ member council . These positions , stipulated by the Omak City Code , are subject to at @-@ large elections every two years , rather than by geographic subdivisions . Like most portions of the United States , government and laws are run by a series of ballot initiatives whereby citizens can pass or reject laws , referenda whereby citizens can approve or reject legislation already passed , and propositions where specific government agencies can propose new laws or tax increases directly to the people . Federally , Omak is part of Washington 's 4th congressional district , represented by Republican Doc Hastings , elected in 1995 . The current mayor , Cindy Gagne , was first elected in 2000 as a <unk> , and was appointed in May 2009 . 
 The State of Washington operates a public government administration office in Omak for access to social and health assistance . Omak is considered to be a code city , based on proposals to provide the local government with more authority from its previous second @-@ class city status . With a functional court for traffic , parking and civil infractions , the city maintains the sewer , water , local road , sidewalk , street lighting , animal control , building inspection , park , and recreation services . It also funds a volunteer fire department which services Omak and nearby rural communities . The Omak Fire Department estimated that there were 312 service calls around 2012 , of which 80 included fire emergencies , 105 emergency medical incidents , six hazardous conditions , 26 service calls and three calls related to excessive heat concerns . 
 Omak is also governed by an eight @-@ member planning commission — part of the Omak City Council — which also operates the Greater Omak Comprehensive Plan , adopted in April 2004 and consisting of improvements considered for the city and surrounding communities . The five @-@ member Omak Library Board and Tree Board are also divisions of the Omak City Council , with public meetings taking place at the Omak Public Library . With four @-@ year terms for participants , the local Civil Service Commission services Omak . The City of Omak 's income has been $ 1 @,@ 170 @,@ 828 for two consecutive years , of which $ 1 @,@ 207 @,@ 026 was used as an expenditure . Shortly after being incorporated in 1911 , Omak unsuccessfully contested Okanogan to become the administrative center of Okanogan County , after Conconully lost its status . During the temperance movement before national prohibition , Omak residents favored the banishment of alcohol in Washington , which was opposed by those of Okanogan . The United States Army ( USA ) operates two military recruiting centers in Omak , although a historical military band , the Omak Military Band , also operated around 1910 . 
 The five @-@ officer Omak Police Department detachment , which covered the municipality and nearby rural communities , reported over 180 criminal code offenses in 2010 . The city 's crime rate of 154 offenses per 100 @,@ 000 people is 28 percent higher than the 2010 state average and one percent higher than the 2010 federal average . According to Uniform Crime Report statistics compiled by the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) in 2011 , there were 19 violent crimes and 166 property crimes . The violent crimes consisted of one forcible rape , three robberies and 15 aggravated assaults , while 32 burglaries , 104 larceny @-@ thefts , eight motor vehicle thefts and one arson defined the property crimes . The FBI classifies Omak as having 4 @,@ 921 people located within the Omak Police Department area . The city 's highest crime rate was recorded in 2004 , with 413 incidents per 100 @,@ 000 people . Until 2013 , when a murder and motor @-@ vehicle theft occurred in the city , there had not been a homicide for over ten consecutive years . The crime in Omak has decreased throughout the past decade . Before marijuana was legalized in Washington , marijuana users were arrested , per state law . Growers , drug lords and international smugglers residing in the Omak area are still arrested . 
 = = Education = = 
 The 2010 census estimated that 1 @,@ 057 people in Omak have attended college , while 504 residents received an academic degree ; more than five percent higher than the state average . Approximately 91 @.@ 5 percent graduated from high school or a more advanced institution ; two percent higher than the state average . Omak 's schools are administered by the county 's largest educational district , Omak School District , which operate two mainstream high schools , one mainstream middle school , two mainstream elementary schools and three virtual schools . Omak High School , built in 1919 , had a 2010 – 11 enrollment of 435 students , while the Omak Alternative High School had an enrollment of 48 students . In contrast to the municipal average as a whole with 2 @,@ 540 females and 2 @,@ 305 males , Omak Alternative High School had 28 males and 20 females attending the institution . Omak Middle School , with an enrolment of 339 children , had 171 males and 169 females in the 2010 – 11 school season . The city 's primary schools are East Omak Elementary and North Omak Elementary which had a combined 2010 – 11 enrollment of 748 children . 
 In February 2010 , Omak became the third settlement in Washington to have a virtual school . During the 2010 – 11 season , Washington Virtual Academy Omak Elementary , Washington Virtual Academy Omak Middle School , and Washington Virtual Academy Omak High School had a combined enrollment of 969 pupils . The private Omak Adventist Christian School , which operates outside of Omak School District , had 16 pupils in 2011 . It is affiliated with the nearby General Conference of the Seventh @-@ day Adventist Church . The Veritas Classical Christian School has also operated in the Omak region . 
 The Omak Public Library , managed by North Central Regional Library ( <unk> ) , was established in 1956 under provisions of state law passed by the City of Omak . The library is open daily , except on Sundays in the summer season . The community college , Wenatchee Valley College , maintains a campus in Omak , which had an enrollment increase of 19 percent between the 2009 – 10 and 2010 – 11 educational seasons . Located approximately 95 miles ( 153 km ) from the main campus in Wenatchee , it was established in the 1970s , and offers adult education classes and two @-@ year associate degrees . Based in Toppenish about 215 miles ( 346 km ) away , Heritage University operates an Omak campus consolidated with Wenatchee Valley College 's , providing degrees in several academic subjects . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 The 2010 census estimated that 89 @.@ 3 percent of residents in Omak commuted to work by automobile ; more than the state average of 72 @.@ 4 percent . Four percent of residents <unk> ; fewer than Washington 's average . 3 @.@ 8 percent walked ; close to the state average . The median time to travel to work was 11 @.@ 5 minutes , less than the state average of 25 @.@ 5 minutes . In the late 1960s , U.S. Route 97 was rerouted to the east and Downtown Omak was bypassed . Large signs located just off U.S. Route 97 promote the city 's central business district . 
 Washington State Route 215 runs north @-@ south through Omak , connecting the city to Okanogan four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) to the south . U.S. Route 97 and State Route 20 also run north @-@ south through Omak , connecting the municipality to Okanogan 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) south along this route and Brewster 32 miles ( 51 km ) south , Nespelem 35 miles ( 56 km ) southeast is connected to the community by the east @-@ west State Route 155 , before it becomes a spur route and continues west along Omak Avenue to terminate into State Route 215 . The residential areas are separated from the industrial sector and the highway by backroads near the major highways . Omak 's central business district is connected by several spur routes along municipal roads , such as Riverside Drive , Main Street and <unk> Drive . 
 Omak has rail , air , and bus services for regional and state transportation . Rail lines from Cascade and Columbia River Railroad enter Omak from Oroville in the north and Wenatchee in the south . The line interchanges with BNSF Railway in the Wenatchee area . The City of Omak operates the general Omak Airport . The paved runway is the third largest in central Washington . The airport provides three daily charter flights , except on Saturdays and Sundays . Wings for Christ Airport and Mid @-@ Valley Hospital EMS Heliport are private aviation ports . The closest commercial airports are located in Penticton and East Wenatchee . Okanogan County Transportation & Nutrition provides bus services in the city , and the federal Amtrak and Greyhound Lines maintain bus stops there . 
 The 30 @-@ bed Mid @-@ Valley Hospital provides medical services , including a 24 @-@ hour emergency medical service , ambulance service , nursing care , a birthing center , and a trauma center . The facility employs 10 physicians and dentists , 20 registered nurses and two licensed practical nurses . Established in July 2000 , Okanogan Behavioral Healthcare serves the city as an alternative medical facility . Numerous nursing homes , including <unk> Care Center , New <unk> and The Source for Seniors , operate in Omak . The city 's clinic was constructed in 1996 using $ 4 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 of local funds . The City of Omak measures residents ' drinking water use and provides storm drains , solid waste , and garbage services since 1984 . Residents under 60 are charged a 10 percent utility tax on purchases . Electricity is supplied by Okanogan County Public Utility District , and natural gas by <unk> . Other utility companies serving Omak include AT & T ( telephone ) ; and Comcast ( telephone , Internet , and cable television ) . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Joe Feddersen was born to a German American father and an Okanagan – Sinixt mother in Omak in 1953 . Feddersen later became an active member of the Colville Indian Reservation and primarily serves as a sculptor , painter and photographer , known for creating artworks with strong geometric patterns reflective of the landscape and his Native American heritage . He was first exposed to printmaking at Wenatchee Valley College under the direction of Robert Graves and worked as an art instructor at the Evergreen State College in Olympia , after he earned his Bachelor of Fine Arts from the University of Washington and his Masters of Fine Arts degree from the University of Wisconsin – Madison . In 2009 , Feddersen moved back to Omak , after leaving his teaching position at the Evergreen State College . 
 Marv Hagedorn was born in Omak in 1956 . He was raised in northern Idaho and served in the United States Navy ( USN ) from 1973 to 1994 while attending Pensacola Junior College and the University of Maryland . He entered politics and was elected to the Idaho House of Representatives by Governor Butch Otter in January 2007 . In 2012 , he was laid off , and was elected to represent the Idaho State Senate . Outside politics he is a member of the Disabled American Veterans and North American Fishing Association . Hagedorn and his wife later decided to reside in Meridian , Idaho , along with their children . 
 Don McCormack was born in Omak in 1955 . He later entered baseball and made his major league debut as a catcher with the Philadelphia Phillies in 1980 , after being chose as fourth round draft pick at the 1974 Major League Baseball Draft . McCormack would end up participating in a total of five games in the major league between 1980 and 1981 and spent nine years playing in the minor leagues for the Detroit Tigers and Philadelphia Tigers farm teams . McCormack later managed the Reading Phillies ( Eastern League ) and served as the bench coach of the Long Island Ducks ( Atlantic League ) for a short period , but was replaced . 
 William Stephen Skylstad , delivered in Omak on a garage table around 1934 to a Norwegian father and a Minnesotan mother , was raised on a farm near Skylstad , Norway , where his family later moved . When he was 14 years old , Skylstad left home to attend seminary in the United States , and was trained for the priesthood at Pontifical College <unk> in Worthington , Ohio . Twelve years later , he was ordained a priest of the Diocese of Spokane on May 21 , 1960 . Skylstad serves as a Roman Catholic Bishop and a Bishop Emeritus of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Spokane , having retired on June 30 , 2010 . He was appointed as the Apostolic Administrator of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Baker , in Oregon , on January 24 , 2011 , upon the appointment of Bishop Robert F. Vasa as Coadjutor Bishop of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Santa Rosa in California . 
 = = International relations = = 
 According to the Lieutenant Governor of Washington , Omak is a sister municipality with Summerland , British Columbia , a district with a population of 11 @,@ 280 people according to the 2011 Canadian census . Located on Okanagan Lake in the adjacent Okanagan @-@ Similkameen Regional District , Summerland was incorporated in December 21 , 1906 , and is located 96 miles ( 154 km ) north of Omak . An agricultural community like Omak , Summerland comprises several trails for hiking , walking or cycling . 
 = Hector Waller = 
 Hector Macdonald Laws ( Hec ) Waller , DSO and Bar ( 4 April 1900 – 1 March 1942 ) was a senior officer in the Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) . In a career spanning almost thirty years , he served in both world wars . At the helm of HMAS Stuart in the Mediterranean from 1939 to 1941 , he won recognition as a skilful ship 's captain and flotilla commander . He then transferred to the South West Pacific as captain of the light cruiser HMAS Perth , and went down with his ship against heavy odds during the Battle of Sunda Strait in early 1942 . 
 Born in Benalla , Victoria , Waller entered the Royal Australian Naval College at the age of thirteen . After graduating , he served with the Royal Navy ( RN ) in the closing stages of World War I. Between the wars , he specialised in communications and was posted as signals officer to various British and Australian warships . He gained his first seagoing command in 1937 , as captain of HMS Brazen . In September 1939 , he took charge of HMAS Stuart and four other obsolete destroyers that together became known as the " Scrap Iron Flotilla " . In 1940 , these were augmented by other ships to form the 10th Destroyer Flotilla , supporting Allied troops in North Africa . 
 Waller was awarded the Distinguished Service Order and Bar , and twice mentioned in despatches , for his achievements in the Mediterranean . He assumed command of HMAS Perth in October 1941 , taking part in the Battle of the Java Sea shortly before his final action in Sunda Strait . He received a third mention in despatches posthumously , and in 2011 came under formal consideration for the award of the Victoria Cross ( VC ) for his performance as Perth 's captain . The submarine HMAS Waller is named in his honour . 
 = = Early life and World War I = = 
 Born on 4 April 1900 in Benalla , Victoria , Hector MacDonald Laws Waller was the son of William Frederick Waller , a grocer , and his wife Helen Waller ( née Duncan ) . Hec Waller was named in honour of General Hector MacDonald , hero of the Boer War , and a forebear called Laws who was an admiral and a contemporary of Nelson . The youngest of ten children , of whom eight survived infancy , he attended Benalla Higher Elementary School . 
 Waller entered the Royal Australian Naval College ( RANC ) as a cadet midshipman on 31 December 1913 , aged thirteen . He gained recognition as a rugby player and became cadet captain . In 1917 , his final year at the college , he was raised to chief cadet captain and won the King 's Medal , awarded for " gentlemanly bearing , character , good influence among his fellows and officer @-@ like qualities " . Promoted to midshipman on 1 January 1918 , he was posted to Britain where , in April , he was appointed to serve in the Royal Navy 's ( RN ) Grand Fleet with the dreadnought HMS Agincourt . The ship did not see combat while he was on board . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 In February 1919 , Waller was assigned to the light cruiser HMAS Melbourne , and two months later returned to Australia . He transferred to the light cruiser HMAS Sydney as an acting sub @-@ lieutenant in September ; his rank was made substantive the following month . In April 1920 he was again posted aboard Melbourne . Promoted to lieutenant in March 1921 , he went through further training in Britain before returning to join the staff of the RANC . Waller married Nancy Bowes , a minister 's daughter , on 7 April 1923 in the Sydney suburb of Lewisham ; the couple had two sons , Michael and John . In April 1924 , he was posted to the light cruiser HMAS Adelaide . Later that year , he began training as a signals officer in England ; his classmates included Lord Louis Mountbatten . Waller finished at the top of the advanced course and , in May 1926 , took charge of the Signals and Wireless @-@ <unk> School at Flinders Naval Depot in Westernport , Victoria . From 1928 to 1930 , he served with the RN as a signals officer aboard the destroyer HMS Broke . He was promoted to lieutenant commander in March 1929 . 
 By this stage of his career , Waller had acquired a strong reputation for his communications work . In July 1930 , he was posted aboard the Royal Australian Navy 's ( RAN ) flagship , the heavy cruiser HMAS Australia , as squadron signals officer . He continued to perform this role upon transferring to Australia 's sister ship , HMAS Canberra , in May 1931 . In early 1932 , he was assigned to the Navy Office in Melbourne , returning to Canberra as squadron signals officer in August 1933 . He was promoted to commander in June 1934 and the following month became executive officer of the RANC . Departing the college in July 1936 , he returned to England and spent six months working in the British Naval Intelligence Division . A stint as executive officer of the repair ship HMS Resource followed . In November 1937 , Waller was given his first command at sea , the RN destroyer HMS Brazen . His ship handling was criticised early on , but was soon reported by his superiors as having " improved greatly " . Stationed in the Mediterranean , Brazen monitored progress of the Spanish Civil War , a duty that included protecting British merchant vessels and rescuing the crews of sinking ships . By June 1939 , Waller had returned to Australia to become Director of Signals and Communications at the Navy Office . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = HMAS Stuart in the Mediterranean = = = 
 At the outbreak of World War II , Waller was appointed captain of HMAS Stuart , taking charge of a group of four other obsolete ex @-@ RN destroyers — HMA Ships Vampire , Vendetta , Voyager , and Waterhen — that the Germans later nicknamed the " Scrap Iron Flotilla " . The ships were en route to Singapore for training when the British and Australian governments agreed that they should be assigned to the Mediterranean as the 19th Destroyer Division , under Waller 's control . Arriving at Malta in late December , Waller made a positive initial impression on senior RN commanders ; this was soon borne out by his actions during the salvage of the <unk> , a disabled tanker . In May 1940 , he was appointed to command the 10th Destroyer Flotilla , which included the vessels of the " Scrap Iron Flotilla " plus four modern British destroyers , and a month later was promoted to captain . 
 Following Italy 's entry into the war on 10 June 1940 , Waller was involved in the search for minefields off the North African coast . A keen shooter , he personally blew up floating mines using a rifle and armour @-@ piercing bullets . On 21 June , Stuart shelled the Italian @-@ held town of Bardia . The next month , his 10th Destroyer Flotilla participated in the Battle of Calabria . Waller 's ships carried out bombardments on Fort Capuzzo on 17 August and an Italian seaplane base in the Gulf of Bomba one week later . In September , he was awarded the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) for " courage , enterprise , and devotion to duty on recent engagements " — in particular , his pinpointing of enemy minefields . The same month , he transferred to HMAS Vampire while Stuart went in for refit . As the Allied armies began to counterattack Italian forces in December 1940 , the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Mediterranean Fleet , Admiral Sir Andrew Cunningham , gave Waller command of the newly formed Inshore Squadron , comprising destroyers , minesweepers , and auxiliaries . In his role as Cunningham 's Senior Officer Afloat , Waller took charge of naval support for the attack on Bardia , which fell to the Allies on 5 January 1941 . Shortly afterwards , he handed over command of the Inshore Squadron and transferred back aboard Stuart . 
 Stuart and other ships of Waller 's 10th Destroyer Flotilla supported the assaults on Tobruk in January 1941 and Benghazi the following month . In March , Stuart escorted Allied troop transports to Greece as part of Operation Lustre , narrowly avoiding falling victim to Axis dive @-@ bomber attacks . During the Battle of Cape Matapan at the end of the month , Waller 's ships were credited with sinking two Italian destroyers . From May to July , the 10th Destroyer Flotilla made 139 ferry runs during the Siege of Tobruk , carrying supplies to the town 's garrison and evacuating the wounded . Waller was mentioned in despatches twice during 1941 : in July for his army cooperation role with the Inshore Squadron off the Libyan coast , and in November for his service during the Greek campaign . In January 1942 , he was awarded a Bar to his DSO for " bravery and enterprise in the Battle of Cape Matapan " . Waller earned the personal admiration of Admiral Cunningham , who described him as " one of the finest types of Australian naval officers ... greatly loved and admired by everyone " . On the occasion of a visit to Alexandria by Australian Prime Minister Robert Menzies , Cunningham escorted him to Stuart and declared : " And now you are going to meet one of the greatest captains who ever sailed the seas — his name is Waller " . According to author Ray Parkin , who began writing while a prisoner of war , " Andrew Cunningham and Hector Waller were cast in the same mould : men would follow them , suffer , and be glad about it . These were both men made by Fate for those ever @-@ recurring Saint Crispin 's Days of human affairs " . 
 = = = HMAS Perth and the Battle of Sunda Strait = = = 
 Departing the Mediterranean , Waller returned to Australia in August 1941 for service in the South West Pacific . On 24 October , he took command of the light cruiser HMAS Perth , berthed in Sydney . Perth had also lately returned from action in the Mediterranean , where she had participated in the Greek , Cretan , and Syrian campaigns , and been damaged on two occasions by German bombers . Waller was reportedly " tired " and " quite a sick man " at this time , but nonetheless prepared Perth for action quickly . In January 1942 , the ship was assigned to American @-@ British @-@ Dutch @-@ Australian Command ( ABDA ) to help defend the Dutch East Indies . She set sail for the ABDA Area on 15 February , the day that Singapore surrendered . 
 The ABDA Striking Force that Perth had joined was crushed by an overwhelming Japanese force at the Battle of the Java Sea on 27 February . Low on ammunition , Waller made the decision to withdraw , accompanied by the cruiser USS Houston under the command of Captain Albert H. Rooks . Waller 's action contravened the orders of his Dutch superior , Admiral Conrad Helfrich , to " continue action whatever the cost , and till the bitter end " , but the Australian was convinced that further engagement would mean pointless sacrifice . 
 On the following night , 28 February , Perth and Houston were attempting to break through the Sunda Strait to Australia when they encountered a Japanese invasion fleet escorted by four cruisers and twelve destroyers . As senior officer , Waller was in the lead with Perth , and gave the order to fire upon making contact with the enemy ships just after 11 : 00 pm . In the ensuing battle , the Allied cruisers sank four Japanese transports and a minesweeper before they themselves were sunk , shortly after midnight on 1 March 1942 . Having fought to the last of its ammunition , Perth was struck by two torpedoes , losing over 350 of its complement of 680 as it keeled over . According to witnesses , Waller was last seen standing on the bridge after he had given the order to abandon ship , " looking down at the silent turrets " . He was officially listed as missing , presumed killed , and was survived by his wife and sons . Admiral Cunningham described Waller 's loss as " a heavy deprivation for the young Navy of Australia " , and Rear Admiral James Goldrick subsequently called him " the outstanding officer of his generation " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 On 15 March 1946 , Waller was awarded a posthumous mention in despatches for " gallantry and resolution " aboard HMAS Perth . His younger son John followed him into the Navy , entering the RANC in 1947 . Graduating as chief cadet captain , John Waller became a weapons electrical engineer and attained the rank of commander in 1967 , before transferring to the Emergency Reserve as a senior Navy research scientist . 
 Hec Waller 's name appears on the Roll of Honour located at Panel 6 in the Commemorative Area at the Australian War Memorial , Canberra , and on the Plymouth Naval Memorial in Devon , England . He is also commemorated by Waller Crescent and Waller Place in the Canberra suburb of Campbell . The Benalla Costume and Pioneer Museum holds his medals and dress uniform . The Waller Division of the RAN Recruit School at HMAS Cerberus , Victoria , was named in his honour until his name transferred to a division at RAN College in 2013 . 
 HMAS Waller , the third of the RAN 's Collins @-@ class submarines to enter service , was commissioned on 10 July 1999 . The attendees included John Waller , Michael Waller 's wife , and surviving crewmen of HMAS Perth . On 13 March 2010 , a memorial to Waller was unveiled in his home town of Benalla . In April 2011 , he was one of thirteen servicemen — eleven sailors and two soldiers , including Teddy Sheean , Robert Rankin , and John Simpson Kirkpatrick — named by the Australian government for consideration as possible recipients of the Victoria Cross ( VC ) for extreme valour in combat , under a review by the Defence Honours and Awards Appeals Tribunal ; no RAN member had ever been awarded the decoration . Concluding its investigations in February 2013 , the tribunal recommended that no further award be made to any of the thirteen servicemen , but that the name Waller ( among others ) should continue to be used for RAN ships after the current bearer was decommissioned . 
 = Hurricane Carol = 
 Hurricane Carol was among the worst tropical cyclones on record to affect the states of Connecticut and Rhode Island in the United States . It developed from a tropical wave near the Bahamas on August 25 , 1954 , and slowly strengthened as it moved northwestward . On August 27 , Carol intensified to reach winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) , but weakened as its motion turned to a northwest drift . A strong trough of low pressure turned the hurricane northeastward , and Carol later intensified into a major hurricane . While paralleling the Mid @-@ Atlantic and Southeastern United States , the storm produced strong winds and rough seas that caused minor coastal flooding and slight damage to houses in North Carolina , Virginia , Washington , D.C. , Delaware , and New Jersey . The well @-@ organized hurricane accelerated north @-@ northeastward and made landfall on Long Island , New York , and Connecticut on August 31 near peak intensity . Early on the following day , Carol transitioned into an extratropical cyclone over New Hampshire . 
 In New York , strong winds on Long Island damaged about 1 @,@ 000 houses , left 275 @,@ 000 people without electricity , downed many trees , and resulted in heavy crop losses . Storm surge flooded LaGuardia Airport and inundated the Montauk Highway , which left the eastern portion of Long Island isolated . Carol also brought strong winds and rough seas to New England . Throughout the region , about 150 @,@ 000 people were left without electricity and telephone service . 1 @,@ 545 houses were destroyed and another 9 @,@ 720 were damaged . Approximately 3 @,@ 500 cars and 3 @,@ 000 boats were destroyed . There were 65 deaths and 1 @,@ 000 injuries in New England . The storm caused an additional $ 1 million in damage in Canada as well as two deaths . Overall , Carol caused 72 fatalities and damage totaled $ 462 million ( 1954 USD ) , making it the costliest hurricane in the history of the United States , at the time . Following the storm , Carol was retired , becoming the first name to be removed from the naming lists in the Atlantic basin . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave spawned a tropical depression over the northeastern Bahamas on August 25 . It moved to the north @-@ northwest and intensified into a tropical storm early on August 26 . Receiving the name Carol , the storm gradually turned to the north , and strengthened under generally favorable conditions . On August 26 , the Hurricane Hunters reported an eye , 23 miles ( 37 km ) in diameter despite Carol being a tropical storm . The next day , Carol strengthened to attain hurricane status while located about 345 miles ( 545 km ) east of Cape Canaveral , Florida . With a large anticyclone persisting across the southeastern United States , the motion of Carol turned to a northwest drift . The hurricane continued to strengthen , and Carol reached an initial peak intensity of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) on August 28 . By that time , it was a small hurricane , and the radius of maximum winds was smaller than normal for its latitude and central pressure . After maintaining peak intensity for 30 hours and moving a distance of about 75 miles ( 120 km ) , Carol weakened slightly off the coast of Georgia . 
 An eastward moving deep @-@ wave trough intensified as it moved through the eastern United States . This caused Carol to accelerate as it turned to the north and north @-@ northeast . On August 30 , the hurricane again strengthened to reach Category 2 status while located 180 miles ( 290 km ) east of Savannah , Georgia . Early on August 31 , Carol passed very near Cape Hatteras , North Carolina with reconnaissance aircraft intensity estimates from 75 – 125 mph ( 120 – 200 km / h ) . The hurricane continued north @-@ northeastward with a forward motion of up to 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) , and Carol intensified further to make landfall on eastern Long Island a Category 3 hurricane with peak winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . After quickly crossing Long Island Sound , the hurricane made its final landfall on Old Saybrook , Connecticut , still at peak intensity . By that time , Carol had maintained its small structure and well @-@ defined eye , despite the fast forward motion and the latitude . The landfall intensity was based on a pressure of 957 mbar ( 28 @.@ 3 inHg ) in Groton , Connecticut , where the eye resulted in calm conditions and clear skies , followed by hurricane @-@ force winds and storm tide that destroyed ninety percent of area homes . Carol quickly lost tropical characteristics while crossing Connecticut and western Massachusetts , and became extratropical over southwestern New Hampshire late on August 31 . The powerful extratropical storm continued northward , and after entering Canada lost its identity over southern Quebec . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Mid @-@ Atlantic = = = 
 Before affecting North Carolina , the threat of Carol prompted a hurricane warning from Wilmington to Manteo . Storm warnings were issued southward to Charleston . Residents evacuated north of Wilmington along the ocean . While passing by the state , the strongest winds remained to the east of Hurricane Carol , though winds of 90 to 100 mph ( 145 to 160 km / h ) were reported at Cape Hatteras . Further inland , the hurricane produced a wind gust of 55 mph ( 90 km / h ) in Wilmington and 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) in Cherry Point . The winds resulted in agricultural damage to the corn and soy bean crop . High winds caused minor damage to roofs and houses , and also downed some trees and power lines . Near the coast , waves from the storm damaged fishing piers , and flooding was reported in New Bern . High waves also damaged coastal roadways . Damage in the state totaled to around $ 228 @,@ 000 . Carol passed 100 miles ( 160 km ) to the east of Virginia , and produced 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) winds in Virginia Beach . The hurricane produced 4 inches ( 100 mm ) of rain in Norfolk . Further to the northwest , rainfall from the system alleviated drought conditions in the Washington , D.C. area . Damage was minor from Virginia to Delaware , where light rains fell . Precipitation also extended into Pennsylvania . 
 In New Jersey , high winds downed power lines , which killed two people . Along the coast , high waves damaged boardwalks and caused flooding . In neighboring Pennsylvania , Carol caused a tractor to crash into a train , resulting in two deaths . Damage in the state was estimated at $ 250 @,@ 000 . 
 On eastern Long Island near where Carol made landfall , a pressure of 960 mbar ( 28 inHg ) was recorded . Winds on the island gusted to 125 mph ( 200 km / h ) , leaving thousands of homes without power . The winds downed many trees , and left heavy crop damage to various fruits . High winds damaged widespread homes , boats , and cars . About 1 @,@ 000 houses were damaged on the island , and 275 @,@ 000 people lost power . The hurricane 's storm surge covered the Montauk Highway in Montauk , effectively isolating eastern Long Island for a period of time . Flooding also affected LaGuardia Airport . Due to the compact nature of the storm , areas west of Fire Island were largely unaffected by the hurricane . There were power outages in New York City , but little damage . Damage was estimated at $ 5 million in the state , and one death was reported , after thousands of people evacuated . 
 = = = New England and Canada = = = 
 Hurricane Carol produced hurricane and gale force winds across New England . Strong winds from Hurricane Carol destroyed nearly 40 % of the apple , corn , peach , and tomato crops from eastern Connecticut to Cape Cod . Overall crop damage was estimated at $ 22 @.@ 25 million . The hurricane destroyed several thousand homes in New England , many of which were destroyed from the waters or the powerful winds . Overall , 11 @,@ 785 families were directly impacted by the hurricane , including 9 @,@ 720 houses that were damaged and 1 @,@ 545 that were destroyed . High winds left over 150 @,@ 000 people without power in New England , potentially as many as one @-@ third of all of New England , and many residents also lost phone service . The hurricane also destroyed 3 @,@ 500 cars and 3 @,@ 000 boats in the region . Heavy rainfall from the storm caused traffic accidents , but only minor flooding . 
 Throughout the United States , Hurricane Carol caused $ 461 million in damage , mostly in New England , making it the costliest Atlantic hurricane at the time . There were 65 deaths in New England , and about 1 @,@ 000 injured people . Despite the high damage , advance warning allowed for many fewer deaths than the total of 488 fatalities during the 1938 New England hurricane , which affected the same area with similar strength . However , some areas did not receive advance warning , due to power outages preventing people from receiving Weather Bureau warnings ahead of the storm . 
 Hurricane Carol struck Connecticut shortly after high tide , and its combination with 10 to 15 feet ( 3 to 4 @.@ 5 m ) storm surges from New London eastward produced widespread tidal flooding . About 2 @,@ 000 people were stranded when a rail line between New Haven and Rhode Island was flooded . The heaviest rainfall associated with the passage of the storm occurred in New London , where up to 6 inches ( 150 mm ) fell and wind blew off a portion of the city hall roof . These strong winds left much of the eastern portion of the state without power . Near the coast , the combination of strong winds and the storm surge damaged or destroyed thousands of buildings , including 100 destroyed houses . Many other homes in Eastern Connecticut were damaged by falling trees . Thousands had evacuated before the storm reached the area , and one person died in the state . Due to the compact nature of the storm , western Connecticut experienced little effects from Carol . Overall damage in the state was estimated at $ 50 million . 
 The hurricane produced a record @-@ high wind gust of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) at Block Island , while on mainland Rhode Island , sustained winds peaked at 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) in Warwick with gusts to 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) . Upon making landfall around high tide , Carol produced a storm surge of up to 14 @.@ 4 feet ( 4 @.@ 4 m ) in Narragansett Bay , surpassing that of the New England Hurricane of 1938 . The resulting storm surge flooded downtown Providence with 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) of water . News reports indicated that the floods covered the area with 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) in about an hour . The winds downed two broadcasting towers in the city . Westerly was also flooded , where 200 homes were washed away . There was also heavy damage in Newport , where the Newport Casino was damaged . Some entire coastal communities were nearly destroyed , and 620 houses and 83 other buildings were destroyed in the state . The winds destroyed the roofs of hundreds of buildings , forcing many to evacuate to shelters during the passage of the storm . The powerful winds also downed thousands of trees and power lines , blacking out the entire state and interrupting 95 percent of phone service . Damage in the state totaled about $ 200 million , and there were at least 17 deaths in Rhode Island . 
 Before Carol affected the area , 20 @,@ 000 people evacuated from Cape Cod . In Massachusetts , the hurricane produced winds between 80 and 110 mph ( 130 to 180 km / h ) across much of the eastern part of the state . Gusts reached 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) at Blue Hill Meteorological Observatory , and the highest gusts in the state was around 125 mph ( 201 km / h ) . The winds downed about 50 million board feet of trees in the state , many of which fell onto power lines ; much of eastern Massachusetts lost power during the storm . Carol left about $ 15 million in crop damage in the state . The winds destroyed much of the corn crop , about half of the peach crop , and about 1 @.@ 5 million bushels of apples . High winds destroyed the spire of the Old North Church in Boston , which was the location of where the lanterns were hung during Paul Revere 's ride . It was a replacement spire , after a hurricane in 1804 destroyed the original . Heavy damage was reported throughout Boston , and in Wareham , about 1 @,@ 500 people were left homeless . Statewide , 3 @,@ 350 homes were damaged to some degree , and another 800 were destroyed . The hurricane destroyed another 213 buildings and severely damaged 530 . Near the coast , strong storm surges were reported , and a 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) storm tide was reported at New Bedford , setting a record . At least 15 deaths were reported in the state , and damage was estimated at $ 175 million . 
 Carol maintained its intensity as it moved inland , and its winds were strong enough to knock down trees and power lines in New Hampshire . One tree fell onto a car , killing a person , and there were three deaths overall in the state , along with $ 3 million in damage . There was also a death in neighboring Vermont . Carol produced winds of up to 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) in Augusta , Maine . Throughout the state , the winds downed hundreds of trees , some of which damaged houses , wrecked cars , destroyed one building , or fell onto power lines . Fallen trees blocked highways , and one person was injured by a falling tree limb . Downed power lines left several counties without power or telephone services . The winds flattened hundreds of acres of corn in North Livermore , and throughout the state , there was heavy damage to the apple crop . Damage to the apple crop amounted to $ 1 @.@ 7 million . While moving west of Maine , the hurricane dropped heavy rainfall , including a report of 2 @.@ 15 inches ( 63 mm ) in 12 hours . Along the coast , high waves damaged boats . In Maine , the hurricane killed three people , injured at least eight , and caused $ 10 million in damage , the costliest natural disaster in the state 's history . Carol lost this distinction 10 days later when Hurricane Edna caused $ 15 million in damage in the state . 
 Rainfall in Canada peaked at 4 @.@ 27 inches ( 108 mm ) in Quebec . In Yarmouth , Nova Scotia , wind gusts peaked at 47 mph ( 75 km / h ) . In Quebec , the extratropical remnants of Carol downed trees and power lines in Montreal from wind gusts as high as 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) . Widespread power outages were reported in New Brunswick and Quebec , and downed trees struck three cars in Saint John , New Brunswick . The storm caused flights to be canceled , and subways were flooded in Montreal . Damage there totaled about $ 1 million ( 1954 CAD , $ 980 @,@ 000 USD ) . Two people were killed , one of whom due to drowning on a sunken barge in Quebec City . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Governor of Rhode Island Dennis J. Roberts declared martial law for the state after Carol caused heavy damage . In Massachusetts , the National Guard were deployed to six towns to prevent looting . National Guardsmen flew a plane of dry ice from Newark , New Jersey to Boston to assist the widespread areas without power and refrigeration . Widespread areas were without power for days , and in some areas for up to a week , until crews could repair downed lines . Spoiled food due to lack of refrigeration resulted in about $ 1 million in losses . Power crews from elsewhere in the United States arrived to assist in the restoration . Workers quickly removed trees from highways . Damaged factories in Rhode Island prevented employees for working for three weeks after the storm . The steeple of the Old North Church in Boston was rebuilt in 1955 , after residents throughout the country provided $ 150 @,@ 000 in donations . Governor of Maine Burton M. Cross declared a state of emergency for the state . The Small Business Administration declared six counties in Maine as disaster areas . In the days after the storm , President of the United States Dwight Eisenhower declared Massachusetts and Rhode Island as federal disaster areas . The federal government provided financial aid , amounting to $ 1 @.@ 5 million in Massachusetts . The president ordered for troops to assist in the aftermath . The American Red Cross quickly deployed teams to the most affected areas , feeding hundreds of families . About 12 days after Carol struck New England , Hurricane Edna struck eastern Massachusetts , causing an additional $ 40 million in damage and 20 deaths . More disaster aid was provided after the second hurricane . 
 The high damage caused by Hurricane Carol and other hurricanes in 1954 prompted the United States government to devote research to set up the National Hurricane Research Project . Hurricane Hunters and the Weather Bureau collected data on subsequent hurricanes to determine their structure , as well as attempted to weaken storms with silver iodide via Project Stormfury . 
 Due to the high damage , the name Carol was removed from the naming list for 10 years . The name was reused in the 1965 season , but was retroactively retired , and it will never again be used for an Atlantic hurricane . Carol was the first Atlantic hurricane name in history to be retired . 
 = The Black Island = 
 The Black Island ( French : L 'Île noire ) is the seventh volume of The Adventures of Tintin , the comics series by Belgian cartoonist Hergé . Commissioned by the conservative Belgian newspaper Le Vingtième Siècle for its children 's supplement Le Petit Vingtième , it was serialised weekly from April to November 1937 . The story tells of young Belgian reporter Tintin and his dog Snowy , who travel to England in pursuit of a gang of counterfeiters . Framed for theft and hunted by detectives Thomson and Thompson , Tintin follows the criminals to Scotland , discovering their lair on the Black Island . 
 The Black Island was a commercial success and was published in book form by Casterman shortly after its conclusion . Hergé continued The Adventures of Tintin with King Ottokar 's Sceptre , while the series itself became a defining part of the Franco @-@ Belgian comics tradition . In 1943 , The Black Island was coloured and re @-@ drawn in Hergé 's distinctive ligne @-@ claire style for republication . In the mid @-@ 1960s , Hergé 's British publishers requested a major revision of the story , for which he sent his assistant Bob de Moor to Britain on a research trip ; on his return , Studios Hergé produced a revised , third edition of the story , serialised in Tintin magazine . The Black Island introduces the recurring villain Dr. Müller , and has been widely cited as one of the most popular instalments in the series . The story was adapted for both the 1957 Belvision animation , Hergé 's Adventures of Tintin , and for the 1991 Ellipse / Nelvana animated series The Adventures of Tintin . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Tintin discovers a plane stranded in the Belgian countryside , offers to help , but is shot by the pilot . Tintin awakens in hospital , where the detectives Thomson and Thompson visit him . They inform him that the plane subsequently flew to Sussex , England , where it crashed . Tintin and Snowy proceed to Sussex , but along the way , two criminals frame Tintin for robbery . Arriving in England by ferry in Newhaven , the criminals kidnap Tintin and attempt to kill him over the cliffs of Seaford , but with Snowy 's help , he escapes . Discovering the plane wreckage , he finds a torn up note in the pilot 's jacket , and following the writing on it arrives at the estate of Dr. J. W. Müller , a German who owns a mental institution . Müller captures Tintin , but the young reporter again escapes . In a scuffle , Müller 's house catches ablaze and the criminals escape . 
 The next morning , Tintin finds electric cables and red beacons in the garden , surmising that they are there designed to attract a plane drop . At night , he lights the flares , and finds that planes drops sacks of counterfeit money , revealing that Müller is running a gang of forgers . He pursues Müller and his accomplices and along the way , Thompson and Thomson join them . When Müller takes a plane north , Tintin , Snowy and the two detectives follow , but hit a storm and crash land in rural Scotland . 
 Learning that Müller 's plane had crashed off the coast of Kiltoch , a Scottish coastal village , Tintin travels there to continue his investigation . At Kiltoch , an old man tells him the story of Black Island — an island off the coast where a " ferocious beast " kills any visitors . Tintin and Snowy travel to the island , where they find that the " beast " is a trained gorilla named Ranko . They further discover that the forgers are using the island as their base , and radio the police for help . Although the criminals attempt to capture Tintin , the police arrive and arrest the criminals , with Ranko going to a zoo . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background and research = = = 
 Georges Remi — best known under the pen name Hergé — was employed as editor and illustrator of Le Petit Vingtième ( " The Little Twentieth " ) , a children 's supplement to Le Vingtième Siècle ( " The Twentieth Century " ) , a staunchly Roman Catholic , conservative Belgian newspaper based in Hergé 's native Brussels which was run by the Abbé Norbert Wallez . In 1929 , Hergé began The Adventures of Tintin comic strip for Le Petit Vingtième , revolving around the exploits of fictional Belgian reporter Tintin . Wallez ordered Hergé to set his first adventure in the Soviet Union as anti @-@ socialist propaganda for children ( Tintin in the Land of the Soviets ) , to set his second adventure in the Belgian Congo to encourage colonial sentiment ( Tintin in the Congo ) , and to set his third adventure in the United States to use the story as a denunciation of American capitalism ( Tintin in America ) . Wallez was subsequently removed from the paper 's editorship following a scandal , although Hergé was convinced to stay on the condition of a salary increase . 
 For his next serial , Hergé planned to put together a story that caricatured the actions of Nazi Germany , developing the plot for King Ottokar 's Sceptre . However , he temporarily set aside that project when he began to experience dreams of white and a car stuck in the snow , having ideas of sending Tintin to the north , considering Greenland or the Klondike as potential locations . The result was The Black Island , although Hergé only sent Tintin as far north as Scotland , and he instead used the idea of the car stuck in a snowdrift on a greetings card that he designed . He also had an idea of Tintin combating a group of anarchists bent on destroying Europe 's iconic buildings , but again this idea did not make it into the eventual story . Having decided to set most of his story in Britain , Hergé briefly visited London and the southern English coast to learn more about the country . There , he purchased a stainless steel <unk> <unk> G @-@ 2 pen , a type that he would continue to use throughout his life . His positive depiction of Britain was in part due to an Anglophilia that he had received from his childhood , with the British government having been a longstanding ally of Belgium , supporting its 1831 creation and liberating it from German occupation during the First World War . 
 Hergé retained the anti @-@ German sentiment that he had first considered for King Ottokar 's Sceptre through the inclusion of a German villain , Dr. Müller , who would go on to become a recurring character in the series . He based the character largely on Georg Bell , a Scottish forger who had been a vocal supporter of the Nazi regime , and who he had learned about from an article in anti @-@ conformist Belgian magazine La Crapouillot ( The Mortar Shell ) . Rather than Germans , Müller 's henchmen were given the Russian names Ivan and Wronzoff , although the latter would be renamed <unk> by Michael Turner and Leslie Lonsdale @-@ Cooper for the English translation . Forging banknotes was a topical crime at the time , while the idea of villains using superstition to hide their lair was a common trope , one that Hergé had used previously in Tintin in the Land of the Soviets . The idea of Ranko brought together two popular fictional creatures of the 1930s ; the giant ape King Kong , who had been introduced in the film King Kong ( 1933 ) , and the Loch Ness Monster , a cryptid who was to have lived in Loch Ness . Gaston Leroux 's character of <unk> the gorilla , who had appeared in a 1911 book and a 1913 film , might also have been an influence on Ranko . The plot and themes of the story were also influenced by Alfred Hitchcock 's 1935 film The 39 Steps , itself an adaptation of John Buchan 's 1915 adventure novel . 
 = = = Original publication = = = 
 The Black Island was first serialised in Le Petit Vingtième from 15 April to 16 November 1937 under the title Le Mystère De L 'Avion Gris ( The Mystery of the Grey Plane ) . From 17 April 1938 , the story was also serialised in the French Catholic newspaper , Cœurs Vaillants . In 1938 , Éditions Casterman collected the story together in a single hardcover volume , publishing it under the title L 'Île noire ( The Black Island ) . Hergé however was unhappy with this publication due to errors throughout , most egregiously that the front cover omitted his name . 
 The inclusion of a television in the original version would have surprised many readers . The BBC had only introduced television to Britain in the late 1930s ( suspended entirely until 1946 ) and Belgium would not have television until 1955 . 
 = = = Second and third versions = = = 
 In the 1940s and 1950s , when Hergé 's popularity had increased , he and his team at Studios Hergé redrew and coloured many of the original black @-@ and @-@ white Tintin adventures . They used the ligne claire ( " clear line " ) drawing style that Hergé had developed , in this way ensuring that the earlier stories fitted in visually alongside the new Adventures of Tintin being created . Casterman published this second , colourised version of the story in 1943 , reduced from 124 pages to 60 . This second version contained no significant changes from the original 1937 one , although the black @-@ and @-@ white television screen that had appeared in the 1930s version was now depicted as a colour screen , despite the fact that such technology was not yet available . 
 In the early 1960s , Hergé 's English language publishers , Methuen , were planning on translating and publishing The Black Island for the British market . Methuen believed that many British readers would find the depiction of Britain in the comic inaccurate and out @-@ of @-@ date , and drew up a list of 131 errors that they asked Hergé to rectify before they would publish it in English . They were also aware that the work would appear particularly dated when compared with some of the most recently published Adventures like Destination Moon and The Calculus Affair , which made use of advanced technologies in their plot . At the time , Hergé was busy producing the twenty @-@ second Tintin story , Flight 714 , and so did not have the time to undertake research into contemporary British society and culture . Instead , he sent his assistant Bob de Moor to Britain in October 1961 , where he visited such sites as Batemans and the White Cliffs of Dover , making many observations as to new developments in clothing and architecture . While in England , de Moor sought out various contemporary uniforms to use as a basis for more accurate illustrations . A police constabulary lent him a police uniform , although when he asked British Rail if he could borrow one of their uniforms , their staff were suspicious and refused . 
 The new version was serialised in Tintin magazine from June to December 1965 , before Casterman published it in a collected volume in 1966 . Studios Hergé made many alterations to the illustrations as a result of de Moor 's research . Reflecting the fact that television had become increasingly commonplace in Western Europe , Hergé changed the prose from " It 's a television set ! " to " It 's only a television set ! " However , as colour television was not yet available in Britain , the screen on the television encountered in Britain was once again reverted to black @-@ and @-@ white . Additionally , at least one line of dialogue was " softened " from the original version - in one scene where Tintin aims a pistol at two of the counterfeiters , he states , " Get back ! And put up your hands ! " compared to the original 's " Take one more step and you 're dead ! " . The counterfeit notes that Tintin finds were also increased in value , from one pound to five pounds . The multiple aircraft featured throughout the story were redrawn by Studios member Roger Leloup , who replaced the depiction of planes that were operational in the 1930s to those active at the time , such as a Percival Prentice , a D.H. Chipmunk , a Cessna 150 , a Tiger Moth , and a British European Airways Hawker Siddeley Trident . 
 The clothing worn by characters was brought up @-@ to @-@ date , while the old steam railways were replaced by electrified alternatives . Adverts for the genuine Johnnie Walker whisky were replaced by adverts for a fictional alternative , Loch Lomond whisky , while a Sussex County Council signpost was added to page 11 . Various English towns and villages were renamed , with <unk> becoming <unk> , and Eastbury becoming <unk> , while Scottish pub Ye Dolphin was renamed The Kiltoch Arms . The police were no longer depicted as carrying guns , as was accurate , while the journalists Christopher Willoughby @-@ <unk> and Marco Rizotto , who had first appeared in The Castafiore Emerald ( 1963 ) , were retroactively added into the background of one scene . With the backgrounds and other elements of the new version drawn by staff members of the Studios , the only thing drawn by Hergé in the 1966 version was the characters themselves . 
 = = = Later publications = = = 
 Casterman republished the original black @-@ and @-@ white version of the story in 1980 , as part of their Archives Hergé collection . In 1986 , they then published a facsimile version of that first edition , that they followed in 1996 with the publication of a facsimile of the second , 1943 edition . 
 = = Critical analysis = = 
 Harry Thompson thought that The Black Island expressed a " convenient , hitherto unsuspected regard for the British " on Hergé 's behalf , with Britain itself appearing as " a little quaint . " He thought that it " outstrips its predecessors " both artistically and comedically , describing it as " one of the most popular Tintin stories . " He felt that some of the logically implausible slapstick scenes illustrated " the last flicker of 1920s Tintin " , but that the 1966 version was " a fine piece of work and one of the most beautifully drawn Tintin books . " Michael Farr commented on the " distinct quality and special popularity " of The Black Island . He thought that the inclusion of many airplanes and a television in the first version was symptomatic of Hergé 's interest in innovation and modernism . Commenting on the differences between the third version of the comic and the earlier two , he thought that the latter was " strongly representative " of the artistic talents of Studios Hergé in the 1960s , but that it was nevertheless inferior , because it had replaced the " spontaneity and poetry " of the original with " over @-@ detailed and fussily accurate " illustrations . 
 Jean @-@ Marc and Randy Lofficier described The Black Island as " a clever little thriller " that bore similarities with the popular detective serials of the era . The Lofficiers thought that the 1966 version " gained in slickness " but became less atmospheric , awarding it two out of five . Biographer Benoît Peeters thought The Black Island to be " a pure detective story " , describing it as " Remarkably well constructed " and highlighting that it contrasted the modern world of counterfeiters , airplanes , and television , with the mysteries of superstition and the historic castle . He described it as " an adventure full of twists and turns " , with the characters Thompson and Thomson being " on top form " . He nevertheless considered the 1966 version to be " shorter on charm " than the earlier versions . Elsewhere he was more critical , stating that " under the guise of modernization , a real massacre occurred " , and adding that " the new Black Island was more than just a failure ; it also showed one of the limitations of the <unk> system " , in that it was obsessed with repeated redrawing . 
 Literary critic Jean @-@ Marie Apostolidès of Stanford University believed that The Black Island expanded on a variety of themes that Hergé had explored in his earlier work , such as the idea of counterfeiting and Snowy 's fondness for whisky . He thought that there was a human @-@ animal link in the story , with Tintin 's hair matching Snowy 's fur in a similar manner to how Wronzoff 's beard matched Ranko 's fur coat . However , he added that while Tintin 's relationship with Snowy was wholly one based in good , Wronzoff 's connection with Ranko is one rooted in evil . By living on an island , Apostolidès thought that Wronzoff was like " a new Robinson Crusoe " , also highlighting that it was the first use of the island theme in Hergé 's work . Literary critic Tom McCarthy thought that The Black Island linked to Hergé 's other Adventures in various ways ; he connected the counterfeit money in the story to the counterfeit idol in The Broken Ear and the fake bunker in Tintin in the Land of the Soviets . He also connected Tintin 's solving of the puzzle in the airman 's jacket to his solving of the pirate puzzles in The Secret of the Unicorn , and that in transmitting from a place of death , Ben Mor , or mort ( death ) , it linked to Tintin 's transmitting from the crypt of Marlinspike Hall in The Secret of the Unicorn . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 The Black Island is one of The Adventures of Tintin that was adapted for the second series of the animated Hergé 's Adventures of Tintin by the Belgian studio Belvision in 1957 . Belvision 's adaptation , directed by Ray Goossens and written by Michel Greg , divided The Black Island up into 5 @-@ minute colour episodes that diverted from Hergé 's original plot in a variety of ways . The French studio Ellipse and Canadian animation company Nelvana subsequently adapted the comic into a 1991 episode of The Adventures of Tintin television series . Directed by Stéphane Bernasconi , Thierry Wermuth voiced the character of Tintin . 
 On 19 March 2010 , the British TV network Channel 4 broadcast a documentary titled Dom Joly and The Black Island in which the comedian Dom Joly dressed up as Tintin and followed in Tintin 's footsteps from Ostend to Sussex and then to Scotland . Reviewing the documentary in The Guardian , Tim Dowling commented ; " it was amusing in parts , charming in others and a little gift for <unk> everywhere . A Tintinologist , I fear , would not learn much he or she didn 't already know . " 
 = Rhondda = 
 Rhondda / <unk> / , or the Rhondda Valley ( Welsh : Cwm Rhondda [ <unk> <unk> ̥ <unk> ] ) , is a former coal mining valley in Wales , formerly a local government district , consisting of 16 communities built around the River Rhondda . The area is , in fact , made up of two valleys : those of the larger Rhondda Fawr valley ( <unk> large ) and the smaller Rhondda Fach valley ( bach small ) . The singular term ' Rhondda Valley ' and the plural ' Rhondda Valleys ' are both commonly used . In 2001 the Rhondda constituency of the National Assembly for Wales had a population of 72 @,@ 443 ; while the National Office of Statistics described the Rhondda urban area as having a population of 59 @,@ 602 . Rhondda is part of Rhondda Cynon Taf County Borough and is part of the South Wales Valleys . 
 The Rhondda Valley is most notable for its historical link to the coal mining industry which was at its peak between 1840 @-@ 1925 . The Rhondda Valleys were home to a strong early Nonconformist Christian movement which manifested itself in the Baptist chapels which moulded Rhondda values in the 19th and early 20th century . Rhondda is also famous for strong masculine cultural ties within a social community which expressed itself outside industry in the form of male voice choirs , sport and politics . 
 = = Rhondda Fawr = = 
 The larger of the two valleys , the Rhondda Fawr , extends from Porth and rises through the valley until it reaches Blaenrhondda , near Treherbert . The settlements that make up the Rhondda Fawr are as follows : 
 <unk> a district of Treherbert . 
 Blaenrhondda a district of Treherbert . 
 Cwm Clydach a community . 
 Cwmparc a district of Treorchy . 
 Cymmer a district of Porth . 
 Dinas Rhondda a district of Penygraig . 
 <unk> a district of Penygraig . 
 Gelli a district of Ystrad 
 <unk> a district of Cymmer 
 <unk> a community . 
 Pentre a community . 
 Penygraig a community 
 Porth a community that sees itself as the unofficial capital of the Rhondda , mainly due to its geographic location . 
 Ton Pentre a district of Pentre . 
 Tonypandy a community . 
 Trealaw a community . 
 <unk> a district of Cymmer 
 <unk> the most southernmost and smallest of the Rhondda Valley communities . 
 Treherbert a community . 
 Treorchy the largest community in either of the valleys . 
 Tynewydd a district of Treherbert 
 Williamstown a district of Penygraig . 
 <unk> a district of Treorchy . 
 Ystrad a community . 
 = = Rhondda Fach = = 
 The Rhondda Fach is celebrated in the 1971 David Alexander song ' If I could see the Rhondda ' ; the valley includes Wattstown , Ynyshir , Pontygwaith , Ferndale , Tylorstown and Maerdy . The settlements that make up the Rhondda Fach are as follows : 
 <unk> a district of Ferndale . 
 Ferndale a community . 
 Maerdy a community . 
 Penrhys a district of Tylorstown . 
 Pontygwaith a district of Tylorstown . 
 Tylorstown a community . 
 <unk> a district of Tylorstown . 
 Wattstown a district of Ynyshir . 
 Ynyshir a community . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 In the early Middle Ages , Glynrhondda was a commote of the cantref of Penychen in the kingdom of Morgannwg , a sparsely populated agricultural area . The spelling of the commote varied widely , and the Cardiff Records shows the various spellings : 
 Many sources state the meaning of Rhondda as ' noisy ' , though this is a simplified translation without research . Sir Ifor Williams , in his work <unk> <unk> , suggests that the first syllable <unk> is a form of the Welsh <unk> or <unk> , as in ' recite , relate , recount ' , similar to the Old Irish <unk> ; ' speech ' . The suggestion is that the river is speaking aloud , a comparison to the English expression ' a babbling brook ' . 
 With the increase in population from the mid @-@ 19th century the area was officially recognised as the Ystradyfodwg Local Government District , but was renamed in 1897 as the Rhondda Urban District after the River Rhondda . 
 Residents of either valley rarely use the terms ' Rhondda Fach ' or ' Rhondda Fawr ' , referring instead to ' The Rhondda ' , or their specific village when relevant . Locals tend to refer to " The Rhondda " with the definite article , despite its non @-@ usage on sign posts and maps . 
 = = Early history = = 
 = = = Prehistoric and Roman Rhondda : 8 @,@ 000 BC — 410 AD = = = 
 The Rhondda Valley is located in the upland , or Blaenau , area of Glamorgan . The landscape of the Rhondda was formed by glacial action during the last ice age , as slow moving glaciers gouged out the deep valleys that exist today . With the retreat of the ice sheet , around 8000 BC , the valleys were further modified by stream and river action . This left the two river valleys of the Rhondda with narrow , steep sided slopes which would dictate the layout of settlements from early to modern times . 
 = = = = Mesolithic period = = = = 
 The earliest evidence of the presence of man in these upper areas of Glamorgan was discovered in 1963 at Craig y Llyn . A small chipped stone tool found at the site , recorded as possibly being of ' <unk> ' type or at least from the early Mesolithic period , places human activity on the plateau above the valleys . Many other Mesolithic items have been discovered in the Rhondda , predominantly in the upper areas around Blaenrhondda , <unk> and Maerdy , mainly stone age items relating to hunting , fishing and foraging which suggests seasonal nomadic activity . Though no definite Mesolithic settlements have been located in the area , the concentration of finds at the Craig y Llyn escarpment suggests the presence of a temporary campsite in the vicinity . 
 = = = = Neolithic period = = = = 
 The first structural relic of prehistoric man was excavated in 1973 at Cefn Glas near the watershed of the Rhondda Fach river . The remains of a rectangular hut with traces of drystone wall foundations and postholes was discovered ; while carbon dating of charcoal found at the site dated the structure as late Neolithic . 
 = = = = Bronze Age = = = = 
 Although little evidence of settlements has been found in the Rhondda that date between the Neolithic and Bronze Age periods , several cairns and cists have been discovered throughout the length of both valleys . The best example of a round @-@ cairn was found at <unk> yr Afan , near the summit of Graig Fawr , west of Cwmparc . The cairn consisted of an earthen mound with a surrounding ditch 28 metres in circumference and over 2 metres tall . Although most cairns discovered in the area are round , a ring cairn or cairn circle exists on Gelli Mountain . Known as the ' Rhondda Stonehenge ' the cairn consists of 10 upright stones no more than 60 cm in height encircling a central cist . All the cairns found within the Rhondda are located on high ground , many on <unk> , and may have been used as waypoints . 
 In 1912 a hoard of 24 late Bronze Age weapons and tools was discovered during construction work at the Llyn Fawr reservoir , at the source of the Rhondda Fawr . The items did not originate from the Rhondda and are thought to have been left at the site as a votive offering . Of particular interest were fragments of an iron sword which is the earliest iron object to be found in Wales and the only ' C @-@ type ' Hallstatt sword recorded in Britain . 
 = = = = Iron Age = = = = 
 With the exception of the Neolithic settlement at Cefn Glas , there are three certain pre @-@ Medieval settlement sites in the valley — Maendy Camp , Hen Dre 'r Gelli and Hen Dre 'r Mynydd . The earliest of these structures is Maendy Camp , a hillfort whose remains are situated between Ton Pentre and Cwmparc . Although its defences would have been slight , the camp made good use of the natural slopes and rock outcrops to its north @-@ east face . Maendy camp consisted of two earthworks , an inner and outer enclosure . When the site was excavated in 1901 several archaeological finds led to the camp being misidentified as Bronze Age . These finds , mainly pottery and flint knives , were excavated from a burial cairn discovered within the outer enclosure but the site has since been classified as from the Iron Age . 
 The settlement at Hen Dre 'r Mynydd in Blaenrhondda was dated around the Roman period when the discovery of fragments of wheel @-@ made Romano @-@ British pottery were discovered at the location . The site is made up of a group of ruinous drystone roundhouses and enclosures and is thought to have been a sheep farming community . 
 The most definite example of a Roman site in the area is found above <unk> in Ferndale . The settlement is one of a group of earthworks and indicates the presence of the Roman army during the 1st century AD . It was thought to be a military site or marching camp . 
 = = = Dark Age and Medieval Rhondda : 410 – 1550 AD = = = 
 The 5th century saw the withdrawal of Imperial Roman support from Britain , and the succeeding centuries , the Dark Ages , witnessed the emergence of a national identity and of kingdoms . The area which would become the Rhondda lay within Glywysing , an area that incorporated the modern area of Glamorgan , ruled by a dynasty founded by <unk> . This dynasty was later replaced by another founded by Meurig ap Tewdrig whose descendant Morgan ap Owain would give Glamorgan its Welsh name Morgannwg . With the coming of the Norman overlords after the 1066 Battle of Hastings , south @-@ east Wales was divided into five <unk> . The Rhondda lay within Penychen , a narrow strip running between modern day Glyn Neath and the coast between Cardiff and <unk> . Each cantref was further divided into commotes , with Penychen made up of five such commotes , one being Glynrhondda . 
 Relics of the Dark Ages are uncommon within the Glamorgan area and secular monuments are still rarer . The few sites discovered from this period have been located in the Bro , or lowlands , leaving historians to believe that the Blaenau were sparsely inhabited , maybe only visited seasonally by pastoralists . A few earthwork dykes are the only structural relics in the Rhondda area from this period and no carved stones or crosses exist to indicate the presence of a Christian shrine . During the Early Middle Ages communities were split between bondmen and freemen . The bondmen lived in small villages centred on a court or <unk> of the local ruler to whom they paid dues ; while the freemen , who enjoyed a higher status , lived in scattered homesteads . The most important village was the ' mayor 's settlement ' or <unk> . Maerdy in the Rhondda Fach has been identified as a <unk> , mainly on the strength of the name , though the village did not survive past the Middle Ages . The largest concentration of dwellings from this time have been discovered around Gelli and Ystrad in the Rhondda Fawr , mainly platform houses . 
 During the late 11th century , the Norman lord , Robert Fitzhamon entered Morgannwg in an attempt to gain control of the area , building many earth and timber castles in the lowlands . In the early 12th century the Norman expansion continued with castles being founded around Neath , <unk> and <unk> , while within the same period Bishop Urban established the Diocese of Llandaff under which Glynrhondda belonged to the large parish of Llantrisant . 
 Upon the death of William , Lord of Glamorgan , his extensive holdings were eventually granted to Gilbert de Clare in 1217 . The subjugation of Glamorgan , begun by Fitzhamon , was finally completed by the powerful De Clare family , but although Gilbert de Clare had now become one of the great Marcher Lords the territory was far from settled . Hywel ap Maredudd , lord of <unk> captured his cousin Morgan ap Cadwallon and annexed Glynrhondda in an attempt to reunify the commotes under a single native ruler . This conflict was unresolved by the time of De Clare 's death and the area fell under Royal control . 
 = = = = Settlements of Medieval Rhondda = = = = 
 Little evidence exists of settlements within the Rhondda during the Norman period . Unlike the communal dwellings of the Iron Age the remains of the Medieval buildings discovered in the area follow the pattern similar to modern farmsteads ; with separate holdings spaced out around the hillsides . The evidence of Medieval Welsh farmers comes from the remains of their buildings , with the foundations of platform houses having been discovered spaced out throughout both valleys . When the site of several platform houses at <unk> Common were excavated in the 1930s potsherds dating from the 13th @-@ 14th century were discovered . 
 The Rhondda also has the remains of two Medieval castles . The older is Castell Nos which is located at the head of the Rhondda Fach overlooking Maerdy . The only recorded evidence of Castle Nos is a mention by John Leland who stated that " <unk> Nose is but a high stony <unk> in the top of an <unk> " . The castle comprises a scarp and ditch forming a raised platform and on the north face is a ruined drystone building . Due to its location and form it does not appear to be of Norman design and is therefore thought to have been built by the Welsh as a border defence ; and must therefore date before 1247 when Richard de Clare seized Glynrhondda . The second castle is <unk> , located close to what is now Tonypandy town centre . Little remains of this motte @-@ and @-@ bailey earthwork defence as much was destroyed when Tonypandy railway station was built in the 19th century . <unk> is dated around the 12th century or early 13th century and has been misidentified by several historians , notably Owen Morgan in his book ' History of Pontypridd and Rhondda Valleys ' who recorded it as a <unk> sacred mound and Iolo Morgannwg who erroneously believed it to be the burial mound of king Rhys ap Tewdwr . 
 This earliest Christian monument located in the Rhondda is the shrine of St. Mary at Penrhys whose holy well was mentioned by <unk> ap Rhys in the 15th century . 
 = = = Post @-@ Medieval and pre @-@ industrial Rhondda : 1550 — 1850 = = = 
 In the mid @-@ 16th century the Rhondda , at that time known as the Vale of <unk> , belonged to the large but sparsely inhabited parish of Ystradyfodwg , ' St. Tyfodwg 's Vale ' . For administrative purposes the parish was divided into three hamlets : the Upper or Rhigos Hamlet to the north , the Middle or Penrhys Hamlet and the lower or Clydach Hamlet . Throughout the post @-@ Medieval period the Rhondda was a heavily wooded area and its main economic staple was the rearing of sheep , horses and cattle . The historian Rice Merrick , in describing the upland area of the Vale of Glamorgan , stated that there " was always great breeding of cattle , horses and sheep ; but in elder time <unk> grew but small store of corn , for in most places there the ground was not thereunto apt ... " While English cartographer John Speed described that the rearing of cattle was the " best means unto wealth that the Shire doth afford " . As there was no fair held in the Rhondda the animals would be taken to neighbouring fairs and markets at Neath , Merthyr , Llantrisant , <unk> and Llandaff . However , to be self @-@ supporting , the farmers of the area grew crops such as oats , corn and barley in small quantities . Crops were grown in the lower part of the Rhondda on narrow meadows adjoining the <unk> , though during the Napoleonic Wars scarce supplies forced the cultivation of the upland areas such as Carn @-@ y @-@ <unk> and Penrhys . Merrick would describe the diet of the upland inhabitants as consisting of " bread made of wheat ... and ale and bear " and over two hundred years later Benjamin Malkin showed how little the diet had changed when he wrote that the people still ate " Oatmeal bread , with a relish of miserable cheese ; and the beer , where they have any , is worse than none " . 
 In the first half of the 17th century a rising cost of consumable goods and a series of bad harvests brought about economic changes in Glamorgan . Those with enough wealth were able to seize on opportunities created by these unsettled conditions and set about enlarging and enclosing farm lands . The enclosure of freehold lands that began in the later Middle Ages now gained momentum and farms that were once owned by individual farmers were now owned by small groups of wealthy landowners . By the 19th century most of the Rhondda farms and estates were owned by absentee landlords , such as the Marquis of Bute , Earl of Dunraven , Crawshay Bailey of Merthyr and the De Winton family of Brecon . 
 = = = = Settlements of post @-@ Medieval Rhondda = = = = 
 Between the Acts of Union in the mid @-@ 16th century and the English Civil War in the mid @-@ 17th century , a period of great rebuilding took place in the Kingdom of England , of which Wales was now annexed , and this is reflected in the structures that were built within the Rhondda Valley . The fluctuating economic state of the late Tudor period resulted in farmers taking in more land , creating higher levels of surplus goods and therefore producing higher profits . This profit was reflected in the new farm houses built in the Rhondda and for the first time an emphasis on domestic comfort became apparent in the design of the dwellings . Many of the new farm buildings were simple structures consisting of two or three small rooms , though of a much sturdier and permanent quality than the Medieval platform houses . A popular style of building was the long @-@ house , a building which combined the house and cowshed into a single building . By 1840 , at least 160 farms existed in the Rhondda , but most were destroyed with the growth of the mining industry . Of the few surviving buildings , those of note include Tynewydd ( ' New House ' ) in Blaenrhondda , a 17th @-@ century house thought to have given its name to the neighbouring village of Tynewydd and <unk> in Ystrad dated around 1600 . 
 There were few industrial buildings pre @-@ 1850 ; those of note include the 17th @-@ century blast furnace at Pontygwaith which gave the village its name and the fulling mill established by Harri David in 1738 , which in turn gave its name to Tonypandy . Corn mills existed sparsely throughout the valleys as did early coal pits , with two early pits recorded as being opened in 1612 at Rhigos and Cwmparc ; though these would have mined from exposed rock in the hillside and not deep mined . 
 = = Industrial Rhondda 1850 — 1945 = = 
 = = = Industrial growth ( 1850 — 1914 ) = = = 
 The southern coalfield of Wales is the largest continuous coalfield in Britain , extending some 113 kilometres ( 70 mi ) from Pontypool in the east to St Brides Bay in the West , covering almost 2 @,@ 600 square kilometres ( 1 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . This coalfield took in the majority of Glamorgan , and the entirety of the Rhondda was situated within it . Although neighbouring areas such as Merthyr and Aberdare had already sunk coal mines , it was not until Walter Coffin initiated the Dinas Lower Colliery in 1812 that coal was first exported from the Rhondda Valleys on any sort of commercial scale . This coal was originally taken by packhorse , before the extension of Dr. Griffiths ' private tramline , to Pontypridd and then by the Glamorganshire Canal to the port at Cardiff . The lack of any transportation links was one of the main problems that curtailed exploitation of the Rhondda Valley coal fields , along with the belief that the coalfields beneath the valley were thought to be too deep for economic working . It was therefore seen as an expensive risk and deterred anyone looking for a quick profit . The exploration of the Rhondda was undertaken by the Bute Trustees , agents of the third Marquess of Bute , who not only owned large tracts of valley farmland but also possessed a large financial interest in the Cardiff Docks which would export the coal . The trustees sank the Bute Merthyr Colliery in October 1851 , at the top of the Rhondda Fawr in what would become Treherbert . The Bute Merthyr began producing coal in 1855 , the first working steam coal colliery in the Rhondda . 
 In conjunction with the sinking of the first colliery at the head of the Rhondda , the second issue of transportation was being tackled at the same time with the extension of the Taff Vale Railway ( TVR ) line . After Royal Assent was given to construct the railway in 1836 , the original line was laid from Cardiff to <unk> , and by 1841 a branch was opened to link Cardiff with Dinas via Pontypridd . This would allow easier and faster transportation for Walter Coffin 's Dinas mine , an unsurprising addition considering Coffin was a director of the TVR . In 1849 the TVR had extended into the Rhondda Fach and by 1856 the railway had reached the furthest areas of both the Fach and Fawr valleys at Maerdy and Treherbert . For the first time the Rhondda Valley was connected by a major transportation route to the rest of Wales and the exploitation of its coalfields could begin . 
 The TVR line would dominate the transportation of coal throughout the Rhondda 's industrial history , and its monopoly was a point of contention , as with no rivals the colliery owners could not negotiate for haulage rates . Several attempts were made to break the monopoly including the opening of the Rhondda and Swansea Bay Railway , between 1885 and 1895 , which linked Blaenrhondda at the head of the Rhondda Fawr to the Prince of Wales Dock . To achieve this rail link the Rhondda Tunnel was constructed through Mynydd <unk> to <unk> ; at the time the longest railway tunnel in Wales . 
 Initially the shallower pits at Aberdare proved a bigger attraction for prospective mine owners , but once Aberdare became fully worked by the 1860s the Rhondda saw a rapid growth in development . During the 1860s @-@ 1870s 20 collieries opened in the Rhondda Valleys with the leading <unk> in the Rhondda Fach being David Davis of Aberdare , and David Davies in the Rhondda Fawr . In 1865 the output of coal from the Rhondda Valley was roughly one quarter of that of Aberdare ; ten years later the Rhondda was producing over two million tons , more than the Aberdare Valleys . These figures would later be dwarfed by the massive excavation rates seen in the last quarter of the 19th century up to the beginning of the First World War . In 1913 it was recorded that the Rhondda Valley 's output was 9 @.@ 6 million tons . 
 By 1893 there were more than 75 collieries within the Rhondda Valleys and although most were initially owned by a small group of private individuals this trend changed towards the start of the 20th century as companies began buying up the existing collieries . The widespread adoption of limited liability status began a trend towards a concentration of ownership , reducing some of the economic risks involved in <unk> : unstable coal prices , inflated acquisitions , geological difficulties , and large scale accidents . The emerging companies were formed by the individuals and families who sank the original collieries ; but by the start of the 20th century , they were no more than principal shareholders . These companies included the Davies 's Ocean Coal Company , Archibald Hood 's Glamorgan Coal Company and David Davis & Son . 
 = = = Population growth in the Industrial period = = = 
 During the early to mid @-@ 19th century the Rhondda Valleys were inhabited by small farming settlements . In 1841 the parish of Ystradyfodwg , which would later constitute most of the Rhondda Borough , was recorded as having a population of less than a thousand inhabitants . With the discovery of massive deposits of high quality , accessible coal during the mid @-@ 19th century the Rhondda Valleys experienced a large influx of financial immigrants . The first immigrants came to the lower Rhondda villages of Dinas , <unk> and Cymmer . Special sinkers came from <unk> , while the first miners were from Penderyn , <unk> and the neighbouring areas of Llantrisant and <unk> . The 1851 Census lists apprenticed paupers from Temple Cloud in Somerset , some of the earliest English immigrants . From a mere 951 in 1851 , the population of Ystradyfodwg parish grew to 16 @,@ 914 in 1871 and by 1901 the Rhondda Urban District had a population of 113 @,@ 735 . As more and more coal mines were sunk the population grew to fill the jobs needed to extract the coal . In the 1860s and 1870s the majority came from the neighbouring Welsh counties , but with the improving rail transportation and cheaper transport immigrants came from further afield . The 1890s recorded workers from the South West , places such as Gloucester and Devon , by the 1900s people came from North Wales , the lead mining area of Anglesey and the depressed slate @-@ quarrying villages of Bethesda , Ffestiniog and Dinorwig . Although there are records of Scottish workers , mainly centered on Archibald Hood 's <unk> mines , there were only small numbers of Irish , less than 1 @,@ 000 by 1911 . The low immigration levels of Irish workers is often blamed on the forcible ejection of the Irish who lived in Treherbert during three days of rioting in 1857 . The population of the valleys peaked in 1924 at over 167 @,@ 900 inhabitants . 
 The mass influx of immigrants during this period were almost totally English and Welsh ; the most notable exception being an immigrant nationality from outside the United Kingdom , the Italians . In the late 19th century a group of Italian immigrants , originally from the northern area of Italy , centred on the town of Bardi , were forced out of London by an over @-@ saturation of the market . These immigrants set up a network of cafés , ice cream parlours and fish & chip shops throughout South Wales and these businesses became iconic landmarks in the villages they served and they and subsequent generations became Welsh Italians . Particular to the Rhondda , the shops ran by the Italian immigrants , were known as ' <unk> ' , believed to have been named after Angelo <unk> who opened the first café in the Rhondda in the early 1890s . By the early 21st century several of the original <unk> were still open for business in the Rhondda . 
 = = = The decline of coal and economic emigration ( 1914 @-@ 1944 ) = = = 
 At the start of the First World War , the economic prospects in South Wales were good . Although production fell after the 1913 high , demand was still strong enough to push the coalfields to their limit . In February 1917 coal mining came under government control and demand increased as the war intensified , ensuring a market for sufficient supplies of coal . After the war the picture began to change . Initially the British coal industry was buoyed by a series of fortuitous economic events , such as the American coal miners ' strike , and by 1924 , unemployment for miners was below the national average . But the belief that the mining industry would experience a permanent demand for coal was shattered by the Depression , and the Rhondda experienced a massive upturn in unemployment . The situation worsened in 1926 when , in response to <unk> reducing pay and lengthening working hours of miners , the TUC called a general strike in defence of the miners who had been locked out following A.J. Cook 's call ' not a penny off the pay , not a minute on the day ' . The TUC called off the strike just nine days later , without resolving the miners ' cut in wages . The miners disagreed and stayed on strike for a further seven months until they were starved into surrendering . The Rhondda saw many schemes set up by miners to aid their plight , such as soup kitchens and fêtes and ' joy ' days to support them ; while in Maerdy the local miners set up a rationing system . By the time the miners returned to work there was little desire for further action through strikes , which saw a decline in the popularity of ' The Fed ' and greater emphasis on solving problems through political and parliamentary means . 
 With the advent of the Great Depression , employment within the Rhondda Valleys continued to fall . This in turn led to a decline in public and social services , as people struggled to pay rates and rents . One of the outcomes of a lack of funds was a fall in health provisions , which in Rhondda lead to a lack of medical and nursing staff , a failure to provide adequate sewage works and a rise in deaths from tuberculosis . By 1932 the long @-@ term unemployment figure in the Rhondda was recorded at 63 % , and in Ferndale the unemployment figure for adult males rose as high as 72 @.@ 85 % . 
 With little other employment available in the Rhondda the only solution appeared to be emigration . Between 1924 and 1939 , 50 @,@ 000 people left the Rhondda . During this time life was difficult for communities built solely around a singular industry , especially as most families were on a single wage . 
 The start of the Second World War saw a complete turnaround in the employment figures , and by 1944 unemployment figures in the Rhondda ranged from 1 % in Treorchy to 3 @.@ 7 % at Tonypandy . 
 = = = Mining disasters = = = 
 As with any heavy industry , the possibility of serious injury or death was an everyday risk for the mine workers of the Rhondda Valley . The most notorious form of colliery disaster was the gas explosion , caused by either a buildup of methane gas or coal dust . As the mines became deeper and ventilation become more difficult to control the risk increased . The worst single incident in the Rhondda was the 1867 Ferndale disaster in which an explosion saw the loss of 178 lives . However , the major disasters only accounted for roughly 20 % of overall fatalities , with individual accidents accounting for the bulk of deaths . The list below shows mining disasters which saw the loss of five or more lives during a single incident . 
 = = Modern Rhondda 1945 @-@ present = = 
 The coal mining industry of the Rhondda was artificially buoyed throughout the war years , though there were expectations of a return to the pre @-@ 1939 industrial collapse after the end of the Second World War . There was a sense of salvation when the government announced the nationalisation of the British <unk> in 1947 ; but the following decades saw a continual reduction in the output from the Rhondda mines . From 15 @,@ 000 miners in 1947 , Rhondda had just a single pit within the valleys producing coal in 1984 , located at Maerdy . The decline in the mining of coal after World War II was a country wide issue , but South Wales and Rhondda were affected to a higher degree than other areas of Britain . Oil had superseded coal as the fuel of choice in many industries and there was political pressure influencing the supply of oil . Of the few industries that were still reliant on coal , the demand was for quality coals , especially coking coal which was required by the steel industry . Fifty percent of Glamorgan coal was now supplied to steelworks , with the second biggest market being domestic heating , which the ' smokeless ' coal of the Rhondda became once again fashionable after the publication of the Clean Air Act . These two markets now controlled the fate of the mines in the Rhondda , and as demand fell from both sectors the knock @-@ on effect on the mining industry was further contraction . In addition exports to other areas of Europe , traditionally France , Italy and the Low Countries , experienced a massive decline ; from 33 per cent around the start of the 20th century to roughly 5 per cent by 1980 . 
 The other major factors in the decline of coal were related to the massive under @-@ investment in Rhondda mines over the past decades . Most of the mines in the valleys were sunk between the 1850s and 1880s , which , as a consequence , meant they were far smaller than most modern mines . The Rhondda mines were in comparison antiquated , with methods of ventilation , coal @-@ preparation and power supply all of a poor standard . In 1945 the British coal industry cut 72 per cent of their output mechanically , whereas in South Wales the figure was just 22 per cent . The only way to ensure the financial survival of the mines in the valleys was massive investment from the NCB , but the ' Plan for Coal ' paper drawn up in 1950 was overly optimistic in the future demand for coal , which was drastically reduced following an industrial recession in 1956 and an increased availability of oil . 
 The British government and Welsh employment bodies funded and subsidized external businesses to locate new ventures within the valleys to replace the vanishing heavy industries . The first attempt to bring in business not connected to the coal mining industry began in the 1920s when David Jones , Town Clerk to the Rhondda Urban Council , gained government support in attracting outside businesses to the area . Companies included Alfred <unk> 's clothing factory , Messers Jacob Beatus , manufacturing cardboard boxes and Electrical and Musical Industries Ltd . Following the end of the Second World War , 23 companies were set up in the Rhondda Valleys , eighteen of them sponsored by the Board of Trade . Most companies had periods of growth and collapse , notably Thorn EMI in the 1970s and Burberry in the 2000s . 
 The Rhondda Heritage Park , a museum commemorating Rhondda 's industrial past , is situated just south of Porth in the former Lewis Merthyr Colliery in the small former mining village of <unk> . 
 = = Religion = = 
 The commote of Glynrhondda was coterminous with the earlier parish of Ystradyfodwg , but little is known of the Celtic saint Tyfodwg , or <unk> after whom the parish is named . Saint Tyfodwg is thought to have existed around 600 AD , and although the parish bears his name there are now no religious monuments or places of worship named after him within the Rhondda boundaries . There are two churches in South Wales outside the area named after the saint ; Y Tre Sant in Llantrisant and Saint Tyfodwg ’ s in Ogmore Vale . 
 The earliest known religious monument is the Catholic holy well in Penrhys first mentioned in the 15th century , though it may have been a place of pagan worship before this . This pilgrimage site was identified as a ' manor ' belonging to the Cistercian Abbey of Llantarnam and was seen as one of the most important religious sites in Wales , because of its Marian shrine . This holy site was the main reason people would pass through the commote ; it was even thought to be the main reason why the first bridges were built over the River Rhondda . 
 During the Middle Ages the Parish church of Ystradyfodwg near the bank of the River Rhondda served the parishioners of the Rhondda Fawr , while the families of the Rhondda Fach attended Llanwynno church . The inhabitants of the lower Rhondda , in the vicinity of Porth and Dinas , would need to trek to Llantrisant to hear a service . 
 Despite the importance of the Anglican Church in the lives of the parishioners the growing strength of Nonconformity would make itself felt in the 18th century . In 1738 the Reverend Henry Davies formed the Independent Cause in Cymmer and five years later a ‘ ' Ty <unk> ’ ’ or meeting house was opened there . Although attracting families from as far away as Merthyr and the parish of <unk> , there were no other Nonconformist Causes until David Williams began preaching in the Rhondda in 1784 . In 1785 six people were baptised in the river near Melin @-@ yr @-@ Om and in 1786 ‘ ' Ynysfach ’ ’ was opened in Ystrad and was “ a new house for religious services ” . This was the first Baptist chapel in the Rhondda and later became known as Nebo , Ystrad Rhondda . Cymmer and Ynysfach chapel would be the forerunners in a new religious movement in the valley for the next 150 years . In the early 19th century there were only three places of worship in the Rhondda ; the parish church ( now dedicated to St. John the Baptist ) , Cymmer and Ynysfach chapels . This changed rapidly after 1855 as the coal mining industry brought in an influx of population and by 1905 there were 151 chapels in the valley . 
 Chapel life was central to valley life throughout the late 19th and early 20th centuries , but as with many communities throughout Britain , the post wars saw a decline in regular membership . To some extent , as the population declined the number of places of worship also declined , but this was exacerbated in the Rhondda by a process of linguistic change which saw a severe decline in the number of Welsh speakers . As a result , it was the Welsh language chapels , in particular , that saw a severe drop in membership from the 1950s , and the next half @-@ century saw many chapels close . By 1990 the Rhondda had less than 50 places of worship , and many of the buildings had been demolished . 
 = = Political activism = = 
 Political activism in the Rhondda has a deep link with trade unions and the socialist movement but was initially slow to develop . In the 1870s the Amalgamated Association of Miners won support , but was destroyed by employer hostility . The Cambrian Miners ’ Association was more successful and the creation of the South Wales Miners ' Federation after the 1898 coal strike , gave the South Wales miners a reputation for militancy , in which the Rhondda Valley played its part . As part of the Redistribution Act of 1885 the Rhondda was granted its first seat in Parliament which was won by the moderate trade union leader William Abraham , who was notably the only working @-@ class member elected in Wales . Socialism and syndicalism ideals grew throughout the 20th century and industrial struggle reached a crescendo in the 1910 @-@ 11 Tonypandy Riots . A year later Tonypandy saw the publication of Noah Ablett ’ s pamphlet The Miners ' Next Step . Tonypandy was at the centre of further public disorder when , on 11 June 1936 at <unk> Field , a large group of people gathered to confront the open @-@ air address by Tommy Moran , propaganda officer of the British Union of Fascists . The crowd , recorded as between 2 @,@ 000 and 6 @,@ 000 strong , turned violent and police were forced to protect Moran 's Blackshirt bodyguard . Seven local people were arrested . 
 The Rhondda also has a strong history of communist sympathy , with the Rhondda Socialist Society being a key element in the coalition that founded the Communist Party of Great Britain . By 1936 there were seven Communists on the Rhondda Urban District Council and was publishing its own Communist newspaper The Vanguard . In the 1930s Maerdy became such a hotspot of Communist support it was known as Little Moscow producing left wing activists such as Merthyr born Arthur Horner and Marxist writer Lewis Jones . The Rhondda miners were also active in socialist activities outside the valleys . In the 1920s and 1930s the Rhondda and the surrounding valleys provided the principal support of some of the largest hunger marches , while in 1936 more Rhondda Federation members were serving in Spain as part of the International Brigades than the total number of volunteers from all the English coalfields . 
 In 1979 , Rhondda councillor Annie Powell became Wales ' only communist mayor . 
 = = Culture and recreation = = 
 = = = Role of women = = = 
 With an economy fundamentally dependent upon a single industry , there was a scarcity of paid employment for women in Rhondda 's <unk> heyday . The Encyclopaedia of Wales notes that the image of the Welsh Mam , a wife and mother constantly at home and exalted as the queen of the household , was essentially a Rhondda creation . However the Rhondda did produce the suffragette and social reformer Elizabeth Andrews , one of only nine women among a list of a hundred greatest Welsh heroes chosen by ballot in 2004 . 
 = = = Sport = = = 
 Social amenities were rudimentary even before the formation of the Rhondda Urban District Council in 1897 . Due to the geographic layout of the valleys , land was a scarce resource , and therefore leisure activities that took up little space , time and money were sought . This saw the popularity of activities such as greyhound races , cockfighting , open air handball courts ( often attached to a public house ) , boxing booths , foot racing and rugby union . 
 Rugby union 
 During the mid @-@ 19th century the influx of immigrants from the older mining towns , such as Aberdare and Merthyr , brought with them the game of rugby . At Treherbert it took a five @-@ month lockout in 1875 to see the game establish itself at the various collieries where the Amalgamated Association of Miners held their meetings . In 1877 Penygraig Rugby Football Club was formed , followed by Treherbert in 1879 , Ferndale in 1882 , Treorchy in 1886 and Tylorstown in 1903 . In the late 19th and early 20th century , the ' Rhondda forward ' was a key player in many Wales teams . The heavy industrial worker was a prime aggressive attack figure in early Welsh packs , typified by the likes of Treherbert 's Dai ' <unk> ' ( bull ) Jones who at 6 @-@ foot 1 inch ( 185 @.@ 5 cm ) and 16 stone ( 100 kg ) in weight was seen as an animal of a man . 
 Due to the lack of playing fields in the valleys , many rugby teams would share grounds , travel every week to away grounds or even play on inappropriate ( e.g. sloping ) pitches . The valley clubs also had no clubhouses , with most teams meeting , and changing , in the closest local public house . Many more clubs , built around colliery and pub teams , appeared and disbanded but many of the clubs survive to this day . 
 Football 
 Due to the dominance of rugby union there have been few football teams of note in the history of the Rhondda Valleys . Several teams were formed around the end of the 19th century , but most folded during the depression , including Cwmparc F.C. in 1926 and Mid @-@ Rhondda in 1928 . The most successful club from the area is Ton Pentre F.C .. 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The temperance movement , which had been absorbed into the moralistic system of the Nonconformist chapels , caused a shift in social attitudes in the mid- to late @-@ 19th- and early @-@ 20th century Rhondda . Alcohol was looked down upon and so were the increasingly violent sports such as rugby , so young men looked for different and more acceptable pastimes . Voice choirs were a natural progression from chapel society , and brass bands would eventually gain acceptance by the movement . 
 Male voice choirs 
 A phenomenon of Welsh industrial communities was the appearance of male voice choirs , believed to have been formed from glee clubs . The Rhondda produced several choirs of note , including the Rhondda Glee Society , who represented Wales at the World Fair eisteddfod . The rival Treorchy Male Voice Choir also enjoyed considerable success at eisteddfodau and in 1895 sang before Queen Victoria . Many choirs still exist today including the Cambrian Male voice choir , situated in Tonypandy . 
 Brass bands 
 In the mid @-@ 19th century brass bands had a poor relationship with the Nonconformist chapels , mainly due to the heavy social drinking that came hand in hand with being a member of a band . This changed towards the end of the 19th century , and as well as becoming more respectable , many bands had actually joined the temperance movement . Two of the more well known brass bands from the Rhondda both started as temperance bands . The more famous , Cory Band from Ton Pentre , started life as Ton Temperance in 1884 ; while local rivals The Parc and Dare Band were the Cwmparc Drum and Fife Temperance Band . 
 As the temperance movement faded the bands found new benefactors in the colliery owners , and many bands took on the names of specific collieries . A memorable image of the connection between the collieries and brass bands came in 1985 , when the Maerdy miners were filmed returning to work after the miners ' strike , marching behind the village band . 
 = = = Culture and nationality = = = 
 Language 
 For the majority of its history the area now recognised as the Rhondda Valley was an exclusively Welsh speaking area . It was only in the early 20th century that English began to supplant Welsh as the first language of social intercourse . In 1803 , English historian Benjamin Heath Malkin mentioned while travelling through Ystradyfodwg , that he had only met one person with whom he could talk , and then with the help of an interpreter . This situation was repeated with John George Wood , who on his visit to the area complained of the awkwardness of understanding the particular dialects and idioms used by the native speakers , which were on times difficult for other Welsh speakers to understand . This dialect was once called ' <unk> <unk> y <unk> ' ( ' the dialect of the men of <unk> ' ) . 
 As the industrialisation of the valleys began there was little shift in the use of Welsh as a first language . Initial immigrants were Welsh and it was not until the 1900s that English workers began settling in any great numbers , but it wasn 't these new workers who changed the language ; the erosion of Welsh had already begun in the 1860s in the school classrooms . The educational philosophy accepted by schoolmasters and governmental administrators was that English was the language of scholars , and that Welsh was a barrier to moral and commercial prosperity . In 1901 35 @.@ 4 % of Rhondda workers spoke only English but by 1911 this had risen to 43 @.@ 1 % , while Welsh speaking <unk> had dropped from 11 @.@ 4 % to 4 @.@ 4 % in the same period . 
 The true Anglicization of the Rhondda Valleys took place from 1900 to 1950 . Improved transport and communications facilitated the spread of new cultural influences , along with dealings with outside companies with no understanding of Welsh , trade union meetings held in English , the coming of radio , cinema and then television and cheap English newspapers and paperback books ; all were factors in the absorption of the English language . 
 Cadwgan Circle 
 Though the population of the Rhondda was embracing English as its first language , during the 1940s a literary and intellectual movement formed in the Rhondda that would produce an influential group of Welsh language writers . Formed during the Second World War by Egyptologist J. Gwyn Griffiths and his German wife <unk> Bosse @-@ Griffiths , the group was known as the Cadwgan Circle ( <unk> Cadwgan ) , and met at the Griffiths ' house in Pentre . The Welsh writers who made up the movement included Pennar Davies , Rhydwen Williams , James Kitchener Davies and Gareth Alban Davies . 
 National Eisteddfod 
 The Rhondda has hosted the National Eisteddfod on only one occasion , in 1928 at Treorchy . The Gorsedd stones that were placed to commemorate the event still stand on the <unk> hillside overlooking Treorchy and Cwmparc . In 1947 Treorchy held the Urdd National Eisteddfod , the Eisteddfod for children and young adults . 
 Communal activity 
 Rhondda had a strong tradition of communal activity , exemplified by workmen 's halls , miners ' institutes and trade unions . Miners began to contribute to the building and running of institutes - such as the Parc and Dare Hall in Treorchy - from the 1890s onwards , and they were centres of both entertainment and self @-@ improvement with billiards halls , libraries and reading rooms . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 In 1884 the Rhondda Valley was served by local newspaper the Rhondda Chronicle which became the Rhondda Gazette and General Advertiser of the Rhondda Fach and Ogmore Valleys in 1891 . In 1899 , the Rhondda Valley was served by the Pontypridd and Rhondda Weekly Post while Rhondda Post was also in circulation in 1898 . 
 The Rhondda Leader one of the more familiar local papers of the region , was first published in 1899 and nine years later became the Rhondda Leader , Maesteg , <unk> and Ogmore Telegraph . The Porth Gazette was published from 1900 to 1944 and during that period there was a newspaper called the Rhondda Socialist . Rhondda Gazette was in circulation from 1913 to 1919 while the Rhondda Clarion was available in the late 1930s . 
 The Porth Gazette and Rhondda Leader was published from 1944 to 1967 while also published in Pontypridd during those years was the Rhondda Fach Leader and Gazette . In more recent years the Rhondda Leader and Pontypridd & Llantrisant Observer combined before the Rhondda Leader became a separate edition once more . 
 In August 1952 the BBC transmitter at Wenvoe began broadcasting allowing the Rhondda to receive television pictures for the first time . This was followed in January 1958 with Commercial Television provided by Television Wales and the West ( <unk> ) , giving the viewers of the Rhondda a choice of two television channels . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Due to the geological layout of the Rhondda Valley , transport links are fairly restrictive . The original road layout followed the valleys with few connections between them . In the 1920s , a major unemployment relief programme for out of work miners was created to build mountain roads connecting communities together . The mountain roads had a lasting effect and transformed the valleys from being dead @-@ end communities . 
 Two main roads service the area , the <unk> runs through the Rhondda Fawr and the <unk> services the Rhondda Fach . The <unk> starts at Pontypridd runs through Porth before ending at Treorchy , where it joins the <unk> to <unk> . The <unk> begins outside Rhondda at <unk> , heading north through Porth and through the Rhondda Fach to Maerdy , where the road eventually links up with the <unk> at Aberdare . Two other A roads service the area ; the <unk> is a relief road , known as the Tonypandy Bypass and the other is the <unk> which links Treorchy to the Ogmore Vale before reaching Bridgend . 
 There is a single rail link to the Rhondda , the Rhondda Line , based around the old Taff Vale Railway which serviced both the Rhondda Fach and Rhondda Fawr . The Rhondda Line runs through the Rhondda Fawr , linking Rhondda to Cardiff Central . The railway stations that once populated the Rhondda Fach were all closed after the Beeching Axe . The railway line serves ten Rhondda stations with the villages not directly linked connected through bus services . 
 British Rail reopened some of the closed stations such as Ystrad Rhondda railway station in 1986 . 
 = = Residents of note = = 
 See also Category : People from Rhondda 
 Due to the scarcity of inhabitants in the Rhondda prior to industrialisation , there are few residents of note before the valleys became a coal mining area . The earliest individuals to come to the fore were linked with the coal industry and the people ; physical men who found a way out of the Rhondda through sport ; charismatic orators who led the miners through unions or political and religious leaders who tended to the deeply religious chapel going public . 
 = = = Sport = = = 
 The two main sports with which the Rhondda appeared to produce quality participants were rugby union and boxing . One of the first true rugby stars to come from the Rhondda was Willie Llewellyn , who not only gained 20 caps for Wales scoring 48 points , but was also the first Rhondda born member of the British Lions . Such was Llewellyn 's fame that during the Tonypandy Riots , his pharmacy was left unscathed by the crowds due to his past sporting duties . Many players came through the Rhondda to gain international duty , and after the split between amateur rugby union and the professional Northern League , many were also tempted to the North of England to earn a wage for their abilities . Amongst the new league players was Jack <unk> , <unk> born , but living in the Rhondda when he ' Went North ' , eventually becoming the world 's first dual @-@ code international rugby player . 
 The most famous rugby player from the Rhondda of the later half of the 20th century is Cliff Morgan . Morgan was born in <unk> , and gained 29 caps for Wales , four for the British Lions and was one of the inaugural inductees of the International Rugby Hall of Fame . Another notable player is Billy Cleaver from Treorchy , a member of the 1950 Grand Slam winning team . 
 During the 20th century The Rhondda also supplied a steady stream of championship boxers . Percy Jones was not only the first World Champion from the Rhondda , but was the first Welshman to hold a World Title when he won the Flyweight belt in 1914 . After Jones came the Rhondda 's most notable boxer , Jimmy Wilde also known as the " Mighty Atom " , who took the IBU world flyweight title in 1916 . British Champions from the valleys include Tommy Farr who held the British and Empire heavyweight belt and <unk> Edwards who took the British featherweight title . 
 Although association football was not as popular as rugby in the Rhondda in the early 20th century , after the 1920s several notable players had emerged from the area . Two of the most important players both came from the village of Ton Pentre ; Jimmy Murphy was capped 15 times for Wales , and in 1958 managed both the Welsh national team and Manchester United . Roy Paul , also from Ton Pentre , led Manchester City to two successive FA Cup finals in 1955 and 1956 and gained 33 Welsh caps . Alan Curtis , who was best known for representing Swansea City and Cardiff City , came from the neighbouring village of Pentre , and in an 11 @-@ year international career won 35 caps for Wales scoring 6 goals . 
 The Rhondda Valleys have also produced two world class darts players . In 1975 Alan Evans from Ferndale won the <unk> World Masters , a feat repeated in 1994 by Richie Burnett from Cwmparc . Burnett surpassed Evans when he also became BDO World Darts Champion winning the tournament in 1995 . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 Despite neither being born in the Rhondda , the two most notable political figures to emerge from the area are William Abraham , known as Mabon , and George Thomas , Viscount Tonypandy . Abraham , best known as a trade unionist was the first Member of Parliament of the Rhondda and the leader of the South Wales Miners ' Federation . A strong negotiator in the early years of valleys ' unionism , as a moderate he lost ground to more radical leaders in his later years . Thomas was the born in Port Talbot but raised in Trealaw near Tonypandy . He was a Member of Parliament for Cardiff for 38 years and Speaker of the House of Commons ( 1976 – 1983 ) . On his retirement from politics he was made Viscount Tonypandy . 
 Leanne Wood , current leader of Plaid Cymru is from the Rhondda . 
 = = = Film and television = = = 
 The most well known actors to have been born in the Rhondda are Sir Stanley Baker and brothers Donald and Glyn Houston . Baker was born in Ferndale and starred in films such as the The Cruel Sea ( 1953 ) and Richard III ( 1955 ) , though it was as actor / producer of the 1964 film Zulu that his legacy endures . The Houston brothers were both born in Tonypandy , with Donald gaining better success as a film actor , with memorable roles in The Blue Lagoon ( 1949 ) and Ealing 's Dance Hall ( 1950 ) . Glyn Houston acted primarily in British B @-@ Movies , and was better known as a television actor . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 Of the Cadwgan Circle , the most notable of their number is Rhydwen Williams , the winner of the Eisteddfod Crown on two occasions who used the landscape of the industrial valleys as a basis for much of his work . Writing in the English language Peter George was born in Treorchy and is best known as the Oscar nominated screenwriter of Dr. Strangelove , based on his book Red Alert . Reflecting the lives of the residents of the Rhondda , both Gwyn Thomas and Ron Berry brought a realism to the industrial valleys which was missing in the more rose @-@ tinted writings of Richard Llewellyn . 
 = = = Visual arts = = = 
 The Rhondda Valleys has not produced as notable a group of visual artists as it has writers , though in the 1950s a small group of students , brought together through a daily commute by train to the Cardiff College of Art , came to prominence and are known as the ' Rhondda Group ' . Although they did not set up a school or have a manifesto ; the group , which included Charles Burton , Ceri Barclay , Glyn Morgan , Thomas Hughes , Gwyn Evans , Nigel Flower , David Mainwaring , Ernest <unk> and Robert Thomas , were an important artistic movement in 20th @-@ century Welsh art . The most notable members of the group include Ernest <unk> , a painter from Ystrad , whose expressionist work was deeply rooted in the juxtaposition of the industrialised buildings of the valleys set against the green hills that surround them . Also from the Rhondda Fawr was sculptor Robert Thomas ; born in Cwmparc , his heavy cast statues have become icons of contemporary Wales , with five of his statues publicly displayed in the centre of Cardiff . 
 = = = Science and social science = = = 
 In sciences and social sciences the Rhondda has provided important academics within the aspects of Wales and on the World stage . Donald Davies , born in Treorchy in 1924 was the co @-@ inventor of packet switching , a process which enabled the exchange of information between computers , a feature which enabled the Internet . 
 In the social sciences , the Rhondda has produced Welsh historian John Davies , an important voice on Welsh affairs , who was one of the most recognised faces and voices of 21st century Welsh history , and was also one of the main authors of The Welsh Academy Encyclopaedia of Wales . The Rhondda has also produced J. Gwyn Griffiths , an eminent Egyptologist , who was also a member of the Cadwgan Circle . Griffiths and his wife <unk> Bosse @-@ Griffiths were influential writers and curators in the history of Egyptian lore . 
 = Escherichia coli = 
 Escherichia coli ( / <unk> <unk> / ; also known as E. coli ) is a gram @-@ negative , facultatively anaerobic , rod @-@ shaped bacterium of the genus Escherichia that is commonly found in the lower intestine of warm @-@ blooded organisms ( endotherms ) . Most E. coli strains are harmless , but some serotypes can cause serious food poisoning in their hosts , and are occasionally responsible for product recalls due to food contamination . The harmless strains are part of the normal flora of the gut , and can benefit their hosts by producing vitamin K2 , and preventing colonization of the intestine with pathogenic bacteria . E. coli is expelled into the environment within fecal matter . The bacterium grows massively in fresh fecal matter under aerobic conditions for 3 days , but its numbers decline slowly afterwards . 
 E. coli and other facultative anaerobes constitute about 0 @.@ 1 % of gut flora , and fecal – oral transmission is the major route through which pathogenic strains of the bacterium cause disease . Cells are able to survive outside the body for a limited amount of time , which makes them potential indicator organisms to test environmental samples for fecal contamination . A growing body of research , though , has examined environmentally persistent E. coli which can survive for extended periods outside of a host . 
 The bacterium can be grown and cultured easily and inexpensively in a laboratory setting , and has been intensively investigated for over 60 years . E. coli is a <unk> whose chemically defined medium must include a source of carbon and energy . Organic growth factors included in chemically defined medium used to grow E. coli includes glucose , ammonium phosphate , mono basic , sodium chloride , magnesium sulfate , potassium phosphate , <unk> , and water . The exact chemical composition is known for media that is considered chemically defined medium . E. coli is the most widely studied prokaryotic model organism , and an important species in the fields of biotechnology and microbiology , where it has served as the host organism for the majority of work with recombinant DNA . Under favorable conditions , it takes only 20 minutes to reproduce . 
 = = Biology and biochemistry = = 
 = = = Type and morphology = = = 
 E. coli is a gram @-@ negative , facultative anaerobic ( that makes ATP by aerobic respiration if oxygen is present , but is capable of switching to fermentation or anaerobic respiration if oxygen is absent ) and <unk> bacterium . Cells are typically rod @-@ shaped , and are about 2 @.@ 0 micrometers ( μm ) long and 0 @.@ 25 – 1 @.@ 0 μm in diameter , with a cell volume of 0 @.@ 6 – 0 @.@ 7 <unk> . 
 E. coli stains gram @-@ negative because its cell wall is composed of a thin peptidoglycan layer and an outer membrane . During the staining process , E. coli picks up the color of the <unk> <unk> and stains pink . The outer membrane surrounding the cell wall provides a barrier to certain antibiotics such that E. coli is not damaged by penicillin . 
 Strains that possess flagella are motile . The flagella have a peritrichous arrangement . 
 = = = Metabolism = = = 
 E. coli can live on a wide variety of substrates and uses mixed @-@ acid fermentation in anaerobic conditions , producing lactate , succinate , ethanol , acetate , and carbon dioxide . Since many pathways in mixed @-@ acid fermentation produce hydrogen gas , these pathways require the levels of hydrogen to be low , as is the case when E. coli lives together with hydrogen @-@ consuming organisms , such as methanogens or sulphate @-@ reducing bacteria . 
 = = = Culture growth = = = 
 Optimum growth of E. coli occurs at 37 ° C ( 98 @.@ 6 ° F ) , but some laboratory strains can multiply at temperatures of up to 49 ° C ( 120 @.@ 2 ° F ) . Growth can be driven by aerobic or anaerobic respiration , using a large variety of redox pairs , including the oxidation of <unk> acid , formic acid , hydrogen , and amino acids , and the reduction of substrates such as oxygen , nitrate , fumarate , dimethyl sulfoxide , and <unk> N @-@ oxide . E. coli is classified as a facultative <unk> . It uses oxygen when it is present and available . It can however , continue to grow in the absence of oxygen using fermentation or anaerobic respiration . The ability to be able to continue growing in the absence of oxygen is an advantage to bacteria because their survival is increased in environments where water predominates . 
 = = = Cell cycle = = = 
 The bacterial cell cycle is divided into three stages . The B period occurs between the completion of cell division and the beginning of DNA replication . The C period encompasses the time it takes to replicate the chromosomal DNA . The D period refers to the stage between the conclusion of DNA replication and the end of cell division . The doubling rate of E. coli is higher when more nutrients are available . However , the length of the C and D periods do not change , even when the doubling time becomes less than the sum of the C and D periods . At the fastest growth rates , replication begins before the previous round of replication has completed , resulting in multiple replication forks along the DNA and overlapping cell cycles . 
 Unlike eukaryotes , prokaryotes do not rely upon either changes in gene expression or changes in protein synthesis to control the cell cycle . This probably explains why they do not have similar proteins to those used by eukaryotes to control their cell cycle , such as <unk> . This has led to research on what the control mechanism is in prokaryotes . Recent evidence suggests that it may be <unk> or lipid @-@ based . 
 = = = Genetic adaptation = = = 
 E. coli and related bacteria possess the ability to transfer DNA via bacterial conjugation or transduction , which allows genetic material to spread horizontally through an existing population . The process of transduction , which uses the bacterial virus called a bacteriophage , is where the spread of the gene encoding for the Shiga toxin from the Shigella bacteria to E. coli helped produce E. coli O157 : H7 , the Shiga toxin producing strain of E. coli . 
 = = Diversity = = 
 Escherichia coli encompasses an enormous population of bacteria that exhibit a very high degree of both genetic and phenotypic diversity . Genome sequencing of a large number of isolates of E. coli and related bacteria shows that a taxonomic reclassification would be desirable . However , this has not been done , largely due to its medical importance , and E. coli remains one of the most diverse bacterial species : only 20 % of the genes in a typical E. coli genome is shared among all strains . 
 In fact , from the evolutionary point of view , the members of genus Shigella ( S. <unk> , S. <unk> , S. <unk> , and S. <unk> ) should be classified as E. coli strains , a phenomenon termed taxa in disguise . Similarly , other strains of E. coli ( e.g. the K @-@ 12 strain commonly used in recombinant DNA work ) are sufficiently different that they would merit reclassification . 
 A strain is a subgroup within the species that has unique characteristics that distinguish it from other strains . These differences are often detectable only at the molecular level ; however , they may result in changes to the physiology or lifecycle of the bacterium . For example , a strain may gain pathogenic capacity , the ability to use a unique carbon source , the ability to take upon a particular ecological niche , or the ability to resist antimicrobial agents . Different strains of E. coli are often host @-@ specific , making it possible to determine the source of fecal contamination in environmental samples . For example , knowing which E. coli strains are present in a water sample allows researchers to make assumptions about whether the contamination originated from a human , another mammal , or a bird . 
 = = = Serotypes = = = 
 A common subdivision system of E. coli , but not based on evolutionary relatedness , is by serotype , which is based on major surface antigens ( O antigen : part of lipopolysaccharide layer ; H : <unk> ; K antigen : capsule ) , e.g. O157 : H7 ) . It is , however , common to cite only the <unk> , i.e. the O @-@ antigen . At present , about 190 <unk> are known . The common laboratory strain has a mutation that prevents the formation of an O @-@ antigen and is thus not <unk> . 
 = = = Genome plasticity and evolution = = = 
 Like all lifeforms , new strains of E. coli evolve through the natural biological processes of mutation , gene duplication , and horizontal gene transfer ; in particular , 18 % of the genome of the laboratory strain MG1655 was horizontally acquired since the divergence from Salmonella . E. coli K @-@ 12 and E. coli B strains are the most frequently used varieties for laboratory purposes . Some strains develop traits that can be harmful to a host animal . These virulent strains typically cause a bout of diarrhea that is unpleasant in healthy adults and is often lethal to children in the developing world . More virulent strains , such as O157 : H7 , cause serious illness or death in the elderly , the very young , or the immunocompromised . 
 The genera Escherichia and Salmonella diverged around 102 million years ago ( credibility interval : 57 – 176 mya ) which coincides with the divergence of their hosts : the former being found in mammals and the latter in birds and reptiles . This was followed by a split of the <unk> ancestor into five species ( E. <unk> , E. coli , E. <unk> , E. <unk> , and E. <unk> ) . The last E. coli ancestor split between 20 and 30 million years ago . 
 The long @-@ term evolution experiments using E. coli , begun by Richard Lenski in 1988 , have allowed direct observation of major evolutionary shifts in the laboratory . In this experiment , one population of E. coli unexpectedly evolved the ability to aerobically metabolize citrate , which is extremely rare in E. coli . As the inability to grow aerobically is normally used as a diagnostic criterion with which to differentiate E. coli from other , closely related bacteria , such as Salmonella , this innovation may mark a speciation event observed in the laboratory . 
 = = = <unk> strain = = = 
 E. coli is the type species of the genus ( Escherichia ) and in turn Escherichia is the type genus of the family Enterobacteriaceae , where the family name does not stem from the genus Enterobacter + " i " ( sic . ) + " <unk> " , but from " <unk> " + " <unk> " ( <unk> being not a genus , but an alternative trivial name to enteric bacterium ) . 
 The original strain described by <unk> is believed to be lost , consequently a new type strain ( neotype ) was chosen as a representative : the neotype strain is U5 / <unk> , also known under the deposit names DSM <unk> , ATCC <unk> , and <unk> <unk> , which is pathogenic to chickens and has an O1 : K1 : H7 serotype . However , in most studies , either O157 : H7 , K @-@ 12 MG1655 , or K @-@ 12 W3110 were used as a representative E. coli . The genome of the type strain has only lately been sequenced . Particularly the use of whole genome sequences yields highly supported phylogenies . Based on such data , five subspecies of E. coli were distinguished . 
 The link between phylogenetic distance ( " relatedness " ) and pathology is small , e.g. the O157 : H7 serotype strains , which form a clade ( " an exclusive group " ) — group E below — are all <unk> strains ( EHEC ) , but not all EHEC strains are closely related . In fact , four different species of Shigella are nested among E. coli strains ( vide supra ) , while E. <unk> and E. <unk> are outside of this group . Indeed , all Shigella species were placed within a single subspecies of E. coli in a <unk> study that included the type strain , and for this reason an according reclassification is difficult . All commonly used research strains of E. coli belong to group A and are derived mainly from Clifton 's K @-@ 12 strain ( λ ⁺ F ⁺ ; <unk> ) and to a lesser degree from d 'Herelle 's Bacillus coli strain ( B strain ) ( O7 ) . 
 = = Genomics = = 
 The first complete DNA sequence of an E. coli genome ( laboratory strain K @-@ 12 derivative MG1655 ) was published in 1997 . It was found to be a circular DNA molecule 4 @.@ 6 million base pairs in length , containing <unk> annotated protein @-@ coding genes ( organized into <unk> operons ) , seven ribosomal RNA ( rRNA ) operons , and 86 transfer RNA ( tRNA ) genes . Despite having been the subject of intensive genetic analysis for about 40 years , a large number of these genes were previously unknown . The coding density was found to be very high , with a mean distance between genes of only 118 base pairs . The genome was observed to contain a significant number of <unk> genetic elements , repeat elements , cryptic <unk> , and bacteriophage remnants . 
 Today , several hundred complete genomic sequences of Escherichia and Shigella species are available . The genome sequence of the type strain of E. coli has been added to this collection not before 2014 . Comparison of these sequences shows a remarkable amount of diversity ; only about 20 % of each genome represents sequences present in every one of the isolates , while around 80 % of each genome can vary among isolates . Each individual genome contains between 4 @,@ 000 and 5 @,@ 500 genes , but the total number of different genes among all of the sequenced E. coli strains ( the <unk> ) exceeds 16 @,@ 000 . This very large variety of component genes has been interpreted to mean that two @-@ thirds of the E. coli <unk> originated in other species and arrived through the process of horizontal gene transfer . 
 = = Gene nomenclature = = 
 Genes in E. coli are usually named by 4 @-@ letter acronyms that derive from their function ( when known ) . For instance , recA is named after its role in homologous recombination plus the letter A. Functionally related genes are named <unk> , <unk> , recD etc . The proteins are named by uppercase acronyms , e.g. RecA , RecB , etc . When the genome of E. coli was sequenced , all genes were numbered ( more or less ) in their order on the genome and abbreviated by b numbers , such as <unk> ( = recD ) etc . The " b " names were created after Fred <unk> who led the genome sequence effort . Another numbering system was introduced with the sequence of another E. coli strain , W3110 , which was sequenced in Japan and hence uses numbers starting by JW ... ( Japanese W3110 ) , e.g. <unk> ( 
 = recD ) . Hence , recD = 
 <unk> = <unk> . Note , however , that most databases have their own numbering system , e.g. the EcoGene database uses <unk> for recD . Finally , ECK numbers are specifically used for alleles in the MG1655 strain of E. coli K @-@ 12 . Complete lists of genes and their synonyms can be obtained from databases such as EcoGene or <unk> . 
 = = Proteomics = = 
 = = = Proteome = = = 
 Several studies have investigated the proteome of E. coli . By 2006 , 1 @,@ 627 ( 38 % ) of the 4 @,@ 237 open reading frames ( <unk> ) had been identified experimentally . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The interactome of E. coli has been studied by affinity purification and mass spectrometry ( AP / MS ) and by analyzing the binary interactions among its proteins . 
 Protein complexes . A 2006 study purified 4 @,@ 339 proteins from cultures of strain K @-@ 12 and found interacting partners for 2 @,@ 667 proteins , many of which had unknown functions at the time . A 2009 study found 5 @,@ 993 interactions between proteins of the same E. coli strain , though these data showed little overlap with those of the 2006 publication . 
 Binary interactions . <unk> et al . ( 2014 ) have carried out systematic yeast two @-@ hybrid screens with most E. coli proteins , and found a total of 2 @,@ 234 protein @-@ protein interactions . This study also integrated genetic interactions and protein structures and mapped 458 interactions within 227 protein complexes . 
 = = Normal microbiota = = 
 E. coli belongs to a group of bacteria informally known as coliforms that are found in the gastrointestinal tract of warm @-@ blooded animals . E. coli normally colonizes an infant 's gastrointestinal tract within 40 hours of birth , arriving with food or water or from the individuals handling the child . In the bowel , E. coli adheres to the mucus of the large intestine . It is the primary facultative <unk> of the human gastrointestinal tract . ( Facultative anaerobes are organisms that can grow in either the presence or absence of oxygen . ) As long as these bacteria do not acquire genetic elements encoding for virulence factors , they remain benign commensals . 
 = = = Therapeutic use = = = 
 <unk> E. coli strain <unk> 1917 , also known as <unk> , and E. coli <unk> : <unk> : H31 ( known as <unk> ) are used as probiotic agents in medicine , mainly for the treatment of various <unk> diseases , including inflammatory bowel disease . 
 = = Role in disease = = 
 Most E. coli strains do not cause disease , but virulent strains can cause gastroenteritis , urinary tract infections , and neonatal meningitis . It can also be characterized by severe abdominal cramps , diarrhea that typically turns bloody within 24 hours , and sometimes fever . In rarer cases , virulent strains are also responsible for bowel necrosis ( tissue death ) and perforation without progressing to hemolytic @-@ uremic syndrome , peritonitis , mastitis , septicemia , and gram @-@ negative pneumonia . 
 There is one strain , E.coli # <unk> : H7 , that produces the Shiga toxin ( classified as a bioterrorism agent ) . This toxin causes premature destruction of the red blood cells , which then clog the body 's filtering system , the kidneys , causing hemolytic @-@ uremic syndrome ( HUS ) . This in turn causes strokes due to small clots of blood which lodge in capillaries in the brain . This causes the body parts controlled by this region of the brain not to work properly . In addition , this strain causes the buildup of fluid ( since the kidneys do not work ) , leading to edema around the lungs and legs and arms . This increase in fluid buildup especially around the lungs impedes the functioning of the heart , causing an increase in blood pressure . 
 <unk> E. coli ( UPEC ) is one of the main causes of urinary tract infections . It is part of the normal flora in the gut and can be introduced in many ways . In particular for females , the direction of wiping after defecation ( wiping back to front ) can lead to fecal contamination of the urogenital orifices . Anal intercourse can also introduce this bacterium into the male urethra , and in switching from anal to vaginal intercourse , the male can also introduce UPEC to the female urogenital system . For more information , see the databases at the end of the article or UPEC pathogenicity . 
 In May 2011 , one E. coli strain , <unk> : H4 , was the subject of a bacterial outbreak that began in Germany . Certain strains of E. coli are a major cause of foodborne illness . The outbreak started when several people in Germany were infected with <unk> E. coli ( EHEC ) bacteria , leading to hemolytic @-@ uremic syndrome ( HUS ) , a medical emergency that requires urgent treatment . The outbreak did not only concern Germany , but also 11 other countries , including regions in North America . On 30 June 2011 , the German <unk> für <unk> ( <unk> ) ( Federal Institute for Risk Assessment , a federal institute within the German Federal Ministry of Food , Agriculture and Consumer Protection ) announced that seeds of fenugreek from Egypt were likely the cause of the EHEC outbreak . 
 = = = Treatment = = = 
 The mainstay of treatment is the assessment of dehydration and replacement of fluid and electrolytes . Administration of antibiotics has been shown to shorten the course of illness and duration of excretion of <unk> E. coli ( ETEC ) in adults in endemic areas and in traveller ’ s diarrhoea , though the rate of resistance to commonly used antibiotics is increasing and they are generally not recommended . The antibiotic used depends upon susceptibility patterns in the particular geographical region . Currently , the antibiotics of choice are fluoroquinolones or azithromycin , with an emerging role for rifaximin . Oral rifaximin , a semisynthetic <unk> derivative , is an effective and well @-@ tolerated antibacterial for the management of adults with non @-@ invasive traveller ’ s diarrhoea . <unk> was significantly more effective than placebo and no less effective than ciprofloxacin in reducing the duration of diarrhoea . While rifaximin is effective in patients with E. coli @-@ predominant traveller ’ s diarrhoea , it appears ineffective in patients infected with inflammatory or invasive <unk> . 
 = = = Prevention = = = 
 ETEC is the type of E. coli that most vaccine development efforts are focused on . Antibodies against the LT and major CFs of ETEC provide protection against LT @-@ producing ETEC expressing homologous CFs . Oral inactivated vaccines consisting of toxin antigen and whole cells , i.e. the licensed recombinant cholera B subunit ( rCTB ) <unk> cholera vaccine <unk> have been developed . There are currently no licensed vaccines for ETEC , though several are in various stages of development . In different trials , the rCTB @-@ WC cholera vaccine provided high ( 85 – 100 % ) short @-@ term protection . An oral ETEC vaccine candidate consisting of rCTB and formalin inactivated E. coli bacteria expressing major CFs has been shown in clinical trials to be safe , immunogenic , and effective against severe diarrhoea in American travelers but not against ETEC diarrhoea in young children in Egypt . A modified ETEC vaccine consisting of recombinant E. coli strains over expressing the major CFs and a more LT @-@ like hybrid <unk> called <unk> , are undergoing clinical testing . 
 Other proven prevention methods for E. coli transmission include handwashing and improved sanitation and drinking water , as transmission occurs through fecal contamination of food and water supplies . 
 = = = Causes and risk factors = = = 
 Working around livestock 
 Consuming unpasteurized dairy product 
 Eating undercooked meat 
 Drinking impure water 
 = = Model organism in life science research = = 
 = = = Role in biotechnology = = = 
 Because of its long history of laboratory culture and ease of manipulation , E. coli plays an important role in modern biological engineering and industrial microbiology . The work of Stanley Norman Cohen and Herbert Boyer in E. coli , using plasmids and restriction enzymes to create recombinant DNA , became a foundation of biotechnology . 
 E. coli is a very versatile host for the production of heterologous proteins , and various protein expression systems have been developed which allow the production of recombinant proteins in E. coli . Researchers can introduce genes into the microbes using plasmids which permit high level expression of protein , and such protein may be mass @-@ produced in industrial fermentation processes . One of the first useful applications of recombinant DNA technology was the manipulation of E. coli to produce human insulin . 
 Many proteins previously thought difficult or impossible to be expressed in E. coli in folded form have been successfully expressed in E. coli . For example , proteins with multiple disulphide bonds may be produced in the periplasmic space or in the cytoplasm of mutants rendered sufficiently oxidizing to allow disulphide @-@ bonds to form , while proteins requiring post @-@ translational modification such as glycosylation for stability or function have been expressed using the N @-@ linked glycosylation system of Campylobacter jejuni engineered into E. coli . 
 Modified E. coli cells have been used in vaccine development , bioremediation , production of biofuels , lighting , and production of immobilised enzymes . 
 = = = Model organism = = = 
 E. coli is frequently used as a model organism in microbiology studies . Cultivated strains ( e.g. E. coli <unk> ) are well @-@ adapted to the laboratory environment , and , unlike wild @-@ type strains , have lost their ability to thrive in the intestine . Many laboratory strains lose their ability to form biofilms . These features protect wild @-@ type strains from antibodies and other chemical attacks , but require a large expenditure of energy and material resources . 
 In 1946 , Joshua Lederberg and Edward Tatum first described the phenomenon known as bacterial conjugation using E. coli as a model bacterium , and it remains the primary model to study conjugation . E. coli was an integral part of the first experiments to understand phage genetics , and early researchers , such as Seymour <unk> , used E. coli and phage T4 to understand the topography of gene structure . Prior to <unk> 's research , it was not known whether the gene was a linear structure , or if it had a branching pattern . 
 E. coli was one of the first organisms to have its genome sequenced ; the complete genome of E. coli <unk> was published by Science in 1997 . 
 By evaluating the possible combination of <unk> with landscape ecology , complex habitat landscapes can be generated with details at the nanoscale . On such synthetic ecosystems , evolutionary experiments with E. coli have been performed to study the spatial biophysics of adaptation in an island biogeography on @-@ chip . 
 Studies are also being performed attempting to program E. coli to solve complicated mathematics problems , such as the Hamiltonian path problem . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1885 , the German @-@ Austrian pediatrician Theodor <unk> discovered this organism in the feces of healthy individuals . He called it Bacterium coli commune because it is found in the colon . Early classifications of prokaryotes placed these in a handful of genera based on their shape and motility ( at that time Ernst Haeckel 's classification of bacteria in the kingdom <unk> was in place ) . 
 Bacterium coli was the type species of the now invalid genus Bacterium when it was revealed that the former type species ( " Bacterium <unk> " ) was missing . Following a revision of Bacterium , it was reclassified as Bacillus coli by <unk> in 1895 and later reclassified in the newly created genus Escherichia , named after its original discoverer . 
 = = = Databases = = = 
 <unk> E. coli interaction database 
 <unk> ( subset of the comparative genomics database <unk> ) 
 EcoGene ( genome database and website dedicated to Escherichia coli K @-@ 12 <unk> MG1655 ) 
 <unk> Continually updated Web resource based on the classic ASM Press publication Escherichia coli and Salmonella : Cellular and Molecular Biology 
 <unk> The structure of the O @-@ antigens that form the basis of the serological classification of E. coli 
 Coli Genetic Stock Center Strains and genetic information on E. coli K @-@ 12 
 <unk> – literature @-@ based curation of the entire genome , and of transcriptional regulation , transporters , and metabolic pathways 
 <unk> ( formerly <unk> ) – NIH @-@ funded comprehensive data resource for E. coli K @-@ 12 and its phage , plasmids , and mobile genetic elements 
 <unk> is the community annotation component of <unk> 
 <unk> <unk> is a model of the complex regulation of transcription initiation or regulatory network of the cell E. coli K @-@ 12 . 
 <unk> Escherichia coli ( UPEC ) 
 = = = General databases with E. coli @-@ related information = = = 
 5S rRNA Database Information on nucleotide sequences of 5S rRNAs and their genes 
 <unk> A <unk> of Mobile genetic Elements 
 <unk> Matrices that search for additional binding sites in the E. coli genomic sequence 
 <unk> Database of functional genomics experiments 
 ASAP Comprehensive genome information for several enteric bacteria with community annotation 
 <unk> Gene portal hub 
 <unk> Comprehensive Enzyme Information System 
 <unk> Bacterial Structural Genomics Initiative 
 CATH Protein Structure Classification 
 CBS Genome Atlas 
 CDD Conserved Domain Database 
 <unk> Center for Information Biology Gene Expression Database 
 <unk> 
 <unk> – the Bacterial Diversity <unk> 
 = Dinner Party ( The Office ) = 
 " Dinner Party " is the thirteenth episode of the fourth season of the American comedy television series The Office — the show 's sixty @-@ sixth episode overall . Written by the writing team of Lee Eisenberg and Gene Stupnitsky and directed by Paul Feig , the episode originally aired on NBC on April 10 , 2008 . Guest stars in the episode include Beth Grant , Steve <unk> , and Gary Weeks . 
 The series — presented as if it were a real documentary — depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , Michael Scott and his girlfriend Jan Levinson ( Melora Hardin ) , the former Vice @-@ President of Regional Sales at the Dunder Mifflin corporate office in New York City throw a dinner party and invite Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) and Pam Beesley ( Jenna Fischer ) , and Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) and Angela Martin ( Angela Kinsey ) , as well as an uninvited Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) . The party ends with Michael and Jan having a loud argument ; Michael leaves with Dwight on the advice of two police officers who respond to a domestic disturbance call after the fight . 
 The episode was the first original episode of The Office to be broadcast since the episode " The Deposition " on November 15 , 2007 , due to the effects of the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike . As such , the atmosphere on the set was one of a more laid @-@ back nature , and the cast broke into laughter due to the jokes many times . " Dinner Party " received largely positive reviews from critics , with many hailing it as one of the series ' best entries . The episode received 4 @.@ 8 Nielsen rating and was watched by 9 @.@ 2 million viewers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The office workers are stuck working overtime on a major assignment . After asking Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) to confirm that he has not made any plans for the evening in anticipation of the overtime assignment , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) calls corporate and declares that he is releasing the workers from overtime . Michael then proceeds to invite Jim and his girlfriend Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) to join him and his girlfriend Jan Levenson ( Melora Hardin ) for dinner at his condominium after Jim had previously turned him down nine times . When Jim begins to formulate an excuse , Michael reminds him that he just said he hadn 't made any plans . Jim begins to suspect that Michael fabricated the overtime assignment and the call to corporate just to maneuver him and Pam into coming to dinner . Michael also invites Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) and Angela Martin ( Angela Kinsey ) , but excludes Angela 's former boyfriend Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) , much to Dwight 's dismay . On a tour of the condominium , Jan shows the workspace from which she runs her candle @-@ making home business . Jan 's dominance in the relationship is apparent from the living arrangements ; Michael sleeps on a small bench due to Jan 's " space issues " , and his sole comfort is a very small " plasma TV , " which he bought for $ 200 . It is also later revealed that Michael underwent three vasectomies in the course of trying to please Jan. Throughout the evening , Jan plays a song titled " That One Night " by her former assistant , Hunter . 
 In the kitchen , Jan quietly confronts Pam with a false assumption that Michael and Pam had once dated , while Michael attempts to get Jim and Andy to invest in Jan 's candle @-@ making business for " only $ 10 @,@ 000 " . Jim 's attempt to escape the party with Pam by pretending his apartment has flooded is unsuccessful . Dwight arrives , uninvited , with his own food , wine glasses and his former babysitter ( Beth Grant ) as his date ( Dwight describes the relationship as " purely carnal " ) . The feud between Michael and Jan escalates , culminating in Jan 's destruction of the television using one of Michael 's beloved Dundie Awards . The police arrive , responding to a call about a disturbance ; despite Jan becoming remorseful , Michael agrees to spend the night with Dwight under the advice of the officers . Jim and Pam share a warm moment together eating take @-@ out food in their car , repeatedly calling each other " babe " in a mockery of Michael and Jan ; Jim also puts on Hunter 's CD , which he stole from the condo . In Andy 's car , Andy attempts to flirt with Angela by leaning in and tasting her ice cream cone ; she responds coldly by smashing the ice cream on the outside of the door . Jan is seen trying to fix the broken Dundie Award . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The episode was the first original episode of The Office to be broadcast since the episode " The Deposition " on November 15 , 2007 , due to the effects of the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike . The Writers Guild of America ( WGA ) went on strike at 12 : 01AM Eastern Standard Time on November 5 , 2007 . Filming of The Office immediately halted on that date , as Steve Carell , who is a member of the WGA , refused to cross WGA picket lines . Members of Writers Guild of America , East and Writers Guild of America , West voted to end the 100 @-@ day strike on February 12 , 2008 . Writers were allowed to return to work on the same day . The WGA allowed for show runners to return to work on February 11 , in preparation for the conclusion of the strike . The show runner for The Office , executive producer Greg Daniels , returned on the February 11 , while the show 's writers returned to work on February 13 . If not for the writers ' strike , this episode would have completed filming successfully during the week of November 5 , 2007 . Also , a Christmas episode would have been produced and aired , but that script was discarded as the strike lasted past the 2007 holiday season , the time of year when the potential episode would have aired . 
 = = = Writing and directing = = = 
 " Dinner Party " was written by Lee Eisenberg and Gene Stupnitsky . Other writers for the series also added various background gags to the episode , such as Andy wearing two sweaters and holding a coat , all of the photos in the condo being of Jan with other men , and Michael 's garage having both a <unk> and a <unk> back to back because " Michael is completely taken by late @-@ night infomercials " . The song featured in the episode supposedly performed by Jan 's former assistant , Hunter , was written by the episode writers Lee Eisenberg and Gene Stupnitsky and Todd Fancey of The New Pornographers ; Eisenberg and Stupnitsky wrote the lyrics , and Fancey wrote the music . The song was sung by Fancey . Eisenberg and Stupnitsky later explained that , despite the suggestive lyrics , the song is " left to interpretation " . 
 The episode was directed by Paul Feig , making it his sixth directorial credit for the series . Eisenberg and Stupnitsky later noted that , because the episode was the first to be filmed following the strike , there was " a great , loose vibe on set " , and as such , many of the actors would break character and laugh at the jokes . The majority of the episode took place at Michael 's condo . This was the same location used in the second season entry " Office Olympics " . Eisenberg and Stupnitsky explained that " the production design team did an amazing job to transform the condo from Michael 's design aesthetic to Jan 's . " 
 The episode guest starred Beth Grant , Steve <unk> , and Gary Weeks . Grant would later reprise her character in the ninth season episode " Junior Salesman " . Grant was asked to appear in the episode after Daniels saw her performance in the 2007 film No Country for Old Men . Grant praised Carell 's improvisational skills — noting that " he just keeps going off script [ and that he ] is channeling something " — as well as Wilson 's humorous antics while acting . She concluded that " if they had wanted a crazy , wild feature film using all the comedy that I saw in just those few days , you could absolutely have had one " with their acting . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The group plays Celebrity , a game wherein teams play against each other to guess as many celebrity names as possible before time runs out . Michael tries to get his team to guess Arnold Schwarzenegger by saying , " Rhymes with <unk> Schwarzenegger " . Michael also tries to get his team to guess Tom Cruise , to which Jim answers Katie Holmes and Dawson 's Creek to purposely throw Michael off . After Jan informs Pam that people in Spain often do not eat until midnight , Michael responds with When in Rome ... , a popular saying . Thematically , several crew members and critics have compared the episode to the 1962 play Who 's Afraid of Virginia Woolf ? by Edward Albee , which examines the breakdown of the marriage of a middle @-@ aged couple . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Dinner Party " brought in an average of 9 @.@ 2 million American viewers , which was the highest total audience since the fourth season premiere episode " Fun Run " . This episode achieved a 4 @.@ 8 / 12 percent rating in the key 18 – 49 demographic , meaning that 4 @.@ 8 percent of 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds were tuned in at any given moment and twelve percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time were tuned in . The episode ranked in eighth place , in the 18 – 49 demographic , among all programs on television , which aired during the week of this episodes original broadcast . 
 The episode has been met with critical acclaim since it has aired and is considered one of the best episodes of The Office by many critics . Travis Fickett of IGN wrote that " this is one of those great episodes of The Office that is hysterical and difficult to watch at the same time . " He noted that this was largely due to the fact that " it 's not because of something Michael is doing that makes you wince . It 's because of what 's happening to him . " He ultimately gave the episode an 8 @.@ 9 / 10 , denoting a " great " episode . Jay Black of AOL 's TV Squad said that " [ he ] was happy The Office was back " but " the only thing [ he ] worried about was whether it 'd still be good " after the writers strike . However , he noted that his fears were put to rest and that " Dinner Party " was " a Barry Bond 's @-@ style [ sic ] chemically enhanced mega @-@ home @-@ run . " M. Giant of Television Without Pity graded this episode with an " A. " Aubry D 'Arminio of Entertainment Weekly said that her favorite moment of the episode " was when Jan popped on that song by her former assistant , Hunter . " 
 Jack Rodgers of TV Guide wrote that it is " a hilarious , brutally awkward look at the relationship ( and apartment ) from hell , a train wreck that you just can ’ t keep from staring at . " He also noted that it is " also a study of four couples : one hideously dysfunctional ( Michael and Jan ) , one loving ( Jim and Pam ) , one mismatched ( Angela and Andy ) , and one , ahem , " purely carnal " ( Dwight and babysitter ) . " The A.V. Club reviewer Nathan Rabin praised the episode for its " sheer squirm @-@ inducing awkwardness " . He ultimately gave the episode an " A " . Former United States Republican presidential nominee John McCain , a fan of the series , told writer B. J. Novak that his favorite scene from the show is in this episode when Michael is giving his guests a tour of his condo , and a tripod can be seen set up by his bed . Lee Eisenberg and Gene Stupnitsky 's writing for the episode was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series in 2008 . 
 = Bat Out of Hell II : Back into Hell = 
 Bat Out of Hell II : Back into Hell is the sixth studio album by Meat Loaf and was written and produced by Jim Steinman . It was released in September 1993 , sixteen years after Meat Loaf 's first solo album Bat Out of Hell . The album reached number 1 in the United States , United Kingdom and Australia . Five tracks were released as singles , including " I 'd Do Anything for Love ( But I Won 't Do That ) " , which reached number 1 in 28 countries . 
 The album was released by Virgin Records outside of North America , where it was released by MCA . The third part of the Bat trilogy , Bat Out of Hell III : The Monster Is Loose , was released in 2006 . 
 Just like the first album of the trilogy , Bat Out of Hell II was a huge commercial success and sold over 14 million copies worldwide . 
 = = History = = 
 In the midst of the success of Bat Out of Hell , desperate for a follow @-@ up , management and the record company put pressure on Steinman to stop touring in order to write a follow @-@ up , provisionally titled Renegade Angel . In a 1981 BBC Rock Hour Special interview , Jim Steinman recalls the writing process . 
 I started writing what I felt was Bat Out of Hell part 2 , definitely like The Godfather part I and part 2 , that 's how I saw it . I wanted to do a continuation and I wanted to do an album that went even further and that was more extreme , if possible , which a lot of people felt wasn 't possible but I just wanted to see if I could make a record that was even more heroic because that 's what I thought of it ... Bat Out of Hell to me was ultimately very heroic though it was funny ... and I wanted to do one that to me would be even more heroic and more epic and a little more operatic and passionate . 
 In a 1993 promotional interview for the album , Steinman reasserts the continuation of the Bat world . " I didn 't call it Bat Out of Hell II just to identify with the first record . It really does feel like an extension of that ... It was a chance to go back to that world and explore it deeper . It always seemed incomplete because I conceived it like a film , and what would you do without Die Hard 2 ? " Meat Loaf himself was more succinct . He told an interview at the time , " We called it Bat Out of Hell II ' cos that would help it sell <unk> . " 
 Steinman rejoined Meat Loaf and the band for a live performance in Toronto , Canada in 1978 with the intention of going through the songs for Bat II after the show . However , someone broke into their dressing rooms during the show and stole several possessions , including the new lyric book . Then , Meat Loaf lost his voice and was unable to record Renegade Angel . Steinman says " he sounded literally like the little girl in The Exorcist ... like a dragon trying to sing — it was a horrifying sound . " Steinman " kept writing the music to Bat Out of Hell part 2 ... my sequel . " Not being able to " bear for people not to hear those songs , " Steinman recorded the album , retitled Bad for Good , as a solo project , although Rory Dodd contributed lead vocals on some songs . Four songs from Bad for Good were included on Bat Out of Hell II . In 1989 , Steinman formed all @-@ female vocal group Pandora 's Box . The album , Original Sin , was a commercial flop , but featured two songs which would also appear on Bat II . Meat Loaf says " Jim put " It Just Won 't Quit " on Original Sin without telling me . I could have strangled him . " 
 By the time Meat Loaf set about finally recording Bat II in the early 90s , the industry 's enthusiasm for the project had waned . According to the artist 's then manager , Tommy Manzi , in an interview with HitQuarters , " That project was considered a joke as far as the industry was concerned , " and Manzi 's management company Left Bank were " laughed at " for attempting to revive the fortunes of a well @-@ established act rather than focus on " the next hip band " . 
 = = Production = = 
 After a series of financial and legal disputes during the 1980s , Steinman and Meat Loaf met at the singer 's house in Connecticut at Christmas 1989 or 1990 and sang Bat Out of Hell on piano . Steinman says that " working together again seemed like the cool thing to do . " 
 Steinman gave Meat Loaf half the songs for the album , but refused to give him any more until he changed managers . The singer was being managed by Walter <unk> and George Gilbert , who Meat Loaf credits as being " honest guys " but , under Steinman 's influence , thinks would be " incapable of dealing with the record companies " on Bat II . On Steinman 's recommendation , he hired Allen Kovac . 
 Recording of the album lasted from 1991 to 1993 , first at Ocean Way Recording in Los Angeles , California , then at The Power Station in New York City , New York . 
 Many of the performers from the original album returned for the sequel . Roy Bittan performed keyboard and piano on most tracks , with Todd Rundgren , Ellen Foley , Rory Dodd and Kasim Sulton returning to provide background vocals . Meat Loaf and the musicians are credited as co @-@ arrangers , and Bittan and long @-@ term Steinman collaborator Steven Rinkoff are credited as associate producers . The album was mixed by David Thoener with the exception of the final track , which was mixed by Rinkoff . 
 According to Meat Loaf , he and Steinman only had one " big fight " throughout the album 's production , which occurred during the mixing of " Life Is a Lemon " . Production took a long time ( see above ) , mainly because of the length of the songs . The singer says , " Jim 's songs may be miniature operas , but they 're always too long for radio . " Steinman fought with Kovac over the edit of " I 'd Do Anything for Love " , with the manager advising that radio stations were unlikely to play anything over five minutes long . 
 Steinman had secured a contract with Meat Loaf 's recording label MCA for Lorraine Crosby , a club singer from North East England whom he was managing . While visiting the company 's recording studios on Sunset Boulevard , Crosby was asked to provide guide vocals for Meat Loaf , who was recording " I 'd Do Anything for Love " . Crosby recalls , " I went and sang it twice and I never thought anything more of it until six months later when I got a phone call saying , ' Would you mind if we used your vocals ? ' " Cher , Melissa Etheridge and Bonnie Tyler had been considered for the role . However , as Crosby had recorded her part as guide vocals , she did not receive any royalties from the song . 
 = = Compositions = = 
 The album opens with " I 'd Do Anything for Love ( But I Won 't Do That ) " , a marathon twelve @-@ minute opus which was edited for single release in some countries . The track begins with a guitar played to sound like a revving motorcycle , a reference to Todd Rundgren 's contribution in the middle of " Bat Out of Hell " . Each verse comprises two things that he would do for love , followed by one thing that he would not do . It is that latter parts of each chorus that is the " that " of the title . However , some people misunderstand the lyrics , claiming that the singer never identifies what the " that " is that he is unwilling to do , a confusion that Steinman predicted during production . The song combines stadium rock and ballad for much of its twelve minutes . However , near the end of the song , a female vocalist is introduced . Credited in the liner notes as Mrs. Loud , this part was sung by Lorraine Crosby . 
 Rundgren points out that " the themes of the songs were darker . " The second track , " Life is a Lemon and I Want My Money Back " , demonstrates this pessimism . Several things are identified as " defective " , including love , sex , gods , childhood and the future . Allmusic labels it " a stomping rocker that wraps serious feelings in a cryptically witty metaphor . " Despite the pessimism , both Allmusic and Meat Loaf point out that " it is a funny song . " 
 The third track , " Rock and Roll Dreams Come Through " , is a prayer to rock music , celebrating how it is always there to help you through troubled times . One of its lyrics is " You 're never alone , ' cause you can put on the ' phones and let the drummer tell your heart what to do . " The fourth track also has dark overtones . " It Just Won 't Quit " , Steinman explains , " is about the fact that there are some things you never shake off ... That 's love , I guess . " " Out of the Frying Pan ( And into the Fire ) " is a more upbeat song . 
 The album 's sixth track , " Objects in the Rear View Mirror May Appear Closer than They Are " is a three part narrative that uses pathetic fallacy , where the seasons ( summer , winter and spring ) reflect the atmosphere of the events being described , drawing " its inspiration from the singer 's often @-@ tragic childhood . The lyrics portray a man who has overcome tragedies in his life yet still feels haunted by their memory . " Steinman says that it was " the hardest song to write and get across . " 
 It 's a very passionate song . It 's really , I think maybe , the most passionate one on the record . I mean , I 'm really proud of it because that 's really one that goes over @-@ the @-@ top in the sense that it 's got images — it has religious imagery of resurrection , it 's got images of fertility and rebirth , it has really very good sexual images , images of cars — which I always like . 
 The track quotes lyrics from the original 's " Paradise by the Dashboard Light " ( " It was long ago and it was far away " ) , as does the next track , " Wasted Youth " , a spoken word fantasy monologue ( a remixed version of " Love and Death and an American Guitar " from Steinman 's Bad for Good album ) . The 1977 song 's opening line " I remember every [ ... ] little thing as if it happened only yesterday . I was barely seventeen " opens this track also , but instead of being " barely dressed " the protagonist " once killed a boy with a Fender guitar . " Influenced by The Doors , Steinman wanted to write a piece where " the rhythm wasn 't coming from the drums so much as the voice — the rhythm of the spoken voice and the heartbeat behind it . " 
 According to Steinman , " Good Girls Go to Heaven ( Bad Girls Go Everywhere ) " is a " teenage prayer " . " Lost Boys and Golden Girls " is " Steinman 's interpretation of the story of Peter Pan . " The composer says that Peter Pan has " always been about my favorite story and I 've always looked at it from the perspective that it 's a great rock and roll myth because it 's about — when you get right down to it — it 's about a gang of lost boys who never grow up , who are going to be young forever and that 's about as perfect an image for rock 'n'roll as I can think of . " 
 = = Cover and booklet = = 
 The cover art was illustrated by sci @-@ fi / fantasy artist Michael Whelan , following the style of Richard Corben 's cover for Bat Out of Hell . It features the biker from the first cover flying on his motorcycle towards a giant bat perched on top of New York City 's Chrysler Building . Echoing the gravestones of the first cover , partially destroyed skyscrapers inhabit the lava landscape . Also like the first album , it features a ' Songs by Jim Steinman ' credit , although smaller and located at the bottom of the cover . 
 As well as providing thematic consistency with the original , the repetition of iconography also acted as a vital marketing tool . The marketing of the album was documented in an episode of the 1995 BBC television programme The Music Biz . Executives at Virgin Records thought that this was important to attract the target audience , who they believed no longer spent much time in record shops . They felt that similarities to the design of the first album , including Meat Loaf 's name in Gothic typography , would entice consumers of the 1977 album to purchase this . 
 The booklet contains all of the lyrics to the songs , each accompanied by a small Whelan illustration , which were used as the respective single covers . There is a suggestion to " support Tibet House , an organization dedicated to the unique culture of the Tibetan people which has the potential to make a valuable contribution to the world at large " . 
 = = Singles and videos = = 
 Three tracks from the album were released as singles . " I 'd Do Anything for Love ( But I Won 't Do That ) " became a worldwide # 1 hit from this album . The song reached # 1 in the charts in 28 countries . It spent seven weeks atop the UK Singles Chart , making it the most successful single in the UK that year . Simultaneously , Meat Loaf released " Bat Out of Hell " as a single , which also made the top ten in the United Kingdom . Meat Loaf remained the last artist to have two top @-@ ten UK singles at the same time until the Manic Street Preachers in 2001 . 
 " Rock and Roll Dreams Come Through " reached # 13 on the Billboard Hot 100 , and # 11 on the UK Singles Chart . The third single from the album , " Objects in the Rear View Mirror May Appear Closer Than They Are " , did less well when it was released in 1994 , reaching # 38 on the Billboard Hot 100 and # 26 in the United Kingdom . " Life Is a Lemon " peaked at # 17 on the Billboard Mainstream Rock Tracks chart in the United States . 
 Michael Bay directed three music videos from the album . " I 'd Do Anything for Love " is based on Beauty and the Beast and The Phantom of the Opera . " Rock and Roll Dreams Come Through " features a runaway girl , played by Angelina Jolie . " Objects in the Rear View Mirror " illustrates the song 's narrative . Featuring Robert Patrick , the video contained flying aircraft imagery that he would use in Armageddon and Pearl Harbor . 
 In 1994 , the three films were released as the VHS tape Meat Loaf – Bat Out of Hell 2 – Picture Show , which also included alternate versions of " Paradise by the Dashboard Light " , " Life Is a Lemon and I Want My Money Back " and " I 'd Do Anything for Love " , all featuring lead vocalist Patti Russo . They were included on a DVD in 2006 with the ' Collectors Edition ' release of the album . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The album was a commercial hit , and has sold more than 14 million copies around the world . It was # 1 for one week in the US on the Billboard 200 , the UK Albums Chart for eleven weeks , and # 1 in Australia for four weeks . Meat Loaf won a Grammy Award for Best Solo Rock Vocal Performance for " I 'd Do Anything for Love " and won him two Brit Awards nominations ( Best International Male and Best Selling Single ) . 
 Despite its huge commercial success , critical reception was mixed . The specialist music press were generally positive . Q magazine proclaimed , " truly this ... is the genuine follow @-@ up to the most over @-@ the @-@ top rock album of all time . " Like most critics , Q referred to the excesses of Steinman 's style , citing the length of the songs ( Q says that " Objects ... " running for 10 minutes and 12 seconds is " not necessary " ) . Unlike the original , where the epic loud songs were " offset by the softness of stuff like " Two Out of Three Ain 't Bad " ... even the ballads are Roman orgies of sound and fury . " This , they say , means " the album 's probable theme — the crushing effect growing up has on teenage dreams — seems to get lost among the thud and blunder . " However , overall , Q is positive , concluding with the sentiment that " Ultimately , Back Into Hell may not trash its predecessor , but as a mad , crunching , stadium rock album , it 's probably the best thing of its kind you 'll hear this year . " 
 Looking at how " Steinman 's old @-@ fashioned teen @-@ dream rock ' n ' roll fantasies " fits in with the music culture of 1993 , Kerrang ! suggests that it wouldn 't appeal to " Nirvana and Metallica fans , but there 's an older generation of rockers out there who will , quite properly , worship this album . " Their four @-@ star review declares that " it is a work of genius , a ready made rock classic and arguably the last word in rock operas . " In The Tip Sheet , Jonathan King labelled it a " glorious , splendid album , " celebrating Meat Loaf 's " operatically gorgeous " voice and Steinman 's " superb " songs , arrangements and production . " You 'll be blown away . Better still you 'll catch yourself openly laughing out loud at times with delight . You know what to expect yet it 's constantly better , fresher and brighter than you hope . If they had a Mercury Music Prize for American albums , this would win it hands down . " 
 In a 1999 documentary celebrating the original album , Meat Loaf says that Bat Out of Hell polarizes people : some hate it , and some worship it . The bombast did not meet some critics ' approval . As with the first album , Rolling Stone gave the album a mixed review . They call it " harmless , low @-@ octane operatic drivel " with " insufferably long Steinman compositions with equally long names . " Non @-@ specialist publications gave the most negative reviews . The Fort Worth Star @-@ Telegram also referred to the length of the songs , in which Steinman " vomits up 75 minutes of endlessly repeated choruses . " The newspaper branded it " the worst pop album of 1993 . " The Des Moines Register thought that the album was " wallowing in excess so gratuitous as to make Michael Bolton , by comparison , seem a master of understatement ... Mountains of banshee @-@ like wailing guitars ! <unk> drums ! <unk> vocals ! Profoundly stupid lyrics ! <unk> . This isn 't pandering to the lowest common denominator — it 's lowering the lowest common denominator . " 
 Like the original , retrospective reviews have been appreciative . Allmusic appreciates the bombast and " the pseudo @-@ operatic splendor of Jim Steinman 's grandly cinematic songs . Responding to concerns about length and overstatement , they reply , " that 's precisely the point of this album , and is also why it works so well . No other rock ' n ' roller besides Meat Loaf could pull off the humor and theatricality of Back Into Hell and make it seem real . In that sense , it 's a worthy successor to the original . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Jim Steinman . 
 = = = Other versions and re @-@ issues = = = 
 = = = = 1993 Special Limited Edition = = = = 
 Alongside the original version a two disc special edition was released , containing a foldout poster and a bonus disc containing three live tracks , which can also be found as b @-@ sides to the " I 'd Do Anything for Love ( But I Won 't Do That ) " singles . 
 = = Bonus CD Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Jim Steinman . 
 This was produced by Meat Loaf and recorded and mixed by David Thoener . It was recorded in New York , NY in July 1993 . 
 = = = 2002 deluxe edition = = = 
 A two @-@ disc " deluxe edition " was released by MCA on June 25 , 2002 . The first disc contains the remastered original album , while the second contains several radio edits and remixes . It was presented as a foldout double @-@ disc set <unk> in a slipcase , with an extensive booklet with liner notes and rare photographs . Allmusic suggest that although the album deserves the attention , " the extra disc of material is [ not ] worth the time of anyone outside of fanatics ... it doesn 't really offer any revelations , curiosities , or an interesting listen for anybody else ( and it may not be that interesting to those collectors , either ) . " 
 CD 2 track listing 
 = = Track listing = = 
