 = = = 2006 2CD / <unk> collector 's edition = = = 
 In 2006 , a three disc collector 's edition was released by Virgin / EMI . The first disc contains the original album remastered and the second a live version of the original Bat Out of Hell album plus " I 'd Do Anything for Love ( But I Won 't Do That ) " , compiled from the various b @-@ sides from the album 's singles . 
 The tracks were recorded live in New York during July 1993 , except " For Crying Out Loud " which was recorded live in the United States in 1994 . Live arrangements by Meat Loaf and the Neverland Express featuring Patti Russo as lead female vocalist . Tracks 1 @-@ 6 and 8 were recorded and mixed by David Thoener , and the audio was remastered by Peter Mew with Nigel Reeve at Abbey Road Studios , London . 
 The final disc is a DVD containing all three of the Michael Bay videos , and a featurette with an interview with Meat Loaf and Steinman , with behind the scenes footage from the video shoot of " I 'd Do Anything for Love " . 
 CD2 track listing 
 DVD track listing 
 All sections were directed by Michael Bay and produced by Propaganda Films . DVD produced by Abbey Road Interactive . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Track numbers indicate that a musician only plays the instrument so noted on that specific track . 
 = = = Band on studio tracks = = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Isabeau of Bavaria = 
 Isabeau of Bavaria ( or Isabelle ; also Elisabeth of Bavaria @-@ Ingolstadt ; c . 1370 – 24 September 1435 ) was born into the House of Wittelsbach as the eldest daughter of Duke Stephen III of Bavaria @-@ Ingolstadt and <unk> Visconti of Milan . She became Queen of France when she married King Charles VI in 1385 . At age 15 or 16 , Isabeau was sent to France on approval to the young French king ; the couple wed three days after their first meeting . 
 Isabeau was honored in 1389 with a lavish coronation ceremony and entry into Paris . In 1392 Charles suffered the first attack of what was to become a lifelong and progressive mental illness , resulting in periodic withdrawal from government . The episodes occurred with increasing frequency , leaving a court both divided by political factions and steeped in social extravagances . A 1393 masque for one of Isabeau 's ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting — an event later known as Bal des Ardents — ended in disaster with the King almost burning to death . Although the King demanded Isabeau 's removal from his presence during his illness , he consistently allowed her to act on his behalf . In this way she became regent to the Dauphin of France ( heir apparent ) , and sat on the regency council , allowing far more power than was usual for a medieval queen . 
 Charles ' illness created a power vacuum that eventually led to the Armagnac – Burgundian Civil War between supporters of his brother , Louis of Orléans and the royal dukes of Burgundy . Isabeau shifted allegiances as she chose the most favorable paths for the heir to the throne . When she followed the Armagnacs , the Burgundians accused her of adultery with Louis of Orléans ; when she sided with the Burgundians the Armagnacs removed her from Paris and she was imprisoned . In 1407 John the Fearless assassinated Orléans , sparking hostilities between the factions . The war ended soon after Isabeau 's eldest son , Charles , had John the Fearless assassinated in 1419 — an act that saw him disinherited . Isabeau attended the 1420 signing of the Treaty of Troyes , which decided that the English king should inherit the French crown after the death of her husband , Charles VI . She lived in English @-@ occupied Paris until her death in 1435 . 
 Isabeau was popularly seen as a spendthrift and irresponsible <unk> . In the late 20th and early 21st centuries historians re @-@ examined the extensive chronicles of her lifetime , concluding that many elements of her reputation were unearned and stemmed from factionalism and propaganda . 
 = = Lineage and marriage = = 
 Isabeau 's parents were Duke Stephen III of Bavaria @-@ Ingolstadt and <unk> Visconti , whom he married for a 100 @,@ 000 ducat dowry . She was most likely born in Munich where she was baptized as Elisabeth at the Church of Our Lady . Hers was the ancient and well @-@ established Wittelsbach family , descended from Charlemagne , and she was great @-@ granddaughter to the Wittelsbach Holy Roman Emperor Louis IV . At that period Bavaria was the most powerful of the German states and divided between members of the House of Wittelsbach . 
 Isabeau 's uncle , Duke Frederick of Bavaria @-@ Landshut , suggested in 1383 that she be considered as a bride to King Charles VI of France . The match was proposed again at the lavish Burgundian double wedding in Cambrai in April 1385 — John the Fearless and his sister Margaret of Burgundy married Margaret and William of Bavaria @-@ Straubing respectively . Charles , then 17 , rode in the tourneys at the wedding . He was an attractive , physically fit young man , who enjoyed jousting and hunting and was excited to be married . 
 Charles VI 's uncle , Philip the Bold , Duke of Burgundy , thought the proposed marriage ideal to build an alliance with the Holy Roman Empire and against the English . Isabeau 's father agreed reluctantly and sent her to France with his brother , her uncle , on the pretext of taking a pilgrimage to Amiens . He was adamant that she was not to know she was being sent to France to be examined as a prospective bride for Charles , and refused permission for her to be examined in the nude , customary at the time . According to the contemporary chronicler Jean Froissart , Isabeau was 13 or 14 when the match was proposed and about 16 at the time of the marriage in 1385 , suggesting a birth date of around 1370 . 
 Before her presentation to Charles , Isabeau visited Hainaut for about a month , staying with her granduncle Duke Albert I , ruler of some of Bavaria @-@ Straubing and Count of Holland . Albert 's wife , Margaret of Brieg , replaced Isabeau 's Bavarian style of dress , deemed unsuitable as French courtly attire , and taught her etiquette suitable to the French court . She learned quickly , suggestive of an intelligent and quick @-@ witted character . On 13 July 1385 she traveled to Amiens to be presented to Charles . 
 Froissart writes of the meeting in his Chronicles , saying that Isabeau stood motionless while being inspected , exhibiting perfect behavior by the standards of her time . Arrangements were made for the two to be married in Arras , but on the first meeting Charles felt " happiness and love enter his heart , for he saw that she was beautiful and young , and thus he greatly desired to gaze at her and possess her " . She did not yet speak French and may not have reflected the idealized beauty of the period , perhaps inheriting her mother 's dark Italian features , then unfashionable , but Charles most certainly approved of her because the couple were married three days later . Froissart documented the royal wedding , joking about the lascivious guests at the feast and the " hot young couple " . 
 Charles seemingly loved his young wife , lavishing gifts on her . On the occasion of their first New Year in 1386 , he gave her a red velvet palfrey saddle , trimmed with copper and decorated with an intertwined K and E ( for Karol and Elisabeth ) , and he continued to give her gifts of rings , tableware and clothing . The uncles too , apparently , were pleased with the match , which contemporary chroniclers , notably Froissart and Michel Pintoin ( the Monk of St. Denis ) , describe similarly as a match rooted in desire and based on her beauty . The day after the wedding , Charles went on a military campaign against the English , and Isabeau went to <unk> to live with his great @-@ aunt Blanche , Duchess of Orléans , who taught her courtly traditions . In September she took up residence at the Château de Vincennes , where in the early years of their marriage Charles frequently joined her , and which became her favorite home . 
 = = Coronation = = 
 Isabeau 's coronation was celebrated on 23 August 1389 with a lavish ceremonial entry into Paris . Her second cousin and sister @-@ in @-@ law Valentina Visconti , who had married her own cousin Louis of Orléans ( Charles ' younger brother ) two years earlier by proxy and papal dispensation , arrived in style , escorted across the Alps from Milan by 1 @,@ 300 knights carrying personal luxuries such as books and a harp . The noblewomen in the coronation procession were dressed in lavish costumes with thread @-@ of @-@ gold embroidery , and rode in litters escorted by knights . Philip the Bold wore a doublet embroidered with 40 sheep and 40 swans , each decorated with a bell made of pearls . 
 The procession lasted from morning to night . The streets were lined with tableaux vivants displaying scenes from the Crusades , Deësis and the Gates of Paradise . More than a thousand burghers stood along the route ; those on one side were dressed in green facing , those on the opposite in red . The procession began at the Porte de St. Denis and passed under a canopy of sky @-@ blue cloth beneath which children dressed as angels sang , winding into the Rue Saint @-@ Denis before arriving at the Notre Dame for the coronation ceremony . As Tuchman describes the event , " So many wonders were to be seen and admired that it was evening before the procession crossed the bridge leading to Notre Dame and the climactic display . " 
 As Isabeau crossed the Grand Pont to Notre Dame , a person dressed as an angel descended from the church by mechanical means and " passed through an opening of the hangings of blue taffeta with golden fleurs @-@ des @-@ lis , which covered the bridge , and put a crown on her head . " The angel was then pulled back up into the church . An acrobat carrying two candles walked along a rope suspended from the spires of the cathedral to the tallest house in the city . 
 After Isabeau 's crowning , the procession made its way back from the cathedral along a route lit by 500 candles . They were greeted by a royal feast , and a progression of narrative pageants complete with a depiction of the Fall of Troy . Isabeau , seven months pregnant , nearly fainted from heat on the first of the five days of festivities . To pay for the extravagant event , taxes were raised in Paris two months later . 
 = = Charles ' illness = = 
 Charles suffered the first of what was to become a lifelong series of bouts of insanity in 1392 when , on a hot August day outside Le Mans , he attacked his household knights , including his brother Orléans , killing four men . After the attack he fell into a coma that lasted four days . Few believed he would recover ; his uncles , the dukes of Burgundy and Berry , took advantage of his illness and quickly seized power , re @-@ establishing themselves as regents and dissolving the <unk> council . 
 The King 's sudden onset of insanity was seen by some as a sign of divine anger and punishment , and by others as the result of magic . Modern historians speculate that he may have suffered from the onset of paranoid schizophrenia . The comatose king was returned to Le Mans , where Guillaume de Harsigny — a venerated and well @-@ educated 92 @-@ year @-@ old physician — was summoned to treat him . Charles regained consciousness and his fever subsided ; he was gradually returned to Paris in September . 
 The physician recommended a program of amusements . A member of the court suggested that Charles surprise Isabeau and the other ladies by joining a group of courtiers who would disguise themselves as wild men and invade the masquerade celebrating the remarriage of Isabeau 's lady @-@ in @-@ waiting , Catherine de <unk> . This came to be known as the Bal des Ardents . Charles was almost killed and four of the dancers burned to death , when a spark from a torch brought by Orléans lit one of the dancer 's costumes . The disaster undermined confidence in Charles ' capacity to rule . Parisians considered it proof of courtly decadence and threatened to rebel against the more powerful members of the nobility . The public 's outrage forced the King and Orléans , whom a contemporary chronicler accused of attempted regicide and sorcery , into offering penance for the event . 
 Charles suffered a second and more prolonged attack of insanity the following June ; it removed him for about six months and set a pattern that would hold for the next three decades as his condition deteriorated . Froissart described the bouts of illness as so severe that the King was " far out of the way ; no medicine could help him " , although he had recovered from the first attack within months . For the first 20 years of his illness he sustained periods of lucidity , enough that he continued to rule . Suggestions were made to replace him with a regent , although there was uncertainty and debate as to whether a regency could assume the full role of a living monarch . When he was incapable of ruling , his brother Orléans , and their cousin John the Fearless , the new Duke of Burgundy , were chief among those who sought to take control of the government . 
 When Charles became ill in the 1390s , Isabeau was 22 ; she had three children and had already lost two infants . During the worst of his illness Charles was unable to recognize her , and caused her great distress by demanding her removal when she entered his chamber . The Monk of St Denis wrote in his chronicle , " What distressed her above all was to see how on all occasions ... the king repulsed her , whispering to his people , ' Who is this woman obstructing my view ? Find out what she wants and stop her from annoying and bothering me . ' " As his illness worsened at the turn of the century , she was accused of abandoning him , particularly when she moved her residence to the Hôtel Barbette . Historian Rachel Gibbons speculates that Isabeau wanted to distance herself from her husband and his illness , writing , " it would be unjust to blame her if she did not want to live with a madman . " 
 Since the King often did not recognize her during his psychotic episodes and was upset by her presence , it was eventually deemed advisable to provide him with a mistress , Odette de <unk> , the daughter of a horse @-@ dealer ; according to Tuchman , Odette is said to have resembled Isabeau and was called " the little Queen " . She had probably assumed this role by 1405 with Isabeau 's consent , but during his remissions the King still had sexual relations with his wife , whose last pregnancy occurred in 1407 . Records show that Isabeau was in the King 's chamber on 23 November 1407 , the night of Orléans ' assassination , and again in 1408 . 
 Charles ' bouts of illness continued unabated until his death . The two may have still felt mutual affection , and Isabeau exchanged gifts and letters with him during his periods of lucidity , but distanced herself during the prolonged attacks of insanity . Adams writes that Isabeau 's attachment and loyalty is evident in the great efforts she made to retain the crown for his heirs in the ensuing decades . 
 = = Political factions and early diplomatic efforts = = 
 Isabeau 's life is well documented , most likely because Charles ' illness placed her in an unusual position of power . Nevertheless , not much is known about her personal characteristics , and historians even disagree about her appearance . She is variously described as " small and brunette " or " tall and blonde " . The contemporaneous evidence is contradictory : chroniclers said of her either that she was " beautiful and hypnotic , or so obese through dropsy that she was crippled . " Despite living in France after her marriage , she spoke with a heavy German accent that never diminished , which Tuchman describes as giving her an " alien " cast at the French court . 
 Historian Tracy Adams describes Isabeau as a talented diplomat who navigated court politics with ease , grace and charisma . Charles had been crowned in 1387 , aged 20 , attaining sole control of the monarchy . His first acts included the dismissal of his uncles and the reinstatement of the so @-@ called Marmousets — a group of councilors to his father , Charles V — and he gave Orléans more responsibility . Some years later , after Charles ' first attack of illness , tensions mounted between Orléans and the royal uncles — Philip the Bold , Duke of Burgundy ; John , Duke of Berry ; and Louis II , Duke of Bourbon . Forced to assume a greater role in maintaining peace amidst the growing power struggle , which was to persist for many years , Isabeau succeeded in her role as peacekeeper among the various court factions . 
 As early as the late 1380s and early 1390s , Isabeau demonstrated that she possessed diplomatic influence when the Florentine delegation requested her political intervention in the Gian Galeazzo Visconti affair . Orléans and the Duke of Burgundy were in the pro @-@ Visconti faction while the anti @-@ Visconti faction included Isabeau , her brother , Louis VII , Duke of Bavaria , and John III , Count of Armagnac . At that time Isabeau lacked the political power to effect change . Some years later , however , at the 1396 wedding of her seven @-@ year @-@ old daughter , Isabella , to Richard II of England ( an event at which Charles attacked a herald for wearing Galeazzo 's livery ) , Isabeau successfully negotiated an alliance between France and Florence with Florentine ambassador Buonaccorso Pitti . 
 In the 1390s Jean Gerson of the University of Paris formed a council to eliminate the Western Schism , and in recognition of her negotiating skills he placed Isabeau on the council . The French wanted both the Avignon and Roman popes to abdicate in favor of a single papacy in Rome ; Clement VII in Avignon welcomed Isabeau 's presence given her record as an effective mediator . However , the effort faded when Clement VII died . 
 During his short @-@ lived recovery in the 1390s , Charles made arrangements for Isabeau to be " principal guardian of the Dauphin " , their son , until he reached 13 years of age , giving her additional political power on the regency council . Charles appointed Isabeau co @-@ guardian of their children in 1393 , a position shared with the royal dukes and her brother , Louis of Bavaria , while he gave Orléans full power of the regency . In appointing Isabeau , Charles acted under laws enacted by his father , Charles V , which gave the Queen full power to protect and educate the heir to the throne . These appointments separated power between Orléans and the royal uncles , increasing ill @-@ will among the factions . The following year , as Charles ' bouts of illness became more severe and prolonged , Isabeau became the leader of the regency council , giving her power over the royal dukes and the Constable of France , while at the same time making her vulnerable to attack from various court factions . 
 During Charles ' illness , Orléans became financially powerful as the official tax collector , and in the following decade Isabeau and Orléans agreed to raise the level of taxation . In 1401 , during one of the King 's absences , Orléans installed his own men to collect royal revenues , angering Philip the Bold who in retaliation raised an army , threatening to enter Paris with 600 men @-@ at @-@ arms and 60 knights . At that time Isabeau intervened between Orléans and Burgundy , preventing bloodshed and the outbreak of civil war . 
 Charles trusted Isabeau enough by 1402 to allow her to arbitrate the growing dispute between the Orléanists and Burgundians , and he turned control of the treasury over to her . After Philip the Bold died in 1404 and his son John the Fearless became Duke of Burgundy , the new duke continued the political strife in an attempt to gain access to the royal treasury for Burgundian interests . Orléans and the royal dukes thought John was usurping power for his own interests and Isabeau , at that time , aligned herself with Orléans to protect the interests of the crown and her children . Furthermore , she distrusted John the Fearless who she thought overstepped himself in rank — he was cousin to the King whereas Orléans was Charles ' brother . 
 Rumors that Isabeau and Orléans were lovers began to circulate , a relationship that was considered incestuous . Whether the two were intimate has been questioned by contemporary historians , including Gibbons who believes the rumor may have been planted as propaganda against Isabeau as retaliation against tax increases she and Orléans ordered in 1405 . An Augustinian friar , Jacques Legrand , preached a long sermon to the court denouncing excess and depravity , in particular mentioning Isabeau and her fashions — with exposed necks , shoulders and décolletage . The monk presented his sermon as allegory so as not to offend Isabeau overtly , but he cast her and her ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting as " furious , vengeful characters " . He said to Isabeau , " If you don 't believe me , go out into the city disguised as a poor woman , and you will hear what everyone is saying . " Thus he accused Isabeau as having lost touch with the commoners and the court with its subjects . At about the same time a satirical political pamphlet , Songe Veritable , now considered by historians to be pro @-@ Burgundian propaganda , was released and widely distributed in Paris . The pamphlet hinted at the Queen 's relations with Orléans . 
 John the Fearless accused Isabeau and Orléans of fiscal mismanagement and again demanded money for himself , in recompense for the loss of royal revenues after his father 's death ; an estimated half of Philip the Bold 's revenues had come from the French treasury . John raised a force of 1 @,@ 000 knights , and entered Paris in 1405 . Orléans hastily retreated with Isabeau to the fortified castle of Melun , with her household and children a day or so behind . John immediately left in pursuit , intercepting the party of chaperones and royal children . He took possession of the Dauphin , and returned him to Paris under control of Burgundian forces ; however , the boy 's uncle , the duke of Berry , quickly took control of the child at the orders of the Royal Council . At that time Charles was lucid for about a month and able to help with the crisis . The incident , that came to be known as the <unk> of the dauphin , almost caused full @-@ scale war , but it was averted . Orléans quickly raised an army while John encouraged Parisians to revolt . They refused , claiming loyalty to the King and his son ; Berry was made captain general of Paris and the city 's gates were locked . In October Isabeau became active in mediating the dispute , in response to a letter from Christine de Pizan and an ordinance from the Royal Council . 
 = = Orléans ' assassination and aftermath = = 
 In 1407 John the Fearless ordered Orléans ' assassination . On 23 November hired killers attacked the duke as he returned to his Paris residence , cut off his hand holding the horse 's reins , and " hacked [ him ] to death with swords , axes , and wooden clubs " . His body was left in a gutter . John first denied involvement in the assassination , but quickly admitted that the act was done for the Queen 's honor , claiming he acted to " avenge " the monarchy of the alleged adultery between Isabeau and Orléans . His royal uncles , shocked at his confession , forced him to leave Paris while the Royal Council attempted a reconciliation between the Houses of Burgundy and Orléans . 
 In March 1408 Jean Petit presented a lengthy and well @-@ attended justification at the royal palace before a large courtly audience . Petit argued convincingly that in the King 's absence Orléans became a tyrant , practiced sorcery and necromancy , was driven by greed , and had planned to commit fratricide at the Bal des Ardents . John should be exonerated , Petit argued , because he had defended the King and monarchy by assassinating Orléans . Charles , " insane during the oration " , was convinced by Petit 's argument and pardoned John the Fearless , only to rescind the pardon in September . 
 Violence again broke out after the assassination ; Isabeau had troops patrol Paris and , to protect the Dauphin Louis , Duke of Guyenne , she again left the city for Melun . In August she staged an entry to Paris for the Dauphin , and early in the new year Charles signed an ordinance giving the 13 @-@ year @-@ old the power to rule in the Queen 's absence . During these years Isabeau 's greatest concern was the Dauphin 's safety as she prepared him to take up the duties of the King ; she formed alliances to further those aims . At this point the Queen and her influence were still crucial to the power struggle . Physical control of Isabeau and her children became important to both parties and she was frequently forced to change sides , for which she was criticized and called unstable . She joined the Burgundians from 1409 to 1413 , and switched sides to form an alliance with the Orléanists from 1413 to 1415 . 
 At the Peace of Chartres in March 1409 , John the Fearless was reinstated to the Royal Council after a public reconciliation with Orléans ' son , Charles , Duke of Orléans , at Chartres Cathedral , although the feuding continued . In December that year Isabeau bestowed the <unk> ( guardianship of the Dauphin ) upon John the Fearless , made him the master of Paris , and allowed him to mentor the Dauphin , after he had Jehan de Montagu , Grand Master of the King 's household , executed . At that point the Duke essentially controlled the Dauphin and Paris , and was popular in the city because of his opposition to taxes levied by Isabeau and Orléans . Isabeau 's actions with respect to John the Fearless angered the Armagnacs , who in the fall of 1410 marched to Paris to " rescue " the Dauphin from the Duke 's influence . At that time members of the University of Paris , Jean Gerson in particular , proposed that all feuding members of the Royal Council step down and be immediately removed from power . 
 To defuse tension with the Burgundians a second double marriage was arranged in 1409 . Isabeau 's daughter Michelle married John the Fearless ' son Philip the Good ; Isabeau 's son , Dauphin Louis , married John 's daughter Margaret . Before the wedding , Isabeau negotiated a treaty with John the Fearless in which she clearly defined family hierarchy and her position in relation to the throne . 
 = = Civil war = = 
 Despite Isabeau 's efforts to keep the peace , the Armagnac – Burgundian Civil War broke out in 1411 . John gained the upper hand during the first year , but the Dauphin began to build a power base ; Christine de Pizan wrote of him that he was the savior of France . Still only 15 , he lacked the power or backing to defeat John , who fomented revolt in Paris . In retaliation against John the Fearless ' actions , Charles of Orléans denied funds from the royal treasury to all members of the royal family . In 1414 , instead of allowing her son , then 17 , to lead , Isabeau allied herself with Charles of Orléans . The Dauphin , in return , changed allegiance and joined John , which Isabeau considered unwise and dangerous . The result was continued civil war in Paris . Parisian commoners joined forces with John the Fearless in the <unk> Revolt , and at the height of the revolt a group of butchers entered Isabeau 's home in search of traitors , arresting and taking away up to 15 of her ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting . In his chronicles Pintoin wrote that Isabeau was firmly allied with the Orléanists and the 60 @,@ 000 Armagnacs who invaded Paris and Picardy . 
 King Henry V of England took advantage of the internal strife in France , invading the northwest coast , and in 1415 he delivered a crushing defeat to the French at Agincourt . Nearly an entire generation of military leaders died or were taken prisoner in a single day . John , still feuding with the royal family and the Armagnacs , remained neutral as Henry V went on to conquer towns in northern France . 
 In December 1415 Dauphin Louis died suddenly at age 18 of illness , leaving Isabeau 's political status unclear . Her 17 @-@ year @-@ old fourth @-@ born son , John of Touraine , now the Dauphin , had been raised since childhood in the household of Duke William II of Bavaria in Hainaut . Married to Countess Jacqueline of Hainaut , Dauphin John was a Burgundian sympathizer . William of Bavaria refused to send him to Paris during a period of upheaval as Burgundians plundered the city and Parisians revolted against another wave of tax increases initiated by Count Bernard VII of Armagnac ; in a period of lucidity , Charles had raised the Count to be the Constable of France . Isabeau attempted to intervene by arranging a meeting with Jacqueline in 1416 , but Armagnac refused to allow Isabeau to reconcile with the House of Burgundy , while William II continued to prevent the young Dauphin from entering Paris . 
 In 1417 Henry V invaded Normandy with 40 @,@ 000 men . In April that year Dauphin John died and another shift in power occurred when Isabeau 's sixth and last son , Charles , age 14 , became Dauphin . He was married to Armagnac 's daughter Marie of Anjou and favored the Armagnacs . At that time Armagnac imprisoned Isabeau in Tours , confiscating her personal property ( clothing , jewels and money ) , dismantling her household , and separating her from the younger children as well as her ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting . She secured her freedom in November through the help of the Duke of Burgundy . Accounts of her release vary : <unk> writes that Burgundy " delivered " her to Troyes , and Pintoin that the Duke negotiated Isabeau 's release to gain control of her authority . Isabeau maintained her alliance with Burgundy from that period until the Treaty of Troyes . 
 Isabeau at first assumed the role of sole regent but in January 1418 yielded her position to John the Fearless . Together Isabeau and John abolished parliament ( Chambre des <unk> ) and turned to securing control of Paris and the King . John took control of Paris by force on 28 May 1418 , slaughtering Armagnacs . The Dauphin fled the city . According to Pintoin 's chronicle , the Dauphin refused Isabeau 's invitation to join her in an entry to Paris . She entered the city with John on 14 July . 
 Shortly after he assumed the title of Dauphin , Charles negotiated a truce with John in Pouilly . Charles then requested a private meeting with John , on 10 September 1419 at a bridge in Montereau , promising his personal guarantee of protection . The meeting , however , was a ploy to assassinate John , whom Charles " hacked to death " on the bridge . His father , King Charles , immediately disinherited his son . The civil war ended after John 's death . The Dauphin 's actions fueled more rumor about his legitimacy , and his <unk> set the stage for the Treaty of Troyes . 
 = = Treaty of Troyes and later years = = 
 By 1419 Henry V occupied much of Normandy and demanded an oath of allegiance from the residents . The new Duke of Burgundy , Philip the Good , allied with the English , putting enormous pressure on France and Isabeau , who remained loyal to the King . In 1420 Henry sent an emissary to confer with the Queen , after which according to Adams , Isabeau " ceded to what must have been a persuasively posed argument by Henry V 's messenger " . France had effectively been left without an heir to the throne , even before the Treaty of Troyes . Charles VI had disinherited the Dauphin , whom he considered responsible for " breaking the peace for his involvement in the assassination of the duke of Burgundy " ; he wrote in 1420 of the Dauphin that he had " rendered himself unworthy to succeed to the throne or any other title " . Charles of Orléans , next in line as heir under Salic law , had been taken prisoner at the Battle of Agincourt and was kept in captivity in London . 
 In the absence of an official heir to the throne , Isabeau accompanied King Charles to sign the Treaty of Troyes in May 1420 ; Gibbons writes that the treaty " only confirmed [ the Dauphin 's ] outlaw status " . The King 's malady prevented him from appearing at the signing of the treaty , forcing Isabeau to stand in for him , which according to Gibbons gave her " perpetual responsibility in having sworn away France " . For many centuries Isabeau stood accused of relinquishing the crown because of the Treaty . Under the terms of the Treaty , Charles remained as King of France but Henry V , who married Charles ' and Isabeau 's daughter , Catherine , kept control of the territories he conquered in Normandy , would govern France with the Duke of Burgundy , and was to be Charles ' successor . Isabeau was to live in English @-@ controlled Paris . 
 Charles VI died in October 1422 . As Henry V had died earlier the same year , his infant son by Catherine , Henry VI , was proclaimed King of France , according to the terms of the Treaty of Troyes , with the Duke of Bedford acting as regent . Rumors circulated about Isabeau again ; some chronicles describe her living in a " degraded state " . According to Tuchman , Isabeau had a farmhouse built in St. Ouen where she looked after livestock , and in her later years , during a lucid episode , Charles arrested one of her lovers whom he tortured , then drowned in the Seine . Desmond Seward writes it was the disinherited Dauphin who had the man killed . Described as a former lover of Isabeau as well as a " poisoner and wife @-@ murderer " , Charles kept him as a favorite at his court until ordering his drowning . 
 Rumors about Isabeau 's promiscuity flourished , which Adams attributes to English propaganda intended to secure England 's grasp on the throne . An allegorical pamphlet , called <unk> , was published in the mid @-@ 1420s painting Isabeau and Orleans as lovers . During the same period Isabeau was contrasted with Joan of Arc , considered <unk> pure , in the allegedly popular saying " Even as France had been lost by a woman it would be saved by a woman " . Adams writes that Joan of Arc has been attributed with the words " France , having been lost by a woman , would be restored by a virgin " , but neither saying can be substantiated by contemporary documentation or chronicles . 
 In 1429 , when Isabeau lived in English @-@ occupied Paris , the accusation was again put forth that Charles VII was not the son of Charles VI . At that time , with two contenders for the French throne — the young Henry VI and disinherited Charles — this could have been propaganda to prop up the English claim . Furthermore , gossip spread that Joan of Arc was Isabeau and Orleans ' illegitimate daughter — a rumor Gibbons finds improbable because Joan of Arc almost certainly was not born for some years after Orléans ' assassination . Stories circulated that the <unk> were murdered , and attempts were made to poison the other children , all of which added to Isabeau 's reputation of one of history 's great villains . 
 Isabeau was removed from political influence and retired to live in the Hôtel Saint @-@ Pol with her brother 's second wife , Catherine of Alençon . She was accompanied by her ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting Amelie von <unk> and Madame de Moy , the latter of whom had traveled from Germany and had stayed with her as dame d 'honneur since 1409 . Isabeau died there in 1435 . Her death and funeral were documented by Jean Chartier ( member of St Denis Abbey ) who may well have been an eyewitness . 
 = = Reputation and legacy = = 
 Isabeau was dismissed by historians as a wanton , weak and indecisive leader . Modern historians now see her as taking an unusually active leadership role for a queen of her period , forced to take responsibility as a direct result of Charles ' illness . Her critics accepted skewed interpretations of her role in the negotiations with England , resulting in the Treaty of Troyes , and in the rumors of her marital infidelity with Orléans . Gibbons writes that a queen 's duty was to secure the succession to the crown and look after her husband ; historians described Isabeau as having failed in both respects , and she came to be seen as one of the great villains of history . Gibbons goes on to say that even her physical appearance is uncertain ; depictions of her vary depending on whether she was to be portrayed as good or evil . 
 Rumored to be a bad mother , she was accused of " incest , moral corruption , treason , avarice and profligacy ... political aspirations and involvements " . Adams writes that historians reassessed her reputation in the late 20th century , exonerating her of many of the accusations , seen particularly in Gibbons ' scholarship . Furthermore , Adams admits she believed the allegations against Isabeau until she delved into contemporary chronicles : there she found little evidence against the Queen except that many of the rumors came from only a few passages , and in particular from Pintoin 's pro @-@ Burgundian writing . 
 After the onset of the King 's illness , a common belief was that Charles ' mental illness and inability to rule were due to Isabeau 's witchcraft ; as early as the 1380s rumors spread that the court was steeped in sorcery . In 1397 Orléans ' wife , Valentina Visconti , was forced to leave Paris because she was accused of using magic . The court of the " mad king " attracted magicians with promises of cures who were often used as political tools by the various factions . Lists of people accused of bewitching Charles were compiled , with Isabeau and Orléans both listed . 
 The accusations of adultery were rampant . According to Pintoin 's chronicle , " [ Orléans ] clung a bit too closely to his sister @-@ in @-@ law , the young and pretty Isabeau of Bavaria , the queen . This ardent brunette was twenty @-@ two ; her husband was insane and her seductive brother @-@ in @-@ law loved to dance , beyond that we can imagine all sorts of things " . Pintoin said of the Queen and Orléans that they neglected Charles , behaved scandalously and " lived on the delights of the flesh " , spending large amounts of money on court entertainment . The alleged affair , however , is based on a single paragraph from Pintoin 's chronicles , according to Adams , and is no longer considered proof . 
 Isabeau was accused of indulging in extravagant and expensive fashions , jewel @-@ laden dresses and elaborate braided hairstyles coiled into tall shells , covered with wide double <unk> that , reportedly , required widened doorways to pass through . In 1406 a pro @-@ Burgundian satirical pamphlet in verse allegory listed Isabeau 's supposed lovers . She was accused of leading France into a civil war because of her inability to support a single faction ; she was described as an " empty headed " German ; of her children it was said that she " took pleasure in a new pregnancy only insofar as it offered her new gifts " ; and her political mistakes were attributed to her being fat . 
 In the 18th and 19th centuries historians characterized Isabeau as " an adulterous , luxurious , meddlesome , scheming , and spendthrift queen " , overlooking her political achievements and influence . A popular book written by Louise de <unk> ( 1758 – 1822 ) about the " bad " French queens prior to Marie Antoinette is , according to Adams , where " Isabeau 's black legend attains its full expression in a violent attack on the French royalty in general and queens in particular . " <unk> wrote : " Isabeau was raised by the furies to bring about the ruin of the state and to sell it to its enemies ; Isabeau of Bavaria appeared , and her marriage , celebrated in Amiens on July 17 , 1385 , would be regarded as the most horrifying moment in our history " . Isabeau was painted as Orléans ' passionate lover , and the inspiration for the Marquis de Sade 's unpublished 1813 novel Histoire secrete d <unk> de <unk> , reine de France , about which Adams writes , " submitting the queen to his ideology of gallantry , [ the Marquis de Sade ] gives her <unk> a cold and calculating violence ... a woman who carefully manages her greed for maximum gratification . " She goes on to say that de Sade admitted to " being perfectly aware that the charges against the queen are without ground . " 
 = = Patronage = = 
 Like many of the Valois , Isabeau was an appreciative art collector . She loved jewels and was responsible for the commissions of particularly lavish pieces of ronde @-@ bosse — a newly developed technique of making enamel @-@ covered gold pieces . Documentation suggests she commissioned several fine pieces of tableaux d 'or from Parisian goldsmiths . 
 In 1404 , Isabeau gave Charles a spectacular ronde @-@ bosse , known as the Little Golden Horse Shrine , ( or <unk> <unk> ) , now held in a convent church in <unk> , Bavaria . Contemporary documents identify the statuette as a New Year 's gift — an <unk> — a Roman custom Charles revived to establish rank and alliances during the period of factionalism and war . With the exception of manuscripts , the Little Golden Horse is the single surviving documented <unk> of the period . Weighing 26 pounds ( 12 kg ) the gold piece is encrusted with rubies , sapphires and pearls . It depicts Charles kneeling on a platform above a double set of stairs , presenting himself to the Virgin Mary and child Jesus , who are attended by John the Evangelist and John the Baptist . A jewel encrusted trellis or bower is above ; beneath stands a squire holding the golden horse . Isabeau also exchanged New Year 's gifts with the Duke of Berry ; one extant piece is the ronde @-@ bosse statuette Saint Catherine . 
 Medieval author Christine de Pizan solicited the Queen 's patronage at least three times . In 1402 she sent a compilation of her literary argument <unk> du Roman de la Rose — in which she questions the concept of courtly love — with a letter exclaiming " I am firmly convinced the feminine cause is worthy of defense . This I do here and have done with my other works . " In 1410 and again in 1411 , Pizan solicited the Queen , presenting her in 1414 an illuminated copy of her works . In The Book of the City of Ladies , Pizan praised Isabeau lavishly , and again in the illuminated collection , The Letter of <unk> , which scholar Karen Green believes for de Pizan is " the culmination of fifteen years of service during which Christine formulated an ideology that supported Isabeau 's right to rule as regent in this time of crisis . " 
 Isabeau showed great piety , essential for a queen of her period . During her lifetime , and in her will , she bequeathed property and personal possessions to Notre Dame , St. Denis , and the convent in Poissy . 
 = = Children = = 
 According to modern historians Isabeau stayed in close proximity to the children during their childhood , had them travel with her , bought them gifts , wrote letters , bought devotional texts , and arranged for her daughters to be educated . She resisted separation and reacted against having her sons sent to other households to live ( as was the custom at the time ) . Pintoin records she was dismayed at the marriage contract that stipulated her third surviving son , John , be sent to live in Hainaut . She maintained relationships with her daughters after their marriages , writing letters to them frequently . She sent them out of Paris during an outbreak of plague , staying behind herself with the youngest infant , John , too young to travel . The <unk> allowed " whenever and as often as she liked , she and her could enter the monastery and church ... their vineyards and gardens , both for devotion and for entertainment and pleasure of herself and her children . " 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Weezer ( 1994 album ) = 
 Weezer ( also known as The Blue Album ) is the debut studio album by the American rock band Weezer , released on May 10 , 1994 , through DGC Records . The album was produced by Cars frontman Ric Ocasek and recorded in Electric Lady Studios in New York City . The Blue Album was produced by three singles : " Undone – The Sweater Song " , " Buddy Holly " and " Say It Ain 't So " , which brought Weezer mainstream success , helped by music videos directed by Spike Jonze . 
 As of August 2009 , the album had sold over 3 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . The album debuted at number 16 on the Billboard 200 and became a certified triple @-@ platinum in the United States and became a certified double @-@ platinum in Canada . 
 = = Background = = 
 Weezer was formed on February 14 , 1992 , in Los Angeles by Rivers Cuomo , Patrick Wilson , Matt Sharp , and Jason Cropper . At the time , they would play at clubs and other small venues around L.A .. However , it took a long time for the band to gain popularity . Cuomo explained : 
 ... I remember just being totally shocked at how little people responded to us , because I thought we were so good . I mean , we were playing the same songs that eventually became big hits , like ' The Sweater Song ' and ' Say It Ain 't So , ' and we 'd play ' em out in the L.A. clubs would just be like , ' Go away . We want a grunge <unk> 
 Weezer recorded The Kitchen Tapes as an attempt to create a buzz around L.A. The band eventually attracted attention from major @-@ label A & R reps looking for alternative rock bands while performing on the same bill as the band That Dog . They were then signed to DGC Records on June 26 , 1993 , by Todd Sullivan , an A & R rep from Geffen Records . 
 = = Recording = = 
 While prepping for the forthcoming studio sessions , the band focused on their vocal interplay by practicing barbershop quartet @-@ styled songs , which helped both Cuomo and Sharp achieve a newfound collaborative comfort during rehearsals . Sharp , who never sang before joining Weezer , developed his falsetto backing vocal : " I had to sing an octave higher than Rivers . After a lot of practice , I started to get it down . " Fifteen songs were rehearsed for the album pre @-@ production sessions in New York in preparation for the Electric Lady Studios recording sessions . Four songs from this rehearsal would not be attempted for the album : " Lullaby for Wayne " , " I Swear It 's True " , " Getting Up and Leaving " , and a reprise version of " In The Garage " . The other song , an ode to two women who ran the Weezer fanclub called " Mykel & Carli " , was attempted during the Electric Lady sessions , but was also abandoned ( this recording would later be released as a digital bonus track on the 2010 Death to False Metal album ) . A later re @-@ recording of " Mykel & Carli " would be featured as a B @-@ side on the " Undone - The Sweater Song " single . 
 The band briefly considered self @-@ producing , but were pressured by Geffen to choose a producer . They ultimately decided on Ric Ocasek ; Cuomo explained his choice : " I 'd always admired The Cars and Ric Ocasek 's songwriting and production skills . " During production , Ocasek convinced the band to change their guitar pickup from the neck pick @-@ up to the bridge pick @-@ up , resulting in a brighter sound . During these sessions , founding guitarist Jason Cropper left the band and was replaced by current guitarist Brian Bell , leading to some speculation about how much Bell contributed to the album . While Bell 's vocals are clearly audible on some tracks , Cuomo re @-@ recorded all of Cropper 's guitar parts . According to Ocasek , all ten tracks were laid down by Cuomo in one day , each in one take . However , Bell is still credited for playing guitar in the album liner notes . Cropper 's writing credit on " My Name Is Jonas " is earned by his coming up with the intro to the song . 
 = = Writing and composition = = 
 Most of the album was written by Rivers Cuomo . Exceptions are " My Name Is Jonas " , which was co @-@ written with Jason Cropper and Patrick Wilson , and " Surf Wax America " and " The World Has Turned and Left Me Here " , which were composed and written by Cuomo and Wilson . Weezer touches upon various life experiences of Cuomo , including subjects such as his brother 's car accident , heartbreak , jealousy , alcohol , and former girlfriends . Weezer incorporates the genres alternative rock and power pop . 
 Many songs from the album are inspired by Cuomo 's past personal experiences . " My Name is Jonas " , deals with Cuomo 's brother Leaves who had been seriously injured in a car accident while a student at Oberlin College and was having problem with his insurance . Jason Cropper earned co @-@ writing credit for coming up with the intro to the song . Both " No One Else " and " The World Has Turned and Left Me Here " are lyrically connected , with Cuomo describing the narrator of " No One Else " as " the jealous @-@ obsessive asshole in me freaking out on my girlfriend " and claiming that " ' The World has Turned and Left Me Here ' is the same asshole wondering why she 's gone . " The second single from The Blue Album was " Buddy Holly " , whose music video was also directed by Spike Jonze . It portrayed the band performing at the original Arnold 's Drive @-@ In diner from the popular 1970s television show , Happy Days . The video combined contemporary footage of the band with clips from the show . Happy Days cast member Al Molinaro made a cameo appearance in the video . The video was met with great popularity and heavy rotation on MTV . The music video was also featured as an extra in the Microsoft Windows 95 Upgrade CD , along with Edie Brickell 's " Good Times " music video and the movie trailer for Rob Roy . The video won four awards at the 1995 MTV Video Music Awards , including prizes for Breakthrough Video and Best Alternative Video . 
 The single " Undone - The Sweater Song " was described by Cuomo as " the feeling you get when the train stops and the little guy comes <unk> ' on your door . It was supposed to be a sad song , but everyone thinks it 's hilarious . " The video marks one of the early directorial efforts of Spike Jonze , whose pitch was simply " A blue stage , a steadicam , a pack of wild dogs . " The video became an instant hit on MTV . The final single , " Say it Ain 't So " , was again inspired by Cuomo believing his parents split up when he was four because he thought his dad was an alcoholic . The music video , which was directed by Sophie Muller , was less successful than the previous Spike Jonze @-@ directed video . It featured the band performing in the garage of their former house , and the bandmates playing hacky sack in the backyard . 
 = = Artwork = = 
 The album artwork , photographed by American glamour photographer Peter Gowland , features Patrick Wilson , Rivers Cuomo , Matt Sharp , and Brian Bell standing left to right in front of a plain , blue background . The simple image would be used prominently in the advertising of the album . The cover received many comparisons to the Feelies ' album Crazy Rhythms . 
 In an interview with Adobe , for the Adobe Imagination Challenge , Cuomo revealed that Adobe Photoshop was used to digitally alter the cover . Cuomo stated that , while the band liked the chosen band photo for the cover , Matt Sharp was not happy with the way his head looked . The Geffen Art Director used Photoshop to swap out the head with one from another shot . 
 On some vinyl pressings of the album , the cover does not crop off their feet . On the Deluxe Edition case the feet are presented on the back cover , and the band sold an official T @-@ shirt with a shot of the band 's feet after the deluxe edition release . 
 Inside the album booklet , Rivers Cuomo pays tribute to his past metal influences with a photo taken in the group 's garage on Amherst ( this same garage would be featured in the " Say It Ain 't So " music video ) . A poster of Judas Priest 's album British Steel is featured on the left side of the photo , while on the right a Quiet Riot concert poster is displayed . The Deluxe Edition features additional photographs of the band and hand @-@ written lyrics for each song . 
 = = Release = = 
 The Blue Album was released on May 10 , 1994 . It was certified gold just under seven months later on December 1 , 1994 , and certified platinum on January 1 , 1995 ; since then it has gone three times multi @-@ platinum in the United States . The album peaked at No. 16 on the Billboard 200 . As a single , " Undone – The Sweater Song " peaked at No. 35 on the UK Top 40 , and " Buddy Holly " and " Say It Ain 't So " peaked at No. 12 and No. 37 on the UK Top 40 respectively . In the U.S. , " Buddy Holly " peaked at No. 17 on the Billboard Hot 100 Airplay chart . 
 A " deluxe edition " of the album was released on March 23 , 2004 , including the original album and a second disc , Dusty Gems and Raw Nuggets , containing B @-@ sides and rarities . As of December 2007 , the " deluxe edition " had sold 86 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Initial = = = 
 The album was well received by critics . Rolling Stone praised the album in their year @-@ end review , saying " Weezer 's Rivers Cuomo is great at sketching vignettes ( the Dungeons and Dragons games and Kiss posters that inspire the hapless daydreamer of ' In the Garage ' ) , and with sweet inspiration like the waltz tempo of ' My Name Is Jonas ' and the self @-@ deprecating humor of lines like " I look just like Buddy Holly / And you 're Mary Tyler Moore " , his songs easily ingratiate . " Robert Christgau of The Village Voice was less complimentary and awarded the album a " neither " rating . 
 = = = Retrospect = = = 
 In the years since its release , The Blue Album has risen in stature to become one of the most highly regarded albums of the 1990s , appearing on many " Best @-@ of " lists . In 2003 , Rolling Stone ranked the album number 297 on their list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . In 2002 , the readers of Rolling Stone ranked the album the 21st greatest of all time . Blender named The Blue Album among the " 500 CDs You Must Own " , calling the album " Absolute geek @-@ rock , out and proud . " Non @-@ U.S. publications have acclaimed the album as well : New Zealand 's The Movement placed it at number 39 on a list of " The 101 Best Albums of the 90s " , and Visions of Germany ranked it number 32 on a list of " The Most Important Albums of the 90s . " In November 2011 , The Blue Album was ranked number three on Guitar World magazine 's top ten list of guitar albums of 1994 , with Bad Religion 's Stranger than Fiction and The Offspring 's Smash in first and second place respectively . The album also peaked at number 25 on Guitar World 's " Superunknown : 50 Iconic Albums That Defined 1994 " list . 
 Reviews of the album when its deluxe edition was released have reflected its rise in stature continuing to be positive . In 2004 , PopMatters gave the album a very positive review , saying " I 'd go so far to declare the ' Blue Album ' one of the greatest records of the last 20 years . " And Rolling Stone reiterated their original positive review by further describing it as " big , vibrant pop @-@ rock that would inspire thousands of emo kids . " Blogcritics Magazine gave the album a score of 10 / 10 and asserted that " this is one of the most important debut albums of the last ten years . " 
 In naming Weezer the 26th best album of the 1990s , Pitchfork summed up the album 's critical recognition : 
 An album so substantial the band misguidedly attempted to tap into its resonance through cover graphics a mere two releases later . In 1994 , 70s rock had come to mean either a bastardized version of Led Zeppelin or a bullshit reconstruction of punk rock . As guitar nerds , Weezer sought influence there but found true inspiration in forgotten bubblegum power @-@ pop like Cheap Trick , Raspberries , 20 / 20 , and The Quick . Most impressively , Rivers Cuomo rescued the thrilling guitar solo from finger @-@ tapping metal and disregarding grunge / punk . A decade later air @-@ <unk> to the album feels far less embarrassing than singing along . With the help of Spike Jonze , Weezer kept joy alive in arena rock , making the critical repositioning of Weezer as some emo touchstone even more <unk> . They called themselves Weezer , knowingly , for <unk> . – Brent DiCrescenzo 
 NME claimed that the album " pretty much invented emo 's melodic wing " . AllMusic gave the album 5 stars , explaining " What makes the band so enjoyable is their charming geekiness ; instead of singing about despair , they sing about love , which is kind of refreshing in the gloom @-@ drenched world of ' 90s guitar @-@ pop . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Since its release , The Blue Album has featured heavily in various " must have " lists compiled by the music media . Some of the more prominent of these lists to feature The Blue Album are shown below ; this information is adapted from Acclaimed Music . 
 ( * ) designates lists which are unordered . 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 In 2011 , Alvin and the Chipmunks and The Chipettes covered the song " Holiday " as a bonus track on the iTunes deluxe edition of the soundtrack Alvin and the Chipmunks : Chipwrecked : Music from the Motion Picture . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Rivers Cuomo , except where noted . 
 = = = Deluxe edition bonus disc = = = 
 The 2004 deluxe edition included a bonus disc titled Dusty Gems and Raw Nuggets . 
 The tracks on the bonus disc originally appeared on the following releases : 
 Tracks 1 and 3 from " Undone - The Sweater Song " single ( 1994 ) 
 Track 2 is from the soundtrack to Mallrats ; an earlier mix of the same song was included on the " Undone " single 
 Track 4 from DGC Rarities compilation ( 1994 ) 
 Tracks 5 and 6 from " Buddy Holly " single ( 1994 ) 
 Tracks 7 and 8 from " Say It Ain 't So " single ( 1995 ) 
 Tracks 9 – 11 previously unreleased , and part of Kitchen Tape demo ( 1992 ) 
 Tracks 12 and 13 previously unreleased , pre @-@ production recordings done with Ric Ocasek just prior to Weezer 's recording ( 1993 ) 
 Track 14 is the version featured on the original release of the album . The mix was changed for the single and was later added to newer versions of the album . The single mix is the version included on Disc 1 of this Deluxe Edition . 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Rivers Cuomo – lead vocals , lead and rhythm guitars , keyboards , harmonica 
 Brian Bell – backing vocals 
 Matt Sharp – bass , backing vocals 
 Patrick Wilson – drums , percussion , backing vocals 
 Mykel Allan - spoken intermission on " Undone - The Sweater Song " 
 Karl Koch - dialogue on " Undone - The Sweater Song " 
 Ric Ocasek – producer 
 Chris Shaw – engineer 
 Hal Belknap – assistant engineer 
 Brian Bell does not actually play guitar on the album despite being credited as such in the liner notes . 
 = 300 @-@ page iPhone bill = 
 A 300 @-@ page iPhone bill from AT & T Mobility mailed in a box was the subject of a viral video made by YouTube personality Justine Ezarik , best known as <unk> , which became an Internet meme in August 2007 . Ezarik 's video focused on the unnecessary waste of paper , as the detailed bill itemized all data transfers made during the billing period , including every email and text message . Stories of unexpected billing issues began to circulate in blogs and the technical press after the Apple iPhone 's heavily advertised and anticipated release , but this video clip brought the voluminous bills to the attention of the mass media . 
 Ten days later , after the video had been viewed more than 3 million times on the Internet and had received international news coverage , AT & T sent iPhone users a text message outlining changes in its billing practices . The information technology magazine Computerworld included this incident in its list of " Technology 's 10 Most <unk> Moments " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Apple released the iPhone in the United States with a software " lock " so it could only be used on the AT & T Mobility network . After purchase , buyers activated their iPhone 's AT & T service contract using the Apple iTunes software , during which buyers had the ability to choose their billing preference ; however , if no option was specified during activation , AT & T defaulted to detailed billing . Detailed billing itemized every data transfer , including background traffic for e @-@ mail , text messaging , and Web browsing . This generated a large number of entries on the detailed bills . 
 After a month 's time , as early adopters started receiving their first monthly bills , stories of unusually large and expensive iPhone bills began to circulate . The 300 @-@ page bill was exceptional , but other heavy users received 50- to 100 @-@ page bills . One of the first to attract wider attention was from Ben Kuchera , gaming editor for the technology @-@ related website Ars Technica , who described his 34 @-@ sheet , double @-@ sided bill and another 104 @-@ page bill sent to a colleague , writing , " While many of us have had smart @-@ phones for some time , we 've never seen a bill like this . " However , it was the release of Justine Ezarik 's video that acted as a catalyst to bring widespread media attention to this aspect of the iPhone story . 
 = = Video = = 
 Justine Ezarik , then a 23 @-@ year @-@ old Pittsburgh @-@ area graphic designer and sketch comedian , who video blogged under the name <unk> , received her 300 @-@ page bill on Saturday , August 11 , 2007 and decided to use it as a prop for a self @-@ produced video shot in a coffee shop . She posted the edited one @-@ minute clip to several popular Internet video hosting services by the following Monday . In the first week , the video received over 500 @,@ 000 total views on YouTube , 350 @,@ 000 views on <unk> , 500 @,@ 000 views on <unk> and 1 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 views on Yahoo Video , as self @-@ reported by the four popular Internet video sites as of August 22 . Total views were reported to exceed 8 million by the end of 2007 . Ezarik said she earned $ 2 @,@ 000 from the video from <unk> . 
 Portions of the video were also televised along with one @-@ on @-@ one interviews with Ezarik by several national and local news programs in the United States , including CNN , Fox News Channel , WTAE @-@ TV , and WPXI @-@ TV . ABC News Now also included independent reporting by an ABC News Radio reporter in their video interview . 
 Ezarik 's Internet video commentary focused on the unnecessary waste of paper billing . In the video she highlights the physical size of the bill , not the amount due . " I have an iPhone and I had to switch to AT & T. So , that 's wonderful . Well , I got my first AT & T bill , right here in a box , " she says at the start of the video . The rest of the video , set to the distinctive music used in American iPhone television commercials , shows her opening the box and flipping through the pages in fast motion . The clip ends with the on @-@ screen caption , " Use e @-@ billing . Save a forest . " 
 Her other comments also followed along the same lines . In a blog posting , she wrote , " Apparently , they give you a detailed transaction of every text message sent and received . Completely unnecessary . " She told a USA Today reporter , " This is so silly , there 's no reason they need to send you this much information . " Ezarik is a heavy user who typically sends and receives tens of thousands of text messages a month , which generated an exceptionally long , $ 275 bill – 300 double @-@ sided pages that had to be sent in a box with postage charges of $ 7 . 
 She had no complaints about the iPhone itself , saying , " I made the video only to point out the comical aspect of my phone bill being delivered in a box . As for the iPhone ? I love it . " 
 = = Reaction = = 
 = = = Company = = = 
 AT & T Mobility , the mobile phone service provider for the iPhone , said through spokesman Mark Siegel that the size of this bill was exceptional . " We 're not sending lots of boxed bills to customers , " he told USA Today . He said that the billing is the same for all AT & T mobile users , but the popularity and functionality of the iPhone gave it new visibility . " It 's no different than with any other bill for any other device or any other service that we offer . " 
 Later , on August 18 , AT & T issued a statement saying : " Our customers have the option of receiving a bill that is detail @-@ free . Also , we have for years encouraged our customers to switch to online billing because it is convenient , secure , and environmentally friendly . " Then , on August 22 , AT & T announced via text message to iPhone users that it was removing itemized detail from paper bills . Ezarik responded , " Looks like they may have got the message , " in response to AT & T 's action . Company spokeswoman Lauren Garner claimed public reaction was not the reason for the company 's switch from detailed to summary billing , saying , " This was something we planned all along . " 
 = = = Industry = = = 
 AT & T may not have anticipated the downstream effects of iPhone customers ' high data usage . As a result , AT & T call centers were flooded with complaints about the size of the bills . 
 Internet reporter Dana <unk> stated that the size of the bill illustrated a problem with the telephone companies ' " event based " or connection @-@ oriented business model and used it to argue for open spectrum in a radio frequency spectrum auction in the U.S. scheduled for 2008 . He contrasted how telephone billing considers every action a separately <unk> event , while the Internet model is based on a flat fee for best @-@ effort delivery in <unk> mode transmission . 
 The information technology magazine Computerworld reported on the incident , saying the company 's " extraordinarily detailed billing process resulted in some users receiving bills that ran dozens or even hundreds of pages long . " It published the gaffe in its list of " Technology 's 10 Most <unk> Moments " . 
 = = = Environmental = = = 
 Rob Enderle , a Silicon Valley tech analyst , also echoed Ezarik 's environmental activism , saying , " AT & T should get a new tagline – use AT & T , kill a tree . " The USA Today story was also titled " How many trees did your iPhone bill kill ? " According to blogger Muhammad Saleem , Apple 's aim to have 10 million iPhone users by the end of 2008 would require the logging of about 74 @,@ 535 trees annually , assuming an average 100 @-@ page monthly bill . An editorial in The Blade , an independent newspaper in Toledo , Ohio , called the detailed billing " absurd and environmentally wasteful " . 
 = = = Security = = = 
 One security conscious commenter on the Engadget consumer electronics blog addressed the privacy implications of the oversize bills given the limitations of personal paper shredders , by speculating on whether it would be more practical to dispose of these large bills by burning them to protect personal information . An editor for the libertarian monthly Reason also speculated about the usefulness of the detailed information to government investigators . The original Ars Technica blog posting , on the other hand , dismissed privacy concerns , showing that the detail pages do not contain sensitive information . 
 = = Other outsized iPhone bills = = 
 Press accounts of this story also included related details and comments : 
 The founder of a Tampa , Florida think tank received a 42 @-@ page bill and told a reporter , " It 's ridiculous . " 
 An Oak Harbor , Ohio teacher called his 52 @-@ page bill " the biggest phone bill I 've ever gotten in my life " . 
 A partner of a Macintosh consulting firm called his bill " 60 pages of nothingness " . 
 A business consultant from Virginia received a 62 @-@ page bill and asked a reporter , " Why would you send bills that large ? " 
 A software company owner near Seattle , Washington posted on his blog a picture of a Maltese dog sitting on his 127 @-@ page bill spread out on the <unk> and asked , " Has anyone on the Apple Environmental Team seen an AT & T bill ? " 
 " The Packet Rat " columnist wrote in Government Computer News that his wife received a 150 @-@ page boxed iPhone bill and commented , " OK , how many trees did they have to kill to send out the first month 's bills ? " 
 = Craig Conroy = 
 Craig Michael Conroy ( born September 4 , 1971 ) is an American former professional ice hockey player and the current assistant general manager of the Calgary Flames of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . A sixth @-@ round selection of the Montreal Canadiens at the 1990 NHL Entry Draft , Conroy played 1 @,@ 009 NHL games for the Canadiens , St. Louis Blues , Calgary Flames and Los Angeles Kings during a professional career that spanned from 1994 to 2011 . Internationally , he twice played with the United States National Team – at the 2004 World Cup of Hockey and the 2006 Winter Olympics . 
 Developed as a defensive specialist through much of his career , Conroy was twice a finalist for the Frank J. Selke Trophy as the NHL 's top defensive forward , and was nominated for the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy as its most gentlemanly player . He played over 1 @,@ 000 games in the NHL and was the second @-@ oldest player in League history to reach that milestone . Conroy , who enjoyed his greatest offensive seasons with the Flames , is a former captain of the team and was twice honored by the organization for his leadership , dedication and humanitarian efforts . 
 = = Early life = = 
 An only child , Conroy was born and raised in Potsdam , New York . He attended high school at Northwood School . His father Mike played minor league hockey for the Syracuse Blazers and at the age of four years Conroy served as the team 's mascot prior to games . 
 Conroy followed in the footsteps of his father and two uncles in playing hockey at Clarkson University for the Golden Knights . He enrolled at Clarkson in 1990 and played four seasons for the school . During his junior season of 1992 – 93 , Conroy scored two goals in a 5 – 3 victory over Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in the Eastern College Athletic Conference ( ECAC ) semi @-@ final to help lead his team to the conference championship game . Conroy reached 100 career points with the goals , joining his father Mike as the only such pair in Clarkson 's history to reach that milestone . Conroy and the Golden Knights then won the ECAC title with a 3 – 1 victory over Brown University . 
 The Golden Knights made Conroy a co @-@ captain in his senior year of 1993 – 94 . He led the ECAC in scoring with 66 points and was named to the conference 's First All @-@ Star Team , the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) First All @-@ Star Team and the NCAA Final Four All @-@ Tournament Team . He was also a finalist for the Hobey Baker Award as top player in the NCAA , finishing second to Chris <unk> . His Clarkson jersey ( number 7 ) was retired in a ceremony prior to a game against College of Holy Cross on October 20 , 2012 , in which he and his family attended . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Montreal and St. Louis = = = 
 Conroy was selected in the sixth round , 123rd overall , at the 1990 NHL Entry Draft by the Montreal Canadiens . He turned professional in 1994 upon completing his college career in Clarkson . At his first day of his first training camp with Montreal , he got into a fight with the team 's star goaltender , Patrick Roy , after striking the latter with a slap shot in practice . He spent the majority of the 1994 – 95 season in the American Hockey League ( AHL ) with the Fredericton Canadiens , scoring 26 goals and 44 points in 55 games . He appeared in six games for Montreal that year . He played his first NHL game on February 15 , 1995 , against the Hartford Whalers , and scored his first goal one night later against the New York Rangers . Though he was an offensive star at Clarkson and Fredericton , the Canadiens sought to convert him to a defensive specialist in the NHL . 
 While he averaged over one point per game with Fredericton in 1995 – 96 , Conroy again played only a handful of games with Montreal . He again began 1996 – 97 in the AHL , but was traded along with Pierre Turgeon and Rory Fitzpatrick to the St. Louis Blues in exchange for Murray Baron , Shayne Corson and a draft pick on October 29 , 1996 . Conroy appeared in five games with the Worcester <unk> in the AHL , but after earning a recall to St. Louis , established himself as a regular in the NHL and appeared in 61 games with the Blues that season . Head Coach Joel Quenneville worked to develop Conroy 's abilities as a defensive forward and top faceoff specialist . Conroy responded in 1997 – 98 by improving to 43 points and a career @-@ high plus @-@ minus rating of + 20 . In recognition of his season , he was named a finalist for both the Frank J. Selke Trophy as the NHL 's top defensive forward and the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy as its most gentlemanly player . 
 Conroy remained one of the League 's top defensive forwards in 1998 – 99 . While he missed several games with a high ankle sprain , he scored his first career hat @-@ trick on February 26 , 1999 , against the Calgary Flames and finished sixth in Selke Trophy voting that season . He faced a difficult season in 1999 – 2000 , however , as Joel <unk> adopted a new strategy that abandoned the concept of a checking line . Conroy struggled at both ends of the ice , and frequently found his ice time limited as a result . He finished the season with just 27 points . 
 Looking to improve their team for a playoff run in 2000 – 01 , the Blues dealt Conroy , along with a draft pick , to the Calgary Flames for Cory Stillman . The trade was initially unpopular in Calgary , as the Flames had given up their leading scorer for Conroy , who noted that that was when he " learned not to read the papers or watch TV . " 
 = = = Calgary and Los Angeles = = = 
 Opinion of the deal shifted considerably the following season as Conroy established himself as the Flames ' first line center alongside Jarome Iginla . The pair developed good chemistry and became strong friends . Conroy scored career highs with 28 goals and 75 points , while Iginla reached the 50 @-@ goal plateau for the first time and led the NHL in scoring . Iginla credited Conroy for making his breakout season possible . Additionally , Conroy was named a finalist for the Selke Trophy for a second time . The Flames named him a co @-@ captain along with Bob Boughner late in the 2001 – 02 season , and he held the role full @-@ time in 2002 – 03 . 
 Conroy was the Flames second @-@ leading scorer in 2002 – 03 with 59 points and again in 2003 – 04 when he scored 47 points despite missing 19 games with a knee injury . Shortly before the 2003 @-@ 04 season began , Conroy gave up the captaincy after having decided it was time for Iginla to take over leadership of the team . He reached two milestones that season ; he scored his 300th career point against the Vancouver Canucks on November 29 , 2003 and played his 600th game against the Detroit Red Wings on March 16 , 2004 . The Flames qualified for the 2004 playoffs , their first trip to the post @-@ season in eight seasons . Conroy was a key player for the team as they upset the top three seeds in the Western Conference , the Canucks , Red Wings and San Jose Sharks en route to a seventh game loss to the Tampa Bay Lightning in the Stanley Cup Final . He finished second on the team in playoff scoring with 17 points . Following the season , Conroy was named to play with Team USA at the 2004 World Cup of Hockey , but appeared in only two games for the team . 
 Conroy left the Flames as a free agent following the playoff run , opting to sign a four @-@ year , US $ 12 million contract with the Los Angeles Kings . He later admitted that he did not truly wish to leave the Flames , but facing financial uncertainty with the 2004 – 05 NHL lockout looming , Conroy chose to accept the guaranteed contract . The lockout wiped out the first year of the deal , but he returned in 2005 – 06 to reach the 20 @-@ goal mark for the third time and 60 points for the second time in his career . During that season , he joined the United States national team for a second time , playing in the 2006 Winter Olympics . He appeared in six games , scoring one goal and five points for the eighth place Americans . 
 Conroy struggled under new coach Marc Crawford early in the 2006 – 07 season , falling to five goals and 16 points in 52 games for the Kings before he was traded back to the Flames on January 29 , 2007 , in exchange for Jamie <unk> and two draft picks . An emotional Conroy , who said he was happy to return to Calgary , scored two goals the following night in his second debut with the Flames to defeat his former Kings teammates , 4 – 1 . Conroy finished the season by scoring 21 points in 28 games for Calgary , then scored 34 points in 2007 – 08 . 
 The Flames re @-@ signed Conroy to a new contract prior to the 2008 – 09 season and named him an alternate captain . He scored his 500th career point on January 3 , 2009 , when he assisted on Todd Bertuzzi 's game @-@ winning goal in a 3 – 2 win against the Nashville Predators , and finished the year with 48 points . The 2009 – 10 season proved a difficult one for Conroy , as he scored only three goals and 12 assists during a season shortened by wrist and knee injures along with a broken foot . He returned for another season as the Flames re @-@ signed him to a one @-@ year , two @-@ way contract for the League minimum of $ 500 @,@ 000 . At the age of 39 years , Conroy played his 1,000th NHL game , against the Colorado Avalanche , on October 28 , 2010 . Only Grant Ledyard was older ( age 40 ) when he reached that milestone . 
 Conroy played only nine more games after passing the milestone , and last played on December 20 against the Minnesota Wild . A healthy scratch in 32 of 50 games , and 28 of his final 29 , Conroy was waived on January 25 , 2011 . After going unclaimed , he was left with the option of joining Calgary 's AHL affiliate in Abbotsford or retiring . One week later , on February 4 , 2011 , Conroy formally announced his retirement and accepted a management position with the Flames organization , becoming the special assistant to General Manager Jay Feaster . On June 6 , 2014 , Conroy was promoted to the position of assistant general manager , reporting to GM Brad <unk> . 
 = = Off the ice = = 
 Conroy has a wife , Jessie , and three daughters , Taylor , Sophia and Sydney . Conroy and his family chose to remain in Calgary following his retirement as a player , though they had considered other options including returning to his home town of Potsdam , New York . 
 Conroy is known for his outgoing and talkative nature , traits that have made him a popular figure with the fans . The Flames honored Conroy with the J. R. " Bud " McCaig Award , given by the organization to individuals that show respect , courtesy and compassion , in 2008 – 09 . He was also named him the winner of the Ralph T. Scurfield Humanitarian Award in 2010 in recognition of his charitable efforts . Additionally , his teammates voted him the organization 's nominee for the King Clancy Memorial Trophy which is awarded to the player who best exemplifies leadership and humanitarian contributions to their community . Conroy is the spokesman for the team 's charitable organization , the Flames Foundation for Life and routinely participates in team events . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 = From The Doctor to my son Thomas = 
 " From The Doctor to my son Thomas " is a viral video recorded by actor Peter Capaldi and sent to autistic nine @-@ year @-@ old Thomas Goodall to console the child over grief from the death of Goodall 's grandmother . Capaldi filmed the video in character as the 12th incarnation of the Doctor in the BBC science @-@ fiction series Doctor Who . Capaldi 's message had a positive effect on Thomas ; his father said the boy smiled for the first time since learning of his grandmother 's death and gained the courage to go to her funeral . 
 Thomas 's father Ross Goodall posted the video to YouTube on 6 November 2014 . He later explained to media that he wanted to make the video available to his family and had no idea it would become popular online . CNN reported that after its appearance on YouTube , the video was viewed over 200 @,@ 000 times in its first 48 @-@ hours online . This more than doubled the next day , and less than a week later it had over 900 @,@ 000 total views . BBC News observed that Capaldi 's message had become a viral video , and ITV News described response to the video as a global phenomenon . 
 The Guardian and The Daily Telegraph called the recording by Capaldi a touching video to a young child suffering from grief . CNN and MTV characterised the video similarly , as did Spanish and Dutch media . The Independent wrote that Capaldi displayed a kinder face of his personality by sending the message . BT commented it was Capaldi 's best contribution as the character of the Doctor to date . 
 The video had a positive impact on those with mental health problems . Autism Daily Newscast reported favourably on Capaldi 's actions . The Hollywood Reporter observed that as his character the Doctor , Capaldi was using his role to support mental health . Hollywood Life said their reporters were moved to tears after watching Capaldi 's video . Peter Harness , writer of the episode " Kill the Moon " , said Capaldi 's video was his favourite highlight from ten years of Doctor Who . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Scottish actor and film director Peter Capaldi was cast in 2013 as the 12th incarnation of the Doctor , in the BBC science @-@ fiction series Doctor Who . His casting was announced on 4 August 2013 in a special BBC programme hosted by Zoë Ball . Capaldi first appeared as the Doctor in a cameo in the 50th anniversary special , " The Day of the Doctor " , before appearing in the 2013 Christmas special , " The Time of the Doctor " . A lifelong fan of the series , Capaldi had played Lobus Caecilius in the 2008 episode " The Fires of Pompeii " and a civil servant , John Frobisher , in the 2009 spin @-@ off Torchwood : Children of Earth . 
 Before taking the role , Capaldi said that he had to seriously consider the increased visibility that would come with the part . He said in an interview with Entertainment Weekly that he had been invited to audition for the role of the Eighth Doctor in 1995 before the production of the 1996 TV film but did not go because he was unsure if he would get the part and did not wish to be part of a large group of actors turned down for the role . 
 = = Prior correspondence = = 
 Thomas Goodall had been a devoted fan of Doctor Who from North Baddesley in Hampshire since the age of two , and wrote a letter to Peter Capaldi saying he hoped the actor found success in his new role portraying the Doctor . The Goodall family were all fans of Doctor Who , describing themselves as <unk> . Thomas decorated his home with objects related to the television series . Capaldi wrote back to Thomas thanking him , and sent a note to the child 's father saying he intended to send a video message . Capaldi enclosed guidance to Ross Goodall on how to organise a tour of the production studios for Doctor Who . 
 Ross Goodall subsequently communicated with Capaldi through the actor 's agent , to inform him that Thomas 's grandmother had died . ( Helen , aged 72 , died in early October 2014 . ) He told Capaldi that his son was not dealing well with the grief from his grandmother 's death . The family received the subsequent video message to Thomas from Capaldi three weeks after the death of the child 's grandmother . 
 = = Video message = = 
 Capaldi appears in character as the Doctor and addresses Thomas directly , greeting him by name . He expresses his gratitude at receiving the child 's letter , saying it had pleased him . 
 He then speaks to Thomas about grief , mentioning the Doctor 's adventures with travelling companion Clara Oswald ( played by Jenna Coleman ) . He tells Thomas that negative events impact Clara and himself in their journeys through the universe and time travel , and that occasionally they feel depressed too . The Doctor tells Thomas he is glad the child is supporting him in his adventures . 
 Capaldi concludes the video message by wishing Thomas to experience joy , and encourages the youth to be well and remain positive . The video is 42 seconds long . 
 = = Goodall family response = = 
 The family received the video from Capaldi on 3 November 2014 . After viewing the video , Thomas felt encouraged to attend his grandmother 's funeral . In an interview with The Guardian , Ross Goodall explained that Capaldi 's mention of sadness resonated with the child due to his experience of grief over his grandmother 's death . He discussed the manner in which Thomas perceived emotions as a strict dichotomy between positive and negative without a middle ground . Thomas interpreted from the video that it was all right to feel happy while simultaneously acknowledging a sad event had occurred . Ross Goodall told The Guardian that before viewing the video from Capaldi his son did not want to attend his grandmother 's funeral . 
 The boy 's mother said that the video had helped him to deal with his depression . After watching Capaldi 's message , Ross Goodall stated that his son 's behaviour patterns changed markedly . This change included the ability to comfort his sister and step out of his day @-@ to @-@ day routine . Ross Goodall said after watching the video his son smiled for the first time since his grandmother died . The family framed the letter from Capaldi that came before the video message , and Ross Goodall said Thomas looked at it when he felt distressed . 
 = = Posted to YouTube = = 
 Ross Goodall uploaded the message from Capaldi to the video @-@ sharing website YouTube on 6 November 2014 . He commented at the video 's YouTube location that he was surprised at the online response , and that at the time of initial posting was unaware it would become viral . He later explained that he had uploaded it only to share it with family members on completion of the memorial services for Thomas 's grandmother . Thomas 's father wrote that the video greatly affected his son and enabled him to cope with grief and feel comforted . He praised Capaldi for his kind act and explained that the video improved his son 's mental well @-@ being throughout the ordeal . 
 By 10 November 2014 , total comments by viewers posted below the video on YouTube numbered in the hundreds . The majority of comments were supportive . Visitors to the site wrote favourably of Capaldi 's actions to record the video for the child . A few observed that Capaldi 's version of the Doctor character is sinister and serious , and contrasted this with the actor 's depiction of the character as warm and effusive in his recording . 
 = = Reception = = 
 CNN reported that after its appearance on YouTube , the video had over 200 @,@ 000 views in its first 48 hours of availability . BBC News noted that by the next day , it had received over 500 @,@ 000 views , and by 10 November 2014 it had over 750 @,@ 000 . The Washington Post noted that by the next day the view count was above 900 @,@ 000 . Multiple publications observed that Capaldi 's message had become a viral video . ITV News called online reaction to the video a global phenomenon . 
 The Guardian called the recording by Capaldi a touching video tribute . CNN characterised the video similarly , as did Digital Spy , ITV News , TV 3 , and publications in Spanish and Dutch . The Barcelona newspaper La Vanguardia wrote that Capaldi 's video was an example of bringing joy into someone 's life through a small act . The Washington Post called it a touching message . The Daily Dot described the video as inspirational . The Independent contrasted Capaldi 's portrayal of the 12th Doctor as one of the darker incarnations of the character with his kinder message as the same character in the video . MTV called Capaldi a most wonderful person for his act , and concluded the video was quite endearing . 
 The Daily Telegraph described the video as a moving inspiration to a child suffering from grief . The Huffington Post wrote that if they were able to engage in time travel themselves , they would be unable to encounter a kinder tale . Io9 appreciated that Capaldi was using his celebrity status to effect positive change through his portrayal of the character , and praised his use of the fictional role as a force for public good . The South Wales Evening Post noted Capaldi had appeared in a brief video as himself congratulating a bride on her wedding , and wrote that this video was more impressive than the previous appearance . Metro commented " Just when you thought Peter Capaldi couldn 't possibly get any cooler , he 's gone and outdone himself with this video . " 
 = = Impact = = 
 International Business Times reported that the video message had a significant impact on the child , in spite of its brevity , and noted in a follow @-@ up piece that Capaldi 's video was featured in headlines of multiple newspapers . Digital Spy followed up on its earlier favourable coverage of Capaldi 's video , and chose it as the number one entry out of " 7 awesome celebrity moments that will melt your heart " . Hollywood Life said their journalists were moved to tears after watching the video . Their review concluded that Capaldi 's message was both kind and strong , and that it was intelligent of the actor to compare the grief of Thomas to that encountered by his character on the television programme . 
 Capaldi 's actions received favourable coverage from the Autism Daily Newscast , an official Google News website reporting on current events and news of interest to those on the autism spectrum . Journalist on the site Jo Worgan noting the actor had devoted himself while on the set of Doctor Who to spending time with an autistic girl who was a fan of the show . The Hollywood Reporter noted that the Time Lord character took time to support the mental well @-@ being of a child in addition to his duties of protecting the universe from harm . 
 In a March 2015 interview with Radio Times , Peter Harness , writer of Doctor Who episode " Kill the Moon " , cited the video by Capaldi as his favourite highlight from the last ten years of the television programme . Harness explained his decision , saying that the video demonstrated Capaldi 's kind demeanour and illustrated that Doctor Who served to assist youngsters in learning about the travails of greater society . He said that , by extension , it reminded all viewers to act with more compassion towards one another . 
 = Ralph Flanders = 
 Ralph Edward Flanders ( September 28 , 1880 – February 19 , 1970 ) was an American mechanical engineer , industrialist and Republican U.S. Senator from the state of Vermont . He grew up on subsistence farms in Vermont and Rhode Island , became an apprentice first as a machinist , then as a draftsman , before training as a mechanical engineer . He spent five years in New York City as an editor for a machine tool magazine . After moving to Vermont , he managed and then became president of a successful machine tool company . Flanders used his experience as an industrialist to advise state and national commissions in Vermont , New England and Washington , D.C. on public economic policy . He was president of the Boston Federal Reserve Bank for two years before being elected U.S. Senator from Vermont . 
 Flanders was noted for introducing a 1954 motion in the Senate to censure Senator Joseph McCarthy . McCarthy had made sensational claims that there were large numbers of Communists and Soviet spies and sympathizers inside the federal government and elsewhere . He used his Senate committee as a nationally televised forum for attacks on individuals whom he accused . Flanders felt that McCarthy ’ s attacks distracted the nation from a much greater threat of Communist successes elsewhere in the world and that they had the effect of creating division and confusion within the United States , to the advantage of its enemies . Ultimately , McCarthy 's tactics and his inability to substantiate his claims led to his being discredited and censured by the United States Senate . 
 = = Biographical = = 
 Flanders was born oldest of nine children in Barnet , a town in Caledonia County in northeastern Vermont , and spent much of his childhood in Rhode Island . In his autobiography , Senator from Vermont , Flanders described life on his family ’ s subsistence farms in Vermont and Rhode Island , before he left to work in the machine tool industry for most of his career . In his first years as a machinist and draftsman , he spent his vacations traveling by bicycle over country roads between Rhode Island and Vermont and New Hampshire . Later , he lived for a time in New York City where he edited a machine tool magazine , but after five years decided to move back to Vermont . In 1911 , he married Helen Edith Hartness , daughter of inventor and industrialist James Hartness . They made their home in Springfield , Vermont , where Flanders became president of the Jones & Lamson Machine Company . Flanders and his wife had three children : Elizabeth ( born 1912 ) , Anna ( also known as Nancy — born 1918 ) , and James ( born 1923 ) . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Flanders ’ s career began with an apprenticeship , progressed into engineering , journalism , management , policy consulting , banking , finance , and finally politics when he was elected U.S. Senator from Vermont . 
 = = = Education and apprenticeship = = = 
 Flanders had no formal education beyond the high schools that he attended in Pawtucket and Central Falls , Rhode Island . But even so , he achieved a solid grounding in mathematics , literature , Latin and Classical Greek there . Unable to afford college tuition , his father bought a two @-@ year apprenticeship for him in 1896 at the Brown & Sharpe Manufacturing Company , a leading machine tool builder . There and through the International Correspondence School he learned machinist and drafting skills . Following his apprenticeship , he worked for various machine tool companies in New England . Despite his lack of a formal university education , he was a self @-@ taught scholar , who read extensively in the literatures of science , engineering and the liberal arts . 
 = = = Technical journalism = = = 
 Flanders began writing early in his career . His published articles on machine tool technology led to a job as an editor of Machine magazine in New York City . This job , which he held between 1905 and 1910 , required him to cover developments in the machine tool industry . He traveled widely to visit the companies that he wrote about , which provided him many valuable contacts with leaders in the industry . As editor , he wrote articles on gear tooth systems , gear cutting machinery , <unk> , the manufacture of cans , and of motor cars , including Machinery ’ s reference series on the subject . 
 In 1909 , while working long hours on his definitive book on gear cutting machinery , his energy gave out and he suffered a “ nervous breakdown . ” He had to take time off to recover . In 1910 , he accepted a job offer to work in a machine tool company in Vermont . He continued to write on technical and other matters throughout his life and would develop a broader philosophy of the role of industry in society . In 1938 , he received a Worcester Reed Warner Medal in recognition for his technical writing . 
 = = = Engineering = = = 
 Flanders 's first major experience in machine design came when he helped an entrepreneur in Nashua , New Hampshire develop a box @-@ folding machine . After that , he worked as a draftsman for General Electric until 1905 , when he moved to New York City to work for Machine . 
 In 1910 , he moved to Springfield , Vermont to work as a mechanical engineer for the Fellows Gear Shaper Company . He was already friendly with James Hartness , the president of the Jones & Lamson Machine Company ( J & L ) , another company in town . In 1911 , Flanders married Hartness ' daughter , Helen . Shortly afterwards , Hartness hired Flanders as a manager of the department at J & L that built the Fay automatic lathe . Flanders redesigned that lathe to achieve higher productivity and accuracy . He became a director in 1912 and president of the company in 1933 after Hartness retired . As president of J & L , Flanders implemented a continuous production line to manufacture the Hartness Turret Lathe instead of building each machine individually , attempting to bring some of the efficiencies of mass production to machine tool building . By 1923 , he had acquired and assigned more than twenty patents to J & L. 
 Flanders and his brother , Ernest , were instrumental in developing screw thread grinding machines . These incorporated advances in thread technology ( furthered by the Hartness optical comparator ) and Flanders ’ s engineering calculations for gear @-@ cutting machinery . In 1946 , the two brothers received the Edward <unk> Medal of the Franklin Institute as recognition for this accomplishment . They had improved the accurate manufacture of die @-@ cut screws in soft metal and solved the problem of thread @-@ grinding on hardened work . 
 = = = Professional societies = = = 
 Flanders became president of the National Machine @-@ Tool Builders Association in 1923 . He served as president of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers ( ASME ) from 1934 to 1936 . He was vice president of the American Engineering Council in 1937 . Throughout the 1930s , Flanders served as chairman of the Screw @-@ Thread Committee of the American Standards Association . In 1942 he was awarded the Edward <unk> Medal . In 1944 the ASME awarded him the Hoover Medal for his “ public service in the field of social , civic and humanitarian effort [ s ] . ” The British Institution of Mechanical Engineers made him an honorary member . 
 = = = Public life = = = 
 In 1917 , Flanders served in the Machine @-@ Tool Section of the War Industries Board . After World War I , he oversaw the completion of international standards for screw threads through the 1930s , first as a member , then as chairman of the Screw @-@ Thread Committee of the American Standards Association . 
 During the Great Depression Flanders began to write about social policy . His major concern was human development in a technological era . He addressed employing spiritual guidance with a “ program of human values ” to achieve a good life . Nevertheless , his underlying goal was to achieve “ full employment . ” So , he kept himself grounded in economic principles , as understood and debated during that era . 
 In 1933 , Franklin D. Roosevelt ’ s Secretary of Commerce , Daniel Roper , appointed Flanders to the Business Advisory Council , which was created to provide input to the administration on matters affecting business . The Council then made Flanders chairman of the Committee on Unemployment . This committee recommended addressing the problem both geographically and by industry . Flanders reported , however , that when the committee made its recommendations President Roosevelt was preoccupied with augmenting the Supreme Court and ultimately chose the undistributed profits tax instead — a choice that Flanders felt discouraged capital investment . 
 In 1933 , the National Industrial Recovery Act created the National Recovery Administration ( NRA ) . The NRA allowed industries to create " codes of fair competition , " intended to reduce destructive competition and to help workers by setting minimum wages and maximum weekly hours . Flanders was appointed to the industrial advisory board of the NRA . In a speech before a 1934 conference of the code authority members , attended by President Roosevelt , Flanders opposed a proposal by the Roosevelt administration to require that businesses cut worker hours by 10 percent and raise wages by 10 percent in order to spread employment more widely . Ultimately , economic policy moved away from the codes system . 
 In 1937 , Vermont Governor George Aiken appointed Flanders to two commissions : first , the Special Milk Investigative Committee to study ways to modernize dairying in Vermont ; and second , the Flood Control Commission , which chose Flanders as its chairman . This commission was to negotiate with other New England states a means of sharing costs in a system of flood @-@ control dams . 
 In 1940 , the New England Council elected Flanders president . The governors of the New England states had established this council to study industry and commerce in their states . Flanders ’ s role increased his awareness of the labor and business assets in New England . He also tried to alert his peers to the prospect of U.S. involvement in the expanding Second World War . 
 In 1942 , Flanders became involved in the Committee for Economic Development ( CED ) , an offshoot of the Business Advisory Council , whose purpose was to help re @-@ align the nation to a peacetime economy after the war . Flanders reported helping to shape the CED ’ s recommendations to Congress on roles for the World Bank and International Monetary Fund . 
 = = = Banking and investment = = = 
 Starting in the 1930s , Flanders held directorships on the boards of the Shawmut Bank ( 1938 – 41 ) , Federal Reserve Bank of Boston ( 1941 – 44 ) Boston and Maine Railroad , National Life Insurance Company , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , and Norwich University . 
 In 1944 , he was elected to a two @-@ year term as president of the Federal Reserve Bank in Boston . During this period , the bank helped establish the Boston Port Authority to revitalize the capacity for cargo from New England . 
 In 1946 , Georges Doriot , Flanders , Karl Compton and others organized American Research & Development ( AR & D ) . This was the first venture capital company to invest — according to a set of investment rules and goals — in a pool of fledgling companies . Flanders served as a director of AR & D. 
 = = U.S. Senate career = = 
 In 1940 , Ralph Flanders ran an unsuccessful campaign for the U. S. Senate . His Republican primary opponent was George Aiken , the popular two @-@ term Governor of Vermont . Although Flanders admired and liked Aiken , he felt that Aiken 's " liberal " ideas would not help the nation ’ s economic recovery . In 1990 , one of Vermont ’ s major newspapers , The Rutland Herald described the 1940 Republican primary campaign as dirty and mean . Aiken ’ s side accused Flanders of selling arms to the Nazis , and Flanders ’ s side suggested that " Aiken was unduly influenced by his administrative assistant , a pretty 24 @-@ year @-@ old with a fondness for power . " In retrospect , Flanders felt that he had allowed his campaign advisers to make too many of the decisions . For example , a campaign brochure showed the candidate wearing a three @-@ piece suit and holding a piglet in his arms . Although he had grown up on a subsistence farm and had an active interest in Vermont agriculture — especially in the type of hog shown in the picture — this had the effect of making him appear to be a phony . The Rutland Herald observed that , “ In Vermont in 1940 , pigs were common to many households . But so was common sense . There were many people , most in fact , who did not want as their representative someone who would wear his best clothes if he intended to be handling pigs . ” Aiken won by 7 @,@ 000 votes , having spent $ 3 @,@ 219 @.@ 50 to Flanders ’ s $ 18 @,@ 698 @.@ 45 . This campaign taught Flanders that “ I had to be myself . ” 
 On November 1 , 1946 , Vermont Governor Mortimer R. Proctor appointed Flanders to the U.S. Senate as a Republican to complete the term of Republican Senator Warren Austin . Austin had just been appointed by U.S. President Harry S. Truman as Ambassador to the United Nations . Flanders 's appointment gave him seniority over the freshman Senators who would be elected four days later on November 5 . Flanders ran for the office then , as well , and was elected to a full term . He was overwhelmingly reelected in 1952 . He declined to seek a third term in 1958 . 
 = = = Senate record and committee assignments = = = 
 Flanders 's voting record in the Senate was more conservative than his senior colleague , George Aiken , and reflected Flanders 's business orientation . In his second term , a Republican majority allowed Flanders to obtain seats on the Joint Economic Committee — this committee acted in an investigatory and advisory capacity to both Houses of the Congress — the Finance Committee and the Committee on Armed Services . These assignments reflected his interests as a senator . 
 = = = Political philosophy = = = 
 Flanders , although himself a conservative , espoused a constructive competition between conservatism and liberalism . He felt that liberalism represented the welfare of individual people , as opposed to organizations — governments , businesses , etc . — preserving freedom of thought and action . For him , conservatism was concerned with preserving institutions that serve the interests of people , collectively . Conservatives , according to Flanders , could find themselves offering " reasoned objections to foolish proposals " by emotionally motivated liberals . He observed that , “ Even in the established democracies , ... the voters are easily seduced into leaving politics to skillful politicians who are themselves without a sense of general , social responsibility . ” 
 = = = = On moral law in policy formulation = = = = 
 Flanders had a strict Congregationalist religious beginning , which evolved with his experience into a belief in “ moral law . ” He felt that “ recognition of moral law is as much a necessary requirement of social achievement as physical law is of material advancement . ” In Flanders ’ s view , moral law required honesty , compassion , responsibility , cooperation , humility , and wisdom — values that all cultures hold in common . For him it was an absolute standard . He spoke of a “ Presence ” or “ daimon ” that “ renewed his courage ” and “ indicated direction ” in everything he did . 
 Flanders referred to the Marshall Plan as an important application of moral law to public policy . He said that the plan ’ s true purpose was to fend off Communism through the economic restoration of Europe — not to provide relief to Europe ( something beyond the powers of the U.S. ) , nor to enhance gratitude towards the U.S. , its prestige or power . 
 = = = = On labor and business = = = = 
 In testifying on the Employment Act ( of 1946 ) before the Banking and Currency Committee of the Senate in 1945 , Flanders defined the “ right to a job , ” as implying a responsibility shared among individuals , organized labor , businesses , and governments , as follows : 
 Each individual should be “ productive , self @-@ reliant and energetically in search of employment , when out of a job . ” 
 Organized Labor should avoid wage demands that upset costs of production in a manner that decreases the total volume of employment . 
 Business should operate efficiently to allow for expansion of production and employment . 
 State and local governments can help preserve human rights and property rights that foster investment , while the Federal Government should “ encourage business to expand and investors to undertake new ventures . ” 
 Flanders felt that , to quell inflation , wage increases should be tied to productivity increases , rather than the cost of living . He recommended splitting gains in productivity three ways : to the worker for higher wages , to the company for higher profits and to the consumer for lower prices . He felt that with this approach everyone would benefit at the company level and in the national economy . Such an approach would require mutual respect and understanding between labor and management . 
 Flanders ’ s relations with organized labor were amicable . He welcomed the United Electrical Workers Union into Jones & Lamson Machine Company . J & L became the first company in Springfield , Vermont to be unionized . 
 = = = = On Franklin D. Roosevelt = = = = 
 Flanders met with President Roosevelt on several occasions . He felt that Roosevelt and his advisors did not heed Secretary of the Navy , Frank Knox ’ s warning that it was “ easily possible that hostilities would be initiated by a surprise attack upon the fleet or the Naval Base at Pearl Harbor . ” He further faulted the president for failing to recognize the growing threat of Communism in China . In Flanders ’ s opinion , he sold out on Mongolia , Nationalist China and Central Europe to Communist powers at the 1943 Tehran Conference . Flanders recognized the president ’ s political genius and leadership skills , but deplored his advocacy of raising taxes . He characterized the Roosevelt philosophy as one where re @-@ employment “ must come from Government — not private — action . ” Flanders felt that large social programs were an ineffective approach to solve national problems . 
 = = = Cold War policies = = = 
 National policy relating to the Cold War interested Flanders greatly . He was concerned about the world @-@ wide encroachment of Communism even without force of arms . He felt that President Truman was generally a good president , but was hampered by the Roosevelt legacy of appeasing the Soviets . He also felt that Truman 's commitment to bringing the Nationalist and Communist Chinese factions together into an alliance was mistaken . He endorsed the Marshall Plan as a way to avoid Communist influence in Western Europe . However , he was critical of John Foster Dulles , Secretary of State , for mishandling opportunities to create friendly alignment with Egypt and India , countries which instead sided with the Soviet Union . 
 Flanders felt that spending 62 % of federal income on defense was irrational , when the Soviet government claimed it wished to avoid nuclear conflict . He advocated that the development of “ A [ <unk> ] - and H [ <unk> ] <unk> be paralleled with equally intense negotiations towards disarmament . ” For him , “ gaining the co @-@ operation of the Soviet government on an effective armament control , ” was most important . 
 = = = The censure of Joseph McCarthy = = = 
 Flanders was an early and strong critic of fellow Republican Senator Joseph McCarthy ’ s " misdirection of our efforts at fighting communism ” and his role in “ the loss of respect for us in the world at large . ” He felt that rather than looking inward for communists within U.S. borders , the nation should look outward at the “ alarming world @-@ wide advance of Communist power ” that would leave the United States and Canada as “ the last remnants of the free world . ” On March 9 , 1954 he addressed Senator McCarthy on the Senate floor , expressing these concerns . ( McCarthy had been advised of the speech , but was absent at the time . ) Apart from a brief note of encouragement after this speech , Flanders was grateful that President Eisenhower stayed out of the McCarthy controversy . Members of President Eisenhower ’ s cabinet passed along the message that Flanders should “ lay off . ” 
 The Times @-@ Argus newspaper of Randolph , Vermont reported : 
 " The speech was a sensation , and the next day Vonda Bergman reported to the Herald that Flanders was unable to appear on the Senate floor because of the flood of telephone calls and telegrams , said to run 6 @-@ 1 in his support . One message called his speech ' a fine example of Vermont courage , humor and decency , ' while another told him , ' Your remarks brought a breath of fresh clean air from the Green <unk> 
 " Two Senate colleagues , John Sherman Cooper , R @-@ Kentucky , and Herbert Lehman , D @-@ New York , were among those who heaped praise on the Vermont senator . The editor of a national publication said : ' It was one of the few recent indications that the Republican Party on Capitol Hill is not wholly devoid of courageous moral leadership . ' And an editorial in the Rutland Herald stated , ' The effect of the speech was to <unk> that vast majority of Americans who hate communism but who also revere the Constitution . ' " 
 . 
 Other reactions were not so favorable . People who wrote the Rutland Herald “ hinted at retribution for McCarthy ’ s foes ” and called McCarthy “ a demigod above the law of the U.S.A. ... If you disagree , you are RED . ” William Loeb , owner of the Burlington Daily News , wrote , “ It would take somebody as stupid as Senator Flanders to finally swallow the Democratic bait on the subject of Senator McCarthy . ” In a speech that Flanders did not mention in his autobiography , the Times @-@ Argus article reported that on June 1 , 1954 Flanders 
 " ... addressed the Senate on ' the colossal innocence of the junior Senator from Wisconsin . ' Comparing McCarthy to ' Dennis the Menace ' of cartoon fame , the <unk> delivered a scathing address in which he lambasted the Wisconsin man for dividing the nation . ' In every country in which communism has taken over , ' he reminded the Senate , ' the beginning has been a successful campaign of division and confusion . ' He marveled at the way the Soviet Union was winning military successes in Asia without risking its own resources or men , and said this nation was witnessing ' another example of economy of effort ... in the conquest of this country for communism . ' He added , ' One of the characteristic elements of communist and fascist tyranny is at hand as citizens are set to spy upon each other . ' ' Were the junior Senator from Wisconsin in the pay of the communists , he could not have done a better job for them . ' ' This is a colossal innocence , indeed . ' " 
 On June 11 , 1954 , Flanders introduced a resolution charging McCarthy “ with unbecoming conduct and calling for his removal from his committee membership . ” Upon the advice of Senators Cooper and Fulbright and legal assistance from the Committee for a More Effective Congress he modified his resolution to “ bring it in line with previous actions of censure . ” The text of the resolution of censure condemns the senator for “ obstructing the constitutional processes of the Senate ” when he “ failed to cooperate with the Subcommittee on Privileges and Elections of the Senate Committee on Rules and Administration and acting “ contrary to senatorial ethics ” when he described the Select Committee to Study Censure Charges and its chairman in slanderous terms . Time reported that a “ group of 23 top businessmen , labor leaders and educators ... wired every U.S. Senator ( except McCarthy himself ) urging a favorable vote ‘ to curb the flagrant abuse of power by Senator McCarthy . ’ " The Senate censured McCarthy on December 2 , 1954 by a vote of 65 to 22 . The Senate Republicans were split 22 to 22 . For a further treatment of this episode , refer to Joseph McCarthy — Censure and the Watkins Committee . 
 A 1990 article in the Rutland Herald characterized the reaction in Vermont to Flanders ’ s role in the McCarthy censure as “ sour . ” It concludes that Flanders ’ s convictions did not necessarily reflect the priorities of his constituency , which regarded the issue as “ not our problem . ” 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Flanders was the author or coauthor of eight books , including his autobiography , Senator from Vermont . He wrote about many issues : the problems of unemployment , inflation , ways for achieving a cooperative relationship between management and labor , and his belief that “ moral law is natural law ” and should be an integral part of everyone ’ s education . His papers are located at the Special Collections Research Center at Syracuse University Library and at the Special Collections of the University of Vermont ’ s Bailey @-@ Howe Library . 
 During his lifetime , Flanders received more than sixteen honorary degrees from institutions that included Dartmouth College , Harvard University ( LL.D. ) , Middlebury College ( D. Sc . ) and the University of Vermont ( D. Eng . ) . His wife , Helen Hartness Flanders , was a folk song collector and author of several books on New England ballads . 
 Flanders died in 1970 and he is buried in the Summer Hill Cemetery in Springfield , Vermont , alongside his wife , Helen , and members of the Hartness family . 
 Flanders ’ s Senate legacy has continued to inspire Vermont politicians . In his May 24 , 2001 speech announcing his departure from the Republican Party , Vermont Senator James Jeffords cited Flanders three times and spoke of him as one of five Vermont politicians who , “ spoke their minds , often to the dismay of their party leaders , and did their best to guide the party in the direction of those fundamental principles they believed in . ” In speeches to Georgetown University Law Center and Johnson State College , Senator Patrick Leahy cited Flanders as one of three Vermont politicians who showed , “ the importance of standing firm in your beliefs , ” “ that conflict need not be hostile or adversarial ” and who , “ rose up against abuses , against infringements upon Americans ' rights when doing that was not popular . ” 
 = = = Flanders = = = 
 Flanders , Ralph E. ( February <unk> ) , " Interchangeable <unk> Gear Tooth Systems " , Journal of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers ( <unk> F ) . 
 Flanders , Ralph E. ( February <unk> ) , " Recent developments in gear @-@ cutting machinery " , Machinery ( <unk> C ) . 
 Flanders , Ralph E. ( January <unk> ) , " How many gashes should a hob have ? " , Machinery ( 1550 C ) . 
 Flanders , Ralph E. ( <unk> ) , " Making <unk> cans for food products " , Machinery ( 7500 C ) . 
 Flanders , Ralph E. ( October <unk> ) , " The design and manufacture of a high @-@ grade motor car — Illustrated detailed description of the factory , methods and products of the Stevens @-@ Duryea Co . " , Machinery ( 8279 C ) . 
 Flanders , Ralph E. ( <unk> ) , Gear @-@ cutting machinery , comprising a complete review of contemporary American and European practice , together with a logical classification and explanation of the principles involved , New York : J. Wiley & Sons . 
 Flanders , Ralph E. ( 1910 ) , Construction and Manufacture of Automobiles , Machinery ’ s Reference Series . No. 60 , New York : The Industrial Press . 
 Flanders , Ralph E. ( 1925 ) , Design manufacture and production control of a standard machine 46 , New York : ASME Transactions . 
 Flanders , Ralph E. ( 1930 ) , " The new age and the new man " , in Beard , Charles A. , Toward Civilization , New York : Longmans , Green & Co . . 
 Flanders , Ralph E. ( 1931 ) , Taming Our Machines ; The Attainment of Human Values in a Mechanized Society , New York : R.R. Smith , Inc . 
 Flanders , Ralph E. ( 1932 ) , " Limitations and possibilities of economic planning " , Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science ( July 1932 ) 162 ( <unk> ) , p . 27 , doi : 10 @.@ 1177 / <unk> . 
 Flanders , Ralph E. ( 1935 ) , New pioneers on a new frontier 46 , New York : ASME Transactions , pp . R1 – 77 . 
 Flanders , Ralph E. ( <unk> ) , " New pioneers on a new frontier " , Mechanical Engineering Magazine , p . 3 . 
 Flanders , Ralph E. ( <unk> ) , Platform for America , New York : <unk> House , McGraw @-@ Hill Book Company , Inc . 
 Dennison , Henry S. ; Filene , L. ; Flanders , R. ; Leeds , M. ( 1938 ) , Toward full employment , New York : McGraw @-@ Hill Book . 
 Flanders , Ralph E. ( <unk> ) , The Function of Management in American Life , Palo Alto , California : Graduate School of Business , Stanford University . 
 Flanders , Ralph E. ( <unk> ) , Limitations of national policy : speech of Hon. Ralph E. Flanders of Vermont in the Senate of the United States August 11 , 1949 , Special Collections , University of Vermont Library . 
 Flanders , Ralph E. ( 1954 ) , " Activities of Senator <unk> — The World Crisis " , Congressional Record — Proceedings and Debates of the 83rd Congress , Second Session ( Washington , DC : U.S. Government Printing Office , published March 9 , 1954 ) . 
 Flanders , Ralph E. ( 1956 ) , Letter to a generation , Boston : Beacon Press . 
 Flanders , Ralph E. ( 1961 ) , Senator from Vermont , Boston : Little , Brown . 
 Flanders , Ralph E. ( 1963 ) , A Search for Meaning , Springfield , Vermont : Hurd ’ s Offset Printing . 
 = = = Others = = = 
 ASME ( 1921 ) , <unk> mechanical catalog and directory , Volume 11 , American Society of Mechanical Engineers . 
 ASME ( 1944 ) , Hoover Medal awardees , <unk> , retrieved 2013 @-@ 05 @-@ 04 
 Crozier , Barney ( September 29 , 1979 ) , " Vermont Senator 's Speech Heralded McCarthy 's End " , Times @-@ Argus ( Randolph , Vermont ) . 
 Editors ( February 21 , 1970 ) , " In our opinion — Sen. Flanders of Vermont " , Burlington Free Press . 
 Editors ( December 17 , 2006 ) , " Leahy takes lead on Judiciary Committee " , Burlington Free Press , retrieved January 4 , 2010 . 
 Fortune ( August 1945 ) , " Flanders of New England " , Fortune Magazine , vol . 32 no . 2 . 
 Herman , Arthur ( 2012 ) , Freedom 's Forge : How American Business Produced Victory in World War II , New York , NY : Random House , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 4000 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Hill , Tom ( December 3 , 1989 ) , " <unk> . ' s Senator Ralph Flanders took on McCarthy , and won " , Sunday Rutland Herald and Sunday Times Argus ( Vermont ) , pp . E1 , E4 . 
 Jeffords , James ( May 24 , 2001 ) , Transcript : Jeffords statement , CNN <unk> , retrieved January 4 , 2010 . 
 <unk> , William ( 1996 ) , The Encyclopedia of the McCarthy Era , Facts on File , ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3097 @-@ 9 . 
 Leahy , Patrick ( May 17 , 2008 ) , Senator Patrick Leahy <unk> 2008 Commencement Address , Johnson State College , retrieved January 4 , 2010 . 
 Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( March 6 , 1970 ) , " Ralph Edward Flanders 1880 @-@ 1970 " , Resolutions of the Corporation of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology on the death of Ralph Edward Flanders Life Member Emeritus . 
 Porter , Bill ; Terry , Stephen C. ( September 9 , 1990 ) , " Down & Dirty — The Aiken @-@ Flanders Primary of 1940 " , Vermont Sunday Magazine of the Rutland Herald and the Times Argus of Rutland and Randolph , Vermont . 
 Roe , Joseph Wickham ( 1937 ) , James Hartness : A Representative of the Machine Age at Its Best , New York , New York , USA : American Society of Mechanical Engineers , LCCN <unk> , OCLC <unk> , ; . link from <unk> . 
 Senate Historical Office ( 1995 ) , United States Senate Historical Office : " The Censure Case of Joseph McCarthy of Wisconsin ( 1954 ) " , <unk> , retrieved 2013 @-@ 05 @-@ 04 . 
 The Tech ( November 15 , 1949 ) , " Sen. Flanders to Discuss Welfare " ( PDF ) , The Tech ( MIT newspaper ) : 4 . 
 Time ( August 2 , 1954 ) , " The <unk> Man " , Time Magazine . 
 Vermont Encyclopedia , Editors ( 2003 ) , " Flanders , Ralph E. " , in Duffy , John J. ; Hand , Samuel B. ; Orth , Ralph H. , The Vermont Encyclopedia , Lebanon , New Hampshire : University Press of New England , ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 086 @-@ 9 . 
 WGBH , Public Broadcasting Service ( 2004 @-@ 06 @-@ 30 ) , Who made America — George Doriot , <unk> , retrieved 2013 @-@ 05 @-@ 04 . 
 = David Mirkin = 
 David Mirkin ( born September 18 , 1955 ) is an American feature film and television director , writer and producer . Mirkin grew up in Philadelphia and intended to become an electrical engineer , but abandoned this career path in favor of studying film at Loyola Marymount University . After graduating , he became a stand @-@ up comedian , and then moved into television writing . He wrote for the sitcoms Three 's Company , It 's Garry Shandling 's Show and The Larry Sanders Show and served as showrunner on the series Newhart . After an unsuccessful attempt to remake the British series The Young Ones , Mirkin created Get a Life in 1990 . The series starred comedian Chris Elliott and ran for two seasons , despite a lack of support from many Fox network executives , who disliked the show 's dark and surreal humor . He moved on to create the sketch show The Edge starring his then @-@ partner , actress Julie Brown . 
 Mirkin left The Edge during its run and became the executive producer and showrunner of The Simpsons for its fifth and sixth seasons . Mirkin has been cited as introducing a more surreal element to the show 's humor , as shown by his first writing credit for the show , " Deep Space Homer " , which sees Homer Simpson go to space as part of a NASA program to restore interest in space exploration . He won four Primetime Emmy Awards and a Peabody Award for his work on The Simpsons . Mirkin stood down as showrunner after season six , but produced several subsequent episodes , co @-@ wrote The Simpsons Movie ( 2007 ) and in 2013 remains on the show as a consultant . Mirkin has also moved into feature film direction : he directed the films Romy and Michele 's High School Reunion ( 1997 ) and Heartbreakers ( 2001 ) . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Mirkin was born and raised in Philadelphia and graduated from Northeast High School in 1973 . His father was a computer engineer until his death in 1960 . Mirkin 's older brother Gary worked as a television engineer for the Philadelphia NBC affiliate , KYW @-@ TV , now a CBS owned @-@ and @-@ operated station . Throughout his childhood , Mirkin had an interest in film , and explored both writing and filming . Mirkin has described himself as a " nerd " and was often in trouble as a child because he was " in another world " . At high school , he felt the teaching was " too slow " and was allowed by his teachers to " skip class two to three days a week . " 
 Mirkin intended to pursue a career in electrical engineering , which he saw as a more stable employment opportunity than writing or film making . He took a course at Philadelphia 's Drexel University which offered six months of teaching followed by a six @-@ month internship at the National Aeronautics Federal Experimental Center . Mirkin found the experience to be monotonous and unenjoyable and chose to abandon this career path . He decided that " making no money doing something I loved was going to be better than making a good living doing something I didn 't " , so took " an enormous chance on show business " and moved to Los Angeles . He attended film school at Loyola Marymount University , and graduated in 1978 . 
 Mirkin lists Woody Allen and James L. Brooks as his writing inspirations and Stanley Kubrick and the work of the comedy group Monty Python as developing his " dark sense of humor . " He considers Mike Nichols 's film The Graduate to be what inspired him to enter directing . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career on Three 's Company and Newhart = = = 
 Mirkin started out as a stand @-@ up comedian in 1982 and performed across the United States , including at The Comedy Store , where he became a regular , and at The Improv . The first joke he used in his routine was , " Is it just me or has everybody been coughing up blood lately ? " Mirkin considers the joke to be " an insight into the way [ he writes ] . " Stand @-@ up comedy was the most profitable and easily accessible route Mirkin found into the comedy industry , but " it wasn 't a lifestyle that [ he ] particularly coveted , " especially due to the traveling required . 
 He got his first job writing for television on the sitcom Three 's Company in 1983 . Through his cousin , Mirkin met writer George Tricker who became his mentor . Tricker wrote for the Three 's Company spin @-@ off The Ropers so Mirkin wrote a spec script for an episode of The Ropers . Although rejected by the producers of The Ropers , Three 's Company creator Bernie West was impressed by the script and Mirkin began pitching ideas for that series instead . Mirkin pitched to the series ' story editors for several years without success because they had very limited script buying power . He was eventually able to pitch to the show 's producers , who bought a script from him , and then hired him as a staff writer . Mirkin was apprehensive about the job because he was aiming to work on Cheers , a show more focused on character @-@ driven humor which Mirkin preferred writing , but felt he could not turn the opportunity down . Mirkin considered Three 's Company to have " a classic French farce structure , " as " the characters were so stupid they could never say anything clever . " This meant Mirkin had to adapt his preference for character @-@ driven comedy to fit the show ; it " forced you to put all the cleverness into the plot , a much more difficult thing to do . The plot had to get all the laughs . " Mirkin felt the experience " taught [ him ] a lot about structure " which greatly aided his later work on character @-@ focused shows . 
 Still hoping to work on Cheers , Mirkin sent a spec script of an episode of Taxi to Cheers writers Ken Levine and David Isaacs . The two approved and offered Mirkin a freelance job writing one of the final nine episodes of the show 's first season , pending their commissioning by NBC . The episodes were commissioned , but Mirkin 's agent rejected the Cheers job without telling his client , failing to see why Mirkin would want to work on what was then the lowest @-@ rated comedy on television . Mirkin sacked the agent and signed on with Robb Rothman . Rothman knew Dan Wilcox , the executive producer of Newhart , which like Cheers was more character @-@ focused . Rothman persuaded Wilcox to hire Mirkin . Mirkin wrote a freelance script and in 1984 beat seven other writers to a staff position on the series . He served as a writer and supervising story editor , before being promoted to executive producer and showrunner after one and a half years . Mirkin " felt [ Newhart ] was where I belonged . I 'd finally come to a place in my life where everything I 'd ever wanted had come together . " In 1987 , he received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series for Newhart . It was the first nomination the show had received in that category and for the first episode Mirkin wrote as the series ' showrunner . Mirkin directed several of the Newhart episodes he wrote because he saw directing as " a means of protecting the writing . " A philosophy he carried into his later work , Mirkin felt that " being the head writer ... was not enough ; you had to see the material through its execution – especially the weirder stuff . You had to be right there to make sure every sick idea didn 't lose any disturbing nuance . " Mirkin left Newhart in 1988 , desiring to work on a single @-@ camera sitcom . 
 After leaving Newhart , Mirkin wrote freelance scripts for It 's Garry Shandling 's Show and The Tracey Ullman Show . Garry Shandling asked Mirkin to co @-@ create The Larry Sanders Show with him . Mirkin did not have time , but worked as writer and consultant on the show 's first season , and later returned to direct the 1998 final season episode " The Beginning of the End " . 
 = = = Get a Life and The Edge = = = 
 Mirkin wanted to produce a surreal , Monty Python @-@ esque , single @-@ camera comedy series . He had a development deal with Newhart 's producers MTM Enterprises and persuaded them to buy the rights to produce a pilot for an American adaptation of the British sitcom The Young Ones . The pilot was entitled Oh No , Not Them ! , and featured Nigel Planer from the original series , as well as Jackie Earle Haley and Robert Bundy . Mirkin had wanted to cast comedian Chris Elliott in the pilot , but was prevented by Fox , which wanted Elliott for another show . Oh No , Not Them ! , in Mirkin 's words , " tested through the floor " because it was too " surreal " and " sarcastic " and was not picked up . Mirkin and Elliott decided to develop a show together , along with Adam Resnick . In 1990 , they created the sitcom Get a Life , which was conceived as a dark , surreal , psychotic version of the cartoon Dennis the Menace . The show stars Elliott as Chris Peterson , a 30 @-@ year @-@ old newspaper delivery boy who still lives with his parents , and who is increasingly losing his grip on reality . Fox was lukewarm about the idea , but Mirkin convinced them to order a pilot by understating how dark the show would be . The network executives disliked the pilot after seeing an initial run @-@ through , but Mirkin felt that this was because they " didn 't get " the show and opted not to change it . The executives enjoyed the finished pilot and it was aired . However , throughout the show 's run , the network 's initially negative attitude prevailed . According to Mirkin , many of the executives struggled to understand it and objected to the darkness and surrealism of the show 's humor , which included the frequent death of Elliott 's character , and regularly threatened to shut down production . After its first season , on the insistence of the network , Chris moves out of his parents ' garage , attempts to get additional jobs to his paper route , and attempts to get a girlfriend . However , Mirkin and Elliott refused to " [ compromise on ] the essential goofiness of the show . " 
 Mirkin served as executive producer for the series , directed most of the episodes , wrote several of them , and oversaw the filming and production of them all , to ensure that they had the correct " tone " . The show 's production process was lengthy ; Mirkin would rise at 5 am to film the show , write further episodes from 7 pm until 1 am , and then repeat that the following day . Unlike most single @-@ camera shows , which have around six days to film , Mirkin had to film each episode in two days . He enjoyed doing it , but described it as " not a healthy way to live " . Due to the logistics of filming the show , especially its many sets and effects , Mirkin convinced Fox to not film it in front of a studio audience and use a laugh track instead . The show achieved steady ratings in its first season , finishing 92nd out of the 129 shows listed in the Nielsen ratings . However , for its second season , it was moved from 8 : 30 pm on Sunday to 9 : 30 pm on Saturday and lost the bulk of its audience ; it was canceled after that second season finished in 1992 . In a 1999 piece about the show 's DVD release , Tom Shales praised the show , concluding , " At its best , Get a Life achieved dizzying heights of surrealist farce . At its worst , it was at least amusingly idiotic existential slapstick . Get a Life is a television classic unlike any other . For one thing , most of the others are better . We 're not talking Playhouse 90 here , after all . But we are talking riotous nonsense , and that 's not to be sneezed at . It 's to be laughed at . Hard . " A strong cult following subsequently developed , and Mirkin noted that although the show was canceled " ultimately we got the audience I was hoping for and they are super dedicated and passionate to this day . " 
 In 1991 , Mirkin wrote a pilot with Julie Brown entitled The Julie Show , starring Brown , but NBC did not produce it . Several people at the network enjoyed it and commissioned The Edge , a sketch comedy show also written by Mirkin and Brown , with Mirkin directing . NBC opted against production , but Fox ran it from 1992 to 1993 . Mirkin had long wished to produce a sketch show , and designed The Edge to be " fast @-@ paced " and " some skits overlap , end abruptly or are broken into segments , " in order to maintain attention . The Edge was a ratings success and was supported by the network . Mirkin considered it " the first time I experienced the feeling of having a hit that I created . It just kept building and growing . " The show 's material often inflamed its targets , particularly producer Aaron Spelling . Spelling objected to a sketch mocking his series Beverly Hills , 90210 , another Fox show , and its lead actress Tori Spelling , who is his daughter . He demanded a public apology and that no further episodes contain the parody , threatening to sue . The show 's production company TriStar Television refused , while Mirkin responded : " The thing about these parodies is they don 't hurt a show . It 's only cross @-@ promotion . The viewers who like the show always come back the next week . What 's upsetting to me is it shows absolutely that Mr. Spelling has no sense of humor . " Mirkin left his role as executive producer of The Edge during its run . The Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette reported that Mirkin had been " forced off the show , " due to the negative reaction of Spelling and others , though in 2012 , Mirkin stated that he left the series after refusing to accept a substantially reduced budget . The show 's producers Sony failed to persuade him to stay but he returned to the series to produce its final " Best Of " compilation . 
 = = = The Simpsons = = = 
 Mirkin was the executive producer and showrunner for the animated sitcom The Simpsons , during its fifth and sixth seasons ( 1993 – 1995 ) . Following the end of the show 's fourth season , most of the original staff members left the show ; only Bill Oakley , Josh Weinstein , Conan O 'Brien and Dan McGrath remained , and O 'Brien soon left to replace David Letterman as host of Late Night . Executive producers James L. Brooks and Richard Sakai hired Mirkin following his exit from The Edge . He had been asked to join the show 's writing team when it started in 1989 , but decided instead to work on Get a Life . He was a fan of The Simpsons before being hired for the show , and started work in November 1992 . Due to the show 's long production cycle , season five did not air until the following September . Mirkin was the program 's first solo showrunner . Due to the high staff departure at the end of season four , Mirkin " pretty much had to build [ the ] show from the ground up again , " and noted that this " was exciting but also a big challenge . " He hired several new writers , including Richard Appel , David X. Cohen , Jennifer Crittenden , Greg Daniels , Bob Kushell , Jace Richdale and Mike Scully . 
 Mirkin 's tenure on The Simpsons has been cited as a period where the series evolved to focus more on abstract and surreal stories and humor . A. O. Scott notes that " several veterans recall the ' crazy David Mirkin years ' as a time of wild inventiveness . " In The Simpsons : An Uncensored , Unauthorized History ( 2009 ) , John Ortved describes Mirkin 's era as moving the show away from more " realistic " emotional and character @-@ based stories to " pure comedy " and " surreal " humor . In a 2004 interview with Animation Magazine , Mirkin stated that he felt that he " brought [ the show ] back to a more story @-@ oriented " approach and increased the focus on characters and their emotions , although " at the same time still keeping it surreal and weird " . Mirkin moved the show 's focus toward Homer Simpson , and also developed some of its secondary characters , including Apu Nahasapeemapetilon . He also strongly opposed censorship and network interference , telling post @-@ production supervisor Colin <unk> Lewis to ignore the list of changes sent by the Fox censors . He aimed to put " as much blood and guts " as possible into the episode " Treehouse of Horror V " as an attack on the censors . 
 Ortved — using interviews with writers Bob Kushell and Brent Forrester and Mirkin 's assistant <unk> Easton — describes Mirkin as an " outsider " on the show , with the writing staff , at least initially , divided with respect to Mirkin 's comedy and leadership style . Forrester described the latter as " a little bit dictatorial " . Mirkin conducted the show 's writing sessions in one room , rather than splitting the writers into two groups , as later showrunners would do , and often worked late into the night . Some praised Mirkin 's leadership , including Appel , who felt that " the shows were great under him . " Others criticised him , including Kushell , who clashed with Mirkin over the episode " A Star is Burns " , a crossover with the The Critic . In 2004 , Mirkin stated that he " really wasn 't at all <unk> [ ed ] to join [ the show 's writing ] crew , " because he " had worked with and written with " many of his fellow writers previously and concluded that , " [ I took ] this show in a direction that is more personal to me . I did that , had a great time doing that , and everyone was very receptive to that . " Mirkin 's era and style of humor are popular amongst the show 's fans . 
 The season five episode " Deep Space Homer " , in which the characters Homer and Barney are recruited by NASA , is Mirkin 's first writing credit on The Simpsons , the second being " The Man Who Came to Be Dinner " , which was co @-@ written with Al Jean . Mirkin worked on the concept for a long time , basing the story on NASA 's Teacher in Space Project scheme to send ordinary civilians into space in order to spark interest amongst the general public . The idea proved controversial to some of the show 's writing staff , who felt that having Homer go into space was too " large " an idea . Series creator Matt Groening felt that the idea gave the writers " nowhere to go . " Based on these attitudes , several jokes were toned down to make the episode feel more realistic , including the impression that everyone at NASA was as stupid as Homer . During re @-@ writes , Mirkin and the other writers placed greater emphasis on the relationship between Homer and his family and on Homer 's attempts to be a hero , but most of Mirkin 's original script was retained . The episode is considered one of the show 's best . Colin Kennedy of Empire magazine named it a " contender for greatest ever episode " , and in Chris Turner 's book , Planet Simpson , he says the episode is " second to none " . Regarding the long sequence that begins with Homer eating potato chips in the space shuttle and ends with Kent Brockman 's dramatic speech , Turner claimed that it was " simply among the finest comedic moments in the history of television " . A copy of the episode was later sent to the International Space Station for astronauts to view . Mirkin considers the episode to be " very very special . " Ortved says the episode , in its plot and surreal humor , epitomizes Mirkin 's era . 
 Mirkin pitched the plots for the episodes " The Last Temptation of Homer " , " Bart 's Girlfriend " and " Homer the Great " . He also produced the show 's sole two @-@ part episode " Who Shot Mr. Burns ? " , which aired as the finale of season six and the premiere of season seven . The writers decided to write the episode in two parts with a mystery that could be used as a contest . Mirkin suggested Maggie Simpson as the culprit because he felt it was funnier and wanted the culprit to be a family member . 
 After season six , Mirkin suggested Oakley and Weinstein take over as showrunners , but remained on the show in an advisory capacity , helping them with technical aspects of the show such as editing and sound mixing , and attending table readings of the scripts . He was the executive producer for three other episodes from season seven : " Lisa the Vegetarian " , " Radioactive Man " and " Team Homer " . " Lisa the Vegetarian " was approved by Mirkin after the story was pitched by Cohen ; Mirkin had just become a vegetarian himself , and so many of Lisa 's experiences in the episode were based on his own . Mirkin flew to London to record the episode 's guest stars Paul and Linda McCartney at Paul 's recording studio , where the McCartneys spent an hour recording their parts . Mirkin later said that recording with the McCartneys was one of the most " amazing " experiences of his life and considers the episode to be one of his favorites . Mirkin returned to the role of showrunner to produce the episodes " The Joy of Sect " and " All Singing , All Dancing " for season nine . He pitched the plot for " The Joy of Sect " , because he was attracted to the notion of parodies of cults , calling them " comical , interesting and twisted . " 
 As of 2012 Mirkin still works part @-@ time on the show as a consultant , helping with the re @-@ write process . The show 's nine @-@ month production cycle allows him to contribute to each episode in some form , whilst engaging in other projects as well . Mirkin also co @-@ wrote The Simpsons Movie in 2007 , and the 3D animated short The Longest Daycare in 2012 , which was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film . Mirkin won four Primetime Emmy Awards and a Peabody Award for his work on The Simpsons . 
 = = = Subsequent work = = = 
 Mirkin directed the feature film Romy and Michele 's High School Reunion in 1997 . The film stars Mira Sorvino and Lisa Kudrow as two friends determined to show their former high school tormentors at their 10 @-@ year reunion that they have led successful lives . Mirkin said of the film : " These are women characters we haven 't seen before . There are so few female buddy movies , written funny for women . Women don 't get to do odd , strange , self @-@ involved roles like these . " He knew Kudrow previously and felt she was " perfect " for the role , but did not expect Sorvino would take the part given her recent Academy Award win for Mighty Aphrodite , but it " turn [ ed ] out that she 'd had a horrible time in high school , so the story appealed to her . " The film received critical praise , as did Mirkin 's direction . James Berardinelli wrote that Mirkin " brings a lot of energy to the production , always keeping things moving , " while Jack Matthews of The Los Angeles Times says Mirkin " knew exactly what he had here and composed it like frames in a comic strip , ordering cheerful snow @-@ cone colors for everything from the girls ' childlike outfits to the decor of a <unk> . " 
 In 1999 , several of the Fox executives who had disliked Get a Life came to Mirkin and apologized for the way they had treated the show , stating that they now found it funny . They commissioned Mirkin to write , produce and direct a similarly @-@ themed show of his choice . Mirkin produced a pilot for Jeff of the Universe , a " sarcastic " parody of the science fiction genre . The executives who had disproved of Get a Life had since moved from the Fox Network to Fox Studios , and they liked this new show . However , the new executives at Fox did not , and chose not to air the show . Mirkin often plays clips from the show at the talks he does at colleges ; they receive a positive response . 
 Heartbreakers , Mirkin 's second film as a feature director , was released in 2001 . Mirkin rejected the project three times because he disliked the script . While he liked the idea of a mother and daughter con @-@ woman team , he found the writing " really broad , " and " it had no emotion in it . " Eventually , Mirkin was allowed to rewrite the script himself , which he did in a year 's time . He filmed the project in Florida and Los Angeles and had a cameo appearance in the film as Jack 's lawyer . Reactions to both the film and Mirkin 's direction of it were more varied compared to Romy and Michele 's High School Reunion . Roger Ebert said the film was not " as sly and has no ambition to be [ as ] charming " as Romy and Michele 's High School Reunion , " but in a season of dreary failed comedies it does what a comedy must : It makes us laugh . " Chris Hewitt of Empire wrote that " Mirkin 's direction is a little flat , but he 's clearly having tremendous fun , " but Susan Wloszczyna of USA Today opined that Mirkin " never gets the timing right and allows the story to drag with little internal logic . " 
 Mirkin was attached to direct Sports Widow in 2004 , a comedy starring Reese Witherspoon as a disregarded housewife who seeks to become an expert in American football in order to regain her husband 's attention ; the project has never been completed . Mirkin is a fan of the musician James Taylor ; Taylor guest starred in " Deep Space Homer " and Mirkin directed the music videos for his songs " Enough to Be on Your Way " and " Sea Cruise " . As of 2012 , Mirkin will write , direct and co @-@ produce a biopic of businessman Richard Branson , based on his memoir Losing My Virginity . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Mirkin is a vegetarian . In the early 1990s , Mirkin was in a relationship with actress Julie Brown , with whom he had worked on The Julie Show and The Edge . 
 = = Credits = = 
 = Operation Varsity = 
 Operation Varsity ( 24 March 1945 ) was a successful airborne forces operation launched by Allied troops that took place toward the end of World War II . Involving more than 16 @,@ 000 paratroopers and several thousand aircraft , it was the largest airborne operation in history to be conducted on a single day and in one location . 
 Varsity was part of Operation Plunder , the Anglo @-@ American @-@ Canadian assault under Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery to cross the northern Rhine River and from there enter Northern Germany . Varsity was meant to help the surface river assault troops secure a foothold across the Rhine River in Western Germany by landing two airborne divisions on the eastern bank of the Rhine near the village of Hamminkeln and the town of Wesel . 
 The plans called for the dropping of two divisions from U.S. XVIII Airborne Corps , under Major General Matthew B. Ridgway to capture key territory and to generally disrupt German defenses to aid the advance of Allied ground forces . The British 6th Airborne Division was ordered to capture the villages of Schnappenberg and Hamminkeln , clear part of the Diersfordter Wald ( Diersfordt Forest ) of German forces , and secure three bridges over the River Issel . The U.S. 17th Airborne Division was to capture the village of Diersfordt and clear the rest of the Diersfordter Wald of any remaining German forces . The two divisions would hold the territory they had captured until relieved by advancing units of 21st Army Group , and then join in the general advance into northern Germany . 
 The airborne forces made several mistakes , most notably when pilot error caused paratroopers from the 513th Parachute Infantry Regiment , a regiment of the U.S. 17th Airborne Division , to miss their drop zone and land on a British drop zone instead . However , the operation was a success , with both divisions capturing Rhine bridges and securing towns that could have been used by Germany to delay the advance of the British ground forces . The two divisions incurred more than 2 @,@ 000 casualties , but captured about 3 @,@ 500 German soldiers . The operation was the last large @-@ scale Allied airborne operation of World War II . 
 = = Background = = 
 By March 1945 , the Allied armies had advanced into Germany and had reached the River Rhine . The Rhine was a formidable natural obstacle to the Allied advance , but if breached would allow the Allies to access the North German Plain and ultimately advance on Berlin and other major cities in Northern Germany . Following the " Broad Front Approach " laid out by General Dwight David Eisenhower , the Supreme Allied Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force , it was decided to attempt to breach the Rhine in several areas . Field Marshal Sir Bernard Montgomery , commanding the Anglo @-@ Canadian 21st Army Group , devised a plan , code @-@ named Operation Plunder , that would allow the forces under his command to breach the Rhine , which was subsequently authorized by Eisenhower . Plunder envisioned the British Second Army , under Lieutenant @-@ General Miles C. Dempsey , and the U.S. Ninth Army , under Lieutenant General William Simpson , crossing the Rhine at Rees , Wesel , and an area south of the Lippe Canal . 
 To ensure that the operation was a success , Montgomery insisted that an airborne component be inserted into the plans for the operation , to support the amphibious assaults that would take place ; this was code @-@ named Operation Varsity . Three airborne divisions were initially chosen to participate in the operation , these being the British 6th Airborne Division , the U.S. 13th Airborne Division and the U.S. 17th Airborne Division , all of which were assigned to U.S. XVIII Airborne Corps , commanded by Major General Matthew B. Ridgway . One of these airborne formations , the British 6th Airborne Division , commanded by Major @-@ General Eric Bols , was a veteran division ; it had taken part in Operation Overlord , the assault on Normandy in June the previous year . However , the U.S. 17th Airborne Division , under Major General William Miley , had been activated only in April 1943 and had arrived in Britain in August 1944 , too late to participate in Operation Overlord . The division did not participate in Operation Market Garden . It did , however , participate in the Ardennes campaign but had yet to take part in a combat drop . The U.S. 13th Airborne Division , under Major General Eldridge Chapman , had been activated in August 1943 and was transferred to France in 1945 ; the formation itself had never seen action , although one of its regiments , the 517th Parachute Infantry , had fought briefly in Italy , and later in Southern France and the Ardennes campaign . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Allied preparation = = = 
 Operation Varsity was therefore planned with these three airborne divisions in mind , with all three to be dropped behind German lines in support of 21st Army Group as it conducted its amphibious assaults to breach the Rhine . However , during the earliest planning stages , it became apparent that the 13th Airborne Division would be unable to participate in the operation , as there were only enough combat transport aircraft in the area to transport two divisions effectively . The plan for the operation was therefore altered to accommodate the two remaining airborne divisions , the British 6th Airborne and the US 17th Airborne Division . The two airborne divisions would be dropped behind German lines , with their objective to land around Wesel and disrupt enemy defences in order to aid the advance of the British Second Army towards Wesel . 
 To achieve this , both divisions would be dropped near the village of Hamminkeln , and were tasked with a number of objectives : they were to seize the Diersfordter Wald , a forest that overlooked the Rhine , including a road linking several towns together ; several bridges over a smaller waterway , the River Issel , were to be seized to facilitate the advance ; and the village of Hamminkeln was to be captured . The Diersfordter Wald was chosen by Lt @-@ Gen. Dempsey as the initial objective because its seizure would deny the Germans artillery positions from which they could disrupt Second Army 's bridging operations . Once these objectives were taken , the airborne troops would consolidate their positions and await the arrival of Allied ground forces , defending the territory captured against the German forces known to be in the area . 
 Operation Varsity would be the largest single @-@ lift airborne operation conducted during the conflict ; more significantly , it would contradict previous airborne strategy by having the airborne troops drop after the initial amphibious landings , in order to minimize the risks to the airborne troops learned from the experiences of Operation Market Garden . Unlike Market Garden , the airborne forces would be dropped only a relatively short distance behind German lines , thereby ensuring that reinforcements in the form of Allied ground forces would be able to link up with them within a short period : this avoided risking the same type of disaster that had befallen the British 1st Airborne Division when it had been isolated and practically annihilated by German infantry and armour at Arnhem . It was also decided by the commander of the 1st Allied Airborne Army , General Lewis Brereton , who commanded all Allied airborne forces including US XVIII Airborne Corps , that the two airborne divisions participating in Operation Varsity would be dropped simultaneously in a single " lift , " instead of being dropped several hours apart , addressing what had also been a problem during Operation Market Garden . Supply drops for the airborne forces would also be made as soon as possible to ensure adequate supplies were available to the airborne troops as they fought . 
 = = = German preparation = = = 
 By this period of the conflict , the number of German divisions remaining on the Western Front was rapidly declining , both in numbers and quality , a fact in the Allies ' favour . By the night of 23 March , Montgomery had the equivalent of more than 30 divisions under his command , while the Germans fielded around 10 divisions , all weakened from constant fighting . The best German formation the Allied airborne troops would face was the 1st Parachute Army , although even this formation had been weakened from the losses it had sustained in earlier fighting , particularly when it had engaged Allied forces in the <unk> Forest in February . First Parachute Army had three corps stationed along the river ; 2nd Parachute Corps to the north , 86th Corps in the centre , and 63rd Corps in the south . Of these formations , 2nd Parachute Corps and 86th Corps had a shared boundary that ran through the proposed landing zones for the Allied airborne divisions , meaning that the leading formation of each corps — these being 7th Parachute Division and 84th Infantry Division — would face the airborne assault . After their retreat to the Rhine both divisions were under @-@ strength and did not number more than 4 @,@ 000 men each , with 84th Infantry Division supported by only 50 or so medium artillery pieces . 
 The seven divisions that formed the 1st Parachute Army were short of manpower and munitions , and although farms and villages were well prepared for defensive purposes , there were few mobile reserves , ensuring that the defenders had little way to concentrate their forces against the Allied bridgehead when the assault began . The mobile reserves that the Germans did possess consisted of some 150 armoured fighting vehicles under the command of 1st Parachute Army , the majority of which belonged to XLVII Panzer Corps . Allied intelligence believed that of the two divisions that formed XLVII Panzer Corps , 116th Panzer Division had up to 70 tanks , and 15th Panzergrenadier Division 15 tanks and between 20 – 30 assault guns . Intelligence also pointed to the possibility of a heavy anti @-@ tank battalion being stationed in the area . Also , the Germans possessed a great number of antiaircraft weapons ; on 17 March Allied intelligence estimated that the Germans had 103 heavy and 153 light anti @-@ aircraft guns , a number which was drastically revised a week later to 114 heavy and 712 light anti @-@ aircraft guns . The situation of the German defenders , and their ability to counter any assault effectively , was worsened when the Allies launched a large @-@ scale air attack one week prior to Operation Varsity . The air attack involved more than 10 @,@ 000 Allied aircraft and concentrated primarily on Luftwaffe airfields and the German transportation system . The German defenders were also hampered by the fact that they had no reliable intelligence as to where the actual assault would be launched ; although German forces along the Rhine had been alerted as to the general possibility of an Allied airborne attack , it was only when British engineers began to set up smoke generators opposite Emmerich and began laying a 60 @-@ mile ( 97 km ) long smokescreen that the Germans knew where the assault would come . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Operation Plunder began at 9 pm on the evening of 23 March , and by the early hours of the morning of 24 March Allied ground units had secured a number of crossings on the eastern bank of the Rhine . In the first few hours of the day , the transport aircraft carrying the two airborne divisions that formed Operation Varsity began to take off from airbases in England and France and began to rendezvous over Brussels , before turning northeast for the Rhine dropping zones . The airlift consisted of 541 transport aircraft containing airborne troops , and a further 1 @,@ 050 troop @-@ carriers towing 1 @,@ 350 gliders . The U.S. 17th Airborne Division consisted of 9 @,@ 387 personnel , who were transported in 836 C @-@ 47 Skytrain transports , 72 C @-@ 46 Commando transports , and more than 900 Waco CG @-@ 4A gliders . The British 6th Airborne Division consisted of 7 @,@ 220 personnel transported by 42 Douglas C @-@ 54 and 752 C @-@ 47 Dakota transport aircraft , as well as 420 Airspeed Horsa and General Aircraft Hamilcar gliders . This immense armada stretched more than 200 miles ( 322 km ) in the sky and took 2 hours and 37 minutes to pass any given point , and was protected by some 2 @,@ 153 Allied fighters from the U.S. Ninth Air Force and the Royal Air Force . The combination of the two divisions in one lift made this the largest single day airborne drop in history . At 10 am British and American airborne troops belonging to the 6th Airborne Division and 17th Airborne Division began landing on German soil , some 13 hours after the Allied ground assault began . 
 = = = 6th Airborne Division = = = 
 The first element of the British 6th Airborne Division to land was the 8th Parachute Battalion , part of the 3rd Parachute Brigade under Brigadier James Hill . The brigade actually dropped nine minutes earlier than scheduled , but successfully landed in drop zone A , while facing significant small @-@ arms and 20 mm anti @-@ aircraft fire . The brigade suffered a number of casualties as it engaged the German forces in the Diersfordter Wald , but by 11 : 00 hours the drop zone was all but completely clear of enemy forces and all battalions of the brigade had formed up . The key place of Schnappenberg was captured by the 9th Parachute Battalion in conjunction with the 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion , the latter unit having lost its commanding officer , Lieutenant Colonel Jeff <unk> , to German small @-@ arms fire only moments after he had landed . Despite taking casualties the brigade cleared the area of German forces , and by 13 : 45 Brigadier Hill could report that the brigade had secured all of its objectives . Canadian medical orderly Corporal Frederick George Topham was awarded the Victoria Cross for his efforts to recover casualties and take them for treatment , despite his own wounds , and great personal danger . 
 The next British airborne unit to land was the 5th Parachute Brigade , commanded by Brigadier Nigel Poett . The brigade was designated to land on drop zone B and achieved this , although not as accurately as 3rd Parachute Brigade due to poor visibility around the drop zone , which also made it more difficult for paratroopers of the brigade to rally . The drop zone came under heavy fire from German troops stationed nearby , and was subjected to shellfire and mortaring which inflicted casualties in the battalion rendezvous areas . However , the 7th Parachute Battalion soon cleared the DZ of German troops , many of whom were situated in farms and houses , and the 12th Parachute Battalion and 13th Parachute Battalion rapidly secured the rest of the brigade 's objectives . The brigade was then ordered to move due east and clear an area near Schnappenberg , as well as to engage German forces gathered to the west of the farmhouse where the 6th Airborne Division Headquarters was established . By 15 : 30 Brigadier Poett reported that the brigade had secured all of its objectives and linked up with other British airborne units . 
 The third airborne unit that formed a part of the 6th Airborne Division was the 6th Airlanding Brigade , commanded by Brigadier Hugh Bellamy . The brigade was tasked with landing in company @-@ sized groups and capturing several objectives , including the town of Hamminkeln . The gliders containing the airborne troops of the brigade landed in landing zones P , O , U and R under considerable antiaircraft fire , the landing being made even more difficult due to the presence of a great deal of haze and smoke . This resulted in a number of glider pilots being unable to identify their landing areas and losing their bearings ; a number of gliders landed in the wrong areas or crashed . However , the majority of the gliders survived , allowing the battalions of the brigade to secure intact the three bridges over the River Issel that they had been tasked with capturing , as well as the village of Hamminkeln with the aid of the U.S. 513th Parachute Infantry Regiment , which had been dropped by mistake nearby . The brigade secured all of its objectives shortly after capturing Hamminkeln . 
 = = = 17th Airborne Division = = = 
 The 507th Parachute Infantry Regiment , under the command of Colonel Edson Raff , was the lead assault formation for the 17th Airborne Division , and was consequently the first American airborne unit to land as part of Operation Varsity . The entire regiment was meant to be dropped in drop zone W , a clearing 2 miles ( 3 km ) north of Wesel ; however , excessive ground haze confused the pilots of the transport aircraft carrying the regiment , and as such when the 507th dropped it split into two halves . Colonel Raff and approximately 690 of his paratroopers landed northwest of the drop zone near the town of Diersfordt , with the rest of the regiment successfully landing in drop zone W. The colonel rallied his separated paratroopers and led them to drop zone W , engaging a battery of German artillery en route , killing or capturing the artillery crews before reuniting with the rest of the regiment . By 2 pm , the 507th PIR had secured all of its objectives and cleared the area around Diersfordt , having engaged numerous German troops and also destroying a German tank . The actions of the 507th Parachute Infantry during the initial landing also gained the division its second Medal of Honor , when Private George Peters posthumously received the award after charging a German machine gun nest and eliminating it with rifle fire and grenades , allowing his fellow paratroopers to gather their equipment and capture the regiment 's first objective . 
 The 513th Parachute Infantry Regiment was the second American airborne unit to land after the 507th , under the command of Colonel James Coutts . En route to the drop zone , the transport aircraft carrying the 513th had the misfortune to pass through a belt of German antiaircraft weapons , losing 22 of the C @-@ 46 transport aircraft and damaging a further 38 . Just as the 507th had , the 513th also suffered from pilot error due to the ground haze , and as such the regiment actually missed its designated drop zone , DZ X , and was dropped on one of the landing zones designated for the British 6th Airlanding Brigade . Despite this inaccuracy the paratroopers swiftly rallied and aided the British glider @-@ borne troops who were landing simultaneously , eliminating several German artillery batteries that were covering the area . Once the German troops in the area had been eliminated , a combined force of American and British airborne troops stormed Hamminkeln and secured the town . By 2 pm , Colonel Coutts reported to Divisional Headquarters that the 513th Parachute Infantry had secured all of its objectives , having knocked out two tanks and two complete regiments of artillery during their assault . During its attempts to secure its objectives , the regiment also gained a third Medal of Honor for the division when Private First Class Stuart S. Stryker posthumously received the award after leading a charge against a German machine @-@ gun nest , creating a distraction to allow the rest of his platoon to capture the fortified position in which the machine @-@ gun was situated . 
 The third component of the 17th Airborne Division to take part in the operation was the 194th Glider Infantry Regiment , under the command of Colonel James Pierce . Troopers of the 194th GIR landed accurately in landing zone S , but their gliders and tow aircraft took heavy casualties ; 12 C @-@ 47 transports were lost due to anti @-@ aircraft fire , and a further 140 were damaged by the same fire . The regiment landed in the midst of a number of German artillery batteries that were engaging Allied ground forces crossing the Rhine , and as such many of the gliders were engaged by German artillery pieces that had their barrels lowered for direct @-@ fire . However , these artillery batteries and their crews were defeated by the glider @-@ borne troops , and the 194th Glider Infantry was soon able to report that its objectives had been secured , having destroyed 42 artillery pieces , 10 tanks , 2 self @-@ propelled anti @-@ aircraft vehicles and 5 self @-@ propelled guns . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Operation Varsity was a successful large @-@ scale airborne operation . All of the objectives that the airborne troops had been tasked with had been captured and held , usually within only a few hours of the operation beginning . The bridges over the Issel had been successfully captured , although one later had to be destroyed to prevent its capture by counter @-@ attacking German forces . The Diersfordter Forest had been cleared of enemy troops , and the roads through which the Germans might have routed reinforcements against the advance had been cut by airborne troops . Finally , Hamminkeln , the village that dominated the area and through which any advance would be made , had been secured by air @-@ lifted units . By nightfall of 24 March , 15th ( Scottish ) Infantry Division had joined up with elements of 6th Airborne , and by midnight the first light bridge was across the Rhine . By 27 March , twelve bridges suitable for heavy armour had been installed over the Rhine and the Allies had 14 divisions on the east bank of the river , penetrating up to 10 miles ( 16 km ) . According to Generalmajor Fiebig , commanding officer of one of the defending German formations , 84 Infantry Division , the German forces defending the area had been greatly surprised by the speed with which the two airborne divisions had landed their troops , explaining that their sudden appearance had had a " shattering effect " on the greatly outnumbered defenders . He revealed during his interrogation that his division had been badly depleted and could muster barely 4 @,@ 000 soldiers . 
 The U.S. 17th Airborne Division gained its fourth Medal of Honor in the days following the operation , when Technical Sergeant Clinton M. Hedrick of the 194th Glider Infantry Regiment received the award posthumously after aiding in the capture of Lembeck Castle , which had been turned into a fortified position by the Germans . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 The casualties taken by both airborne formations were quite heavy , although lighter than had been expected . By nightfall of 24 March , the 6th Airborne Division had suffered around 1 @,@ 400 personnel killed , wounded or missing in action out of the 7 @,@ 220 personnel who were landed in the operation . The division also claimed to have secured around 1 @,@ 500 prisoners of war . The 17th Airborne Division suffered a similar casualty rate , reporting around 1 @,@ 300 casualties out of 9 @,@ 650 personnel who took part in the operation , while the division claimed to have taken 2 @,@ 000 POWs , a number similar to those taken by 6th Airborne . This made a total of around 3 @,@ 500 POWs taken by both airborne formations during the operation . Between 24 March and 29 March , the 17th Airborne had taken a total of 1 @,@ 346 casualties . The air forces involved in the operation also suffered casualties ; 56 aircraft in total were lost during the 24th , 21 out of the 144 transport aircraft transporting the 17th Airborne were shot down and 59 were damaged by antiaircraft fire , and 16 bombers from the Eighth Air Force were also shot down during supply drops . 
 = = = Battle honours = = = 
 In the British and Commonwealth system of battle honours , there was no distinct award for service in Operation Varsity . Instead , units that participated in the operation were included in the awards made between 1956 and 1959 to all units that participated in the Rhine crossing between 23 March and 1 April 1945 : Rhine , or The Rhine to Canadian units , later translated to Le Rhin for French Canadian units . 
 = = Post @-@ war praise = = 
 Contemporary observers and historians generally agree that Operation Varsity was successful . General Eisenhower called it " the most successful airborne operation carried out to date " , and an observer later wrote that the operation showed " the highest state of development attained by troop @-@ carrier and airborne units " . In the official summary of the operation , Major General Ridgway wrote that the operation had been flawless , and that the two airborne divisions involved had destroyed enemy defences that might otherwise have taken days to reduce , ensuring the operation was successful . 
 Several modern historians have also praised the operation and the improvements that were made for Varsity . G. G. Norton argued that the operation benefited from the lessons learned from previous operations , and Brian Jewell agrees , arguing that the lessons of Market Garden had been learned as the airborne forces were concentrated and quickly dropped , giving the defenders little time to recover . Norton also argues that improvements were made for supporting the airborne troops ; he notes that a large number of artillery pieces were available to cover the landings and that observers were dropped with the airborne forces , thus augmenting the firepower and flexibility of the airborne troops . He also highlights the development of a technique that allowed entire brigades to be landed in tactical groups , giving them greater flexibility . Dropping the airborne forces after the ground forces had breached the Rhine also ensured that the airborne troops would not have to fight for long before being relieved , a major improvement on the manner in which the previous large @-@ scale airborne operation , Market Garden , had been conducted . 
 Historian Peter Allen states that while the airborne forces took heavy casualties , Varsity diverted German attention from the Rhine crossing onto themselves . Thus , the troops fighting to create a bridgehead , across the Rhine , suffered relatively few casualties , and were able to " break out from the Rhine in hours rather than days " . 
 = = Post @-@ war criticism = = 
 Despite a great deal of official accolade and praise over the success of the operation , a number of criticisms have been made of the operation and the errors that were made . Several military historians have been critical of the need for the operation , with one historian , Barry Gregory , arguing that " Operation Varsity was not entirely necessary ... " Another historian , James A. Huston , argues that " ... had the same resources been employed on the ground , it is conceivable that the advance to the east might have been even more rapid than it was " . 
 = = = Aircraft shortages = = = 
 One specific failure in the massive operation was the critical lack of transport aircraft for the operation , an unsolved flaw that had dogged every large @-@ scale airborne operation the Allies had conducted . In the original planning for Varsity , an extra airborne division , the 13th , had been included ; however , a lack of transport aircraft to drop this division led to it being excluded from the final plan . Thus , the unsolved problem of a shortage of transport aircraft meant that a third of the planned troops to be used were discarded , weakening the fighting power of the airborne formation . In the event , the airborne troops actually employed were sufficient to overwhelm the defenders . 
 Some historians have commented on this failure ; Gerard Devlin argues that because of this lack of aircraft the remaining two divisions were forced to shoulder the operation by themselves . 
 = = = Aircraft and troop losses = = = 
 Losses of airborne troops were high . The cause of this high casualty rate can likely be traced to the fact that the operation was launched in full daylight , rather than a night @-@ assault . The airborne landings were conducted during the day primarily because the planners believed that a daytime operation had a better chance of success than at night , the troops being less scattered . 
 However , landing paratroopers , and especially gliders , without the cover of darkness left them exceedingly vulnerable to anti @-@ aircraft fire . The official history of the British Airborne Divisions highlights the cost of this trade @-@ off , stating that of the 416 gliders that landed , only 88 remained undamaged by enemy fire , and that between 20 – 30 percent of the glider pilots were casualties . Another historian argues that the gliders landing in daylight was a calamity , with the 194th Glider Infantry Regiment having two @-@ thirds of their gliders hit by ground fire and suffering heavy casualties as they landed . The casualty rates were worsened by the slow rates of release and descent of the gliders themselves , and the fact that each aircraft towed two gliders , slowing them even further ; as the time to release a glider unit was 3 – 4 times longer than a parachute unit , the gliders were vulnerable to flak . 
 A large number of paratroop drop aircraft were hit and lost as well . This was largely due to the hostile conditions encountered by the drop aircraft . Operation Varsity 's paratroop drop phase was flown in daylight at slow speeds at very low altitudes , using unarmed cargo aircraft , over heavy concentrations of German 20 mm , 37 mm , and larger calibre antiaircraft ( AA ) cannon utilizing explosive , incendiary , and armor @-@ piercing incendiary ammunition . By that stage of the war , German AA crews had trained to a high state of readiness ; many batteries had considerable combat experience in firing on and destroying high speed , well @-@ armed fighter and fighter @-@ bomber aircraft while under fire themselves . Finally , while many if not all of the C @-@ 47s used in Operation Varsity had been retrofitted with self @-@ sealing fuel tanks , the much larger C @-@ 46 Commando aircraft employed in the drop received no such modification . This was exacerbated by the C @-@ 46 's <unk> wings , which tended to pool leaked gasoline at the wing root where it could be ignited by flak or a stray spark . Although 19 of 72 C @-@ 46 aircraft were destroyed during Operation Varsity , losses of other aircraft types from AA fire during the same operation were also significant , including 13 gliders shot down , 14 crashed , and 126 damaged ; 15 Consolidated B @-@ 24 bombers shot down , and 104 damaged ; and 30 C @-@ 47s shot down and 339 damaged . 
 Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Otway , who wrote an official history of the British airborne forces during World War II , stated that Operation Varsity highlighted the vulnerability of glider @-@ borne units . While they arrived in complete sub @-@ units and were able to move off more quickly than airborne troops dropped by parachute , the gliders were easy targets for anti @-@ aircraft fire and short @-@ range small @-@ arms fire once landed ; Otway concluded that in any future operations , troops dropped by parachute should secure landing zones prior to the arrival of glider @-@ borne units . Thus , by having the landings conducted during daylight to ensure greater accuracy , the Allied planners incurred a far greater casualty rate , particularly amongst the glider @-@ borne elements . The operation also suffered from poor piloting . Although the piloting was of a better quality than in the Sicilian and Normandy operations , there were still significant failures on the part of the pilots , especially when it is considered that the drop was conducted in daylight . A significant error occurred when the pilots of the transports carrying 513th Parachute Infantry Regiment dropped much of the regiment several miles from their designated drop zones , with the mis @-@ dropped units actually landing in the British landing zones . 
 = Ice ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Ice " is the eighth episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files , which premiered on the Fox network on November 5 , 1993 . It was directed by David Nutter and written by Glen Morgan and James Wong . The debut broadcast of " Ice " was watched by 10 million viewers in 6 @.@ 2 million households and received positive reviews from critics , who praised its tense atmosphere . 
 The plot of the episode sees FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) investigate the deaths of an Alaskan research team . Isolated and alone , the agents and their accompanying team discover the existence of extraterrestrial parasitic organisms which drive their hosts into impulsive fits of rage . 
 The episode was inspired by an article in Science News about an excavation in Greenland , and series creator Chris Carter also cited John W. Campbell 's 1938 novella Who Goes There ? as an influence . Although the producers hoped that " Ice " would save money by being shot in a single location , it ended up exceeding its production budget . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A mass murder – suicide occurs among a team of geophysicists at an outpost in Icy Cape , Alaska . FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) head for the outpost , accompanied by physician Dr. Hodge ( Xander Berkeley ) ; toxicologist Dr. DaSilva ( Felicity Huffman ) ; geologist Dr. Murphy ( Steve Hytner ) and Bear ( Jeff Kober ) , their pilot . With the scientists ' bodies the group finds a dog , who attacks Mulder and Bear . Scully notices black nodules on its skin , and suspects that it may be infected with bubonic plague ; she also notices movement beneath its skin . Although Bear ( who was bitten by the dog ) becomes ill and develops similar nodules on his body , autopsies reveal no such nodules on the bodies of the scientists . 
 Murphy finds an ice core sample believed to originate from a meteor crater , and theorizes that the sample might be 250 @,@ 000 years old . Although Bear insists on leaving , the others are concerned about infecting the outside world . When he is asked to provide a stool sample , he attacks Mulder and tries to flee . Something moves under Bear 's skin , and he dies when Hodge removes a small worm from the back of his neck . Now without a pilot , the group is informed that evacuation is impossible because of the weather . 
 The worm removed from Bear is kept in a jar , and another is recovered from one of the scientists ' bodies . Mulder ( believing that the worms are extraterrestrial ) wants them kept alive , but Scully feels that they should be destroyed to prevent infection . The group check each other for black nodules and find none , although Mulder reminds Scully that the nodules disappeared from the dog over time . When Mulder finds Murphy in the freezer with his throat cut , the others ( including Scully ) believe that he has become infected and killed Murphy . Mulder is then locked in a storeroom . 
 Scully discovers that two worms put together will kill each other . When the investigators place one of the worms into the infected dog , it recovers . Against Scully 's objections , Hodge and DaSilva try to place the other worm into Mulder and Hodge realizes that DaSilva is the infected person . He and Mulder restrain the hysterical DaSilva and place the last worm inside her . When they are rescued , DaSilva is quarantined and the others are released . Although Mulder wants to return to the site , he is told that it has been destroyed by the government . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and writing = = = 
 Glen Morgan began writing the episode after he read a Science News article about men in Greenland who found a 250 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old item encased in ice . The setting — an icy , remote research base overcome by an extraterrestrial creature — is similar to that of John W. Campbell 's 1938 novella Who Goes There ? and its two feature @-@ film incarnations : The Thing from Another World ( 1951 ) , directed by Christian <unk> and produced by Howard Hawks , and The Thing ( 1982 ) , directed by John Carpenter . Chris Carter has cited them as the main inspirations for the episode . As in the novella and films , the characters cannot trust each other because they are uncertain if they are who they seem to be . Carter particularly enjoyed this aspect , because it pitted Mulder and Scully against each other and provided " a new look on their characters early on in the series " . 
 The episode 's premise became a recurring theme in the series , with episodes such as " Darkness Falls " and " Firewalker " repeating the combination of remote locations and unknown lifeforms . A similar plot was featured in " The Enemy " , a 1995 episode of Morgan and his writing partner James Wong 's series Space : Above and Beyond , and according to UGO Networks the Fringe episode " What Lies Below " has " basically " the same plot as " Ice " . The episode introduced invertebrate parasites as antagonists in the series ; this plot device would recur in " Firewalker " , " The Host " , " F. Emasculata " and " Roadrunners " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The similarity to Carpenter 's version of The Thing was due in part to new production designer Graeme Murray , who worked on Carpenter 's film and created the complex in which the episode took place . Although " Ice " was intended as a bottle episode which would save money by being shot in a single location , it went over budget . According to Carter , The X @-@ Files typically worked from a small budget and " every dollar we spend ends up on the screen " . As a bottle episode , " Ice " used a small cast and its interiors were filmed on a set constructed at an old Molson brewery site . The episode 's few exterior shots were filmed at Delta Air Park in Vancouver , whose hangars and flat terrain simulated an Arctic location . Carter said that he would have preferred to set the episode at the North Pole , but he believed that this was unfeasible at the time . 
 At first , the production company planned to use snakes in latex suits for the worms ; when this proved impossible , mealworm larvae were used . The effect of the worms crawling in the host bodies was achieved with wires under fake skins , including a skin with hair for the dog . Digital effects were used for scenes involving the worms swimming in jars and entering the dog 's ear . Although extra footage of the worm scenes was shot so they would last as long as intended if Fox 's standards @-@ and @-@ practices officials asked for cuts , no edits were requested . " Ice " was the first significant role in the series for makeup effects artist Toby Lindala , who become its chief makeup artist . The dog used in the episode was a parent of Duchovny 's dog , Blue . Ken Kirzinger , who played one of the scientists killed in the episode 's cold open , was the series ' stunt coordinator . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Although " Ice " is not directly connected to the series ' overarching mythology , it has been described as " a portent to the alien conspiracy arc which would become more pronounced in the second season " with its themes of alien invasion and governmental conspiracy . The episode is noted for exploring the relationship between its lead characters ; Mulder and Scully 's trust contrasts with the behavior of Hodge and DaSilva , who are united by a distrust of those around them . The pairs are " mirror images " in their approaches to partnership . 
 " Ice " features two elements common to other works by Morgan and Wong : dual identities and the questioning of one 's personality . In her essay " Last Night We Had an Omen " , Leslie Jones noted this thematic leitmotif in several of their other X @-@ Files scripts : " the meek animal @-@ control inspector who is a mutant shape @-@ shifter with a taste for human liver [ " Squeeze " ] , the hapless residents of rural Pennsylvania driven mad by a combination of insecticides and electronic equipment [ " Blood " ] , [ and ] the uptight PTA run by practicing Satanists [ " Die Hand Die Verletzt " ] " . 
 Anne Simon , a biology professor at the University of Maryland , discussed the episode in her book Monsters , Mutants and Missing Links : The Real Science Behind the X @-@ Files . Simon noted that like the worms in " Ice " , parasitic worms can attach to the human hypothalamus because it is not blocked by the blood – brain barrier . She compared " Ice " to the later episodes " Tunguska " and " Gethsemane " , with their common theme of extraterrestrial life reaching earth through panspermia . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Ice " originally aired on the Fox network on November 5 , 1993 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on November 10 , 1994 . The episode 's initial American broadcast received a Nielsen rating of 6 @.@ 6 with an 11 share ; about 6 @.@ 6 percent of all households with television and 11 percent of households watching TV viewed the episode , a total of 6 @.@ 2 million households and 10 million viewers . " Ice " and " Conduit " were released on VHS in 1996 , and the episode was released on DVD as part of the complete first season . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Ice " was praised by critics . In The Complete X @-@ Files , authors Matt Hurwitz and Chris Knowles called the episode a milestone for the fledgling series . An Entertainment Weekly first @-@ season retrospective graded " Ice " as A − , calling it " particularly taut and briskly paced " . On The A.V. Club , Keith Phipps praised the episode and gave it an A. According to Phipps , the cast " plays the paranoia beautifully " and the episode was " as fine an hour as this first season would produce " . " Ice " was included on an A.V. Club list of greatest bottle episodes , where it was described as " us [ ing ] its close quarters as an advantage " . A third A.V. Club article , listing ten " must @-@ see " episodes of the series , called " Ice " " the first sign that this show had a shot at really being something special " and said that it " makes great use of claustrophobia and the uneasy but growing alliance between the heroes " . 
 Digital Spy 's Ben Rawson @-@ Jones described " Ice " ' s stand @-@ off between Mulder and Scully as " an extremely tense moment of paranoia . " A New York Daily News review called the episode " potent and creepy " , and said that its plot " was worthy of honorary passage into The Twilight Zone " . Matt Haigh called it " an extremely absorbing and thrilling episode " on the Den of Geek website , noting its debt to The Thing , and Juliette Harrisson called " Ice " the " finest " stand @-@ alone episode of the first season . On the TV Squad blog , Anna Johns called it " a spectacular episode " with an " excellent " opening . UGO Networks called the episode 's worms among the series ' best " Monsters @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " and the cause of " much pointed @-@ guns aggression " . In Tor.com , Meghan Deans compared the scene where Mulder and Scully inspect each other for infection to a similar scene in " Pilot " ; in " Ice " , both characters were equally vulnerable and ( unlike the pilot scene ) Scully was not portrayed as " an idiot " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , gave the episode five out of five stars . They called it " the most influential episode ever made " , noting that the series reprised its formula several times during its run . Shearman felt that although their script was derivative , Morgan and Wong created " a pivotal story " by combining crucial themes from The Thing with a " well rounded " cast of characters . 
 " Ice " was also considered one of the best episodes of the first season by the production crew . According to Carter , Morgan and Wong " just outdid themselves on this show , as did director David Nutter , who really works so hard for us . I think they wrote a great script and he did a great job directing it , and we had a great supporting cast " . Nutter said : " The real great thing about ' Ice ' is that we were able to convey a strong sense of paranoia . It was also a great ensemble piece . We 're dealing with the most basic emotions of each character , ranging from their anger to their ignorance and fear . It established the emotional ties these two characters have with each other , which is very important . Scaring the hell out of the audience was definitely the key to the episode " . Anderson said that " it was very intense . There was a lot of fear and paranoia going on . We had some great actors to work with " . 
 = Fred Moosally = 
 Fred P. Moosally ( born 4 October 1944 ) is a former captain in the United States Navy . During his naval career , Moosally served in many different assignments , including commander of a destroyer and the battleship USS Iowa . Moosally was captain of the Iowa when the center gun of one of the ship 's main gun turrets exploded on April 19 , 1989 , killing 47 crewmen . 
 During the investigation into the cause of the explosion , Moosally testified that the Navy had assigned personnel of inferior quality to the Iowa . The investigation found that Iowa had been operating with severe deficiencies in safety and training procedures , for which Moosally was disciplined . The Navy stated that the deficiencies were unrelated to the turret explosion . 
 In December 1989 in testimony before the United States Senate Armed Services Committee , Moosally declined to fully support the Navy 's conclusion that the explosion had been intentionally caused by Clayton Hartwig , one of the turret 's crewmen . Moosally 's testimony was widely reported in the media . Moosally retired from the Navy soon after in May 1990 . 
 In 1999 , Moosally began working for Lockheed Martin . In 2002 he was appointed president of the company 's MS2 division . In this capacity , Moosally has helped lead Lockheed Martin 's involvement in the Freedom @-@ class littoral combat ship and Integrated Deepwater System programs . Fred Moosally led MS2 from a $ 1B organization to a $ 4B + organization when he retired in January 2010 . Fred Moosally was succeeded in his position by Orlando <unk> , former General Manager and Vice President of the Lockheed Martin MS2 Moorestown , NJ site . 
 It was announced on 12 February 2010 that Moosally was hired as President and Chief Executive Officer of Fincantieri Marine Group ( FMG ) , a subsidiary of Fincantieri @-@ Cantieri <unk> Italiani S.p.A. 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Moosally , born and raised in Youngstown , Ohio , was one of six children in a family of three sons and three daughters . His father was an insurance salesman and the family attended the local Syriac Maronite Church . 
 At Ursuline High School , according to Charles Thompson , Moosally played American football . A defensive tackle , he was selected as a second @-@ string member of the all @-@ city squad . Moosally also lifted weights , ran track , and played summer baseball . He graduated high school in 1962 and was recruited by Penn State and the University of Pittsburgh to play football . He instead decided to attend the United States Naval Academy after speaking with the academy 's football coach , Bill Elias . Moosally played defensive tackle on the academy 's football team . In 1964 he and the team played in the Cotton Bowl Classic . One of Moosally 's teammates in the game was Heisman Trophy winner Roger Staubach . In 1965 Moosally was awarded the Annapolis Touchdown Club 's Silver Helmet trophy as the team 's Most Valuable Player and was selected to play in the Blue @-@ Gray Football Classic . 
 Moosally graduated in 1966 with a class ranking of 812 out of 868 . His classmates nicknamed him " Moose " because of his physical presence and his " slap @-@ on @-@ the @-@ back " personality . 
 = = Naval career = = 
 Moosally 's first tour after commissioning as an ensign was on the destroyer USS Kenneth D. Bailey in which he spent some time off the coast of Vietnam . He attended destroyer department head school at Naval Station Newport , Rhode Island and was assigned to the destroyer USS Lynde McCormick . 
 According to Thompson , in 1971 , Moosally returned to the Naval Academy , where he worked in the recruitment and candidate guidance office . He also worked with the varsity football team . After turning 30 years old , Moosally was assigned to the frigate USS Bronstein as the ship 's executive officer . The ship 's captain was ( then ) Lieutenant Commander William J. " Bud " Flanagan who would later become a four @-@ star admiral and commander of the Navy 's Atlantic Fleet . 
 After the Bronstein , according to Thompson , Moosally was assigned to Washington , D.C. in the Navy 's Bureau of Naval Personnel , where he worked for Vice Admiral Joseph Metcalf , III . He was subsequently assigned to the destroyer USS Mahan as executive officer . After Mahan , Moosally was promoted to commander and was assigned to work for the Navy 's Chief of Naval Operations ( CNO ) office as a surface @-@ warfare program coordinator . Two years later , he became administrative assistant and aide to the CNO , Thomas B. Hayward . 
 By this time , Moosally was considered to be very well @-@ connected politically with many of the Navy 's top admirals , mainly because of tours on the staffs of Metcalf and Hayward . In 1985 , Moosally began a tour as commander of the destroyer USS Kidd . Metcalf later said he thought Moosally did " a terrific job " as skipper of Kidd . 
 After Kidd , Moosally worked in the Navy 's Office of Legislative Affairs . His supervisor was an Academy football teammate , Rear Admiral Thomas Lynch . In this position , Moosally was successful in helping lobby for congressional approval and funding for two new aircraft carriers , two frigates , and a nuclear @-@ powered cruiser for the Navy . Jim Hickey , a congressional aide at the time , said of Moosally , " He 's intelligent , politically savvy and well respected not only by the people in the liaison office but by the Navy folks as well . " 
 According to Thompson , Moosally requested the command of one of the newly reactivated Iowa @-@ class battleships . His request was supported by Metcalf , ( then ) Rear Admiral " Bud " Flanagan , Rear Admiral Richard Milligan ( the Navy battle group commander in Charleston , South Carolina ) , and ( then ) Rear Admiral Jeremy Michael Boorda . The CNO at that time , Admiral Carlisle Trost , apparently agreed , and the request was granted ; Moosally was assigned to command USS Iowa . 
 = = Iowa = = 
 = = = Takes command = = = 
 On May 23 , 1988 , Moosally took command of Iowa at Norfolk , Virginia . Reportedly , Moosally favored Iowa 's missile and engineering systems and deemphasized 16 @-@ inch gunnery . A week after taking command , Moosally and his executive officer , Mike Fahey , canceled a planned one million dollar repair package for Iowa 's main gun batteries , including repairs to the main gun turrets ' lighting , electrical , powder hoists , and hydraulic systems ; seventy @-@ five detailed deficiencies in all . Instead , the funds were spent on overhauling the ship 's powerplant . 
 After completion of the overhaul , according to Thompson , Moosally took Iowa on a shakedown cruise around Chesapeake Bay on August 25 , 1988 . Encountering difficulty in conning the ship through shallow water , Iowa , with Moosally at the helm , narrowly missed colliding with the <unk> , Farragut , and South Carolina before , Thompson claims , running aground in soft mud outside the bay 's main ship channel near the Thimble Shoals . After one hour , Iowa was able to extricate herself without damage and return to port . Although other US Navy vessels observed Iowa grounded in the mud , the incident apparently was not acted upon by Moosally 's superiors . Throughout August and September , Iowa continued with sea trials , then began refresher training in the waters around Florida and Puerto Rico in October . 
 Thompson states that between September 1988 and January 1989 , Iowa 's crew did not conduct much training with the 16 @-@ inch guns , in part because of ongoing , serious maintenance issues with the main gun turrets . According to Ensign Dan Meyer , officer in charge of the ship 's Turret One , morale and operational readiness among the gun turret crews suffered greatly . In spite of the problems with the main gun turrets , the ship passed its Operation Propulsion Program Evaluation in October 1989 . 
 = = = Gun experiments = = = 
 In January 1989 , according to Thompson , Iowa 's Master Chief Fire Controlman , Stephen Skelley , and Gunnery Officer , Lieutenant Commander Kenneth Michael Costigan , persuaded Moosally to allow them to experiment with increasing the range of the main guns using " supercharged " powder bags and specially designed shells . Moosally was led to believe , falsely , that top officials from Naval Sea Systems Command ( NAVSEA ) had authorized the experiments . In fact , John McEachren , a mid @-@ level bureaucrat with NAVSEA , had given the go @-@ ahead to conduct the experiments , even though he had no authority to do so . McEachren concealed his approval of the gunnery experiments from his superiors . 
 Several of the officers and non @-@ commissioned officers in charge of the main gun turret crews believed that Skelley 's and Costigan 's proposed experiments were dangerous , especially because of the age of and numerous maintenance problems with the main guns and gun turrets . Meyer complained to Lieutenant Commander Roger John Kissinger , Iowa 's chief weapons officer , about the proposed experiments , but Kissinger refused to convey the concerns to Moosally or halt the experiments . 
 On January 20 , 1989 , off Vieques Island , according to Thompson , Iowa 's Turret One fired six of the experimental shells using the supercharged powder bags . Skelley claimed that one of the 16 @-@ inch shells traveled 23 @.@ 4 nautical miles ( 40 km ) , setting a record for the longest conventional 16 @-@ inch shell ever fired . Moosally was pleased with the accomplishment , and ensured that news of the record was publicized in the media . Although the shells had been fired without serious incident , Meyer and Petty Officer First Class Dale Eugene Mortensen , gun chief for Turret One , told Skelley that they would no longer participate in his experiments . Skelley asked Turret Two 's gun chief , Senior Chief Reggie Ziegler , if he could use Turret Two for his experiments ; Ziegler refused . Skelley then asked Lieutenant Phil Buch , Turret Two 's officer in charge , and Buch acquiesced . 
 On April 10 , 1989 the battleship was visited by the commander of the US 2nd Fleet , then Vice Admiral Jerome L. Johnson , and on April 13 sailed from Norfolk to participate in a fleet exercise in the Caribbean Sea near Puerto Rico . The exercise , titled " <unk> 3 @-@ 89 " , began on or around April 17 under Johnson 's command . Iowa served as Johnson 's flagship during the exercise . 
 = = = Turret explosion = = = 
 At 8 : 31 in the morning of April 19 , 1989 Iowa prepared to engage in a main gun firing drill as Moosally and Johnson watched from the ship 's bridge . Turret Two was to fire 2 @,@ 700 @-@ pound ( 1 @,@ 200 kg ) practice ( no explosives ) projectiles with five powder bags . The use of five bags had been directed by Skelley and was against regulations but Moosally was not aware of the unauthorized nature of the drill . 
 Turret One fired first , beginning at 09 : 33 . Turret One 's left gun misfired and its crew was unable to get the gun to discharge . Moosally now ordered Turret Two to load and fire a three @-@ gun salvo . According to standard procedure , the misfire in Turret One should have been resolved first before proceeding with the exercise . 
 At 09 : 53 , about 81 seconds after Moosally 's order to load and 20 seconds after the right gun had reported loaded and ready , Turret Two 's center gun exploded . A fireball between 2 @,@ 500 ° F ( 1 @,@ 370 ° C ) and 3 @,@ 000 ° F ( 1 @,@ 650 ° C ) and traveling at 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) per second with a pressure of 4000 lb per square inch ( 281 kg per square cm ) blew out from the center gun 's open breech . The fireball spread through all three gun rooms and through much of the lower levels of the turret . All 47 crewmen inside the turret were killed . The turret contained most of the force of the explosion . 
 Turret Two 's sprinkler system failed to operate automatically . Firefighting crews quickly responded and sprayed the roof of the turret and the left and right gun barrels , which were still loaded , with water . On Kissinger 's recommendation , Moosally ordered Turret Two 's magazines , annular spaces , and powder flats flooded with 16 tons ( 14 @,@ 000 kg ) of seawater , preventing the remaining powder from exploding and likely saving the ship . The turret fire was extinguished in about 90 minutes . 
 After the fire was extinguished , Moosally directed his crew to remove the bodies and to clean up the turret . No attempt was made to photograph or record the locations of the bodies or of damaged equipment in the turret . As a result , important evidence which could have assisted with the subsequent investigation into the cause of the explosion was lost . 
 Iowa returned on April 23 to Norfolk , where a memorial service was held on April 24 . Several thousand people , including family members of many of the victims , attended the ceremony at which President George H. W. Bush spoke . Moosally also spoke at the ceremony , saying , " I remember Turret 2 . They were the life , the spirit and the soul of our ship . We came together in times of trouble . We shared the good and the bad , the comedy and now the tragedy . But we must go on , the crew of the Iowa . " 
 = = = Investigation , deployment , and disciplinary action = = = 
 Milligan was placed in charge of the investigation into the explosion . As part of his investigation , Milligan interviewed Moosally on May 1 and May 10 , 1989 . In his testimony to Milligan , Moosally criticized Iowa 's crew , stating that the Navy had sent him enlisted men of " inferior quality " and that many of Iowa 's sailors were " dopers , marginal performers , constant <unk> [ unauthorized absences ] " . Moosally added that if he had kicked out every sailor in his crew who was a troublemaker , had legal difficulties , or was incapable of doing his job , " I don 't think I 'd have many guys left . " 
 According to Thompson , Iowa 's Turret Two was trained forward after the explosion to its stowed position and superficial repairs were conducted . All the related repair pieces were stored inside the turret and the turret was sealed shut . The turret was never put back into operation . 
 In June 1989 , Iowa , under Moosally 's command , departed for a training cruise and operational deployment to Europe and the Mediterranean . On August 2 , Iowa , in a shipyard at Marseilles , was ordered to join a force of US warships off the coast of Lebanon in response to threats by Shiite Muslim kidnappers to kill American hostages and threats to the US embassy by Maronite Christian demonstrators loyal to Michel Aoun . The ship remained off Lebanon until the crisis cooled a little over a week later , then departed for Italy . 
 Milligan 's investigation , completed in July , concluded that the explosion was caused intentionally by a Turret Two crewman named Clayton Hartwig who Milligan believed was suicidal and homicidal . Milligan also found that , under Moosally , Iowa was operating with severe training and safety deficiencies . The finding that the explosion was intentionally caused by Hartwig was heavily criticized by the victims ' families , the media , and members of Congress . Most of Iowa 's crewmen also did not believe that Hartwig was responsible for the explosion . 
 On October 3 , 1989 Donnell flew to the Mediterranean to discipline Iowa 's officers in response to findings in Milligan 's report . Milligan had recommended that Moosally be relieved of command , but Donnell had decided on a lesser punishment . Moosally and Bob Finney , Iowa 's operations officer , were given non @-@ punitive " letters of admonition " which were not placed in their permanent personnel records . Donnell stated that Moosally 's " poor adherence to explosive safety regulations and ordnance safety " and " his failure of leadership " were a " marked departure from an otherwise outstanding performance " . 
 Shortly thereafter , the Navy issued a statement explaining that the safety violations and training deficiencies found aboard Iowa during the investigation were unrelated to the explosion . Two weeks later , a panel of 13 Navy admirals recommended that Moosally be given another major command , stating that Moosally was " superbly fit " for such responsibility . Milligan was one of the admirals on the panel who supported the recommendation . After Thompson asked Rear Admiral Brent Baker , the Navy 's Chief of Naval Information , and Chief of Naval Personnel Jeremy Michael Boorda about the recommendation , Moosally 's name , according to Thompson , was withdrawn . 
 On October 8 , the Navy Times newspaper published a story titled " Iowa CO Rips Quality of Officers , Crew " which detailed Moosally 's testimony to Milligan in which Moosally had disparaged his crew . Thompson claims that many of Iowa 's sailors were enraged by Moosally 's remarks , with a few reportedly threatening Moosally 's life . 
 Iowa returned to Norfolk on December 7 . At a press conference the same day , according to Thompson , Moosally explained that his comments criticizing his crew had been taken out of context by the news media . 
 = = = Senate testimony and retirement = = = 
 Moosally was scheduled to testify on December 11 before the United States Senate Armed Services Committee ( SASC ) , which was investigating the Navy 's findings about the explosion . The weekend before his appearance in front of the committee , Moosally prepared his remarks at his home in Oakton , Virginia . Rumors were spreading throughout the top ranks of the Navy that Moosally was angry about Milligan 's investigation and was contemplating attacking the Navy 's findings before the SASC . In response , several Navy admirals , including Bud Flanagan and Ted Gordon , at that time the Navy 's Deputy Judge Advocate General , visited Moosally at his home during the weekend to encourage Moosally to support the Navy 's position regarding the cause of the explosion in his senate testimony . Said Gordon of his visit , " I went over to Moosally 's home the night before his testimony to tell him to cool it , to watch it . I told him I thought he would still make admiral , no matter what had happened to the Iowa . " 
 Appearing before the SASC on December 11 , Moosally denied that Iowa had carried out illegal or unauthorized gunfire experiments . He added that his disparaging remarks about the quality of his crew had been misunderstood . Senator Sam Nunn asked Moosally if he agreed with the Navy 's conclusion that Hartwig had " most probably " caused the explosion . In a response that was widely reported in the media , Moosally answered , " I would not come out and say that . I would not make an unqualified statement that Petty Officer Hartwig is the guy who committed the wrongful act . I do not think I can do that . " 
 Reportedly as a result of his refusal to fully support the Navy 's position , Moosally 's Navy career was over . A request for his retirement , whether made by Moosally or someone else is unclear , was approved a few days later . The Navy later reopened its investigation and eventually concluded that it could not determine who or what had caused the tragedy . An independent review of the Navy 's investigation by Sandia National Laboratories concluded that the explosion had probably been caused by an overram of the powder bags into the center gun 's breech , possibly because of a malfunction in the rammer mechanism or because the gun crew was inadequately trained . 
 Captain Moosally retired from the Navy at that rank in May 1990 . At his change of command ceremony on Iowa on May 4 , 1990 , Moosally criticized the Navy for mismanaging the investigation into the turret explosion , saying that the investigators were " people who , in their rush to manage the Iowa problem , forgot about doing the right thing for the Iowa crew " . During the ceremony , Moosally was awarded the Legion of Merit by Rear Admiral George Gee for his service as commander of Iowa . Soon after , Moosally went to work for an unnamed defense contractor in the Washington DC area . 
 On April 19 , 1994 , Moosally and other former Iowa crewmen attended the dedication of a memorial plaque at Norfolk Naval Station to the 47 sailors killed in the explosion . Thompson claims that Moosally was shunned or ignored by many of the former crewmen present , who were still angry over his disparaging comments about them during the investigation . 
 = = A Glimpse of Hell = = 
 In 1999 , Charles Thompson published a book titled A Glimpse of Hell : The Explosion on the USS Iowa and Its Cover @-@ Up which documented Thompson 's investigation into the explosion and its aftermath . The book was extremely critical of Moosally , depicting him as an inept seaman who gained command of the battleship through political connections . In 2001 , the FX TV network broadcast a movie A Glimpse of Hell based on Thompson 's book , starring James Caan in the role of Moosally . 
 = = = Lawsuit = = = 
 In March 2001 Moosally and two other former Iowa officers plus an officer involved in the investigation into the explosion filed suit against Glimpse of Hell author Thompson , his publisher , W.W. Norton , and Dan Meyer , who the plaintiffs stated provided much of the information used in the book , for libel , false light privacy , and conspiracy . In response to the suit , Thompson stated that he stood " foursquare " behind his book 's content . 
 In April 2004 the South Carolina Supreme Court dismissed the suits against Thompson and Meyer for of lack of personal jurisdiction against both individuals , but allowed the suit against W. W. Norton to proceed . In February 2007 the suit was settled out @-@ of @-@ court for undisclosed terms . Stephen F. DeAntonio , Moosally 's attorney , said that his client felt " totally vindicated " . W. W. Norton did not publicly retract or repudiate any of the material in Thompson 's book , however , instead sending a letter to Moosally and the other plaintiffs stating , in part , " ' To the extent you believe the book implies that any of you were engaged in a cover @-@ up , were incompetent , committed criminal acts , violated Naval regulations or exhibited faulty seamanship or professional ineptitude , Norton regrets the emotional distress experienced by you or your family . " 
 = = Lockheed Martin career = = 
 = = = Littoral combat ship = = = 
 In 1997 , Moosally began working for Lockheed Martin in the Washington , D.C. area while living in Oakton . In 1999 , Lockheed Martin appointed Moosally as president of its Naval Electronics & Surveillance Systems ( <unk> ) Surface Systems business , based in Moorestown , New Jersey . On October 1 , 2002 , Lockheed Martin appointed Moosally as president of the <unk> division . The division 's name was later changed to Maritime Systems and Sensors ( MS2 ) division . 
 On May 29 , 2004 , Lockheed was awarded a contract to construct two of the first four littoral combat ships ( LCS ) for the US Navy . Moosally 's MS2 division managed the contract for Lockheed . The contract called for the first LCS to be delivered to the Navy at the end of 2006 at cost of $ 220 million . As construction of the ship progressed , however , it became apparent that the delivery date and construction cost would significantly exceed the original expectations . 
 In response to an inquiry on adverse issues with the program , on February 8 , 2007 , Moosally submitted a statement to the United States House Committee on Armed Services Subcommittee on Seapower and Expeditionary Forces regarding Lockheed 's construction of its portion of the LCS contract . In the statement , Moosally stated that the problems with contract completion arose from the addition of new requirements and specifications by the Navy shortly after contract award , material shortages , and " First @-@ of @-@ Class issues associated with the process of transitioning a new ship design into production " . 
 Due to the expected cost and schedule overruns with Lockheed 's first LCS and a failure to come to an agreement on a fixed cost for future work , the Navy canceled Lockheed 's production of its second LCS in April 2007 . Lockheed 's first LCS , Freedom , was delivered to the Navy in November 2008 at a cost of over $ 531 million , more than double the original contracted price . In March 2009 , the Navy renewed the contract with Lockheed to build its second LCS , the Fort Worth . 
 = = = Deepwater = = = 
 Around 1997 , the United States Coast Guard ( USCG ) determined that its fleet of open ocean ( " deepwater " ) ships and aircraft needed to be replaced . The USCG elected to replace these assets with a system @-@ of @-@ systems acquisition which would be procured as a single , integrated package , estimated to cost a total of $ 24 billion , called the Integrated Deepwater System Program or " Deepwater . " On June 25 , 2002 , the USCG awarded a five @-@ year , indefinite delivery , indefinite quantity , performance @-@ based contract to Integrated Coast Guard Systems ( ICGS ) , a consortium of private companies led by Lockheed Martin and Northrop Grumman Ship Systems . Moosally served as vice @-@ chairman of ICGS . On May 19 , 2006 , the USCG extended the contract with ICGS for 43 additional months . 
 Moosally 's MS2 division led Lockheed 's participation in the Deepwater contract . Specifically , Lockheed 's portion of the Deepwater program encompassed system engineering and integration , the command and control network , and logistics and aviation , including refurbishment of existing assets and production of new components . One of the refurbishment projects was upgrades to the USCG 's 110 @-@ foot patrol boats . 
 In August 2006 , Lockheed engineer Michael DeKort went public with claims that Lockheed 's MS2 division had contributed to ICGS 's delivery of boats that were unsafe and which did not meet the USCG 's requirements . DeKort stated that Lockheed had accepted schedule and cost requirements that were impossible to meet . As result , according to DeKort , Lockheed 's MS2 engaged in corner @-@ cutting measures which adversely affected the boat 's electronics systems . These issues included camera surveillance blind spots over the bridge , electronic equipment for communications , navigation and sensor systems , that were installed on the outside of the boat , that would not meet extreme weather requirements , the use of hazardous smoke producing cables , and security deficiencies that would cause a compromise of the boat 's secure communications systems . 
 A subsequent United States Department of Homeland Security ( DHS ) inspector general report confirmed that some of DeKort 's allegations were valid , including that in at least one instance , " The contractor [ Lockheed Martin ] knowingly installed in the ( boats ) equipment that did not meet specific environmental requirements outlined in the Deepwater contract . " As a result of this and other issues with the program , in April 2007 the USCG announced that it was curtailing ICGS 's role as active manager of the Deepwater contract . 
 On May 17 , 2007 , Moosally testified before the United States House Homeland Security Subcommittee on Border , Maritime and Global Counterterrorism concerning the DHS ' report 's findings . Moosally stated that Lockheed had either met the contracted requirements or had immediately notified the USCG when issues arose . He added that any other discrepancies were minor and did not affect the safety , reliability , or effectiveness of the systems in question . 
 DeKort criticized Moosally 's testimony , calling it " not correct " in that it had misrepresented the true nature of the issues . In a letter to Representatives Loretta Sanchez and Chris Carney , DeKort stated that in 2004 when he asked to talk to Moosally to explain his concerns about issues with MS2 's work on the systems , Moosally had refused to meet with him . The USCG later canceled all further work on upgrading the 110 @-@ foot patrol boats , but this was primarily because of problems with hull modernization and extension efforts by Bollinger Shipyards , Inc . , a Lockheed subcontractor . 
 = = = Printed media = = = 
 Garzke , William H. , Jr . ; Dulin , Robert O. Jr . ( 1995 ) . Battleships . Naval Institute Press : Anapolis , Maryland . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0174 @-@ 2 . 
 Schwoebel , Richard L. ( 2001 ) . Explosion Aboard the Iowa . Diane Pub Co . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6583 @-@ 8 . 
 Thompson II , Charles C. ( 1999 @-@ 03 @-@ 01 ) . A Glimpse of Hell : The Explosion on the USS Iowa and Its Cover @-@ Up . W. W. Norton & Company . ISBN 0 @-@ 393 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 <unk> , Gregory ( 1997 ) . Fall From Glory : The Men Who Sank the U.S. Navy . Simon & Schuster . ISBN 0 @-@ 684 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 = = = Web = = = 
 Associated Press ( 2007 ) . " Defamation suit over USS Iowa book settled " . <unk> Retrieved December 9 , 2008 . 
 <unk> , Calvin ( September 29 , 2008 ) . " Bollinger Wins Potential $ 1 @.@ 5 Billion Contract To Build Coast Guard Cutters " ( Newspaper article ) . BNET . Retrieved December 19 , 2008 . 
 Blue , Dan ( June 13 , 1999 ) . " Framed at Sea : How Navy officers tried blame 47 deaths on a sailor by calling him gay " ( Newspaper book review ) . San Francisco Chronicle . Retrieved November 19 , 2008 . 
 Charles , Dan ( September 14 , 1991 ) . " Battleship blast was accident , not suicide " ( Magazine article ) . New Scientist . Retrieved October 19 , 2008 . 
 Defense Industry Daily ( March 12 , 2008 ) . " Voted Off the Island : The USCG 's Deepwater FRC Program " . Watershed Publishing . Retrieved November 19 , 2008 . 
 DeKort , Michael ( May 25 , 2007 ) . " Deepwater Whistleblower Challenges Testimony by Lockheed Martin " . Project On Government Oversight . Retrieved December 19 , 2008 . 
 Dorsey , Jack ( April 17 , 1999 ) . " Ten years after Iowa tragedy , only evidence left is memories " . Virginian @-@ Pilot via <unk> Retrieved May 9 , 2007 . 
 Gordon , Michael R. ( May 25 , 1990 ) . " Navy <unk> Iowa Blast Inquiry After Ignition in Gunpowder Test " ( Newspaper article ) . The New York Times . Retrieved January 2 , 2008 . 
 Government Accountability Office ( March 8 , 2007 ) . " Status of Efforts to Improve Deepwater Program Management and Address Operational Challenges " ( PDF ) . Government Accountability Office . Retrieved January 2 , 2008 . 
 Halloran , Richard ( December 14 , 1989 ) . " 2 Survivors of Iowa Blast Deny <unk> Set It Off " ( Newspaper article ) . The New York Times . Retrieved January 2 , 2008 . 
 Lipton , Eric ( December 9 , 2006 ) . " Billions Later , Plan to Remake the Coast Guard Fleet Stumbles " ( Newspaper article ) . The New York Times . Retrieved December 19 , 2008 . 
 Lipton , Eric ( April 18 , 2007 ) . " Coast Guard to Manage Fleet Modernization " ( Newspaper article ) . The New York Times . Retrieved November 19 , 2008 . 
 Lockheed Martin ( September 26 , 2002 ) . " Lockheed Martin <unk> Fred P. Moosally President Of Naval Electronics & Surveillance Systems Business Segment " ( Press release ) . PR Newswire . Retrieved December 19 , 2008 . 
 Lockheed Martin ( November 8 , 2008 ) . " First Littoral Combat Ship Commissioned by the Navy " . Lockheed Martin . Archived from the original ( Press release ) on June 12 , 2008 . Retrieved December 19 , 2008 . 
 Merle , Renae ( April 13 , 2007 ) . " High Costs Lead Navy to Cancel Lockheed Coastal Vessel " ( Newspaper article ) . The Washington Post . Retrieved January 2 , 2008 . 
 Moosally , Fred P. ; Kevin Moak ; Richard McCreary ; Mike Ellis ( February 8 , 2007 ) . " Statement before House Armed Services Committee " ( PDF ) . United States House Committee on Armed Services . Retrieved January 2 , 2008 . 
 Moosally , Fred P. ( May 17 , 2007 ) . " Testimony of Fred P. Moosally President , Lockheed Martin Maritime Systems and Sensors , to The House Committee on Homeland Security Subcommittee on Border , Maritime and Global Counterterrorism " ( PDF ) . United States House Homeland Security Subcommittee on Border , Maritime and Global Counterterrorism . Retrieved January 2 , 2008 . 
 O 'Rourke , Ronald ( October 9 , 2008 ) . " Coast Guard Deepwater Acquisition Programs : Background , Oversight Issues , and Options for Congress " ( PDF ) . Congressional Research Service . Retrieved November 19 , 2008 . 
 Thompson , Charles ( July 1999 ) . " Cover @-@ up aboard the USS Iowa " . Investigative Reporters and Editors ( BNET ) . Retrieved 2008 @-@ 10 @-@ 19 . 
 Washington Post ( March 24 , 2009 ) . " National Briefing : Lockheed Gets Second Ship Deal " ( Newspaper article ) . Washington Post . Retrieved 2009 @-@ 03 @-@ 25 . 
 = A Chorus Lie = 
 " A Chorus Lie " is the sixteenth episode of the American television series Will & Grace 's fourth season . It was written by Tracy Poust and Jon Kinnally and directed by series producer James Burrows . The episode originally aired on NBC in the United States on February 7 , 2002 . Guest stars in " A Chorus Lie " include Matt Damon , Leslie Jordan , Patrick Kerr and real life members of the Gay Men 's Chorus of Los Angeles . 
 In the episode , Jack ( Sean Hayes ) begins a rivalry with a fellow named Owen ( Matt Damon ) . They are competing to be the final entrant in a gay men 's chorus , and after learning that Owen is straight , Jack tries to " in " him with help from Grace ( Debra Messing ) . Meanwhile , Karen ( Megan Mullally ) tries to pass off Will ( Eric McCormack ) as her lover and not her lawyer when she discovers that she is the object of pity for being single at her own Valentine 's Day party . 
 The episode received positive reviews from television critics . According to Nielsen ratings , " A Chorus Lie " was watched by 25 @.@ 3 million viewers during its original broadcast , making it the most @-@ watched episode in the history of the show . The episode garnered three Emmy Award nominations , and won one in the " Cinematography for a Multi @-@ Camera Series " category . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Following his audition , Jack ( Sean Hayes ) receives a call back and is informed that he has become a finalist for the Manhattan Gay Men 's Chorus . At the final auditions for the chorus , Jack is informed by the choral director that he will have a solo , but before he can sing it , Owen ( Matt Damon ) — originally intended for the solo part — barges in and sings his part . Jack sees Owen as competition and thinks of a way to get rid of him . He learns that Owen is posing as a gay man , after observing him gaze at a woman . Jack strikes a plan to get Owen to confess he is straight , in which he invites him to " rehearse " in Will and Grace 's apartment . Jack 's plan fails miserably , so he enlists the help of Grace ( Debra Messing ) to " in " Owen for him . Grace begins flirting with Owen , which ultimately leads to the two making out , prompting Jack to barge in and take a picture . Owen , however , tricks him into pulling the film out of the camera , destroying the proof . At the chorus rehearsal , Jack and Owen begin bickering , which results in Jack revealing to everyone that Owen is straight , to which Owen admits . Despite the revelation , the chorus director ( Patrick Kerr ) tells Owen he has made it into the chorus . 
 Meanwhile , Will ( Eric McCormack ) accepts Karen 's ( Megan Mullally ) invitation as her date , due to her husband being in prison , to her annual Valentine 's Day party . It is there that Karen passes off Will as her " gigolo , " after her rival Beverley Leslie ( Leslie Jordan ) teases her for being alone . Word gets around that Will is " working " for Karen for the weekend , which prompts many women asking for Will 's " services " . Much to his dismay , Will believes he , a lawyer , is accepting legal clients . Karen finally reveals to Will that she has been telling everyone he is her gigolo . Will becomes outraged at the revelation and leaves . At the party , Beverley makes fun of Karen because she has no partner for the annual spotlight dance . Will , however , returns and dances with Karen . 
 = = Production = = 
 " A Chorus Lie " was written by Tracy Poust and Jon Kinnally and directed by series producer James Burrows . In January 2002 , it was confirmed that actor Matt Damon would guest star on Will & Grace . In the same month , it was announced that NBC would extend " A Chorus Lie " with four additional minutes to accommodate the network 's " supersize " plan to compete against the CBS reality show Survivor . Jeff Zucker , who at the time was President of NBC Entertainment , said that the show 's producers approached NBC about the " <unk> " idea rather than the other way around ; " When scripts came in long , [ the producers ] asked NBC if the network could handle a few extra minutes of footage . " Zucker commented that the lengthening of this episode " turned out great , and there was no real extra work for anyone . It 's a great development that [ the producers ] know that [ NBC is ] open to things like this . " 
 In an interview with the San Francisco Chronicle , Damon revealed that he was asked to appear on the show by Sean Hayes , a friend of Damon 's and the actor that plays Jack on Will & Grace . Damon enjoyed the idea for the episode and agreed to appear on the show . He commented that it was easy for him to get into character because he had previously played a gay character in the film The Talented Mr. Ripley ( 1999 ) . Following his appearance , Damon told the Chicago Sun @-@ Times in June 2002 that he would like to come back and guest star . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When Grace and Owen make out on the couch , Grace is wearing a pair of Seven jeans . According to Betsy Taylor of the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch , this scene " prompted a ripple effect " in the United States of people seeking out the jeans label . At the chorus rehearsal , Jack and Owen are singing with the chorus when they begin bickering . Jack sings " Lyin ' and a @-@ cheatin ' ! " to Owen and Owen sings " <unk> and a @-@ tone @-@ deaf " to Jack , a reference to Hal David and Burt Bacharach 's 1963 song " Wishin ' and Hopin ' " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " A Chorus Lie " brought in 25 @.@ 3 million viewers , which drew the highest amount of viewers in the show 's history , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode received a 15 @.@ 5 rating / 23 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . The episode outperformed the 15 @.@ 2 rating / 22 share of CBS ' crime drama series CSI : Crime Scene Investigation in the 18 @-@ 49 category . The episode was nominated for three Emmy Awards , Tony <unk> won an Emmy for Cinematography for a Multi @-@ Camera Series , while Peter Chakos was nominated for Outstanding Multi @-@ Camera Picture Editing for a Series , and James Burrows was nominated for Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series . 
 The episode received generally positive reception . According to Darrell Giles of The Courier Mail , several American critics characterized it as the best episode of the show . Jason Steele of the Chicago Tribune 's RedEye named it one of his three favorite episodes of Will & Grace . Jeffrey Robinson of DVD Talk wrote that the episode was hilarious . Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly noted , " Damon 's spunky appearance ... as a straight guy posing as homosexual and competing with Jack ( Sean Hayes ) for a spot in a gay men 's choir . The show is endlessly imaginative in the ways it explores themes like this with a humor that doesn 't betray or belittle its core gay characters . " Scott D. Pierce of the Deseret News was less positive about the episode , stating that it " plays like bad camp . There 's nothing realistic about it — [ the characters ] seem more like the inhabitants of a lame Saturday Night Live sketch than marginally real characters . " He also noted that " the extent of the tastelessness of the sex talk and Karen faking a sexual encounter is amazing . " 
 Critics praised Damon 's performance in the episode . A television reviewer from The Sacramento Bee noted that Damon " did a well @-@ publicized ( and very good ) gig " on the show . Robert Bianco of USA Today commented that Damon was " incredibly charming " and funny . Matt Roush of TV Guide , in review of season four , said : " If it weren 't for some inspired guest stars — Matt Damon as a straight guy bluffing his way into a gay chorus , Michael Douglas as a gay detective clowning it up on the dance floor , Glenn Close as a lusty photographer groping both Will and Grace during a shoot — this season would be an awfully sad misfire . " Wales on Sunday 's Wil Marlow called Damon 's performance one of the most memorable guest appearances in the history of the show , and commented that he " held his own well against serial scene @-@ stealer Sean Hayes . " Mark Perigard of the Boston Herald said the episode " flies with jokes predicated on stereotypes and sexual innuendo " , but " Damon is a good sport with all the silliness , though , and seems more at ease here in the sitcom than he has in his last three films . " Eric McCormack , who portrays Will , said Damon was " magnificent " in the episode and a " great experience " for the cast of the show . Sean Hayes cites " A Chorus Lie " as one of his favorite episodes . In March 2006 , Entertainment Weekly named Damon 's guest spot as their number two most memorable guest appearance on Will & Grace . 
 = Pegasus Bridge ( video game ) = 
 Pegasus Bridge is a turn @-@ based strategy video game developed and published by Personal Software Services . It was released exclusively in the United Kingdom for the ZX Spectrum , Amstrad CPC and Commodore 64 in 1987 . It is the ninth instalment of the Strategic Wargames series . The game is set during the landings in Normandy on D @-@ Day in the Second World War and revolves around the British 6th Airborne Division 's attempts to secure a bridge over the Caen Canal . 
 The game was designed by Alan Steel , who developed all of the games games in the Strategic Wargames series . The player can assume control of either British or German forces , in which gameplay of Pegasus Bridge focuses on British forces securing various locations in Normandy or German forces defending the area from the attacking British . The game received mixed reviews upon release , with praise being directed at its " attractive " graphics , however a major bug which caused the game to crash was discovered during one reviewer 's initial testing . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is a turn @-@ based strategy and revolves around the British 6th Airborne Division 's attempts to secure Bénouville Bridge ( later renamed Pegasus Bridge , in honour of the battle ) over the Caen Canal during the Normandy landings on 5 June 1944 . The player is able to command either the British or German side in the game . Regardless of the side chosen , British units will not appear on the map at the beginning of the game as the British 6th Airborne Division have not yet made their parachute drops . German forces are distributed around the four far corners of the map , with a few units positioned near Bénouville Bridge . If playing as the British , the objective is to defeat all German forces and secure all bridges in the area , with the capture or destruction of the Merville Battery being the ultimate goal . If playing as the Germans , the only objective is to hold off all British attacks for 18 hours , which is the equivalent to 36 in @-@ game turns . 
 Pegasus Bridge features ten different types of terrain , which affect the movement of the troops and the defensibility of certain areas . If units are situated in towns or woodland areas , their attacks will be less effective . High wind speeds will also render British parachuting troops temporarily ineffective . Units on the map are presented as small squares and can be stacked together to increase defence . While British forces may destroy various bridges throughout the game , certain bridges such as those over the Caen Canal and Orne river must be preserved in order to win the game . 
 = = Background = = 
 Personal Software Services was founded in Coventry , England , by Gary Mays and Richard Cockayne in November 1981 . The company was known for creating games that revolved around historic war battles and conflicts , such as Theatre Europe , Bismarck and Falklands ' 82 . The company had a partnership with French video game developer ERE Informatique and published localised versions of their products to the United Kingdom . The Strategic Wargames series was conceptualised by software designer Alan Steel in 1984 . During development of these titles , Steel would often research the topic of the upcoming game and pass on the findings to other associates in Coventry and London . In 1983 , the company received recognition for being " one of the top software houses " in the United Kingdom , and was a finalist for BBC Radio 4 's New Business Enterprise Award for that year . 
 In 1986 , Cockayne took a decision to alter their products for release on 16 @-@ bit consoles , as he found that smaller 8 @-@ bit consoles , such as the ZX Spectrum , lacked the processing power for larger strategy games . The decision was falsely interpreted as " pulling out " from the Spectrum market by video game journalist Phillipa Irving . Following years of successful sales throughout the mid 1980s , Personal Software Services experienced financial difficulties , in what Cockayne admitted in a retrospective interview that " he took his eye off the ball " . The company was acquired by Mirrorsoft in February 1987 , and was later dispossessed by the company due to strains of debt . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received mixed reviews upon release . Owen Bishop of Your Sinclair found a major bug during testing of the game which caused the game to crash , and ultimately affected his experience , stating that " being Brits [ we ] were obviously too gentlemanly to take advantage of such a situation " . Bishop also criticised the high speed at which the in @-@ game messages flash as " excessive " . Philippa Irving of Crash criticised the presentation of the game , saying that the " annoying " key action ruined playability and that its controls were limited by a cursor . However , Irving praised its graphics and historical accuracy , stating that it was " attractive " yet " <unk> " and clearly based on the historical situation . A reviewer of Computer and Video Games called it an " excellent game " , and praised its value for money . However , the reviewer criticised the " slow moving " pace of the game , as opposed to the fast tempo of the historical battle . 
 = Dabangg = 
 Dabangg ( English : Fearless ) is a 2010 Indian action film directed by Abhinav Kashyap , and produced by Arbaaz Khan under Arbaaz Khan Productions . Arbaaz 's elder brother Salman Khan stars in the lead role , with Sonakshi Sinha ( in her acting debut ) , Arbaaz Khan , Om Puri , Dimple Kapadia , Vinod Khanna , Anupam Kher , Mahesh Manjrekar and Mahie Gill featuring in supporting roles , while Sonu Sood plays the main antagonist . The film marks the debut of Arbaaz as a producer and Kashyap as a director . Malaika Arora Khan appears in " Munni Badnaam Hui " . 
 Dabangg is set in the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh , and tells the story of a corrupt but fearless police officer , Chulbul Pandey , and his troubled relationship with his stepfather and half @-@ brother . Made with a budget of ₹ 300 million and marketed at ₹ 120 million , Dabangg was shot primarily in the town of Wai in Maharashtra , while other major scenes were shot in the United Arab Emirates . 
 Dabangg was released during Eid on 10 September 2010 in nearly 2100 cinemas worldwide . It opened to generally positive reviews , and went on to gross ₹ 2 @.@ 15 billion worldwide . It is the highest @-@ grossing Bollywood film of 2010 and , as of December 2011 , the fourth highest – grossing Bollywood film of all time . Dabangg has won several awards — the National Film Award for Best Popular Film Providing Wholesome Entertainment and six Filmfare Awards , including Best Film and Best Female Debut ( Sinha ) . It was later remade in Tamil as Osthe , and in Telugu as Gabbar Singh . A sequel , titled Dabangg 2 was released in 2012 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Chulbul Pandey , a young boy , lives with his younger half @-@ brother , <unk> " Makkhi " Pandey , stepfather Prajapati Pandey ( Vinod Khanna ) and mother , Naina Devi ( Dimple Kapadia ) in <unk> , Uttar Pradesh . He has a troubled relationship with his stepfather and Makkhi . After 21 years , Chulbul ( Salman Khan ) becomes a policeman . Chulbul , who calls himself " Robin Hood " Pandey , lives with his family . Makkhi ( Arbaaz Khan ) is in love with Nirmala ( Mahi Gill ) , whose father <unk> ( <unk> Anand ) opposes the relationship . Chulbul falls in love with a girl named Rajjo ( Sonakshi Sinha ) , who he meets during a police encounter . 
 A corrupt political leader named Chedi Singh ( Sonu Sood ) meets Chulbul and both quickly become enemies . Makkhi asks his father to arrange his marriage with Nirmala . His father refuses saying that he needs money to repay the loans he took to make his factory , so he needs his son to marry a rich girl . Makkhi , in desperate need of money , steals it from Chulbul 's cupboard , and gives it to Nirmala 's father in order to convince him to marry Nirmala . Meanwhile , Chulbul meets Rajjo and proposes marriage , which she rejects , as she has to take care of her father , <unk> ( Mahesh Manjrekar ) — a drunkard . 
 Chulbul comes home to find his mother dead . He goes to his stepfather to make peace , as he is the only family left . His stepfather refuses and despises him as an outcast . Makkhi invites Chulbul to his marriage with Nirmala . Chulbul convinces Rajjo 's father to marry her . Rajjo 's father commits suicide , as he knows that his daughter will not marry anyone while he is alive . Chulbul takes Rajjo to Makkhi 's exuberant wedding . Realising that Makkhi has stolen his money to finance the wedding , Chulbul marries Rajjo in an impromptu ceremony . Nirmala 's father feels disgraced and cancels his daughter 's wedding . 
 Makkhi beats up one of the workers in his factory due to a small mishap . The worker goes to the police station with his mother to file a complaint . Chulbul beats up Makkhi in public to disgrace him . Chedi takes advantage of the situation , and takes Makkhi along with his father to the police station . Makkhi 's father resolves the situation by accepting an apology from Chulbul . Chulbul meets Dayal Babu ( Anupam Kher ) , a local political leader , who also dislikes Chedi . With his help , Chulbul <unk> the breweries of Chedi , and wrongly frames him for it . 
 To take revenge , Chedi burns Makkhi 's factory . Makkhi 's father suffers a heart attack due to shock and is hospitalised . Makkhi goes to Chedi seek help from him , without knowing that it was Chedi , who burnt his factory . Chedi agrees to finance his father 's treatment , if he delivers a crate of mangoes to Dayal Babu 's house . Unknown to Makkhi , there is a bomb inside the crate , which explodes after he leaves , killing Dayal Babu . Chedi gives Makkhi a task to kill Chulbul . Makkhi accepts , and confesses it to Chulbul . He reveals to Chulbul that Chedi made him plant the bomb unknowingly . Chulbul forgives him and reconciles with his stepfather . Makkhi then reveals to Chulbul that it was Chedi , who killed their mother . Enraged , Chulbul suffocates Chedi to death . Later , Chulbul gets Makkhi married to Nirmala in the presence of her father , while Rajjo reveals that she is pregnant . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Credits adapted from Bollywood Hungama . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Salman Khan grew a moustache after consulting with his brother and prepared his hair to suit his role . For the former , he had to try out nearly fifty styles in a span of four months before commencement of the filming . Photo @-@ shoots were held to finalise his look . Abhinav Kashyap , in an interview with Bollywood Hungama , revealed that initially he had considered a few others for the role of Chulbul Pandey , but eventually changed his mind and approached Salman . Kashyap had seen Arbaaz in Jaane Tu Ya Jaane Na , doing a cameo and approached him to be a part of the project . After reading it , he had instantly accepted to produce and star in it . Sonu Sood was selected for playing the lead antagonist . He revealed that his character was that of a " youth leader with grey shades . " Mahesh Manjrekar was later approached to play the father of Sinha 's character , although he had plans to quit acting . 
 In April 2009 , Sonakshi Sinha signed for her debut role . Salman had seen her at a function engaging in dancing and offered her the role . Speaking about it , she said that she had lost a weight of 30 kg over two years to prepare for her character of a village girl by " a combination of proper diet and vigorous exercise " . She added that she had been " observing people and trying to pick up nuances " as a step of further preparation . Malaika Arora , who had performed a few item numbers in her career , most notably in Dil Se .. , was confirmed to do the same in the film . This was the first of its kind in her home production . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Dabangg 's shooting took place primarily in Wai and the United Arab Emirates . The shooting commenced in September 2009 . Production designer <unk> Khan drew over 100 sketches detailing out every set in the film . The cinematography was performed by Mahesh <unk> . The first schedule began in the town of Wai and continued for 45 days , during which Sonu Sood , the main antagonist fractured his nose . A schedule , primarily involving a song shoot , was captured in the Khalid Bin Al Waheed station in Dubai , making Dabangg the first film to be shot there . Some scenes were also filmed at the Emirates Palace hotel in Abu Dhabi . 
 The film , involving around five action sequences , was choreographed by S. Vijayan , who previously served as the stunt director of Wanted , and shot over 60 days . Later , special effects were incorporated into those scenes . The songs were choreographed by Raju Khan and Shabina Khan , while Farah Khan choreographed the item number , " Munni Badnaam Hui " . The shooting was completed in early June 2010 , and the film went into post @-@ production . A party was held to commemorate the completion of the shooting and the success of the theatrical promo . It was attended by the main cast and crew . 
 = = = Pre @-@ release = = = 
 Dabangg 's theatrical trailer , running for about two and a half minutes , was released on 23 July 2010 , alongside Priyadarshan ’ s <unk> <unk> . Dabangg was described as one of the most anticipated films of the year by the The Indian Express . It was reported to have broken pre @-@ release records for hype by <unk> , a filming awareness product originated by <unk> Media . A special screening of the film took place at Film City on 6 September 2010 . The premiere of Dabangg was held in Mumbai on 9 September 2010 . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack album was composed by the music director duo Sajid @-@ Wajid and Lalit Pandit , while the lyrics were penned by Faiz Anwar , Lalit Pandit and <unk> Sherwani . Lalit Pandit wrote the song " Munni Badnaam Hui " . The album was launched on 6 August 2010 in Delhi . The album contains five original songs , four remixes and one theme song . The audio rights of Dabangg were sold for about ₹ 90 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 3 million ) to T @-@ Series . 
 The track " Munni Badnaam Hui " is said to be inspired by an old Bhojpuri folk song " <unk> Badnaam Hua <unk> Tere Liye " . Director Abhinav Kashyap accepted using the folk song saying that he , being from Uttar Pradesh , was familiar with the song since childhood so he suggested the very song to be improvised and rephrased to fit the film 's requirement . It was alleged that it was inspired from the Pakistani song " <unk> Badnaam Hua " from the film Mr. Charlie ( 1992 ) . 
 Dabangg 's soundtrack received generally positive reviews from music critics . Joginder Tuteja of Bollywood Hungama gave the album 3 stars and said , " [ it ] delivers what it promised . One expected a masala soundtrack and this is what one gets with a couple of item song sequences , a couple of theme tracks and two love songs which are actually the highlight of the film . A soundtrack that has something in store for mass as well as class . " Atta Khan of Planet Bollywood gave it a rating of 6 out of 10 , and called the soundtrack " simple , catchy , easy on the ears and fun " . In a 3 @-@ star rating , critic Devesh Sharma of Filmfare praised Sajid @-@ Wajid 's composition , and the track " Chori Kiya Re Jiya " , calling it " [ pleasure ] to the ears " . 
 The album performed well on the charts after its release . The tracks " Tere Mast Mast Do Nain " and " Munni Badnaam " were successful , and entered the list of top 20 most frequently played songs on radio in India . In August 2010 , the track " Tere Mast Mast Do Nain " reached number @-@ one on the Official Asian Download Chart in the United Kingdom based on legal downloads in that country . 
 Tracklist 
 = = Release = = 
 Dabangg released worldwide on 10 September 2010 . It opened up across 1 @,@ 800 screens in India and around 300 screens overseas . The film was released in 2300 theatres worldwide . It was also screened in Norway at an international film festival . The film 's DVDs and VCDs were launched by the Reliance Big Home Video on 12 October 2010 . It was released on YouTube on 28 January 2011 for free viewing to audiences in India . The satellite rights were pre @-@ sold for ₹ 100 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 5 million ) to Colors . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film generally received positive reviews from critics , most of whom praised the performance of Salman Khan . Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama gave it 4 @.@ 5 stars in his review and praised the film 's action and music , and Khan 's performance . In a 4 @-@ star review for Koimoi , Komal Nahta ensured that the film would be a commercial success . Film critic Aniruddha Guha of Daily News and Analysis called the film " slightly mad , and terribly entertaining . " 
 <unk> Paul of The Statesman gave the film 3 @.@ 5 stars and commented , " Dabangg aligns itself with viewers frustrated by the nonexistence of uncomplicated heroism on screen . " In a 3 @-@ star review for Rediff.com , Abhishek <unk> stated " Dabangg is not a movie for non @-@ Salman fans . But for those who worship him it 's a film you simply cannot afford to miss . " Anupama Chopra of NDTV and Sukanya <unk> of Filmfare gave it 3 stars , and both praised Khan 's performance . Gaurav Malani of Indiatimes was critical towards the film 's story , remarking " the film doesn ’ t care a damn for coming up with any innovative storyline . " Rajeev Masand of CNN @-@ IBN panned the film 's screenplay , but praised Khan 's performance . Shobhaa De of the Bangalore Times was critical , concluding " Let ’ s hand it to Salman who has pulled off the stunts and pelvic thrusts . Nothing new there . But it is the naughty self @-@ parodying , which is so camp , so out there , which delivers the biggest punch . What ’ s left for this guy now – all he needs is a cape . And he can call himself Superman . " 
 = = = Legal issues = = = 
 " Munni Badnaam Hui " included a brand name ' <unk> Balm ' in its lyrics , much to the displeasure of Emami — the makers of the brand . A trademark case was settled by the producers and Emami out of court , and Malaika Arora Khan was later chosen to an official advertising campaign promoting <unk> Balm . Activist Rajkumar Tak filed a case in the Bombay High Court , demanding that the deletion of the word " Hindustan " from the song , claiming that the censor board had not responded to his queries in regard to the " defaming " lyrics . He found them " highly objectionable " and " unpardonable " and labelled the song a " mockery " for the country , as a girl was " indecently " dancing in the presence of corrupted officers , which , according to him , threw bad light on the nation and " hurt the patriotic sentiments of every Indian " . 
 Before release , critic and writer Shobhaa De called for a boycott of Dabangg , due to Salman 's comments on the 2008 Mumbai attacks . She criticised it as " arrogance , ignorance and plain stupidity . " This sparked off a fight with the producers via Twitter , and continued after her negative review of the film . Anurag Kashyap , brother of Abhinav Kashyap , tweeted " Salman khan thinks he made my brother 's life .. Hope he can do the same for his brother Arbaaz with Dabangg 2 . " This was taken as " slamming " Salman and resulted in Arbaaz retorting back by referring to the comment as " attitude " instead of " gratitude " . However , Anurag later apologised for his remarks , which Arbaaz accepted . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Dabangg received accolades in major film award functions in India . Among them , it won the National Film Award for Best Popular Film Providing Wholesome Entertainment . It was given six awards at the 56th Filmfare Awards , including one for Best Film , seven Screen Awards , nine Zee Cine Awards , and ten IIFA Awards . 
 = = Box office = = 
 = = = Domestic = = = 
 Dabangg opened to ₹ 145 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 2 million ) nett collections in its first day , and became the highest opener of all time across India . On the second day , it netted ₹ 165 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 5 million ) . At the end of its weekend , the film collected the total of ₹ 495 million ( US $ 7 @.@ 4 million ) . The film netted ₹ 106 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 6 million ) on Monday , ₹ 86 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 3 million ) on Tuesday , ₹ 70 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 0 million ) on Wednesday , and ₹ 60 million ( US $ 890 @,@ 000 ) on Thursday taking the total nett collections to around ₹ 815 million ( US $ 12 million ) in its first week of release . It subsequently became the highest opening week nett grosser . 
 Dabangg netted ₹ 62 million ( US $ 920 @,@ 000 ) on the second Friday , ₹ 75 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 1 million ) on Saturday and ₹ 105 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 6 million ) on Sunday , for a ₹ 238 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 5 million ) second weekend , a drop of around 50 % from the opening weekend . In its second week , the film earned ₹ 360 million ( US $ 5 @.@ 3 million ) , taking the total nett collections to ₹ 1 @.@ 16 billion ( US $ 17 million ) in two weeks , thus becoming the second highest @-@ grossing film of all time in two weeks . The distributor share of Dabangg was declared to be ₹ 770 million ( US $ 11 million ) — the second highest in Bollywood . Dabangg collected ₹ 160 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 4 million ) during the third week and ₹ 60 million ( US $ 890 @,@ 000 ) in its fourth week , taking the domestic nett collections to ₹ 1 @.@ 4 billion ( US $ 21 million ) . The domestic nett collections in eleven weeks was ₹ 1 @.@ 4 billion ( US $ 21 million ) . It eventually progressed to ₹ 1 @.@ 41 billion ( US $ 21 million ) . 
 = = = Overseas = = = 
 Dabangg opened to a positive response in the overseas markets as well . The film 's final overseas collections were US $ 6 @.@ 10 million . It grossed a total of US $ 4 @.@ 20 million in the international markets at the end of its second weekend . 
 In the United States , Dabangg collected $ 628 @,@ 137 from 62 screens in its opening weekend and $ 1 @,@ 068 @,@ 589 at the end of its second weekend . In the United Arab Emirates , it collected 3 @.@ 2 million <unk> in the opening weekend , and $ 1 @,@ 550 @,@ 000 at the end of the second weekend . Dabangg collected a total of $ 5 @.@ 50 million , making it the fifth highest @-@ grossing in United Arab Emirates with a $ 2 million gross . In the United Kingdom , it collected £ 332 @,@ 673 from 41 screens in its opening weekend and £ 570 @,@ 566 by the end of its second weekend . In Australia , the film collected $ 126 @,@ 000 from 14 screens in the opening weekend , and A $ 272 @,@ 909 at the end of its second weekend . In Mauritius and South Africa , it collected US $ 25 @,@ 000 each in its opening weekend . In Fiji , the film collected US $ 20 @,@ 000 the opening weekend . In other territories of Europe and Africa , the film collected $ 100 @,@ 000 in its opening weekend . 
 = = Sequel and remakes = = 
 After the release of Dabangg , Arbaaz Khan announced that he was planning a sequel to it . After the commercial success of the film , Khan reported " Dabangg 2 may take time to hit the floors , but it is definitely on the cards . " He also announced that the main leads , Salman Khan and Sonakshi Sinha were already cast to reprise their parts in the sequel . Among the new cast members are Prakash Raj , who plays the main antagonist , while Kareena Kapoor performs an item number in the film . Director Abhinav Kashyap opted out of directing the sequel , and therefore Arbaaz took over as the film 's director . 
 Dabangg 2 became one of the highest @-@ grossing Bollywood film of all time in India . Dabangg was remade in Tamil as Osthe by Dharani with Silambarasan playing the lead role , and Sonu Sood reprising his original role . It was also remade in Telugu as Gabbar Singh , starring Pawan Kalyan . 
 = Fantasy ( Mariah Carey song ) = 
 " Fantasy " is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey . It was released on September 12 , 1995 by Columbia Records as the lead single for her fifth studio album , Daydream ( 1995 ) . The song was written by Carey and Dave Hall , both serving as primary producers alongside Sean Combs . The song heavily samples Tom Tom Club 's 1981 song " Genius of Love , " and incorporates various other beats and grooves arranged by the former . The song 's lyrics describe a woman who is in love with a man , and how every time she sees him she starts fantasizing about an impossible relationship with him . The remix for the song features rap verses from Ol ' Dirty Bastard , something Carey arranged to assist in her transition into the hip @-@ hop market . 
 The song was positively reviewed by contemporary music critics , many of whom complimented its clever use of the " Genius of Love " hook as well as Carey 's vocal performance . " Fantasy " experienced strong success around the world , especially in the United States . It became the second song in Billboard history , and the first by a female , to debut atop the Hot 100 . Additionally , aside from topping the chart for eight consecutive weeks , the song achieved strong success outside the United States , topping the charts in Australia , Canada and New Zealand and becoming a top @-@ five hit in Belgium , Finland , France and the United Kingdom . 
 Carey performed " Fantasy " live on several television and award show appearances around the world . Carey performed the song at the 23rd annual American Music Awards , held on January 29 , 1996 . Additionally , it was performed live on British music chart program Top of the Pops and on French television . " Fantasy " was part of the set @-@ lists on several of Carey 's succeeding tours , making its debut during the album 's accompanying set of concerts , the Daydream World Tour and is featured on her compilation albums , # 1 's ( 1998 ) , Greatest Hits ( 2001 ) , The Remixes ( 2003 ) and Playlist : The Very Best of Mariah Carey ( 2010 ) . 
 The cover of the single was shot by top fashion photographer Steven Meisel . The cover for her album Daydream is a cropped version of the single cover . Carey directed the music video for " Fantasy " , making it her directorial debut . Carey created the video 's concept and chose the filming location . After being disappointed with the final result in many of her previous videos , Carey decided to single handedly direct the video . The video showed Carey 's roller blading through an amusement park , singing and enjoying herself . Mid @-@ way through the video , Ol ' Dirty Bastard makes a cameo appearance as a clown . The video concludes with Carey dancing atop the sunroof of a car , with many others present and enjoying the music and celebration . 
 = = Background = = 
 With Daydream , Carey began incorporating urban R & B and hip hop into her music , something very noticeable in " Fantasy . " After Carey began writing songs for her new album Daydream , she decided to include the hook from the Tom Tom Club song " Genius of Love " into an up @-@ tempo song . Afterwards , Carey and Hall began incorporating the sample into the lyrics and melody she had already produced . Carey described how the idea to sample the song became a reality : 
 I was listening to the radio and heard ' Genius of Love ' , and I hadn 't heard it in a long time . It reminded me of growing up and listening to the radio and that feeling the song gave me seemed to go with the melody and basic idea I had for " Fantasy . " I initially told Dave about the idea , and we did it . We called up the Tom Tom Club and they were really into it . 
 Carey recalled how the writers of the song were really intrigued by the idea of Carey sampling the song , and immediately signed over the rights . After Carey presented Hall with the sample , the chorus and beat , he developed a familiar groove that he felt would " highlight Carey 's voice . " After they completed the song , Carey 's husband and CEO of Columbia , Tommy Mottola listened to " Fantasy " and agreed to include it on the album . The cover of the single was shot by top fashion photographer Steven Meisel . A cropped version of the photograph was used as the album cover as well . Hall described his experience with writing the song with Carey : 
 [ It ] was a fun song to do . Mariah brought me ' Genius of Love ' and I laid some strings on it and put it into a groove I felt really fit and highlighted her voice . And that song didn 't take us but a minute to do , because she really busted that out within two days . We did a rough copy and let Tommy Mottola hear it and he loved it , so all we had to do was bring it back in and mix it . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Fantasy " is an uptempo pop , contemporary R & B , and dance @-@ pop song , which blends elements of funk , hip hop , and bubblegum pop . " Fantasy " moves at a tempo of 102 beats per minute . The remix , which features rap verses from O.D.B , also incorporates hip @-@ hop into the bridge . The song uses heavy bass and percussion , as well as a sample from " Genius of Love " . The song is set in the signature common time , and is written in the key of G major . It features a basic chord progression of A ♭ -F ♭ -1 . Carey 's vocal range in the song spans from the note of D3 to the high note of F6 ; the piano and guitar pieces range from D ♭ 4 to E ♭ 5 as well . The song contains choral lyrics written by Carey , who also developed the song 's melody and original beat . Instrumentation and production was performed by Dave Hall , while co @-@ arranging and producing the track as well . The members of the Tom Tom Club , Tina Weymouth , Chris Frantz , Steven Stanley and Adrian Belew are all credited as writers due to the inclusion of the music sample they wrote . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon its release , " Fantasy " garnered mostly positive reviews from contemporary music critics . Bill Lamb from About.com was very positive on the song , calling it " truly inspiring " and a " career high water mark " for Carey . Stephen Thomas Erlewine from Allmusic also praised the song , saying " Carey continues to perfect her craft and that she has earned her status as an R & B / pop diva . " Stephen Holden from The New York Times gave the song praise , writing " with ' Fantasy , ' Ms. Carey glides confidently into the territory where gospel @-@ flavored pop @-@ soul meets light hip @-@ hop and recorded some of the most gorgeously spun choral music to be found on a contemporary album . " Additionally , he claimed " Fantasy " held some of the album 's best moments , writing " she continues to make pop music as deliciously enticing as the best moments of " Fantasy . " Slant Magazine ranked the song at number sixty on their " Best Singles of the ' 90s " list , writing it is " escapism perfected , [ a ] summer bubblegum gem with a sweet , flawless vocal line driven by a diva in her prime . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Fantasy " achieved strong commercial success around the world . The song became Carey 's ninth number one single on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart . It became the first single by a female artist to debut atop the chart , and only the second single to do so after " You Are Not Alone " by Michael Jackson . It debuted at the top of the Billboard Hot 100 due to the strong sales , which were expected to exceed 229 @,@ 000 copies . It spent eight weeks at the top of the chart , from September 24 to November 18 , 1995 , Carey 's longest stay at the time alongside " Dreamlover " ( 1993 ) . It replaced " Gangsta 's Paradise " by Coolio , and was replaced by Whitney Houston 's " Exhale ( Shoop Shoop ) " . " Fantasy " spent 23 weeks in the top 40 and was successful on other Billboard formats , including the R & B and dance charts . Its strong sales led it to be certified double @-@ platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , Carey 's first single to do so . " Fantasy " was the second best @-@ selling single of 1995 in the US , with sales of 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 . It was ranked seventh on the Hot 100 year @-@ end charts for 1995 and 49th on the 1996 year @-@ end charts . " Fantasy " ranked at number 15 on the Hot 100 decade @-@ end chart for the 1990s . 
 In Australia , the song topped the chart and was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . In Canada , the song debuted on the RPM Singles Chart at number 95 on the RPM issue dated October 2 , 1995 , and reached the top of the chart on November 20 , 1995 . It was present on the chart for a total of 20 weeks , and ranked 18 on the RPM Year @-@ end chart for 1995 . " Fantasy " also reached the top 10 in most countries across Europe , and the top 20 on the Oricon chart in Japan . It peaked within the top @-@ five in Belgium ( Wallonia ) , Finland , France and the United Kingdom ; and in the top 10 in Belgium ( Flanders ) , The Netherlands , Ireland , Norway and Switzerland . " Fantasy " was certified silver in France and the United Kingdom , by the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique ( SNEP ) and British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , respectively . According to The Official Charts Company , the song has sold 280 @,@ 000 copies in United Kingdom . The song also topped the charts in New Zealand , where it was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) . 
 = = Remixes = = 
 Carey worked with producer Puff Daddy to create the official remix , the Bad Boy remix of " Fantasy " . While Columbia allowed Carey more leniency with the music she recorded , they became hesitant when she featured Ol ' Dirty Bastard in the remix for " Fantasy . " They feared the sudden change was completely left field for her music , and worried it would jeopardize the album 's success . Finally , the Bad Boy remix used guest raps from O.D.B and background vocals by Puff Daddy . Some of the song 's R & B elements were removed for the remix , while the bassline and " Genius of Love " sample were emphasized & the bridge from the original version was used as the chorus . There is a version omitting Ol ' Dirty Bastard 's verses . The " Bad Boy Fantasy Remix " , combines the chorus from the original version and the chorus of the Bad Boy Remix together , removing Ol ' Dirty Bastard 's vocals from his 2nd verse . Carey re @-@ recorded vocals for club remixes of the song by David Morales , titled " Daydream Interlude ( Fantasy Sweet Dub Mix ) . " The Bad Boy remix garnered positive reviews from music critics . Ken Tucker from Entertainment Weekly praised the song , claiming its one of the few tracks where Carey " defines herself . " Additionally , he complimented the song , writing " At her best , as she is on this clipped , spunky track , Carey is a disco diva for the ' 90s , a worthy successor to trailblazing women like Donna Summer and Vicki Sue Robinson , R & B singers with an affinity for the endless groove . Disco ? No wonder most rock critics can 't get behind her . Party on , Mariah . " 
 Carey has stated that the Bad Boy remix contributed to over half of the sales of " Fantasy " . 
 The " Bad Boy Mix " and " Def Club Mix " would be featured on 2003 's The Remixes , while the " Bad Boy Fantasy " version would feature on 2015 's # 1 to Infinity . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The single 's music video was the first that Carey directed entirely on her own . Carey had been open about the fact that she had not been happy with some of her previous music videos . She therefore decided to single handedly direct the video , so the outcome would to her exact choosing . Carey said her inspiration for the video was to give off a " free and open feeling , " trying to portray the freedom she had finally achieved in being allowed to direct her first video . The video for " Fantasy " debuted on September 7 , at the " MTV Video Music Awards . " The video begins with Carey exploring the Playland amusement park , located in Rye , New York , on roller blades and riding a wooden coaster . The video continues showing snippets of Carey at the park , until the end of the second verse . Afterwards , Carey proceeds to an outdoor celebration that involves people dancing atop their cars . 
 I 'd done a lot of videos and wasn 't always a hundred percent thrilled . For the most part , I was never thrilled with the results , so I figured I would give directing a shot . It was a pretty simple concept . Most of the scenes were featured at the amusement park , at a late @-@ night outdoor celebration . I was really happy to be able to include O.D.B in the remix video . 
 Following in their actions , Carey joins in the festivities and hops atop a car and begins singing and dancing to the strong bass and R & B beat playing from the stereos . The video also contains a scene involving a lovable young girl who tries to emulate Carey and whose character reappears in the video for Carey 's single " Shake It Off " ( 2005 ) . The video shoot took place in mid @-@ August 1995 . In the official video for the song 's remix , O.D.B makes a few cameo appearances as a clown , as well as on the Boardwalk during additional scenes with Carey . 
 = = Awards and accolades = = 
 " Fantasy " won many prestigious awards throughout the music industry in 1995 and 1996 . At the Blockbuster Entertainment Awards , the song won the award for " Favorite Single . " Additionally , the song was a warded the " Pop Award " honor at the 1996 annual American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ( ASCAP ) . Carey won the " Dance Record of the Year " award at the " National Dance Music Awards " in 1996 . " Fantasy " won two awards at the 1996 " Winter Music Conference National Dance Music Awards , " for " Favorite Single " and " Dance Record of the Year . " The song won a Broadcast Music Incorporated ( BMI ) " Pop Song of the Year " award in 1997 , as well as the " Favorite Single " award at the annual " Archer Awards . " The song also was nominated for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance at the 38th Grammy Awards . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Fantasy " was performed at the 23rd Annual American Music Awards , where Carey won two of the top awards . For the performance , Carey wore a long black trench coat and matching boots , pants and blouse , and was backed by three background vocalists . Additionally , Carey sang " Fantasy " on the British music chart program Top of the Pops , during a promotional stop in the United Kingdom on September 12 , 1995 . During its taping , she wore a blue blouse and black jumper . Two days later , Carey appeared on French television where she performed the song alongside several male and female dancers . Carey donned a mid @-@ waist baring white blouse and black leather pants and matching heeled boots . Trey Lorenz and two female back up vocalists were also featured on stage during the show 's taping . Aside from live television appearances , the song was performed on several legs of Carey 's tours . 
 " Fantasy " was performed at every show on her Daydream World Tour ( 1996 ) set to the album version . The performance was tuned similarly to Carey 's recital at the American Music Awards , featuring a similar outfit , dance routines and set up . The remix version was performed on her Butterfly World Tour ( 1998 ) , Rainbow World Tour ( 2000 ) , Charmbracelet World Tour : An Intimate Evening with Mariah Carey ( 2004 ) , and The Adventures of Mimi tour ( 2006 ) , and The Elusive Chanteuse Show ( 2014 ) each of which featured a varying synopsis . In 1998 , it became the first time Carey performed the remix version in concert , placing a large projection screen on to the stage , and featuring snippets and cuts of O.D.B. throughout the video . Additionally , Carey was dressed in blue jeans and a white blouse , and danced several chair routines with several male dancers . During the Charmbracelet Tour and Rainbow Tour , the shows segment was similar to her previous tour . The song was featured on the select set @-@ list on three of Carey 's live taped shows , Fantasy : Mariah Carey at Madison Square Garden , The Adventures of Mimi , and Around the World . Carey also featured the song as the ninth in the setlist for her 2015 Las Vegas residency , Mariah Carey Number 1 's . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 " Fantasy " exemplified how a music sample could be transformed " into a fully realized pop masterpiece " . The song and its remix arguably remains as one of Carey 's most important singles to date . Due to the success and influence of the song , Carey is credited for introducing R & B and hip hop collaboration into mainstream pop culture , and for popularizing rap as a featuring act through her post @-@ 1995 songs . Sasha Frere @-@ Jones , editor of The New Yorker commented in referencing to the song 's remix , " It became standard for R & B / hip @-@ hop stars like Missy Elliott and Beyoncé , to combine melodies with rapped verses . And young white pop stars — including Britney Spears , ' N Sync , and Christina Aguilera — have spent much of the past ten years making pop music that is unmistakably R & B. " Moreover , Jones concludes that " Her idea of pairing a female songbird with the leading male MCs of hip @-@ hop changed R & B and , eventually , all of pop . Although now anyone is free to use this idea , the success of " Mimi " [ <unk> to The Emancipation of Mimi , her tenth studio album released almost a decade after Fantasy ] suggests that it still belongs to Carey . " 
 John Norris of MTV News has stated that the remix was " responsible for , I would argue , an entire wave of music that we 've seen since and that is the R & B @-@ hip @-@ hop collaboration . You could argue that the ' Fantasy ' remix was the single most important recording that she 's ever made . " Norris echoed the sentiments of TLC 's Lisa Lopes , who told MTV that it 's because of Mariah that we have " Hip @-@ Pop . " <unk> Mayard , writer of <unk> , wrote that in regarding of R & B and hip hop collaboration , " The champion of this movement is Mariah Carey . " Mayard also expressed that " To this day ODB and Mariah may still be the best and most random hip hop collaboration of all time " , citing that due to the record " Fantasy , " " R & B and Hip Hop were the best of step siblings . " In the 1998 film Rush Hour , Soo Yong is singing the song while it plays on the car radio , shortly before her kidnapping . In 2011 the experimental metal band <unk> used the song at the beginning and end of the video " You Know That Ain 't Them Dogs ' Real Voices " . 
 Indie artist Grimes has called " Fantasy " one of her favorite songs of all @-@ time and has said Mariah is the reason there is a Grimes . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the Daydream liner notes . 
 Mariah Carey – co @-@ production , songwriting , vocals 
 Dave Hall – co @-@ production , songwriting 
 Tina Weymouth – songwriting 
 Chris Frantz – songwriting 
 Steven Stanley – songwriting 
 Adrian Belew – songwriting 
