 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Chart successions = = 
 = Droeshout portrait = 
 The Droeshout portrait or Droeshout engraving is a portrait of William Shakespeare engraved by Martin Droeshout as the frontispiece for the title page of the First Folio collection of Shakespeare 's plays , published in 1623 . It is one of only two works of art definitively identifiable as a depiction of the poet ; the other is the statue erected as his funeral monument in Shakespeare 's home town of Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon . Both are posthumous . 
 While its role as a portrait frontispiece is typical of publications from the era , the exact circumstances surrounding the making of the engraving are unknown . It is uncertain which of two " Martin <unk> " created the engraving and it is not known to what extent the features were copied from an existing painting or drawing . Critics have generally been unimpressed by it as a work of art , although the engraving has had a few defenders , and exponents of the Shakespeare authorship question have claimed to find coded messages within it . 
 = = States = = 
 The portrait exists in two " states " , or distinct versions of the image , printed from the same plate by Droeshout himself . Examples of the first state are very rare , existing in only four copies . These were probably test printings , created so that the engraver could see whether some alterations needed to be made . The overwhelming majority of surviving copies of the First Folio use the second state , which has heavier shadows and other minor differences , notably in the jawline and the moustache . 
 Later copies of the second state , with minor retouching , were also printed from the plate by Thomas Cotes in 1632 , for Robert <unk> 's Second Folio , a new edition of the collected plays . It was also reused in later folios , although by then the plate was beginning to wear out and was heavily re @-@ engraved . The original plate was still being used into the 1660s , and then disappears . Already in 1640 William Marshall had copied and adapted the design on a new plate for John Benson 's edition of Shakespeare 's sonnets . All subsequent engraved reprintings of the portrait were made by later engravers copying the original printed image . 
 = = Which Martin Droeshout ? = = 
 The engraving is signed under the image at the left , " Martin <unk> <unk> . London " . The <unk> were a family of artists from the Netherlands , who had moved to Britain . Because there were two members of the family named Martin there has been some dispute about which of the two created the engraving . Most sources state that the engraver was Martin Droeshout the Younger ( 1601 – after 1639 ) , the son of Michael Droeshout , an immigrant from Brussels . Except for his date of birth and parentage , very little is known about Martin the Younger , but since his father was an engraver , it has been assumed that Martin followed in his father 's footsteps , and that he made the engraving of Shakespeare . As he was 15 when Shakespeare died , he may never have seen him and it has been assumed that he worked from an existing image . 
 Research by Mary Edmond into the Droeshout family revealed new information about Martin Droeshout the Elder ( c . 1560s – 1642 ) , who was the uncle of the younger Martin . Edmond shows that Droeshout the Elder was a member of the Painter @-@ Stainer 's Company . Edmond writes , 
 It seems perverse to attribute the Shakespeare engraving to the obscure and unsuitably young Martin Droeshout , born in 1601 , as is customary , when there is a quite well @-@ documented artist of the same name to hand , in the person of his uncle " . 
 In 1991 Christiaan <unk> discovered a set of signed plates in Madrid that can be attributed to the engraver of the First Folio portrait . These plates bear Droeshout 's signature and are stylistically similar to his portrait of Shakespeare . ( They include a portrait of the priest and writer <unk> de la Peña that has a striking resemblance to the English poet ) . On the evidence of these plates , which were made between 1635 and 1639 , <unk> attributed the portrait of Shakespeare to the younger Martin and suggested that the engraver had converted to Catholicism and emigrated to Spain in 1635 , where he continued to work . 
 More recently , June Schlueter has found evidence that Martin the Elder was in London when the engraver of the First Folio portrait was known to be in Madrid . Although she began her archival research hoping to prove Edmond 's assertion that the elder Martin was the Shakespeare engraver , Schlueter concludes that the newly discovered evidence actually supports the younger . 
 The traditional attribution to Droeshout the younger can also be supported on stylistic grounds . A drawing known to be by Droeshout the elder appears to show superior artistic skill than the work of his nephew , and the clumsy features of the depiction of Shakespeare 's body resemble other prints by Droeshout the Younger . The attribution to the younger artist is provisionally accepted by the National Portrait Gallery . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The engraving is praised by Shakespeare 's friend Ben Jonson in his poem To the Reader printed alongside it , in which he says that it is a good likeness of the poet . He writes that " the graver had a strife / With nature to outdo the life " and that he has " hit his face " accurately . He adds that the engraver could not represent Shakespeare 's " wit " , for which the viewer will have to read the book . 
 Because of this testimony to the accuracy of the portrait , commentators have used the Droeshout print as a standard by which to judge other portraits alleged to depict Shakespeare . As the 19th @-@ century artist and writer Abraham <unk> put it , 
 It is , as I may say , the key to unlock and detect almost all the impositions that have , at various times , arrested so much of public attention . It is a witness that can refute all false evidence , and will satisfy every <unk> , how to appreciate , how to convict . 
 In a similar vein , <unk> Cooper , in 2006 , writes that " it is the only portrait that definitely provides us with a reasonable idea of Shakespeare 's appearance " . 
 = = = Source image = = = 
 In addition to its use as a template to judge the authenticity of other images , scholars have also speculated about the original source used by Droeshout himself . The 19th @-@ century scholar George Scharf argued on the basis of the inconsistencies in the lights and shadows that the original image would have been " either a <unk> or a crayon drawing " . These typically used outlines rather than chiaroscuro modelling . He deduced that Droeshout had <unk> attempted to add modelling shadows . Mary Edmond points out that Droeshout the Elder seems to have had an association with Marcus Gheeraerts the portraitist , and notes that there is evidence that a portrait of Shakespeare by Gheeraerts may have once existed . She surmises that Droeshout 's engraving may have been derived from this lost portrait . Cooper argues that the poor drawing and modelling of the doublet and collar suggests that Droeshout was copying a lost drawing or painting that only depicted Shakespeare 's head and shoulders . The body was added by the engraver himself , as was common practice . 
 In the 19th century a painting that came to be known as the Flower portrait was discovered , inscribed with the date 1609 and painted on an authentic 17th @-@ century panel . It was initially widely accepted as the original work from which Droeshout had copied his engraving , but in 1905 the art scholar Marion Spielmann demonstrated that the portrait corresponded to the second state of Droeshout 's print . Taking the view that if it were the source , the first state would be closest , he concluded that it was a copy from the print . In 2005 chemical analysis proved the portrait to be a 19th @-@ century fake painted over an authentic 17th @-@ century image . 
 = = Critical evaluations = = 
 The poor modelling and the clumsy relationship between the head and the body have led many critics to see the print as a poor representation of the poet . J. Dover Wilson called it a " pudding faced effigy " . Sidney Lee wrote that " The face is long and the forehead high ; the one ear which is visible is shapeless ; the top of the head is bald , but the hair falls in abundance over the ears . " Samuel <unk> was equally dismissive : 
 In the Shakespeare engraving a huge head , placed against a starched ruff , surmounts an absurdly small tunic with oversized shoulder @-@ wings ... Light comes from several directions simultaneously : it falls on the bulbous protuberance of forehead – that " horrible <unk> development " , as it has been called – creates an odd crescent under the right eye and ( in the second state ) illuminates the edge of the hair on the right side . 
 Northrop Frye said that the portrait makes Shakespeare " look like an idiot . " Cooper notes that " the art of printmaking in England was underdeveloped and there were relatively few skilled engravers . Yet even by the less exacting standards observed in England , the Droeshout engraving is poorly proportioned . " Benjamin Roland Lewis observes that " virtually all of Droeshout 's work shows the same artistic defects . He was an engraver after the conventional manner , and not a creative artist . " 
 Not all critics have been so harsh . The 19th @-@ century writer James <unk> wrote that " to me the portrait exhibits an aspect of calm benevolence and tender thought , great comprehension and a kind of <unk> feeling , as when melancholy yields to the suggestions of fancy " . He added that his friend John Philip Kemble thought this " despised work " was more characteristic of Shakespeare than any other known portrait . More recently , Park Honan has written that " if the portrait lacks the ' sparkle ' of a witty poet , it suggests the inwardness of a writer of great intelligence , an independent man who is not insensitive to the pain of others . " 
 = = = Conspiracy theories = = = 
 Proponents of the Shakespeare authorship question , who assert that someone other than Shakespeare was the real author of the plays attributed to him , have claimed to find hidden signs in the portrait pointing to this supposed secret . Indeed , Dover Wilson suggested that the poor quality of the Droeshout and funeral effigy images are the underlying reason for " the campaign against ' the man from Stratford ' and the attempts to dethrone him in favour of Lord Bacon , the Earl of Derby , the Earl of Oxford , or whatever <unk> pretender may be in vogue at the present moment . " In 1911 William Stone Booth published a book claiming to demonstrate that the features of the engraving were " anatomically identical " to those of Francis Bacon , proving that he wrote the works . He achieved this by creating " combination images " from several portraits of Bacon and then superimposing them on the engraving . Using similar methods Charles Sidney Beauclerk subsequently concluded that the portrait depicted the Earl of Oxford . In 1995 Lillian Schwartz , using a computerised version of the same technique , argued that it was based on a portrait of Queen Elizabeth I. 
 An alternative approach has been to claim that the portrait depicts William Shakespeare , but does so in a way designed to ridicule him by making him look ugly , or to suggest that he is a mask for a hidden author . The double line created by the gap between the modelling shadow and the jawline has been used to suggest that it is a mask , as has the shape of the doublet , which is claimed to represent both the back and front of the body . Thus Edwin Durning @-@ Lawrence asserts that " there is no question – there can be no possible question – that in fact it is a cunningly drawn cryptographic picture , shewing two left arms and a mask ... Especially note that the ear is a mask ear and stands out curiously ; note also how distinct the line shewing the edge of the mask appears . " 
 None of these views are accepted by mainstream art historians . Lewis writes that these features are all characteristic of engravings of the era and that none are unusual . An engraving of John Davies of Hereford shares most of these quirks for example , including the uncertain placing of the head on the body and the " same awkward difference in design between the right and left shoulders " . 
 = Boy Scouts of America = 
 The Boy Scouts of America ( BSA ) is one of the largest youth organizations in the United States , with more than 2 @.@ 4 million youth members and nearly one million adult volunteers . Since its founding in 1910 as part of the international Scout Movement , more than 110 million Americans have been at some point members of the BSA . 
 The BSA 's goal is to train youth in responsible citizenship , character development , and self @-@ reliance through participation in a wide range of outdoor activities , educational programs , and , at older age levels , career @-@ oriented programs in partnership with community organizations . For younger members , the Scout method is part of the program to inculcate typical Scouting values such as trustworthiness , good citizenship , and outdoors skills , through a variety of activities such as camping , aquatics , and hiking . The BSA has several locations in Florida , Minnesota , New Mexico , and West Virginia in the United States and Manitoba and Ontario in Canada that allow Scouts to participate in the various aforementioned outdoor activities which are collectively called high @-@ adventure bases . 
 The BSA is a constituent member of the World Organization of the Scout Movement . The traditional Scouting divisions are Cub Scouting for boys ages 7 to 10 ½ years , Boy Scouting for boys ages 10 ½ to 18 and Venturing for young men and women ages 14 ( or 13 and having completed the 8th grade ) through 21 . Learning for Life is a non @-@ traditional subsidiary that provides in @-@ school and career education . The BSA operates traditional Scouting by chartering local organizations , such as churches , clubs , civic associations , or educational organization , to implement the Scouting program for youth within their communities . Units are led entirely by volunteers appointed by the chartering organization , who are supported by local councils using both paid Professional Scouters and volunteers . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The progressive movement in the United States was at its height during the early 20th century . With the migration of families from farms to cities , there were concerns among some people that young men were no longer learning patriotism and individualism . The YMCA was an early promoter of reforms for young men with a focus on social welfare and programs of mental , physical , social and religious development . : 72 – 82 
 = = = Precursors = = = 
 BSA had two notable predecessors in the United States : the Woodcraft Indians started by Ernest Thompson Seton in 1902 and the Sons of Daniel Boone founded by Daniel Carter Beard in 1905 in Cincinnati , Ohio . In 1907 , Robert Baden @-@ Powell , founded the Scouting movement in England using elements of Seton 's works among other influences . Several Scout programs for boys started independently in the U.S. ( see Scouting in the United States ) . Many of these Scout programs in the U.S. merged with the BSA . : 52 
 = = = Founding of the Boy Scouts of America = = = 
 In 1909 , Chicago publisher W. D. Boyce was visiting London , where he encountered a boy who came to be known as the Unknown Scout . Boyce was lost on a foggy street when an unknown Scout came to his aid , guiding him to his destination . The boy then refused Boyce 's tip , explaining that he was a Boy Scout and was merely doing his daily good turn . Interested in the Boy Scouts , Boyce met with staff at the Boy Scouts Headquarters and , by some accounts , Baden @-@ Powell . Upon his return to the U.S. , Boyce incorporated the Boy Scouts of America on February 8 , 1910 . Edgar M. Robinson and Lee F. Hanmer became interested in the nascent BSA and convinced Boyce to turn the program over to the YMCA for development in April 1910 . Robinson enlisted Seton , Beard , Charles Eastman and other prominent leaders in the early youth movements . Former president Theodore Roosevelt , who had long complained of the decline in American manhood , became an ardent supporter . In January 1911 , Robinson turned the movement over to James E. West who became the first Chief Scout Executive and Scouting began to expand in the U.S. : 148 
 The BSA 's stated purpose at its incorporation in 1910 was " to teach [ boys ] patriotism , courage , self @-@ reliance , and kindred values . " : 7 Later , in 1937 , Deputy Chief Scout Executive George J. Fisher expressed the BSA 's mission ; " Each generation as it comes to maturity has no more important duty than that of teaching high ideals and proper behavior to the generation which follows . " The current mission statement of the BSA is " to prepare young people to make ethical and moral choices over their lifetimes by instilling in them the values of the Scout Oath and Law . " The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints was the first partner to sponsor Scouting in the United States , adopting the program in 1913 as part of its Mutual Improvement Association program for young men . 
 = = = Federally chartered corporation = = = 
 The BSA holds a Congressional charter under Title 36 of the United States Code , which means that it is one of the comparatively rare " Title 36 " corporations in the United States . The 1916 statute of incorporation established this institution amongst a small number of other patriotic and national organizations which are similarly chartered , such as the Girl Scouts of the USA , the American Legion , the Red Cross , Little League Baseball , and the National Academy of Sciences . The federal incorporation was originally construed primarily as an honor , however it does grant the chartered organization some special privileges and rights , including freedom from antitrust and monopoly regulation , and complete control over the organization 's symbols and insignia . The special recognition neither implies nor accords Congress any special control over the BSA , which remains free to function independently . 
 On behalf of the BSA , Paul <unk> , Colin H. Livingstone , Ernest S. Martin and James E. West successfully lobbied Congress for a federal charter for the BSA which President Woodrow Wilson signed on June 15 , 1916 . One of the principal reasons for seeking a Congressional Charter was as a way to deal with competition from other Scout organizations including the United States Boy Scouts and the Lone Scouts of America , The Congressional Charter reads , in part , : 
 That the purpose of this corporation shall be to promote , through organization and cooperation with other agencies , the ability of boys to do things for themselves and others , to train them in Scoutcraft , and to teach them patriotism , courage , self @-@ reliance , and kindred values , using the methods which are now in common use by Boy Scouts . 
 = = Membership = = 
 = = = Traditional membership = = = 
 In the BSA , Scouting is considered to be one movement with four main programs : 
 Cub Scouting is the largest program , available to boys from first to fifth @-@ grade or 7 to 11 years . The program is designed to pursue the aims of character development , citizenship training , and personal fitness . Cub Scouting is divided into age @-@ based levels of Tiger , Wolf , Bear , and Webelos Scouts . 
 Boy Scouting is the flagship program of the BSA for boys ages 11 to 18 . ( Boys who have achieved the Cub Scout Arrow of Light Award or have completed the 5th grade can join as young as 10 years old ) It uses outdoor activities such as camping , aquatics and hiking to achieve the aims of character , citizenship and personal fitness <unk> Scouting is a sub @-@ division of Boy Scouting available to boys ages 14 to 18 ; it adds a program of high adventure and sporting activities . 
 The Order of the Arrow is the Boy Scouting national honor society for experienced campers , based on American Indian traditions and is dedicated to the ideals of brotherhood and cheerful service . 
 Venturing is the program for young men and women ages 14 through 21 . Its purpose is to provide positive experiences to help youth mature and to prepare them to become responsible adults . 
 Sea Scouting is the program for young men and women ages 14 through 21 focused on nautical activities . 
 Lone Scouting is a program designed to allow those who would otherwise not be able to become Boy Scouts or Cub Scouts — usually due to residence in an overseas , isolated , or unsafe community — to participate in the Scouting experience . 
 There are about 100 @,@ 000 physically or mentally disabled Scouts throughout the United States . Anyone certified as disabled " may enroll in Scouting and remain in its program beyond the regulation age limits . This provision allows all members to advance in Scouting as far as they wish . " Advancement is measured by the achievement to the best of the Scout 's abilities . 
 = = = Learning for life = = = 
 Learning for Life is a school and work @-@ site based program that is a subsidiary of the BSA . It utilizes programs designed for schools and community @-@ based organizations that are designed to prepare youth for the complexities of contemporary society and to enhance their self @-@ confidence , motivation , and self @-@ esteem . Exploring is the worksite @-@ based program of Learning for Life with programs based on five areas of emphasis : career opportunities , life skills , citizenship , character education , and leadership experience . 
 Learning for Life is not considered a traditional Scouting program ; it does not use the Scout Promise , Scout Law , uniforms , or insignia of traditional Scouting . All Learning for Life programs are open to youth and adults without restriction based on gender , residence , sexual orientation , or other considerations other than age requirements . 
 = = = Membership controversies = = = 
 Unlike the BSA 's Learning for Life , membership in the traditional BSA programs is more restricted and controversial . Girls may not join Cub Scouting or Boy Scouting , but may join Venturing and Sea Scouting ; women can be adult volunteers in all programs . Today , the BSA does not prohibit gay and lesbian adults or youth from participation . The BSA does prohibit members who are atheist and agnostic based on its " Duty to God " principle . 
 In 2000 , the Supreme Court ruled in Boy Scouts of America v. Dale that Boy Scouts , and all similar private voluntary organizations , have the constitutionally protected right under the First Amendment of freedom of association to set membership standards . In 2004 , the BSA adopted a new policy statement , including a " Youth Leadership " policy that disallowed members to continue in leadership positions in the event they were to hold themselves out as " open and avowed homosexuals . " 
 At the Scouts annual meeting in April 2012 , a leader from the Northeast presented a resolution that " would allow individual units to accept gays as adult leaders " . However , in July 2012 , at the culmination of a review started in 2010 , an 11 @-@ person committee convened by the BSA reached a " unanimous consensus " recommending retaining the current policy . Intel , UPS , and Merck cut financial ties with the BSA over the policy decision . Within the BSA National Executive Board , members James Turley , CEO of Ernst & Young , and Randall Stephenson , CEO of AT & T and who was then " on track to become president of the Scout 's national board in 2014 " and later was , publicly opposed the policy and stated their intention " to work from within the BSA Board to actively encourage dialogue and sustainable progress " in changing the policy . On January 28 , 2013 , the BSA announced they were considering rescinding the ban on homosexuals , allowing chartered organizations to determine local policy . 
 On May 23 , 2013 , 61 % of the 1 @,@ 400 @-@ member BSA National Council voted to remove the restriction denying membership to youth on the basis of sexual orientation while emphasizing that any sexual conduct , whether heterosexual or homosexual , is not allowed . The resolution went into effect on January 1 , 2014 , but Scout leaders who were " open and avowed homosexuals " were still prohibited . The policy specifically states that BSA does not inquire into a person 's sexuality . Gay rights groups hailed the decision , but vowed to press on until all gay members were accepted . Some churches and conservative members threatened to quit the Boy Scouts in response . On June 12 , 2013 , the Southern Baptist Convention passed non @-@ binding resolutions urging the BSA not to change their policy . In September 2013 , a new Scouting group called Trail Life USA was created . Subsequently , some Christian denomination congregations replaced their Boy Scouts of America troops with those of Trail Life USA . 
 In May 2015 , Boy Scouts of America President Robert Gates said it was time to end the ban on gay leaders . Gates said , it “ cannot be sustained , ” any longer . On July 10 , 2015 , the Boy Scouts of America Executive Committee agreed , and referred the matter to the National Executive Board . On July 27 , 2015 , the Boy Scouts of America National Executive Board voted to lift the organization 's blanket ban on openly gay leaders and employees . Local chartering organizations are still permitted to set their own standards based on religious principle for selecting the adult volunteers for their unit . 
 = = Aims , methods , and ideals = = 
 The objectives of the BSA are referred to as Aims of Scouting : moral character development ; citizenship training ; and development of physical , mental , and emotional fitness . The BSA pursues these aims through an informal education system called the Scout method , with variations that are designed to be appropriate for the age and maturity of each membership division . Each unit is sponsored by a community organization as part of their youth program and is involved in the neighborhood and community . 
 Cub Scouts wear a uniform that gives each boy a level of identity within the den , the pack and the community . The boys learn teamwork by meeting and working together in a den of four to ten boys under adult leadership . They learn and apply the ideals codified in the Cub Scout Promise and the Law of the Pack , and in the Character Connections program that develops the core values of citizenship , compassion , cooperation , courage , faith , health and fitness , honesty , perseverance , positive attitude , resourcefulness , respect and responsibility . The advancement system uses both age @-@ based ranks and an optional Academics and Sports Program designed for the development of physical , mental and emotional fitness . Most advancement is done in the home and is intended to involve the entire family and many Cub Scout activities include family members . 
 Boy Scouts learn to use the ideals spelled out in the Scout Oath , the Scout Law , the Outdoor Code , the Scout motto ( " Be prepared " ) , and the Scout slogan ( " Do a good turn daily " ) . They wear a uniform and work together in patrols of four to ten boys with an elected patrol leader . Scouts share responsibilities , apply skills learned at meetings and live together in the outdoors . The advancement system provides opportunities for personal growth and self @-@ reliance . Scouts interact with adult leaders who act as role models and mentors , but they are expected to plan their own activities within the troop and to participate in community service . Opportunities are provided for leadership training with practical application . 
 = = = Scout Motto = = = 
 Be Prepared 
 = = = Scout Oath = = = 
 This is always said while holding up the right hand with the three middle fingers raised in the Scout sign : 
 " On my honor , I will do my best , to do my duty , to God and my country , and to obey the Scout Law , to help other people at all times , to keep myself physically strong , mentally awake , and morally straight . " 
 = = = Scout Law = = = 
 " A Scout is trustworthy , loyal , helpful , friendly , courteous , kind , obedient , cheerful , thrifty , brave , clean , and reverent . " 
 These twelve values are often referred to as the Twelve Points of the Scout Law . 
 = = = Outdoor Code = = = 
 " As an American , I will do my best to be clean in my outdoor manner , to be careful with fire , to be considerate in the outdoors , and to be conservation minded . " 
 Venturers are expected to know and live by the Venturing Oath and Venturing Code . They associate and work directly with adults as partners , but the crew is led by elected youth officers who are given opportunities to learn and apply leadership skills . Venturers plan and participate in interdependent group experiences dependent on cooperation . An emphasis on high adventure provides opportunities for team @-@ building and practical leadership applications . A series of awards provide opportunities for recognition and personal growth . Each award requires the Venturer to teach what they have learned to others returning the skill and knowledge back to the community and enabling the Venturer to master those skills . 
 In October 2012 , the National Council announced that , as a result of the findings and recommendations of a select committee made up of volunteer Scouters , the Cub Scout and Venturing programs would transition to use of the Boy Scout Oath and Promise , and in the case of the Venturers , the Boy Scout three @-@ finger salute and sign as well . The Venturing change will occur in late 2013 or early 2014 ; the Cub Scout change will take effect in mid @-@ 2015 . 
 = = Organization = = 
 = = = National Council = = = 
 The National Council is the corporate membership of the Boy Scouts of America and consists of volunteer Scouters who meet annually . The day @-@ to @-@ day operations of the National Council are administered by the Chief Scout Executive and other national professional staff . National Council members include volunteers who are elected National Officers and Executive Board members , regional presidents , the local council representatives , members at large , and honorary members . The National Headquarters has been in Irving , Texas since 1979 . 
 The BSA was granted a Congressional charter in 1916 , now codified as ( 36 USC 309 ) , stating that their purpose is to : 
 promote , through organization , and cooperation with other agencies , the ability of boys to do things for themselves and others , to train them in scoutcraft , and to teach them patriotism , courage , self @-@ reliance , and kindred virtues , using the methods that were in common use by boy scouts on June 15 , 1916 . 
 The charter authorized and set standards for the incorporation of the BSA and provided for the " exclusive right to use emblems , badges , descriptive or designating marks , and words or phrases " that they adopt . 
 Finally , since the founding of the BSA in 1910 , the President of the United States has served as the organization 's honorary president during his term in office . 
 = = = Governance and the National Executive Board = = = 
 The BSA National Executive Board governs the organization . One source reports that there were 72 members of the NEB in 2001 , while the BSA 's 2011 report lists 77 members . 
 The board is led by the national president , a volunteer elected by the National Council . Board members included regular elected members , regional presidents , and up to five appointed youth members . The Chief Scout Executive is the board secretary and non @-@ voting member . The National Executive Board has a number of standing committees that correspond to the professional staff organization of the National Council . 
 Present and past members of the National Executive Board include former presidential nominee Mitt Romney , Ernst & Young CEO James Turley and AT & T CEO Randall Stephenson . Other members include LDS Church President Thomas S. Monson . 
 = = = Groups and divisions = = = 
 The Program Impact Division is responsible for developing the Scouting program and includes the volunteer committees and staff working on volunteer training , youth development , and other program impact needs . The All Markets membership emphasis includes focus groups and special committees working to improve outreach to youth and families in various underserved ethnic populations , with literature and marketing materials targeting Hispanic / Latino families , Asian @-@ American families , and African @-@ American families . The BSA also participates in the American Indian Scouting Association in partnership with the Girl Scouts of the USA . 
 The Outdoor Adventure Division oversees four " High Adventure " bases Philmont Scout Ranch , Northern Tier National High Adventure Bases , The Summit Bechtel Family National Scout Reserve , and Florida National High Adventure Sea Base , as well as other special programs and the Order of the Arrow . 
 Other divisions provides support for the world and national jamborees and International Scouting relations . The Membership Impact Division works to sustain marketing efforts and relationships with the national organizations that make up the predominant number of chartered organizations , such as Lions International , Rotary International , Kiwanis International , American Legion , Elks , VFW , and all religious denominations chartering BSA units . 
 The National Supply Group is responsible for developing and selling uniforms , apparel , insignia , literature , and equipment . It sells equipment and supplies through National Scout Shops , local council trading posts , authorized independent resellers , and online at <unk> Supply Group also licenses trademarks for use by other commercial vendors . The Administrative Group provides internal administration service and support . It includes the Marketing and Communications Division responsible for marketing the BSA program , administering the national websites , and publishing Scouting for adult leaders and Boys ' Life for youth . 
 The National Scouting Museum is located in Irving , Texas . Exhibits include Norman Rockwell paintings , high adventure sections , hands @-@ on learning experiences , interactive exhibits , and a historical collection tracing uniforms , themes , and documents from the beginning of the Scouting movement in America . Among the museum 's artifacts are the Eagle Scout medal of Arthur Rose Eldred , the first Eagle Scout . 
 The National Court of Honor certifies the BSA 's highest awards : lifesaving and meritorious action awards , Distinguished service awards , Eagle Scout and Quartermaster . 
 = = = Regions and areas = = = 
 For administrative purposes , the BSA is divided into four regions — Western , Central , Southern and Northeast . Each region is then subdivided into areas . 
 Each region has a volunteer president , assisted by volunteer officers , board members , and committee members . The day @-@ to @-@ day work of Scouting is managed by the regional director , assistant and associate regional directors , and area directors . Regions and areas are subdivisions of the National Council and do not have a corporate status separate from the BSA . 
 Central Region covers all of Iowa , Kansas , Michigan , Minnesota , Missouri , North Dakota , Ohio , Wisconsin , and parts of Illinois , Indiana , Kentucky , Montana , Nebraska , South Dakota , Virginia , and West Virginia . 
 Northeast Region covers all of Connecticut , District of Columbia , Delaware , Massachusetts , Maine , New Hampshire , New Jersey , New York , Pennsylvania , Puerto Rico , Rhode Island , Vermont , Virgin Islands ( U.S. ) , parts of Maryland , Virginia , and West Virginia , and members of the BSA Transatlantic Council . 
 Southern Region covers all of Alabama , Arkansas , Florida , Georgia , Louisiana , Mississippi , North Carolina , Oklahoma , South Carolina , and Tennessee , and parts of Illinois , Indiana , Kentucky , Maryland , Texas , Virginia , and West Virginia . 
 Western Region covers all of Alaska , Arizona , California , Colorado , Hawaii , Idaho , New Mexico , Nevada , Oregon , Utah , Washington , Wyoming , most of Montana , parts of Nebraska , South Dakota , and Texas , territories located in the Pacific Ocean , and members of the BSA Far East Council . 
 = = = Local councils = = = 
 The BSA program is administered through 272 local councils , with each council covering a geopolitical area that may vary from a single city to an entire state . Councils receive an annual charter from the National Council and are usually incorporated as a charitable organization . 
 The council level organization is similar to that of the National Council . The council executive board is headed by the council president and is made up of annually elected local community leaders . The board establishes the council program and carries out the resolutions , policies , and activities of the council . Board members serve without pay and some are volunteer Scouters working at the unit level . Youth members may be selected to the council executive board according to the council by @-@ laws . 
 The Scout executive manages council operations — including finance , property management , advancement and awards , registrations , and Scout Shop sales — with a staff of other professionals and para @-@ professionals . Volunteer commissioners lead the unit service functions of the council , help maintain the standards of the BSA , and assures a healthy unit program . 
 The BSA charters two councils for American Scouts living overseas , largely on military bases in Europe and Asia . The Transatlantic Council , headquartered in Livorno , Italy , serves BSA units in much of Europe , and the Far East Council , headquartered in Japan , serves units in the western Pacific areas . The Direct Service branch makes the Scouting movement available to U.S. citizens and their dependents living in countries outside these jurisdictions or in isolated areas . The Aloha Council in Hawaii also serves BSA units in the American territories of American Samoa , Guam , the Northern Mariana Islands and in the sovereign countries of the Federated States of Micronesia , the Marshall Islands , and Palau . 
 The Greater New York Councils are unique in that they are divided into five boroughs with each led by a borough Scout executive and each borough then divided into districts . Similarly , due to Scouting population and geographic distance , the Utah National Parks Council is divided into 12 Sectors with each led by a volunteer assistant Vice president and assistant council commissioner with each sector then divided into districts . 
 Councils are divided into districts with leadership provided by the district executive , district chairman , and the district commissioner . Districts are directly responsible for the operation of Scouting units and , except for the district executive , are mostly staffed with volunteers . The voting members of each district consist of volunteer representatives from each chartered organization having at least one BSA unit , plus annually elected members @-@ at @-@ large who in turn elect the district chairman . Boroughs and districts are subdivisions of the local council and do not have a separate corporate status . 
 = = = Chartered organizations and units = = = 
 The Boy Scouts of America partners with community organizations , such as religious congregations , fraternal groups , service clubs , and other community associations , to provide the Scouting program for the particular neighborhood or community in which the particular organization wishes to outreach to youth and families . These organizations hold charters issued by the BSA and are known then as chartered organizations . Each chartered organization provides the meeting place for BSA youth , oversees the volunteer leaders , and agrees to follow the basic BSA safety policies and values @-@ based program , and the organization is considered the " owner " of its local program , much like a franchise . 
 Within each chartered organization , there may be one or more " units " . A unit is a group of youth and adults which are collectively designated as a Cub Scout pack , Boy Scout troop , Varsity Scout team , or Venturing crew / Sea Scout ship . Each chartered organization may charter as many units as it wishes , but usually only 3 or 4 ( one unit for each program level ) . The BSA council provides the leader training , inter @-@ unit activities , camping programs , volunteer and professional support , and insurance coverage . Units also create their own activities ( such as monthly camping trips , outings , or service projects ) , and most meet weekly at the place of the chartered organization for youth to learn basic skill development and practice leadership in small groups known as dens and patrols . 
 = = National Camping School = = 
 The Boy Scouts of America operates a National Camping School program , which trains people how to run various departments or areas at the Boy Scout summer camps . Some online training is offered , but most areas require an in @-@ person week @-@ long training program at one of the National Camping Schools . After successfully completing a week @-@ long program , a person is entitled to wear the National Camp School patch . The regular size patch may be worn on the right breast shirt pocket , in the temporary patch spot . National Camping School certification is valid for five years . 
 = = Finance = = 
 The National Council is incorporated as a 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) non @-@ profit organization and is funded from private donations , membership dues , corporate sponsors , and special events . In 2005 , the BSA ranked as the twelfth @-@ largest non @-@ profit organization in the U.S. , with total revenues of $ 665 @.@ 9 million . As of January 2007 , the American Institute of Philanthropy listed former Chief Scout Executive Roy Williams as having the fifth @-@ highest compensation of any nonprofit chief in the United States , at $ 916 @,@ 028 . In 2005 , Williams ' pay was 0 @.@ 26 % of total expenses , whereas the national average among charities was a higher 0 @.@ 34 % . Williams was honored in 2005 and 2006 as one of the top fifty most effective non @-@ profit leaders by The <unk> Times . 
 Robert <unk> , Chief Scout Executive of Boy Scouts of America , received $ 1 @,@ 211 @,@ 572 in salary and compensation . This is the 4th highest compensation package given by any charity to the head of the charity , according to Charity Watch . Charity Watch rates BSA an " A " . 
 = = = Corporate funding = = = 
 In addition to donations from individuals , the BSA receives extensive donations from major corporations . In 2010 , their top corporate donors were , in order , Intel , Emerson , Verizon , 3M , Bank of America , Wells Fargo , Pfizer , Valero , UPS , U.S. Bank , Eli Lilly , GE , and Monsanto . However , Intel and UPS cut funding to BSA in 2012 . 
 = = Leadership training = = 
 The BSA offers a wide variety of mandatory and optional training programs in youth protection , outdoor skills and leadership . 
 = = = Adult leadership training = = = 
 Every adult leader must complete Youth Protection Training , and then is strongly encouraged to complete a general overview training called This is Scouting , and a Fast Start training specific to his / her program level . Position @-@ specific training is then offered for all direct @-@ contact leaders . Upon completion of basic training , a leader may wear the Trained emblem on his / her BSA uniform . 
 Supplemental skill @-@ specific training is also available to BSA volunteers to gain knowledge in outdoors skills including camping , hiking , first aid , Leave No Trace , swim safety , climbing safety , hazardous weather , and other skills . 
 The highest level of BSA training is Wood Badge , which is focused on helping participants develop leadership skills while participating in an outdoor program over two weekends . Some councils offer high @-@ adventure training for adults using the Powder Horn program . Sea Scouting leaders can take the <unk> advanced leadership and management course . 
 = = = Youth leadership training = = = 
 Boy Scout and Varsity Scout youth leaders may attend the unit @-@ level Troop Leadership Training . Local councils offer the advanced National Youth Leadership Training and the National Council offers the National Advanced Youth Leadership Experience conducted at Philmont Training Center . The Boy Scouts of America also offers the NYLT Leadership Academy which trains youth staff members from across the country for council @-@ level NYLT courses . 
 Venturers and Sea Scouts may attend the unit @-@ level Introduction to Leadership Skills for Crews or Introduction to Leadership Skills for Ships . Crew officers can attend Crew Officer Orientation , and then a council @-@ provided Kodiak leadership training program . 
 Order of the Arrow members may attend the National Leadership Seminar , run multiple times each year by each region . 
 = = Impact on American life = = 
 Scouting and Boy Scouts are well known throughout American culture . The term " Boy Scout " is used to generally describe someone who is earnest and honest , or who helps others cheerfully ; it can also be used as a pejorative term for someone deemed to be overly idealistic . 
 Prominent Americans in diverse walks of life , from filmmaker Steven Spielberg ( who helped launch a merit badge in cinematography ) to adventurer Steve Fossett to politicians , were BSA members as youths . Over two @-@ thirds of all astronauts have had some type of involvement in Scouting , and eleven of the twelve men to walk on the Moon were Scouts , including Eagle Scouts Neil Armstrong and Charlie Duke . The pinewood derby — a wood car racing event for Cub Scouts — has been declared " a celebrated rite of spring " and was named part of " America 's 100 Best " by Reader 's Digest . 
 President Gerald Ford said , " I can say without hesitation , because of Scouting principles , I know I was a better athlete , I was a better naval officer , I was a better Congressman , and I was a better prepared President . " 
 Famed American illustrator Norman Rockwell 's works were closely associated with the Boy Scouts of America for much of the 20th century . : 43 Beginning in 1913 , Rockwell began illustrating covers of Boys ' Life , the magazine for BSA youth . He also drew the organization 's annual calendar illustrations between 1925 and 1976 . : 89 
 In 1969 , as a tribute to Rockwell 's 75th birthday , officials of Brown & Bigelow and the Boy Scouts of America asked Rockwell to pose in Beyond the Easel for a calendar illustration . As part of the U.S. Bicentennial celebrations in 1976 , Rockwell 's Scouting paintings toured the nation and were viewed by 280 @,@ 000 people . : 155 In 2008 , a twelve @-@ city U.S. tour of Rockwell 's works was scheduled . 
 Alvin Townley wrote in Legacy of Honor about the large positive impact of Eagle Scouts in America . Townley cited such examples as how Scouts , especially Eagle Scouts , were disproportionately represented among Hurricane Katrina 's volunteer relief workers ; just as they are disproportionately represented among members of the United States Senate . : 152 Governor Rick Perry of Texas is an Eagle Scout who defended BSA policies and restrictions against ACLU criticisms in his book , On My Honor : Why the American Values of the Boy Scouts Are Worth Fighting For . 
 Mark Mays , CEO of Clear Channel Communications , told a magazine interviewer in May 2008 that , " Particularly in the very impactful ages of youth 11 to 14 years old , when they can really go astray and you 're taking the time to spend with them and focus on cultural core values like reverent , trustworthy , loyal , and helpful — all of those different things ... Scouting has a huge positive impact on boys and their lives , and that in turn positively impacts our communities and society as a whole . " 
 Mayor of New York City and business tycoon Michael Bloomberg , said that the BSA 's Scout Law required of all Boy Scouts — a Scout is trustworthy , loyal , helpful , friendly , courteous , kind , obedient , cheerful , thrifty , brave , clean , and reverent — are " all the American values ... Americans have quaintly simplistic ways and direct ways of phrasing things ... I think it 's one of the great strengths of this country . " : 116 
 Peter <unk> , an editor of The New York Times , wrote in 2003 of his experience as an adult participating with his son in Scouting activities , " I feel lucky to have had this unexpected vehicle to share my son 's youth , to shape it , and to be shaped by it as well . " He concluded that , although Scouting is viewed by some as old @-@ fashioned , " Scouting 's core values ... are wonderful building blocks for a movement and a life . Scouting 's genuinely egalitarian goals and instincts are more important now than they 've ever been . It 's one of the only things that kids do that 's genuinely cooperative , not competitive . " : 319 – 320 
 At the turn of the 20th century , Halloween had turned into a night of vandalism , with destruction of property and cruelty to animals and people . Around 1912 , the BSA , Boys Clubs and other neighborhood organizations came together to encourage a safe celebration that would end the destruction that had become so common on this night . 
 The Boy Scouts of America are quite particular about how and when the Scout uniforms and insignia may be used in film and other portrayals ; and for that reason , most films and television productions made in the U.S. utilize " ersatz " Scouting organizations . Examples of this include the " Order of the Straight Arrow " , portrayed in the King of the Hill cartoon series , and the " Indian Guides " depicted in the 1995 Chevy Chase film , Man of the House . One exception to this policy is the Walt Disney movie Follow Me , Boys ! with Fred McMurray portraying a Scoutmaster of a rural troop . It was released to theaters in 1966 and re @-@ released in 1976 . Another is the final scene of The Sopranos television show , where Tony Soprano sits down to dinner in a restaurant . At another table , several Cub Scouts , in full uniform , are seated . 
 = = = Good Turns = = = 
 From the inception of the Scouting movement , Scouts have been urged to " Do a Good Turn Daily " , as it is the slogan for the Boy Scouts of America . The first national Good Turn was the promotion of a safe and sane Fourth of July in 1912 . During World War I , Every Scout to Save a Soldier was a slogan used to motivate children involved in Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts to help sell War savings stamps . Scouting for Food is an ongoing annual program begun in 1986 that collects food for local food banks . In 1997 , the BSA developed Service to America with a commitment to provide 200 million hours of service by youth members by the end of the year 2000 . As part of Service to America , the BSA provided service projects in conjunction with the National Park Service ( NPS ) . In October 2003 , the Department of the Interior expanded the program with the creation of Take Pride in America , opening service to all Americans . 
 Service to America became Good Turn for America in 2004 and expanded to address the problems of hunger , homelessness , and inadequate housing and poor health in conjunction with the Salvation Army , the American Red Cross , Habitat for Humanity , and other organizations . 
 = = = Sex abuse cases = = = 
 Scouting sex abuse cases are situations where youth involved in Scouting programs have been sexually abused by someone who is also involved in the Scouting program . J.L. Tarr , a Chief Scout Executive in the United States , was quoted in the 1980s in an article regarding sexual assault cases against Scout leaders across all 50 states : " That 's been an issue since the Boy Scouts began . " Several reports have surfaced over the years regarding incidents of sexual abuse within the Boy Scouts of America to include incidents of repeat offenders . There have also been several high profile court cases that resulted in convictions and settlements involving such incidents . On October 19 , 2012 , the Boy Scouts of America were forced by court order to release over 20 @,@ 000 pages of documentation on 1200 alleged child sexual abuse cases within the organization from between 1965 and 1985 . 
 In the 1980s BSA developed its Youth Protection program , to educate youth , leaders and parents about the problem as a whole , and to introduce barriers to sexual abuse of children using the Scout program to reach victims . " Two deep " leadership dictates that no adult member can be alone with any youth member ( other than their own child ) . Before joining , youth must discuss with their parents a pamphlet on sexual abuse and adults must take youth protection training and , since 2003 , new adult members must pass a criminal background check ( adults who were already members had to pass a background check by 2008 ) . The Youth Protection Plan from the organization is linked to in a CDC report on such programs . 
 = = National Scout jamboree = = 
 The national Scout jamboree is a gathering of Boy Scouts from across the US . It is usually held every four years , with some adjustment for special years such as the 2010 National Scout Jamboree that celebrated the BSA centennial . The first jamboree was held in 1937 at the Washington Monument in Washington , D.C. Since then , jamborees have been held in varying locations . Beginning in 1981 , the jamboree has been held at Fort A.P. Hill , Virginia . A permanent location owned by the BSA was sought in 2008 for future jamborees , high adventure programs and training . The Summit Bechtel Family National Scout Reserve near Beckley , West Virginia is now the permanent site beginning with the 2013 National Scout Jamboree . 
 = = High adventure bases = = 
 The Boy Scouts of America operates several high adventure bases at the national level . Each offers a wide range of programs and training — a typical core program may include sailing , wilderness canoeing or wilderness backpacking trips . These bases are administered by the High Adventure Division of the National Council . 
 Current high @-@ adventure bases of the Boy Scouts of America include Philmont Scout Ranch , Northern Tier National High Adventure Bases , Florida National High Adventure Sea Base , and The Summit Bechtel Family National Scout Reserve which was the site of the 2013 Jamboree . 
 = = Eagle Scout = = 
 A Scout who attains this rank is called an Eagle Scout . Since its introduction in 1911 , the Eagle Scout rank has been earned by more than two million young men . Requirements include earning at least 21 merit badges and demonstrating Scout Spirit through the Boy Scout Oath and Law , service , and leadership . This includes an extensive service project that the Scout plans , organizes , leads , and manages . Eagle Scouts are presented with a medal and a badge that visibly recognizes the accomplishments of the Scout . Additional recognition can be earned through Eagle Palms , awarded for completing additional tenure , leadership , and merit badge requirements . Many famous Americans are Eagle Scouts : astronaut Neil Armstrong , film director Michael Moore , TV host Mike Rowe , Steven Spielberg , Mayor Michael Bloomberg , Secretary of Defense Robert Gates , and President Gerald Ford are just a small sample of Eagle Scouts . 
 = Loch Leven Castle = 
 Loch Leven Castle is a ruined castle on an island in Loch Leven , in the Perth and Kinross local authority area of Scotland . Possibly built around 1300 , the castle was the location of military action during the Wars of Scottish Independence ( 1296 – 1357 ) . In the latter part of the 14th century , the castle was granted by his uncle to William Douglas , 1st Earl of Douglas , and remained in Douglas ' hands for the next 300 years . Mary , Queen of Scots was imprisoned here in 1567 – 1568 , and forced to abdicate as queen , before escaping with the help of her gaoler 's family . In 1588 , the Queen 's gaoler inherited the title Earl of Morton , and moved away from the castle . It was bought , in 1675 , by Sir William Bruce , who used the castle as a focal point in his garden ; it was never again used as a residence . 
 Today , the remains of the castle are protected as a category A listed building , in the care of Historic Scotland . Loch Leven Castle is accessible in summer by the public via a ferry . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 A castle may have been constructed on Castle Island by 1257 , when the 16 @-@ year @-@ old King Alexander III of Scotland was forcibly brought there by his regents . During the First War of Scottish Independence ( 1296 – 1328 ) , the invading English army held the castle , then named Loch Leven Castle , which lies at a strategically important position between the towns of Edinburgh , Stirling and Perth . Parts of the present fortification , the curtain wall , may date from this time and were perhaps built by the occupying English . The castle was captured by the Scots before the end of the 13th century , possibly by the forces of William Wallace . 
 English forces laid siege to Loch Leven in 1301 , but the garrison was relieved in the same year when the siege was broken by Sir John Comyn . King Robert the Bruce ( reigned 1306 – 1329 ) is known to have visited the castle in 1313 and again in 1323 . Following Bruce 's death , the English invaded again , and laid siege to Loch Leven Castle in 1335 in support of the pretender Edward Balliol ( d . 1364 ) . According to the 14th @-@ century chronicle of John of Fordun , the English attempted to flood the castle by building a dam across the outflow of the loch . The water level rose for a month , until the captain of the English force , Sir John de Stirling , left to attend the festival of Saint Margaret of Scotland . The defenders , under Alan de Vipont , took the opportunity to come out of the castle at night , and damaged the dam , causing it to collapse and flood the English camp . The story has , however , been doubted by later historians . 
 Loch Leven Castle was strengthened in the 14th or early 15th century , by the addition of the five @-@ storey tower house or keep . According to Historic Scotland , it is of the 14th century , making it one of the oldest tower houses in Scotland which still substantially survives . In 1390 King Robert II ( reigned 1371 – 1390 ) granted the castle to Sir Henry Douglas , the husband of his niece Marjory . From the 14th century , the castle served as a state prison . Prior to becoming king , Robert II was held here in 1369 , as was Archibald Douglas , 5th Earl of Douglas ( d . 1439 ) in the first half of the 15th century . Patrick Graham , Archbishop of St Andrews , died in captivity at the castle in 1478 . 
 = = = The 16th century = = = 
 Mary , Queen of Scots ( reigned 1542 – 1567 ) first visited Loch Leven in 1565 as a guest of Sir William Douglas of Lochleven ( d . 1606 ) . She held an interview here with the Calvinist preacher John Knox . 
 Mary returned to Loch Leven as a prisoner , from 17 June 1567 until her escape on 2 May 1568 . At the " battle " of Carberry Hill on 15 June , Mary surrendered to her noblemen , who opposed her marriage to the Earl of Bothwell . She was taken to Loch Leven and given into the custody of Sir William Douglas of Lochleven , spending most of her captivity living in the early 16th @-@ century Glassin Tower , at the south @-@ east corner of the castle . Aside from Sir William , the household included his mother Lady Margaret Douglas , mother of Mary 's half brother the Earl of Moray , and his brother George Douglas , as well as Willie Douglas , a young orphaned relative . Mary fell ill on arrival , and sometime before 24 July she miscarried twins that she had conceived with Bothwell . Only a few days later she was forced to abdicate as Queen of Scots , in favour of her infant son James . 
 Mary recovered during the autumn and winter , and gradually won over George Douglas to her own cause . A contemporary wrote that George was " in fantasy of love <unk> hir . " On the night of the escape , Willie Douglas stole the keys and let Mary , dressed as a servant , out of the castle . She was rowed across the lake to where George Douglas and others awaited her , and they fled to Niddry Castle in Lothian . The Castle is one of many in Scotland said to be haunted by Mary 's spirit . 
 The English Earl of Northumberland was also held here , after fleeing to Scotland following the failure of the Catholic Rising of the North in 1570 . He was captured by the Earl of Morton , and confined at Loch Leven before being sent back to England for execution . In 1588 , Sir William Douglas of Lochleven succeeded to the earldom of Morton , as the 6th earl . With the title he inherited other properties , including Aberdour Castle in Fife , and Loch Leven Castle became less frequently used . 
 = = = Sir William Bruce = = = 
 From around 1546 , Margaret Erskine and her son William Douglas built a house on the shore of the Loch which was known as " Newhouse . " The " Newhouse " replaced the island castle as the legal centre of the estate in 1619 . 
 In 1675 , the Loch Leven estate was bought from the Douglases by Sir William Bruce ( <unk> – 1710 ) , royal architect in Scotland . Bruce built nearby Kinross House on the lake shore from 1686 , aligning the principal axis of house and garden on the distant castle . The " Newhouse " , which was finally demolished in 1723 , was just to the north of Bruce 's site . Kinross was one of the first buildings in the classical style erected in Scotland . Thereafter Loch Leven Castle was no longer used as a dwelling , but it was preserved by Bruce as a picturesque focus for his gardens . 
 = = = Recent years = = = 
 Loch Leven Castle had fallen into ruin by the 18th century , but the ruins were conserved and rubbish removed in 1840 . The estate passed from the Bruces to the Graham family in the 18th century and then , in the 19th century , to the <unk> , who still occupy Kinross House . 
 Loch Leven Castle was given in to state care in 1939 , and is now managed by Historic Scotland . Today , the castle can be reached by a 12 @-@ person ferry operated from Kinross by Historic Scotland during the summer months . The remains of the castle are protected as a Scheduled Ancient Monument , and as a category A listed building , the highest level of protection for a historic building in Scotland . 
 = = Description = = 
 The castle , and an outer enclosure of which little trace remains , originally took up almost the entire area of Castle Island . The present wooded , and considerably larger , island was formed in the early 19th century when the <unk> of the outflow of the River Leven , which enters the Firth of Forth at the town of Leven , led to a substantial lowering of the water level . 
 The castle comprises a rectangular courtyard surrounded by a curtain wall , with a tower house , or keep , at one corner , and the round Glassin Tower projecting from the opposite corner . The foundations of demolished ranges of buildings remain around two sides of the courtyard . Of the outer court , only an earth bank shows the position of the walls , with fragmentary remains of a bakehouse the only visible structures . 
 = = = The tower house = = = 
 The tower house , or keep , at the west corner of the enclosure , measures 36 @.@ 5 feet ( 11 @.@ 1 m ) by 31 @.@ 5 feet ( 9 @.@ 6 m ) and originally had five storeys , although the roof and timber floors are now gone . The lowest level is a vaulted basement , with a vaulted kitchen above . The hall was on the next floor , with chambers above , all linked by a spiral stair . 
 = = = The Glassin Tower = = = 
 The Glassin Tower is a round tower , added to the south @-@ east corner of the ancient curtain wall in the 16th century . The tower has a vaulted basement , defended by a gun hole , and two small rooms above . The lower room has an oriel window . 
 = = = Archaeological findings = = = 
 A minor excavation in 1995 found the footings and two steps of a stone stairway that provided access to the Great Hall of the tower . 16th @-@ century pottery and animal bones were found in 0 @.@ 75 metres ( 2 @.@ 5 ft ) of debris near the <unk> . 
 = Lunar : Silver Star Story Complete = 
 Lunar : Silver Star Story Complete , originally released in Japan as simply Lunar : Silver Star Story ( <unk> ~ <unk> , Runa ~ <unk> Sutā Sutōrī ) , is a role @-@ playing video game developed by Game Arts and Japan Art Media as a remake of 1992 's Lunar : The Silver Star . While the overall plot remains true to the original , accommodations are made to the game 's story to allow for a larger , richer cast , as well as additional scenarios . 
 Initially released on the Sega Saturn in 1996 , the game has gone through several variations , beginning with enhanced video support in conjunction with the Saturn 's MPEG graphics add @-@ on in 1997 , and later being ported to Sony 's PlayStation in 1998 . The PlayStation version was released in North America by Working Designs , who had also produced the English adaptation of the original game , in May 1999 . 
 Like its forerunner , the game follows the exploits of Alex , a young boy from a small , humble town who enters a life of adventure and intrigue after being chosen as the heir @-@ apparent to the title of " Dragonmaster " , guardian of the forces of the planet . With the help of his expanding band of companions , Alex must pass the trials set by ancient dragons to claim his place in history , and stop a powerful sorcerer and former hero from controlling the world . 
 Since its English release , Silver Star Story has garnered much attention from critics for its use of fluid full @-@ motion animated sequences , lavish game packaging , and quality of the English script . The game was followed by a sequel , Lunar 2 : Eternal Blue Complete , in 1998 . Two more remakes of Lunar : The Silver Star , Lunar Legend and Lunar : Silver Star Harmony , were released in 2002 by Media Rings and Ubisoft and in 2009 by <unk> Online Entertainment and Xseed Games , respectively . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Silver Star Story Complete is a traditional , top @-@ down role @-@ playing video game featuring two @-@ dimensional character and background graphics . Using the Sega Saturn and PlayStation 's advanced hardware , many elements of the original game 's presentation have been altered , including a larger color palette , more sophisticated visual effects , and improved sound quality . Throughout gameplay , the story is interspersed with fully animated cut scenes designed to give the game a cinematic feel , and allow the player to get more involved in the game 's plot . Players advance the game 's narrative by completing story @-@ based objectives and interacting with non @-@ player characters . In the original version , players encountered enemy monsters randomly every few steps when traveling in a harsh environments , while the remake now makes enemies visible , with combat ensuing only after a character has come in contact with one . 
 Many of the game 's new battle features were adapted from Lunar : Eternal Blue , including the auto @-@ battle feature that allows players to set moves and actions in advance . While in combat , a player may choose to attack an enemy , move about the battlefield , use magic or items , stand their ground and defend , or flee the battle entirely . Silver Star Story Complete retains the original version 's movement feature , which requires characters to be within a certain distance of an enemy before it can be attacked . Battles are won when all enemies are defeated , yielding experience points that allow characters to gain levels , making them stronger as well as allowing access to better abilities . By gaining levels , as well as finding or purchasing increasingly more powerful weapons and armor , characters can battle increasingly more powerful enemies as the game progresses . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The cast of The Silver Star all return for the game 's remake , retaining their original designs by anime and manga artist Toshiyuki Kubooka . Players assume the role of Alex , who is joined by a menagerie of playable and supporting characters who aid him on his quest . 
 Alex - a young boy from a small town who dreams of becoming an adventurer like his idol , Dyne . 
 Luna - his childhood friend and sweetheart 
 Nall - a winged , white , cat @-@ like creature with an uncertain origin 
 Ramus - son of the town mayor with dreams of becoming a rich businessman 
 Nash - a boisterous magician @-@ in @-@ training from a prestigious magic school 
 Mia - quiet daughter of the magic guild 's headmistress 
 Jessica - a tomboyish priestess 
 Kyle - a self @-@ absorbed vagrant and ladies ' man as well as Jessica 's strained boyfriend . 
 Each character 's personalities were expanded for the new version to make them easier for the player to relate to , and give each of them more presence in the game 's story . As the game ’ s designers felt that Luna was lacking presence in the original game , she was included in the player 's party for a longer period and her past was expanded by giving her confounding dream sequences . 
 Ghaleon , a dark magician who seeks godhood , serves as the primary antagonist , and initially appears as an ally to Alex 's cause . In the new version , Ghaleon 's personality is altered to make him a more sympathetic character . Motivation for his plans to rule the world were shifted from revenge to misplaced concern for humanity not having a true leader . He is still undeniably ruthless and cruel , however . Game Arts added new villains to the story , feeling that the game 's opposition lacked enough characterization . These include Royce and <unk> , two powerful sorceresses who are sisters to Xenobia , Ghaleon 's top general who appeared in the original as his sole underling ( who , in this version , actually has romantic feelings for him ) . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The plot of Silver Star Story Complete remains true to the original Sega @-@ CD version written by Kei Shigema . Novelist Keisuke <unk> was recruited as the remake 's scenario writer , and was tasked with expanding the previous script written by Shigema to make the game more current . As in the original version , players assume the role of Alex , a young boy who hopes to become a great hero like his idol , the legendary Dragonmaster Dyne . At the insistence of his fortune @-@ hunting friend Ramus , Alex travels to the nearby Dragon 's Cave with his cat @-@ like companion Nall , and sweetheart Luna , to seek a precious gem . When the team reaches the cave 's interior , they find Quark , an aged , wise dragon who sees hidden potential in Alex , and beckons him to travel the world and become its protector as the new Dragonmaster . Returning home , the group expresses mutual interest in Alex 's quest ; Ramus wishes to sell the dragon gem at a large city , Nall wants to find out what he is , and Luna merely to protect Alex . The group sets off across the frontier to the port town of Saith to continue their journey . 
 Traveling through the Weird Woods , Luna sings a magic song to clear a patch of thick fog in their path , yet is not sure how she knew it would work . The group is surrounded by a horde of monsters , and are defended by a traveling warrior named Laike . Finding Alex 's quest to become Dragonmaster humorous , Laike nonetheless wishes him and his friends luck as they leave the forest . Arriving at Saith , the group meets Nash , a magician @-@ in @-@ training from a prestigious magic school who needs transport back to his home , and joins the group on a boat to the eastern continent . Unlike the original Sega @-@ CD version , Luna continues with Alex rather than stay behind to give her a bigger role in the plot . After arriving in the port town of Meribia , Ramus leaves the group to become a salesman at his own shop , while the rest of the team travels to the floating city of Vane to meet Ghaleon , a former adventurer who traveled with Dyne before his death . Ghaleon sends Alex and Luna on a quest to stop a false Dragonmaster from harassing a village where he meets Jessica , a priestess and daughter of the legendary hero " Hell " Mel . Returning to Vane , Ghaleon tells Alex he wants to see Quark to discuss his future as Dragonmaster , with Luna joining them on a return trip to Burg . After arriving at the dragon cave , Ghaleon and Quark reminisce before Ghaleon cryptically asks whether Luna is " the one from back then " . Upon hearing an affirmation , Ghaleon 's mood changes , and suddenly transforms into a more sinister form , The Magic Emperor , who turns Quark to energy and kidnaps Luna , remarking that he will now use her in his quest to rule the world . 
 The game 's final scenario and the reason for Ghaleon 's actions differ slightly from the original , with the Goddess Althena 's instability serving as the catalyst for the events rather than a rampaging Black Dragon . In this version , Laike relates the story of how one day fifteen years ago , the Goddess Althena concluded that people were depending too much on her , rather than growing as people and as a civilization , and that by continuing to mother them , she was doing more harm than good . Despite Ghaleon 's pleas , Dyne and Althena used their powers to spread her life force throughout the world , transforming her into an infant , to live out a mortal life as a human . Ghaleon , believing humanity could not survive without a god watching over them , cut off all ties to his former friend and set his plan into motion to ascend to godhood himself in Althena 's place ; his cause set on rule rather than revenge as in the original . Believing that humanity was strong and resourceful enough to live on their own , Dyne left the young girl in the care of Alex 's parents to raise her as their own daughter before he began his new life as a traveling adventurer . Now knowing the truth of Luna 's origins , Alex and his friends travel to the Goddess tower to save her and stop Ghaleon from seizing control of the world . Defeating his generals , Alex confronts Ghaleon at the tower 's upper pagoda , where the ritual to transfer Luna 's power to him has already begun . Echoing Dyne 's earlier declaration on the strength of humanity , Alex 's team attacks and defeats Ghaleon as his fortress crumbles around them . With Luna still caught in a trance , Alex attempts to reason with her to leave while the others are teleported to safety . Playing his ocarina , Alex awakens Luna 's memories before the two are transported to the surface as the tower collapses , re @-@ uniting with their companions . 
 = = Development = = 
 The remake initially began as Lunar : Silver Star Story , developed by a collaboration between Game Arts and Japan Art Media . Immediately after producing Lunar : Eternal Blue for the Sega @-@ CD console in 1994 , much of the original staff expressed interest in remaking the first Lunar title on current , more advanced hardware . Displeased with many aspects of the original game 's design , Game Arts sought to improve the original version to coincide with their initial vision of the project , including more sophisticated animation , better quality CD music , and a more engaging script . Silver Star Story was headed by producer <unk> <unk> , who had previously worked on the first two Sega @-@ CD Lunar titles , who enlisted help from the staff of Japan Art Media to aid in the heavy @-@ cost production of the game . While the original game contained roughly ten minutes of animation produced internally , the remake features fifty minutes of new , fully animated cut scenes by Studio Gonzo . For the game 's first release on the Sega Saturn in October 1996 , in @-@ game movies could only display in quarter @-@ screen and low fidelity due to the system 's video limitations . This was corrected for the game 's second release in June 1997 with the introduction of the Saturn 's MPEG card adapter , which allowed for full @-@ screen playback at better quality . Both Saturn versions would be published by Kadokawa Shoten . In May 1998 , Silver Star Story was ported to the PlayStation system in Japan , this time published by Entertainment Software Publishing . This version , while retaining all the extra features of the second Saturn release , including full @-@ screen movies , was unable to produce the same high @-@ fidelity playback as its video card @-@ enhanced predecessor . 
 = = = English version = = = 
 In late 1995 , California @-@ based software company Working Designs , who had previously provided the translation for the original Silver Star , signed on to produce the English @-@ language version . The company originally expressed interest in localizing the Saturn version under the name Lunar : Silver Star Story Director 's Cut to be released in Fall 1996 . The initial project was dropped due to internal conflicts between Working Designs and Sega of America , and work began on the PlayStation version in 1998 . Silver Star Story Complete was headed by company president Victor Ireland , who also served as head translator and localizer . Like the original game , the English version features a lighthearted , non @-@ literal interpretation of the original Japanese script while retaining the same basic story , which now includes American pop culture references , breaking the fourth wall , and slapstick humor . Working Designs kept in close contact with the original Japanese team , adding several new features to the North American version including DualShock controller support , the ability to switch between memory card slots on the save screen , and the ability to create up to fifteen save files instead of three . Programming and production difficulties stifled progress , resulting in numerous delays and changing release dates until the game 's eventual release in May 1999 . A stand @-@ alone demo version of the game was distributed to several game stores across the United States which preceded the final version , as well as a Ghaleon punching puppet available with pre @-@ order of Lunar 2 Eternal Blue 
 Silver Star Story Complete was initially released in North America as a limited collector 's edition which included two game discs , a hardbound instruction manual , a soundtrack CD , a " Making of Lunar : Silver Star Story Complete " special disc , and a cloth map of the Lunar world . The package retailed for $ 60 @.@ 00 to cover the cost of the elaborate extras . Working Designs would also publish their own strategy guide for the game , also billed as a collector 's item . Ireland 's team would add an easter egg to the " Making of " video disc in the form of a minigame based on Atari 's arcade game Warlords called Lords of Lunar accessed by using a code found in @-@ game . In February 2002 , a special " Fan @-@ Art Edition " of the game was released featuring disc artwork by contributors to the Working Designs website , which lacked the extras of the collector 's edition . A Windows @-@ based PC version of Silver Star Story was released in Japan in December 1999 by DigiCube featuring higher resolution graphics and video playback . Working Designs had expressed interest in bringing this version to North America in 2002 , but claimed that the English version was too buggy and unstable to be released . 
 = = Audio = = 
 The music for Silver Star Story Complete consists of entirely new background themes by Noriyuki Iwadare . While Hiroshi Fujioka , Isao Mizoguchi , and Yoshiaki <unk> collaborated with Iwadare on the Sega @-@ CD version , only Iwadare would return for the remake , composing nearly one hundred new songs . When creating the music for Silver Star Story Complete , Iwadare drew from his own experiences , admitting that he was trying to put a personal touch on his work and " express [ myself ] through [ my ] honest emotions " . Music director Isao Mizoguchi claims that the music process was " a little different " than the companies ' previous works , with the game 's main themes being composed before they viewed the scenes that required them , making adjustments as they went along . Each song was divided into four categories : town or village , dungeon , battle , or field ; each with their own pacing and emotional direction . Iwadare described the game 's music as " very well received " according to fan feedback . The Japanese version features a new opening theme , " Tsu · Ba · Sa " ( <unk> ・ BA ・ SA , lit . Wings ) performed by Kyōko Hikami . An intermediary song , " Kaze no Nocturne " ( <unk> , Kaze no <unk> , lit . Wind 's Nocturne ) , also called " The Boat Song " , was added to the game to heighten the emotion of Alex and Luna 's departure into the world , which was kept at Mizoguchi 's insistence even as material was being cut for time . 
 For the North American release , Victor Ireland had expressed interest in replacing many of the new themes with ones from the Sega @-@ CD version , including the original opening theme " Fighting Through the Darkness " . After translating the game , however , Working Designs was left with very little extra space on each game disc , and the idea was abandoned . Many of the arranged songs meant for the English release were included on a special soundtrack packaged with the collector 's edition . The English version features the opening theme , " Wings " , performed by Jennifer Stigile , who also performs " Wind 's Nocturne " . Additionally , Working Designs ' arrangements of classic Lunar : The Silver Star pieces were used to replace the new music in two animation sequences , " A Trinity of Terror " and " The Green Earth " . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 Silver Star Story Complete features twenty voiced characters , four times the original version . The characters ' voices are used in pre @-@ designated cut scenes , animated interludes and when using special attacks in battle . The English cast was composed of family and friends of the Working Designs staff , as well as local talent from the area . Ashley Angel , Jenny Stigile ( Magallanes ) , Rhonda Gibson , Jackie Powers , Hal <unk> , and John Truitt reprise their roles , and were joined by a number of talents to fill out the game 's expanded speaking roles . Working Designs had considered replacing Angel , as Victor Ireland felt he may have aged too much to convincingly play a young boy , but reconsidered after his rehearsal , commenting that " the players have all aged a bit since the original , so Alex could have aged a bit , too " . Jenny Stigile ( Magallanes ) sings the intro song as well as the " Boat Song " in the English version . While the English cast returned , the Japanese version was completely re @-@ cast from the Sega @-@ CD original , bringing in several established anime and game voice actors , including pop idol Sakura Tange . A four @-@ volume sound drama album series , Lunatic Festa , was released in Japan between August and November 1996 featuring the Japanese voice actors performing skits and songs in @-@ character , as well as arranged music tracks from the game . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Saturn version of Silver Star Story was well received in Japan , with Weekly Sega Saturn Magazine recognizing it as one of the most memorable gaming experiences of 1997 . The PlayStation version received a 7 out of 10 score from Hyper PlayStation magazine , remarking that although it contained lower quality visual effects and movie playback than the previous Saturn releases , it still remained a solid role @-@ playing game . It sold enough to qualify for Sony 's PlayStation the Best distinction , and was subsequently re @-@ released in Japan in April 1999 at a budget price . 
 Silver Star Story Complete sold over 223 @,@ 000 units within its first year in North America , including the entire production run of the four @-@ disc collector 's edition . The game became the highest @-@ selling Working Designs title to date , and the third highest @-@ selling role @-@ playing game of 1999 behind Final Fantasy VIII and Planescape : Torment . A heavy media push in magazines and websites brought recognition to the game , and alerted customers that Working Designs planned to cease production of the title starting December 31 , 1999 . English reviews of the game were typically favorable , with critics such as Electronic Gaming Monthly remarking that Lunar 's " plot , writing and voice acting are about the best you 'll find " , awarding the game an editor 's choice gold award . The game 's translation was equally applauded by PlayStation : The Official Magazine , calling it " spotless " , and remarking that Working Designs ' unique humor was applied to every bit of text in the game , including weapon descriptions . Official PlayStation Magazine remarked that " what little [ Lunar ] lacks in visual punch , it more than makes up for in style , story and wholly engrossing gameplay " calling attention to the game 's programming and extra packaging . 
 The game 's two @-@ dimensional graphics were among its most panned feature , with GamePro commenting that the " flat battle areas , wimpy spells , and <unk> @-@ bitty enemies will assault your eyes " , citing the in @-@ game animated cut scenes as the only saving grace . Game Informer conversely declared that the animated interludes were grainy and often would not display in true fullscreen , but remarked that it was " really a small gripe because Lunar has an entertaining story filled with enjoyable quips " . Gamers ' Republic recognized the inferiority of Lunar 's graphics to current role @-@ playing games , but nonetheless found them " charming " . GameSpot simply described the graphics as " truly dated " , adding that many of Lunar 's aesthetic qualities could be re @-@ created on a Super Nintendo . Technology magazine Silicon Mag called the game a " masterpiece " , awarding it a 95 % rating and declared it an asset to the game industry , calling it " a game that will sell systems , with gamers actually buying <unk> just to play it . " In 2000 , Silver Star Story Complete ranked 22nd in IGN 's list of top PlayStation games of all time , while in 2001 Electronic Gaming Monthly ranked it 75th on its list of the top 100 games of all time . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The game 's engine and several design concepts , such as fully animated video interludes and collectible bromides , would later be used in the development of Magic School Lunar ! in 1997 and Lunar 2 : Eternal Blue Complete in 1998 . Working Designs used the game 's strong sales as justification to produce the English version of Eternal Blue Complete in North America , which also featured an elaborate collector 's edition . A four @-@ part Japanese novelization of Silver Star Story 's events would later be written by Kei Shigema and published in 2001 . 
 Silver Star Story Complete would be the first of three major revamps of the first Lunar game . In 2002 , a new version of the game developed by Media Rings was released for the Game Boy Advance handheld system under the name Lunar Legend ( <unk> , Runa <unk> ) , with the title 's English version being the first game in the series not published by Working Designs , but rather Ubisoft . Then , on March 2 , 2010 , Lunar : Silver Star Harmony was released for <unk> ; marking the last major revamp of the series . 
 = Broadhurst Park = 
 Broadhurst Park is a football stadium in Moston , Manchester , England . It is the home of F.C. United of Manchester and Moston Juniors F.C. The stadium was known by its project name , Moston Community Stadium , before being changed at a members ' meeting in 2014 . 
 F.C. United were formed in 2005 , and aimed to construct a ground in Manchester by 2012 . After plans for an initial site collapsed , the development of a new stadium at the Ronald Johnson Playing fields in Moston was announced . A protracted planning process followed , and construction began in November 2013 . Broadhurst Park was completed with a capacity of 4 @,@ 400 in May 2015 . The opening match was a friendly between F.C. United and Benfica on 29 May 2015 . F.C. United played host to Stockport County in their first ever competitive league match at Broadhurst Park on 11 August 2015 , eventually losing 2 – 1 . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = F.C. United = = = 
 F.C. United were formed in 2005 by a group of Manchester United supporters following the club 's controversial takeover by Malcolm Glazer which led to hundreds of supporters defecting from the club . Without a stadium of their own they agreed to use Bury 's Gigg Lane stadium , but the agreement continued at the cost of approximately £ 5 @,@ 000 per match . Within a year , the fan @-@ owned club set aspirations to build its own 7 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 capacity stadium as close to Manchester city centre as possible by 2012 and consequently entered into negotiations with New East Manchester and Manchester City Council to develop their plans . Despite attendances averaging over 2 @,@ 000 in their first few seasons , the fact that the club did not have access to a stadium of its own on its match days was a contributory factor in the club 's financial loss for three years ( £ 42 @,@ 267 in 2007 , £ 40 @,@ 669 in 2008 and £ 9 @,@ 663 in 2009 ) . 
 F.C. United initially proposed a stadium at Ten Acres Lane in Newton Heath , on the site of an existing leisure centre and Astroturf outdoor football pitch . The plans indicated that these community facilities would have been maintained within the new scheme . Newton Heath is 2 @.@ 8 miles ( 4 @.@ 5 km ) east north east of Manchester city centre and has close links to Manchester United , who were formed in the urban area and were originally known as Newton Heath LYR Football Club between 1878 and 1902 . However , on 4 March 2011 it was announced that Manchester City Council had backed out of plans to fund the new stadium with grants , despite the fact that the previously agreed £ 1 @.@ 5 million was close to being raised by fans , and F.C. United moved to search for other sites . Despite this the Council stated that they were still committed to helping F.C. United build a ground in Manchester and on 5 April 2011 it was announced that , after considering three possible alternative sites , Ronald Johnson Playing Fields in Moston was the preferred location for the stadium to be built according to Manchester City Council . 
 = = = Moston Juniors = = = 
 Moston Juniors is a youth football club , formed in 1993 . The club has Active Sports and Charity Club status and was the first club in Manchester to receive FA Charter Standard Community Club status . The club signed the lease for Ronald Johnson Playing fields in 2007 , with work to improve the site being completed in 2009 due to a grant from Manchester City Council and the Football Foundation . The club had further plans with the help of a proposed £ 750 @,@ 000 council grant to build a clubhouse and upgrade their pitches , however they were unable to secure sufficient additional funding to make the project happen . On announcement of the intended redevelopment of the Ronald Johnson Playing fields into a new stadium , Moston Juniors entered into a partnership with F.C. United and Manchester City Council so that they could lease the new ground facilities . 
 = = History prior to construction = = 
 The surrounding area was part of the manor of Moston , near the now demolished Moston Hall . It was owned by Sir Edward <unk> Broadhurst , a local industrialist , who in 1920 donated 80 acres of the land for use as a park , as a recognition of victory in the First World War . 
 The ground on which the stadium is built has long been used for sport . The playing fields in Moston were purchased on behalf of the workers of " Johnson , Clapham and Morris " , a metal working and fabrication business . The fields were named for Ronald Lindsay Johnson ( 24 September 1889 – 29 May 1917 ) , a member of the Johnson family who died while serving as an Acting Captain and Divisional Trench Mortar Officer ( <unk> ) in the First World War . As <unk> for the 23rd Division , Johnson was responsible for co @-@ ordinating the targeting and positioning of mortar batteries and it was during preparation for the Battle of Messines that he was mortally wounded on 29 May 1917 . He had ascended to chairman of his family business following the deaths of his father in February 1914 and his brother William in July 1916 . His will ( compiled before Christmas 1916 ) originally left his shares in the family business in trust for the benefit of the employees of the firm ; but when this bequest was deemed to be impractical , the trustees decided instead that eight acres of land should be purchased for the staff as playing fields and a recreation ground . They were opened in the presence of his mother on 17 June 1925 . 
 In April 1934 , following the moving of the Richard Johnson , Clapham and Morris Ltd firm to Trafford Park , the playing grounds were offered to the Parks Committee of the Manchester Corporation for £ 2 @,@ 400 . At the time , the ground was described as being fenced all round with iron railings , containing bowling greens , a number of tennis courts and a cricket pitch , together with two well @-@ built pavilions . For many years the land was used for community events including football and funfairs . A cycle speedway track was built during the 1980s . In 2005 , a 2 @.@ 4 m green powder coated weld mesh fence with gates was erected at the perimeter of the fields . Moston Juniors Football Club secured a lease for the site in 2007 , with a view to future development . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 The original plans for the Moston scheme remained similar to the original Ten Acres Lane proposal with a total capacity of 5 @,@ 000 expected . The plans were developed by architects Taylor Young ( now known as <unk> Group ) and structural engineers Scott Hughes Design . 
 Some local objections emerged in response to the plans to use of the fields for the stadium . Residents opposed to the stadium were concerned that it would lead to parking problems and devaluation of their property . There were also concerns about the loss of green space . There were also Moston residents who supported the stadium proposals , believing the stadium would provide sports facilities and activities for local children and teenagers , improving the overall health of people in the area . By the end of the consultation process 5 @,@ 635 letters of support and 2 @,@ 226 letters of objection were received . – of these 7 @,@ 653 ( 97 @.@ 3 % ) were " standard letters " with supporters and objectors simply adding a signature . There were also six petitions with 854 names in support and 1 @,@ 420 names in objection . 
 In April 2011 , the Executive Committee of Manchester City Council approved the proposal to site the ground development subject to a planning application and consultation with residents , local community groups and Moston Juniors F.C. Detailed information about the new facility , including the tentative name Moston Community Stadium , was released on 9 June 2011 . A decision by the planning officers from Manchester City Council regarding consent had to be moved from 15 September to 27 October due to the volume of interest in the application . The Head of Planning recommended that the Committee were " Minded to <unk> " the planning application subject to a total of 42 attached conditions including the signing of an agreement for the site to have community use , an ongoing travel plan and off @-@ site parking provision . At the planning meeting on 27 October , Manchester City Council approved the planning permission for the new stadium . 
 = = = Judicial review = = = 
 After the planning approval was granted , local residents hired barristers to consider an appeal against the decision . The activation of the planning permission allowed solicitors on behalf of a group called Residents United Residents Association ( RURA ) to launch its Judicial Review Pre @-@ Action Protocol , which challenged the council 's decision making process . One of the original areas for appeal revolved around historic covenants on parts of the land , but the Charities Commission ruled that the fields are not charitable land . 
 The residents gained legal aid to launch the judicial review and argued that there were flaws in the planning process . The review took place on 18 – 19 December 2012 in Manchester to decide whether the council 's planning process was legal . The judge reserved his decision for a month , but decided to reject RURA 's claim to quash the planning permission . The final legal action from RURA came to an end after an unsuccessful challenge was made to the Court of Appeal in March 2013 . 
 = = = Funding = = = 
 In total , £ 6 @.@ 5 million was required to fund construction of the ground : – 
 £ 2 million – F.C. United Community Shares scheme ( target reached on 26 Feb 2015 ) 
 £ 1 million – from other fundraising , e.g. £ 467 @,@ 000 from the F.C. United Development Fund ( including £ 51 @,@ 000 from crowdfunding ) and £ 345 @,@ 000 from a Loan Stock scheme 
 £ 918 @,@ 000 – Sport England ( Iconic facilities fund ) 
 £ 550 @,@ 000 – Manchester City Council ( approved January 2012 ) 
 £ 500 @,@ 000 – Football Foundation Community Facilities Fund 
 £ 500 @,@ 000 – Manchester City Council loan ( approved January 2012 ) 
 £ 303 @,@ 000 – Government grant , Community Assets and Services Fund ( announced January 2014 ) 
 £ 150 @,@ 000 – Football Foundation Football Stadia Improvement Fund 
 £ 90 @,@ 000 – Viridor Waste Management 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The club signed a Section 106 and lease agreement in July 2012 , activating the planning permission which had been granted subject to the 42 conditions recommended by the Head of Planning back in October 2011 . Many of these conditions would be routinely applied to applications , such as the ground must be completed within three years ( July 2015 ) and the building matching the submitted drawings . Other conditions include the recommendation that F.C. United not play any home games when Manchester City are also at home , or there being a major event at the City of Manchester Stadium due to the grounds being just over 3 miles apart and the possible impact on traffic and car parking availability within the area . Floodlights on one of the community pitches must be switched off at 8pm , with the other pitches being allowed to operate until 9pm . The club 's original target was to open the Ten Acres Lane site in August 2012 . However , several delays ensued including the change of site to Moston and a 13 @-@ week " cooling off period " after the successful application . The F.C. United board had initially identified a tentative construction start date of May 2012 , but the legal challenge to the council 's decision delayed this for nearly 18 months until work finally began in November 2013 . 
 The ground was then scheduled to be completed by September 2014 with the work being undertaken by Barnes Construction . The project manager was Frank Whittle Partnerships . The completion target was to be 40 weeks after construction had commenced . The club had hoped to play the 2014 – 15 season in their own ground . However , some difficulties with the steel and logistics led to delays . The opening was initially moved back to December 2014 but further delays led to F.C. United playing the entire 2014 – 15 season at Bower Fold in Stalybridge and at Curzon Ashton 's Tameside Stadium . Much of the stadium 's fittings were constructed by fans and volunteers , while one terrace was recycled from the Drill Field ground in Northwich which had closed in 2002 . The facilities were largely completed by April 2015 and a test event was held at the ground on 16 May 2015 . 
 = = = Ground naming = = = 
 The " Moston Community Stadium " was the project name for the ground announced in the summer of 2011 . However , the official ground name was chosen by F.C. United members at the club 's Annual General Meeting on 10 April 2014 . The members were able to propose suggestions and these were reduced to a shortlist of seven . 
 Broadhurst 
 Broadhurst Park 
 <unk> Hall 
 Lightbowne Road 
 Ronald Johnson Ground 
 The Boardwalk 
 United of Manchester Stadium 
 The name was announced as " Broadhurst Park " on 11 April 2014 , after a members ' vote . The surrounding area has been named for Edward <unk> Broadhurst since he donated land to the people of Moston in 1920 . 
 = = Opening = = 
 F.C. United hosted a test event on 16 May 2015 , staging a short match between their first team and an Invitational XI made up of past players . This event was organized to test the facilities and prove that the stadium can hold a large capacity crowd , and took place with 3 @,@ 241 supporters in attendance . The official opening game was a friendly between F.C. United of Manchester and Benfica B on 29 May , the anniversary of Manchester United 's victory over Benfica in the 1968 European Cup Final . The date also happened to be the anniversary of the death of Ronald Johnson . Benfica won the opening game 0 – 1 in front of a crowd of 4 @,@ 232 . The ground 's first league game was on 11 August 2015 , the second match of the 2015 – 16 season for F.C. United , in a National League North local derby against Stockport County , a 1 – 2 loss . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The pitch at Broadhurst Park is surrounded on all sides by covered stands : the St. Mary 's Road End ( east ) , the North Stand , the Lightbowne Road End ( west ) and the Main Stand ( south ) , the last of which has seating sections . Spectators enter via twelve turnstiles in the corners of the stadium . The Main Stand contains a clubhouse with a bar and catering facilities , club offices , changing rooms , a medical suite and a classroom . There is an additional bar under the St. Mary 's Road End and food , concessions and merchandise areas are located both inside and outside the ground . Broadhurst Park also has a 3G pitch and two grass pitches adjacent to it as well as training and community facilities . The 3G pitch is used for home fixtures by F.C. United 's Reserve and Women 's teams . The ends of the main stand have been constructed with future expansion in mind , specifically with space to trial a safe standing area . The club has a partnership with Pennine Telecom to provide free Wi @-@ Fi to supporters at the ground . 
 Broadhurst Park has 50 – 60 car parking spaces , though on match days these are only available via booking in advance . The stadium is also served by Newton Heath and Moston tram stop ( tram / light rail ) , Moston railway station ( heavy rail ) , and several bus routes , including match day special buses from the city 's Northern Quarter . 80 bicycle stands have also been installed by the club to encourage cycling to the ground . 
 = Talon ( roller coaster ) = 
 Talon is a 135 @-@ foot ( 41 m ) steel inverted roller coaster at Dorney Park & Wildwater Kingdom in South Whitehall Township , Pennsylvania , United States . It features 4 inversions and close to the ground encounters . Designed by Bolliger & Mabillard , Talon was known to be one of the longest inverted roller coasters in the Northeast when it opened in 2001 . Unlike many roller coasters , Talon 's track is filled with sand to reduce the noise made by the trains . 
 = = History = = 
 On April 28 , 2000 , Dorney Park announced that a 135 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 41 m ) four inversion inverted roller coaster would be built for the 2001 season . No further details were given until August 30 , 2000 when Dorney Park announced the full details of the new $ 13 million roller coaster and its name , Talon . The ride would be the Northeast 's longest inverted roller coaster and would be built on a portion of land set aside for a major attraction by Cedar Fair when they purchased the park in 1992 . Construction began on September 5 , 2000 and continued through the winter . The first parts of Talon to be put into place were the brake run and transfer track in October 2000 . The roller coaster was topped off ( the highest piece of the lift hill ) on November 21 , 2000 and the track was completed in early 2001 . After testing was complete , Talon opened on May 5 , 2001 . 
 = = Experience = = 
 Having <unk> from the station , the train immediately begins to climb the 135 @-@ foot ( 41 m ) lift hill . Once at the top , the train goes through a pre @-@ drop before making a sharp 120 @-@ foot ( 37 m ) downward right turn . The train then enters a 98 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) tall vertical loop . After exiting the loop , the train goes through a zero @-@ gravity roll before dropping back to the ground and entering an immelmann loop . The train then makes a full 360 @-@ degree upward right turn followed by a left turn leading into another drop . After the drop , the train makes highly banked right turn into a flat spin . Next , the train makes a left turn ( extremely close to the ground ) before heading to an airtime , and back up which leads into the brake run . After exiting the brake run , the train makes a right turn into a second , shorter , set of brakes before entering the station . 
 One cycle of the ride lasts about 2 minutes . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 Talon operates with two steel and fiberglass trains . Each train has eight cars that can seat four riders in a single row for a total of 32 riders per train . The train structure is coloured blue and turquoise , the seats are black , and the over @-@ the @-@ shoulder restraints are yellow . 
 = = = Track = = = 
 The steel track of Talon is approximately 3 @,@ 110 feet ( 950 m ) long , the height of the lift is approximately 135 feet ( 41 m ) high , and the entire track weighs just under 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 pounds ( 1 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 kg ) . It was manufactured by Clermont Steel Fabricators located in Batavia , Ohio . To reduce the noise made by the trains , the track is filled with sand . Also , the track is painted orange and yellow while the supports are blue . 
 = = = Slogan & theme = = = 
 The entrance sign has a mini @-@ slogan as , " The Grip Of Fear " , after a claw . The word , " Talon " , is another meaning for , " Claw " , specifically on Bald eagles and mythical creatures . 
 = = Awards = = 
 = Dare to Be Stupid = 
 Dare to Be Stupid is the third studio album by " Weird Al " Yankovic , released in 1985 . The album was one of many produced by former The McCoys guitarist Rick Derringer . Recorded between August 1984 and March 1985 , the album was Yankovic 's first studio album released following the success of 1984 's In 3 @-@ D , which included the Top 40 single " Eat It " . 
 The music on Dare to Be Stupid is built around parodies and pastiches of pop and rock music of the mid @-@ 1980s , featuring jabs at Madonna , Cyndi Lauper , Huey Lewis and the News , and The Kinks . The album also features many " style parodies " , or musical imitations that come close to , but do not copy , existing artists . These style parodies include imitations of specific artists like Devo and Elvis , as well as imitations of various musical genres like doo @-@ wop , sci @-@ fi soundtracks , and music from the 1920s and 1930s . 
 Despite the mixed reception , Dare to Be Stupid sold well and peaked at number fifty on the Billboard 200 . The album also produced one of Yankovic 's more famous singles , " Like a Surgeon " , a parody of Madonna 's " Like a Virgin " , which peaked at number forty @-@ seven on the Billboard Hot 100 . The album was Yankovic 's second Gold record , and went on to be certified Platinum for sales of over one million copies in the United States . The album was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Comedy Recording in 1986 . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 In January 1985 Yankovic entered the recording studio to begin the sessions to his In 3 @-@ D follow @-@ up album . To produce the album , Yankovic brought in former The McCoys guitarist Rick Derringer who also produced Yankovic 's previous albums . Backing Yankovic were Jon " Bermuda " Schwartz on drums , Steve Jay on bass , and Jim West on guitar . The first session yielded four originals : " Dare to Be Stupid " , " Cable TV " , " Slime Creatures from Outer Space " , and " One More Minute " . The band also recorded a cover tune of the theme from " George Of The Jungle " . The following month , Yankovic began recording the four parodies and polka medley that would appear on the album , " Yoda " , " Like a Surgeon " , " I Want a New Duck " , " Girls Just Want to Have Lunch " , and " Hooked on Polkas " . 
 = = = Originals = = = 
 " This Is The Life " had already been recorded and released as a single in November 1984 . The song describes the narrator 's overly lavish lifestyle and had originally been commissioned for the gangster spoof movie Johnny Dangerously . The album 's title track , " Dare to Be Stupid " , is an ode to living life stupidly . According to the liner notes of The Ultimate Video Collection , the song represents " Al 's motto in life " . The song is a style parody of the band Devo . Devo 's reaction was very positive . Yankovic said , " Right after I finished " Dare To Be Stupid " , I went over to Mark Mothersbaugh 's house and played it for him . He seemed to enjoy it a lot . " The song was later released on the soundtrack to the 1986 film The Transformers : The Movie . Yankovic later mused that more people were introduced to " Dare to Be Stupid " the song through the Transformers movie than through the actual Dare to Be Stupid album itself . 
 " One More Minute " , about an ex @-@ girlfriend , was written in the style of an Elvis Presley @-@ like Doo @-@ wop . According to the liner notes of Permanent Record , Yankovic was preparing to write songs for Dare to Be Stupid when his then @-@ girlfriend broke up with him . In order to mentally deal with the heartbreak , Yankovic decided to write a humorous song to express his anger , eventually into " One More Minute " . Yankovic tears up her picture in the video . " Slime Creatures from Outer Space " was Yankovic 's attempt to emulate the sound of " cheesy 50s sci @-@ fi soundtracks . " The track features prominent usage of a theremin , courtesy of Steve Jay . 
 = = = Parodies and polka = = = 
 On February 21 , 1985 , Yankovic began recording the parodies for Dare to Be Stupid . The first parody recorded for the album was " Yoda " . " Yoda " was originally written by Yankovic during the initial run of the 1980 American film The Empire Strikes Back . After the success of the movie , Yankovic toyed with the idea of writing a song based on the break @-@ out character , but was unable to find a suitable song to use as the base . Yankovic remembers , " I was still in college at the time , and a friend of mine named Mike suggested that I do the song to the tune of ' Lola ' — which I couldn 't believe that I hadn 't thought of myself , since I was such a huge Kinks fan . " Yankovic wrote and recorded a version of the song , using only an accordion , on a four @-@ track cassette <unk> . This version of " Yoda " was a hit on the " Dr. Demento Show " , and even managed to hit , and hold onto , number one on the Funny Five countdown for several weeks . This early demo was later released on one of Dr. Demento 's Basement Tapes . 
 After the large success of the demo version , Yankovic wanted to put the song on one of his albums . However , the immensely complex process of getting permission from George Lucas and the publishers of the Kinks ' " Lola " delayed the release of the song for about five years . Eventually , after Lucas gave Yankovic permission , the song 's publishers turned Al down . Several versions of why the parody was turned down exist . In a 1985 interview with Spin , Yankovic explained that , " We approached Ray Davies [ the song 's composer ] , we 've been approaching him every year and a half , two years before each album comes out and he 's always been a little skeptical , a little afraid because ' Lola ' was a very personal song for him . Then just out of the blue he decided this time to let us do it . " However , the liner notes to the Permanent Record present a different story . According to the album 's notes , the song may have remained unreleased for some time had it not been for a chance encounter Yankovic had with the song 's original songwriter , Ray Davies . When Yankovic asked why he hadn 't given him permission , Davies remarked that he had never been asked . Davies immediately gave Yankovic permission to record the song , and the song was later released on Dare to Be Stupid . 
 The day after recording " Yoda " , Yankovic started recording " Like a Surgeon " , the lead single for the album . Although Yankovic normally refuses to use parody ideas from other people , Madonna is partly responsible for " Like a Surgeon " . Madonna asked one of her friends how long it would take until Yankovic satirized her song " Like a Virgin " into " Like a Surgeon " . This friend was a mutual friend of Al 's manager , Jay Levey . When word got back to Yankovic , he decided it was a good idea and wrote the song . This is the only known time that Yankovic has gotten a parody idea directly from the original artist . 
 The third parody recorded for the album was a parody of " I Want a New Drug " by Huey Lewis and the News entitled " I Want a New Duck " . After the recording of " I Want a New Duck " , Yankovic was comfortable with releasing the album as it was . However , Scotti Bros. insisted that Yankovic include a parody of a Cyndi Lauper song . Yankovic begrudgingly complied , producing " Girls Just Wanna Have Lunch " . Yankovic has cited it as one of his least favorite songs , and ultimately left it off his 1993 compilation album The Food Album . Yankovic also approached Prince about a potential parody of " When Doves Cry " , circa 1984 . Prince refused , and did not accept any future parody ideas Yankovic presented to him . 
 On March 25 , 1985 , Yankovic rounded out the recording of his new album with a polka medley of then @-@ popular songs in music . Dare to Be Stupid also includes " George of the Jungle " , the only straight cover song released by Yankovic , not counting his polka medleys . The song later ended up on the soundtrack to the 1997 film of the same name . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 After the release of the album , Yankovic undertook the 70 @-@ city " Stupid Tour " ; this was his biggest tour of the 1980s , and featured " costume changes , carefully designed lighting , and several of Al 's videos cleverly integrated into the stage show " . Yankovic 's on @-@ stage wardrobe changed dramatically during the tour , and he specifically stipulated that every promoter " had to supply one garish Hawaiian shirt " for him to wear . Yankovic eventually acquired " a couple closets full " of them . Yankovic also started wearing exclusively Vans , and joked that " whenever I need some they let me go to their warehouse and take home an <unk> . " 
 The videos that were made to promote Dare to Be Stupid were later compiled , with additional material into a direct @-@ to @-@ video mockumentary called The Compleat Al . The video , directed by Yankovic 's manager Jay Levey and Robert K. Weiss , was one of " the first programs of its kind to be made specifically for the home video market " . A 60 @-@ minute version was later aired on Showtime . To go along with the video , the tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek book The Authorized Al was also released . The book , co @-@ written by Yankovic and Tino <unk> , has since gone out of print . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Dare to Be Stupid received moderately favorable reviews from critics . AllMusic reviewer Eugene Chadbourne awarded the album three and a half stars , and cited " Like a Surgeon " and " Dare to Be Stupid " as some of Yankovic 's best songs . Christopher Thelen from The Daily Vault wrote that " while Dare To Be Stupid is not Yankovic 's finest album [ ... ] there 's enough on this one to recommend it " . The song " Yoda " has gone on to become one of Yankovic 's most famous songs . Although it was left off his first greatest hits album , the song was featured on the second volume , the box set Permanent Record , and the 2009 compilation The Essential " Weird Al " Yankovic . The song has appeared on the " Time Machine " episode of The Weird Al Show and on the compilation album Radio Disney : Kid Jams . 
 Although the lead single " Like a Surgeon " and the parody " Yoda " were met with praise , many criticized the album 's other parodies . Many critics were split on the amount of emphasis the original songs were given . Rolling Stone writer David Hinkley positively wrote that " the pick of this album 's original litter is ' One More Minute ' , which is a parody of a style ( Fifties vocal group ) rather than a specific song and is a superb tune besides – right down to the perfect little gasp right before the final chorus " . In contrast , Chadbourne was disappointed with the original material , stating that " only someone who is missing important brain cells would suggest this artist 's original songs are any good " . The album was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Comedy Recording in 1986 , though it lost to Whoopi Goldberg 's Whoopi : Original Broadway Recording . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 Dare to Be Stupid was released on June 18 , 1985 ; it was the first album of musical comedy to be released on Compact Disc . Dare to Be Stupid eventually peaked on the Billboard 200 at number 50 . The album spent a total of eight weeks on the chart . On January 27 , 1986 , a little less than a year after its release , the album was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . On February 24 , 2003 , the album was certified Platinum by the RIAA . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 The following is adapted from the album liner notes . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo = 
 The Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of Congo ( French : Forces Armées de la République Démocratique du Congo or FARDC ) is the state organisation responsible for defending the Democratic Republic of the Congo . The FARDC is being rebuilt as part of the peace process which followed the end of the Second Congo War in July 2003 . 
 The majority of FARDC members are land forces , but it also has a small air force and an even smaller navy . Together the three services may number between 144 @,@ 000 and 159 @,@ 000 personnel . In addition , there is a presidential force called the Republican Guard , but it and the National Congolese Police ( PNC ) are not part of the Armed Forces . 
 The government in the capital city Kinshasa , the United Nations , the European Union , and bilateral partners which include Angola , South Africa , and Belgium are attempting to create a viable force with the ability to provide the Democratic Republic of Congo with stability and security . However , this process is being hampered by corruption , inadequate donor coordination , and competition between donors . The various military units now grouped under the FARDC banner are some of the most unstable in Africa after years of war and underfunding . 
 To assist the new government , since February 2000 the United Nations has had the United Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo ( now called MONUSCO ) , which currently has a strength of over 16 @,@ 000 peacekeepers in the country . Its principal tasks are to provide security in key areas , such as the South Kivu and North Kivu in the east , and to assist the government in reconstruction . Foreign rebel groups are also in the Congo , as they have been for most of the last half @-@ century . The most important is the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda ( FDLR ) , against which Laurent Nkunda 's troops were fighting , but other smaller groups such as the anti @-@ Ugandan Lord 's Resistance Army are also present . 
 The legal standing of the FARDC was laid down in the Transitional Constitution , articles 118 and 188 . This was then superseded by provisions in the 2006 Constitution , articles 187 to 192 . Law 04 / 023 of November 12 , 2004 establishes the General Organisation of Defence and the Armed Forces . In mid @-@ 2010 , the Congolese Parliament was debating a new defence law , provisionally designated Organic Law 130 . 
 = = History = = 
 The first organized Congolese troops , known as the Force Publique , were created in 1888 when King Leopold II of Belgium , who held the Congo Free State as his private property , ordered his Secretary of the Interior to create military and police forces for the state . In 1908 , under international pressure , Leopold ceded administration of the colony to the government of Belgium as the Belgian Congo . It remained under the command of a Belgian officer corps through to the independence of the colony in 1960 . The Force Publique saw combat in Cameroun , and successfully invaded and conquered areas of German East Africa , notably present day Rwanda , during World War I. Elements of the Force Publique were also used to form Belgian colonial units that fought in the East African Campaign during World War II . 
 At independence on 30 June 1960 , the army suffered from a dramatic deficit of trained leaders , particularly in the officer corps . This was because the Force Publique had always only been officered by Belgian or other expatriate whites . The Belgian Government made no effort to train Congolese commissioned officers until the very end of the colonial period and there were only about 20 African cadets in training on the eve of independence . Ill @-@ advised actions by Belgian officers led to an enlisted ranks ' rebellion on 5 July 1960 , which helped spark the Congo Crisis . Lieutenant General Émile Janssens , the Force Publique commander , wrote during a meeting of soldiers that ' Before independence = After Independence ' , pouring cold water on the soldiers ' desires for an immediate raise in their status . 
 <unk> says that on the morning of 8 July 1960 , following a night during which all control had been lost over the soldiers , numerous ministers arrived at Camp Leopold with the aim of calming the situation . Both Patrice Lumumba and Joseph Kasa @-@ Vubu eventually arrived , and the soldiers listened to Kasa @-@ Vubu " religiously . " After his speech , Kasa @-@ Vubu and the ministers present retired into the camp canteen to hear a delegation from the soldiers . <unk> says that , according to Joseph Ileo , their demands ( <unk> ) included the following : 
 that the defence portfolio not be given to the Prime Minister 
 that the name Force publique be changed to Armée nationale congolaise 
 and that the commander @-@ in @-@ chief and chief of staff should not necessarily be Belgians 
 The " laborious " discussions which then followed were later retrospectively given the label of an " extraordinary ministerial council . " Gérald @-@ <unk> writes that ' .. the special meeting of the council of ministers took steps for the immediate Africanisation of the officer corps and .. named Victor Lundula , who was born in Kasai and was burgomaster of Jadotville , as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Armée Nationale Congolaise ( ANC ) ; Colonel Joseph @-@ Désiré Mobutu as chief of staff ; and the Belgian , Colonel <unk> , as chief advisor to the ANC . ' Thus General Janssens was dismissed . Both Lundula and Mobutu were former sergeants of the Force Publique . It appears that Maurice <unk> , Minister of Youth and Sports , was given the defence portfolio . 
 On 8 – 9 July 1960 , the soldiers were invited to appoint black officers , and ' command of the army passed securely into the hands of former sergeants , ' as the soldiers in general chose the most @-@ educated and highest @-@ ranked Congolese army soldiers as their new officers . Most of the Belgian officers were retained as advisors to the new Congolese hierarchy , and calm returned to the two main garrisons at Leopoldville and Thysville . The Force Publique was renamed the Armée nationale congolaise ( ANC ) , or Congolese National Armed Forces . However , in Katanga Belgian officers resisted the Africanisation of the army . 
 On 9 July 1960 , there was a Force Publique mutiny at Camp <unk> at <unk> ; five or seven Europeans were killed . The army revolt and resulting rumours caused severe panic across the country , and Belgium despatched troops and the naval Task Group 218 @.@ 2 to protect its citizens . Belgian troops intervened in <unk> and Luluabourg ( 10 July ) , Matadi ( 11 July ) , Leopoldville ( 13 July ) and elsewhere . There were immediate suspicions that Belgium planned to re @-@ seize the country while doing so . Large numbers of Belgian colonists fled the country . At the same time , on 9 July , Albert Kalonji proclaimed the independence of South Kasai . Two days later on 11 July , Moise Tshombe declared the independence of Katanga province in the south @-@ east , closely backed by remaining Belgian administrators and soldiers . 
 On 14 July 1960 , in response to requests by Prime Minister Lumumba , the UN Security Council adopted United Nations Security Council Resolution 143 . This called upon Belgium to remove its troops and for the UN to provide ' military assistance ' to the Congolese forces to allow them ' to meet fully their tasks ' . Lumumba demanded that Belgium remove its troops immediately , threatening to seek help from the Soviet Union if they did not leave within two days . The UN reacted quickly and established the United Nations Operation in the Congo ( ONUC ) . The first UN troops arrived the next day but there was instant disagreement between Lumumba and the UN over the new force 's mandate . Because the Congolese army had been in disarray since the mutiny , Lumumba wanted to use the UN troops to subdue Katanga by force . Referring to the resolution , Lumumba wrote to UN Secretary General Dag Hammarskjöld , ' From these texts it is clear that , contrary to your personal interpretation , the UN force may be used to subdue the rebel government of Katanga . ' Secretary General Hammarskjöld refused . To Hammarskjöld , the secession of Katanga was an internal Congolese matter and the UN was forbidden to intervene by Article 2 of the United Nations Charter . Disagreements over what the UN force could and could not do continued throughout its deployment . 
 The last Belgian troops left the country by 23 July , as United Nations forces continued to deploy throughout the Congo . 
 During the crucial period of July – August 1960 , Joseph @-@ Désiré Mobutu built up " his " national army by channeling foreign aid to units loyal to him , by exiling unreliable units to remote areas , and by absorbing or dispersing rival armies . He tied individual officers to him by controlling their promotion and the flow of money for payrolls . Researchers working from the 1990s have concluded that money was directly funnelled to the army by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency , the UN , and Belgium . Despite this , by September 1960 , following the four @-@ way division of the country , there were four separate armed forces : <unk> 's ANC itself , numbering about 12 @,@ 000 , the South Kasai Constabulary loyal to Albert Kalonji ( 3 @,@ 000 or less ) , the Katanga Gendarmerie which were part of Moise Tshombe 's regime ( totalling about 10 @,@ 000 ) , and the Stanleyville dissident ANC loyal to Antoine Gizenga ( numbering about 8 @,@ 000 ) . 
 In August 1960 , due to rejection of requests to the UN for aid to suppress the South Kasai and Katanga revolts , Lumumba 's government decided to request Soviet <unk> de Witte writes that ' Leopoldville asked the Soviet Union for planes , lorries , arms , and equipment . .. Shortly afterwards , on 22 or 23 August , about 1 @,@ 000 soldiers left for Kasai . ' de Witte goes on to write that on 26 – 27 August , the ANC seized Bakwanga , Albert Kalonji 's capital in South Kasai , without serious resistance . ' In the next two days it temporarily put an end to the secession of <unk> 
 The Library of Congress Country Study for the Congo says at this point that : " [ On 5 September 1960 ] Kasavubu also appointed Mobutu as head of the ANC . Joseph Ileo was chosen as the new prime minister and began trying to form a new government . Lumumba and his cabinet responded by accusing Kasa @-@ Vubu of high treason and voted to dismiss him . Parliament refused to confirm the dismissal of either Lumumba or Kasavubu and sought to bring about a reconciliation between them . After a week 's deadlock , Mobutu announced on September 14 that he was assuming power until December 31 , 1960 , in order to " neutralize " both Kasavubu and Lumumba . " 
 In early January 1961 , ANC units loyal to Lumumba invaded northern Katanga to support a revolt of Baluba tribesmen against Tshombe 's secessionist regime . 
 United Nations Security Council Resolution 161 of 21 February 1961 , called for the withdrawal of Belgian officers from command positions in the ANC , and the training of new Congolese officers with UN help . The various efforts made by ONUC to retrain the ANC from August 1960 to their effective end in June 1963 are described in Arthur House 's book The UN in the Congo : The Civilian Operations , pages 145 @-@ 155 . By March 1963 however , after the visit of Colonel Michael Greene of the United States Army , and the resulting ' Greene Plan , ' the pattern of bilaterally agreed military assistance to various Congolese military components , instead of a single unified effort , was already taking shape . 
 In early 1964 , a new crisis broke out as Congolese rebels calling themselves " Simba " ( Swahili for " Lion " ) rebelled against the government . They were led by Pierre Mulele , Gaston <unk> and Christophe Gbenye who were former members of Gizenga 's Parti Solidaire Africain ( PSA ) . The rebellion affected Kivu and Eastern ( Orientale ) provinces . By August they had captured Stanleyville and set up a rebel government there . As the rebel movement spread , discipline became more difficult to maintain , and acts of violence and terror increased . Thousands of Congolese were executed , including government officials , political leaders of opposition parties , provincial and local police , school teachers , and others believed to have been Westernized . Many of the executions were carried out with extreme cruelty , in front of a monument to Lumumba in Stanleyville . Tshombe decided to use foreign mercenaries as well as the ANC to suppress the rebellion . Mike Hoare was employed to create the English @-@ speaking 5 Commando ANC at Kamina , with the assistance of a Belgian officer , Colonel Frederic <unk> , while 6 Commando ANC was French @-@ speaking and originally under the command of a Belgian Army colonel , <unk> . By August 1964 , the mercenaries , with the assistance of other ANC troops , were making headway against the Simba rebellion . Fearing defeat , the rebels started taking hostages of the local white population in areas under their control . These hostages were rescued in Belgian airdrops ( Dragon Rouge and Dragon Noir ) over Stanleyville and <unk> with U.S. airlift support . The operation coincided with the arrival of mercenary units ( seemingly including the hurriedly formed 5th Mechanised Brigade ) at Stanleyville which was quickly captured . It took until the end of the year to completely put down the remaining areas of rebellion . 
 After five years of turbulence , in 1965 Mobutu used his position as ANC Chief of Staff to seize power in the Congo . Although Mobutu succeeded in taking power , his position was soon threatened by the Kisangani Mutinies , also known as the Stanleyville Mutinies or Mercenaries ' Mutinies , which were eventually suppressed . 
 As a general rule , since that time , the armed forces have not intervened in politics as a body , rather being tossed and turned as ambitious men have shaken the country . In reality , the larger problem has been the misuse and sometimes abuse of the military and police by political and ethnic leaders . 
 On 16 May 1968 a parachute brigade of two regiments ( each of three battalions ) was formed which eventually was to grow in size to a full division . 
 = = = Zaire 1971 – 1997 = = = 
 The country was renamed Zaire in 1971 and the army was consequently designated the Forces Armées <unk> ( FAZ ) . In 1971 the army 's force consisted of the 1st Groupement at Kananga , with one guard battalion , two infantry battalions , and a gendarmerie battalion attached , and the 2nd Groupement ( Kinshasa ) , the 3rd Groupement ( Kisangani ) , the 4th Groupement ( Lubumbashi ) , the 5th Groupement ( Bukavu ) , the 6th Groupement ( Mbandaka ) , and the 7th Groupement ( Boma ) . Each was about the size of a brigade , and commanded by ' aging generals who have had no military training , and often not much positive experience , since they were NCOs in the Belgian Force Publique . ' By the late 1970s the number of groupements reached nine , one per administrative region . The parachute division ( Division des Troupes <unk> <unk> de Choc , <unk> ) operated semi @-@ independently from the rest of the army . 
 In July 1972 a number of the aging generals commanding the groupements were retired . Général d 'armée Louis <unk> , and <unk> de Corps d 'Armée <unk> Mata <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> Grima , <unk> Kambala Wa <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and General de Division <unk> Yi <unk> , the last having been commander of the Kamina base , were all retired on 25 July 1972 . Taking over as military commander @-@ in @-@ chief , now titled Captain General , was newly promoted General de Division <unk> <unk> , former commander of the parachute division . 
 A large number of countries supported the FAZ in the early 1970s . Three hundred Belgian personnel were serving as staff officers and advisors throughout the Ministry of Defence , Italians were supporting the Air Force , Americans were assisting with transport and communications , Israelis with airborne forces training , and there were British advisors with the engineers . 
 On 11 June 1975 several military officers were arrested in what became known as the coup <unk> et <unk> . Amongst those arrested were <unk> Daniel <unk> wa <unk> , Land Forces Chief of Staff , <unk> <unk> , Commandant of the 2nd Military Region at Kalemie ; <unk> <unk> , Military Attaché of Zaïre in Washington , Colonel <unk> wa <unk> , the military attaché of Zaïre in Paris , the military attache in Brussels , a <unk> battalion commander , and several others . The regime alleged these officers and others ( including Mobutu 's civil <unk> particulier ) had plotted the assassination of Mobutu , high treason , and disclosure of military secrets , among other offences . The alleged coup was investigated by a revolutionary commission headed by <unk> <unk> Singa , at that time head of the Gendarmerie . Writing in 1988 , Michael Schatzberg said the full details of the coup had yet to emerge . 
 In late 1975 , Mobutu , in a bid to install a pro @-@ Kinshasa government in Angola and thwart the Marxist Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola ( MPLA ) ' s drive for power , deployed FAZ armored cars , paratroopers , and three infantry battalions to Angola in support of the National Liberation Front of Angola ( FNLA ) . On 10 November 1975 , an anti @-@ Communist force made up of 1 @,@ 500 FNLA fighters , 100 Portuguese Angolan soldiers , and two FAZ battalions passed near the city of Quifangondo , only 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) north of Luanda , at dawn on 10 November . The force , supported by South African aircraft and three 140 mm artillery pieces , marched in a single line along the <unk> River to face an 800 @-@ strong Cuban force across the river . Thus the Battle of Quifangondo began . The Cubans and MPLA fighters bombarded the FNLA with mortar and 122 mm rockets , destroying most of the FNLA 's armored cars and six Jeeps carrying antitank rockets in the first hour of fighting . 
 Mobutu 's support for the FNLA policy backfired when the MPLA won in Angola . The MPLA , then , acting ostensibly at least as the Front pour la Libération Nationale du Congo ( Front for the National Liberation of the Congo ) , occupied Zaire 's Katanga Province , then known as Shaba , in March 1977 , facing little resistance from the FAZ . This invasion is sometimes known as Shaba I. Mobutu had to request assistance , which was provided by Morocco in the form of regular troops who routed the MPLA and their Cuban advisors out of Katanga . The humiliation of this episode led to civil unrest in Zaire in early 1978 , which the FAZ had to put down . 
 The poor performance of Zaire 's military during Shaba I gave evidence of chronic weaknesses ( which extend to this day ) . One problem was that some of the Zairian soldiers in the area had not received pay for extended periods . Senior officers often kept the money intended for the soldiers , typifying a generally disreputable and inept senior leadership in the FAZ . As a result , many soldiers simply deserted rather than fight . Others stayed with their units but were ineffective . During the months following the Shaba invasion , Mobutu sought solutions to the military problems that had contributed to the army 's dismal performance . He implemented sweeping reforms of the command structure , including wholesale firings of high @-@ ranking officers . He merged the military general staff with his own presidential staff and appointed himself chief of staff again , in addition to the positions of minister of defence and supreme commander that he already held . He also redeployed his forces throughout the country instead of keeping them close to Kinshasa , as had previously been the case . The Kamanyola Division , at the time considered the army 's best formation , and considered the president 's own , was assigned permanently to Shaba . In addition to these changes , the army 's strength was reduced by 25 percent . Also , Zaire 's allies provided a large influx of military equipment , and Belgian , French , and American advisers assisted in rebuilding and retraining the force . 
 Despite these improvements , a second invasion by the former <unk> gendarmerie , known as Shaba II in May – June 1978 , was only dispersed with the despatch of the French 2e régiment <unk> de <unk> and a battalion of the Belgian Paracommando Regiment . Kamanyola Division units collapsed almost immediately . French units fought the Battle of Kolwezi to recapture the town from the <unk> . The U.S. provided logistical assistance . 
 In July 1975 , according to the IISS Military Balance , the FAZ was made up of 14 infantry battalions , seven " Guard " battalions , and seven other infantry battalions variously designated as " parachute " ( or possibly " commando " ; probably the units of the new parachute brigade originally formed in 1968 ) . There were also an armored car regiment and a mechanized infantry battalion . <unk> , the army was made up of seven brigade groups and one parachute division . In addition to these units , a tank battalion was reported to have formed by 1979 . 
 In January 1979 General de Division <unk> <unk> Singa was named as both military region commander and Region Commissioner for Shaba . 
 In 1984 , a militarised police force , the Guard Civile , was formed . It was eventually commanded by Général d 'armée <unk> <unk> Kata . 
 Further details of FAZ operations in the 1980s and onwards can be found in John W. Turner 's book A Continent Ablaze . 
 Thomas Turner wrote in the late 1990s that .. ' [ m ] <unk> acts of violence , such as the killings that followed the ' Kasongo uprising ' in Bandundu Region in 1978 , the killings of diamond miners in Kasai @-@ Oriental Region in 1979 , and , more recently , the massacre of students in Lubumbashi in 1990 , continued to intimidate the <unk> 
 The authors of the Library of Congress Country Study on Zaire commented in 1992 @-@ 93 that : " The maintenance status of equipment in the inventory has traditionally varied , depending on a unit 's priority and the presence or absence of foreign advisers and technicians . A considerable portion of military equipment is not operational , primarily as a result of shortages of spare parts , poor maintenance , and theft . For example , the tanks of the 1st Armored Brigade often have a <unk> rate approaching 70 to 80 percent . After a visit by a Chinese technical team in 1985 , most of the tanks operated , but such an improved status generally has not lasted long beyond the departure of the visiting team . Several factors complicate maintenance in Zairian units . Maintenance personnel often lack the training necessary to maintain modern military equipment . Moreover , the wide variety of military equipment and the staggering array of spare parts necessary to maintain it not only clog the logistic network but also are expensive . 
 The most important factor that negatively affects maintenance is the low and irregular pay that soldiers receive , resulting in the theft and sale of spare parts and even basic equipment to supplement their meager salaries . When not stealing spare parts and equipment , maintenance personnel often spend the better part of their duty day looking for other ways to profit . American maintenance teams working in Zaire found that providing a free lunch to the work force was a good , sometimes the only , technique to motivate personnel to work at least half of the duty day . 
 The army 's logistics corps is to provide logistic support and conduct direct , indirect , and depot @-@ level maintenance for the FAZ . But because of Zaire 's lack of emphasis on maintenance and logistics , a lack of funding , and inadequate training , the corps is understaffed , underequipped , and generally unable to accomplish its mission . It is organized into three battalions assigned to Mbandaka , Kisangani , and Kamina , but only the battalion at Kamina is adequately staffed ; the others are little more than skeleton " units . 
 The poor state of discipline of the Congolese forces became apparent again in 1990 . Foreign military assistance to Zaire ceased following the end of the Cold War and Mobutu deliberately allowed the military 's condition to deteriorate so that it did not threaten his hold on power . <unk> low wages and lack of pay , paratroopers began looting Kinshasa in September 1991 and were only stopped after intervention by French ( ' Operation <unk> ' ) and Belgian ( ' Operation Blue Beam ' ) forces . 
 In 1993 , according to the Library of Congress Country Studies , the 25 @,@ 000 @-@ member FAZ ground forces consisted of one infantry division ( with three infantry brigades ) ; one airborne brigade ( with three parachute battalions and one support battalion ) ; one special forces ( commando / counterinsurgency ) brigade ; the Special Presidential Division ; one independent armored brigade ; and two independent infantry brigades ( each with three infantry battalions , one support battalion ) . These units were deployed throughout the country , with the main concentrations in Shaba Region ( approximately half the force ) . The Kamanyola Division , consisting of three infantry brigades operated generally in western Shaba Region ; the 21st Infantry Brigade was located in Lubumbashi ; the 13th Infantry Brigade was deployed throughout eastern Shaba ; and at least one battalion of the 31st Airborne Brigade stayed at Kamina . The other main concentration of forces was in and around Kinshasa : the 31st Airborne Brigade was deployed at N 'djili Airport on the outskirts of the capital ; the Special Presidential Division ( DSP ) resided adjacent to the presidential compound ; and the 1st Armored Brigade was at <unk> @-@ <unk> ( in Bas @-@ Congo , approximately 120 kilometres ( 75 mi ) southwest of Kinshasa ) . Finally the 41st Commando Brigade was at Kisangani . 
 This superficially impressive list of units overstates the actual capability of the armed forces at the time . Apart from privileged formations such as the Presidential Division and the 31st Airborne Brigade , most units were poorly trained , divided and so badly paid that they regularly resorted to looting . What operational abilities the armed forces had were gradually destroyed by politicisation of the forces , <unk> , and division of the forces , included purges of <unk> disloyal groups , intended to allow Mobutu to divide and rule . All this occurred against the background of increasing deterioration of state structures under the <unk> Mobutu regime . 
 For a concise general description of the FAZ in the 1990s , see René Lemarchand , The dynamics of violence in Central Africa , University of Pennsylvania Press , 2009 , pages 226 @-@ 228 . 
 = = = Mobutu 's overthrow and after = = = 
 Much of the origins of the recent conflict in what is now the Democratic Republic of the Congo stems from the turmoil following the Rwandan Genocide of 1994 , which then led to the Great Lakes refugee crisis . Within the largest refugee camps , beginning in Goma in Nord @-@ Kivu , were Rwandan Hutu fighters , who were eventually organised into the Rassemblement Démocratique pour le Rwanda , who launched repeated attacks into Rwanda . Rwanda eventually backed Laurent @-@ Désiré Kabila and his quickly organised Alliance of Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Congo in invading Zaire , aiming to stop the attacks on Rwanda in the process of toppling Mobutu 's government . When the militias rebelled , backed by Rwanda , the FAZ , weakened as is noted above , proved incapable of mastering the situation and preventing the overthrow of Mobutu in 1997 . 
 When Kabila took power in 1997 , the country was renamed the Democratic Republic of the Congo and so the name of the national army changed once again , to the Forces armées congolaises ( FAC ) . Tanzania sent six hundred military advisors to train Kabila 's new army in May 1997 . Command over the armed forces in the first few months of Kabila 's rule was vague . Gérard Prunier writes that ' there was no minister of defence , no known chief of staff , and no ranks ; all officers were Cuban @-@ style ' commanders ' called ' Ignace ' , ' Bosco ' , Jonathan ' , or ' James ' , who occupied connecting suites at the Intercontinental Hotel and had presidential list cell @-@ phone numbers . None spoke French or <unk> , but all spoke Kinyarwanda , Swahili , and , quite often , English . ' On being asked by Belgian journalist Colette <unk> what was the actual army command structure apart from himself , Kabila answered ' We are not going to expose ourselves and risk being destroyed by showing ourselves openly ... . We are careful so that the true masters of the army are not known . It is strategic . Please , let us drop the matter . ' Kabila 's new Forces armées congolaises were riven with internal tensions . The new FAC had Banyamulenge fighters from South Kivu , kadogo child soldiers from various eastern tribes , such as Thierry <unk> , Safari <unk> , etc ... [ the mostly ] Lunda Katangese Tigers of the former FNLC , and former FAZ personnel . Mixing these disparate and formerly warring elements together led to <unk> . On 23 February 1998 , a mostly Banyamulenge unit <unk> at Bukavu after its officers tried to disperse the soldiers into different units spread all around the Congo . By mid @-@ 1998 , formations on the outbreak of the Second Congo War included the Tanzanian @-@ supported 50th Brigade , headquartered at Camp <unk> in Kinshasa , and the 10th Brigade — one of the best and largest units in the army — stationed in Goma , as well as the 12th Brigade in Bukavu . The declaration of the 10th Brigade 's commander , former DSP officer Jean @-@ Pierre <unk> , on 2 August 1998 that he no longer recognised Kabila as the state 's president was one of the factors in the beginning of the Second Congo War . 
 The FAC performed poorly throughout the Second Congo War and " demonstrated little skill or recognisable military doctrine " . At the outbreak of the war in 1998 the Army was ineffective and the DRC Government was forced to rely on assistance from Angola , Chad , Namibia and Zimbabwe . As well as providing expeditionary forces , these countries unsuccessfully attempted to retrain the DRC Army . North Korea and Tanzania also provided assistance with training . During the first year of the war the Allied forces defeated the Rwandan force which had landed in Bas @-@ Congo and the rebel forces south @-@ west of Kinshasa and eventually halted the rebel and Rwandan offensive in the east of the DRC . These successes contributed to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement which was signed in July 1999 . Following the Lusaka Agreement , in mid @-@ August 1999 President Kabila issued a decree dividing the country into eight military regions . The first military region , Congolese state television reported , would consist of the two Kivu provinces , Orientale Province would form the second region , and Maniema and Kasai @-@ Oriental provinces the third . Katanga and <unk> would fall under the fourth and fifth regions , respectively , while Kasai @-@ Occidental and Bandundu would form the sixth region . Kinshasa and Bas @-@ Congo would form the seventh and eighth regions , respectively . In November 1999 the Government attempted to form a 20 @,@ 000 @-@ strong paramilitary force designated the People 's Defence Forces . This force was intended to support the FAC and national police but never became effective . 
 = = = 1999 @-@ present = = = 
 The Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement was not successful in ending the war , and fighting resumed in September 1999 . The FAC 's performance continued to be poor and both the major offensives the Government launched in 2000 ended in costly defeats . President Kabila 's mismanagement was an important factor behind the FAC 's poor performance , with soldiers frequently going unpaid and unfed while the Government purchased advanced weaponry which could not be operated or maintained . The defeats in 2000 are believed to have been the cause of President Kabila 's assassination in January 2001 . Following the assassination , Joseph Kabila assumed the presidency and was eventually successful in negotiating an end to the war in 2002 @-@ 2003 . 
 The December 2002 Global and All @-@ Inclusive Agreement devoted Chapter VII to the armed forces . It stipulated that the armed forces chief of staff , and the chiefs of the army , air force , and navy were not to come from the same warring faction . The new ' national , restructured and integrated ' army would be made up from Kabila 's government forces ( the FAC ) , the RCD , and the MLC . Also stipulated in VII ( b ) was that the RCD @-@ N , RCD @-@ ML , and the Mai @-@ Mai would become part of the new armed forces . An intermediate mechanism for physical identification of the soldiers , and their origin , date of enrolment , and unit was also called for ( VII ( c ) ) . It also provided for the creation of a Conseil Superieur de la Defense ( Superior Defence Council ) which would declare states of siege or war and give advice on security sector reform , disarmament / demobilization , and national defence policy . 
 A decision on which factions were to name chiefs of staff and military regional commanders was announced on 19 August 2003 as the first move in military reform , superimposed on top of the various groups of fighters , government and former rebels . Kabila was able to name the armed forces chief of staff , Lieutenant General <unk> Mata , who previously served as navy chief of staff under Laurent Kabila . Kabila was able to name the air force commander ( John Numbi ) , the RCD @-@ Goma received the Land Force commander 's position ( Sylvain <unk> ) and the MLC the navy ( Dieudonne Amuli <unk> ) . Three military regional commanders were nominated by the former Kinshasa government , two commanders each by the RCD @-@ Goma and the MLC , and one region commander each by the RCD @-@ K / ML and RCD @-@ N. However these appointments were announced for Kabila 's Forces armées congolaises ( FAC ) , not the later FARDC . Another report however says that the military region commanders were only nominated in January 2004 , and that the troop deployment on the ground did not change substantially until the year afterward . 
 On 24 January 2004 , a decree created the Structure Militaire d <unk> ( SMI , Military Integration Structure ) . Together with the SMI , CONADER also was designated to manage the combined <unk> <unk> DDR element and military reform programme . The first post @-@ Sun City military law appears to have been passed on 12 November 2004 , which formally created the new national Forces Armées de la République Démocratique du Congo ( FARDC ) . Included in this law was article 45 , which recognized the incorporation of a number of armed groups into the FARDC , including the former government army Forces Armées <unk> ( FAC ) , ex @-@ FAZ personnel also known as former President Mobutu 's ' les <unk> ' , the RCD @-@ Goma , RCD @-@ ML , RCD @-@ N , MLC , the Mai @-@ Mai , as well as other government @-@ determined military and paramilitary groups . 
 Turner writes that the two most prominent opponents of military integration ( brassage ) were Colonel Jules Mutebusi , a <unk> from South Kivu , and Laurent Nkunda , a <unk> Tutsi who Turner says was allegedly from Rutshuru in North Kivu . In May – June 2004 Mutebusi led a revolt against his superiors from Kinshasa in South Kivu . Nkunda began his long series of revolts against central authority by helping Mutebusi in May – June 2004 . In November 2004 a Rwandan government force entered North Kivu to attack the FDLR , and , it seems , reinforced and resupplied RCD @-@ Goma ( ANC ) at the same time . Kabila despatched 10 @,@ 000 government troops to the east in response , launching an attack which was called ' Operation <unk> . ' In the midst of this tension , Nkunda 's men launched attacks in North Kivu in December 2004 . 
 There was another major personnel reshuffle on 12 June 2007 . FARDC chief General <unk> <unk> Lombe was replaced with General Dieudonne <unk> <unk> . General Gabriel Amisi Kumba retained his post as Land Forces commander . John Numbi , a trusted member of Kabila 's inner circle , was shifted from air force commander to Police Inspector General . U.S. diplomats reported that the former Naval Forces Commander Maj. General Amuli <unk> ( ex @-@ MLC ) became the FARDC 's Chief of Operations ; former FARDC Intelligence Chief General Didier <unk> ( ex @-@ FAC ) was promoted to Vice Admiral and appointed Commander of Naval Forces ; Maj. General Rigobert <unk> ( ex @-@ FAC ) , a former commander of the Kitona air base , was appointed as Air Forces Commander ; and Brig. General Jean @-@ Claude <unk> , commander of the Republican Guard , was appointed as a regional military commander . 
 Much of the east of the country remains insecure , however . In the far northeast this is due primarily to the Ituri conflict . In the area around Lake Kivu , primarily in North Kivu , fighting continues among the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda and between the government FARDC and Laurent Nkunda 's troops , with all groups greatly exacerbating the issues of internal refugees in the area of Goma , the consequent food shortages , and loss of infrastructure from the years of conflict . In 2009 , several United Nations officials stated that the army is a major problem , largely due to corruption that results in food and pay meant for soldiers being diverted and a military structure top @-@ heavy with colonels , many of whom are former warlords . In a 2009 report <unk> FARDC abuses , Human Rights Watch urged the UN to stop supporting government offensives against eastern rebels until the abuses ceased . 
 In 2010 , thirty FARDC officers were given scholarships to study in Russian military academies . This is part of a greater effort by Russia to help improve the FARDC . A new military attaché and other advisers from Russia visited the DRC . 
 On 22 November 2012 , Gabriel Amisi Kumba was suspended from his position in the Forces Terrestres by president Joseph Kabila due to an inquiry into his alleged role in the sale of arms to various rebel groups in the eastern part of the country , which may have implicated the rebel group M23 . In December 2012 it was reported that members of Army units in the north east of the country are often not paid due to corruption , and these units rarely counter attacks made against villages by the Lord 's Resistance Army . 
 The FARDC deployed 850 soldiers and 150 PNC police officers as part of an international force in the Central African Republic , which the DRC borders to the north . The country had been in a state of civil war since 2012 , when the president was ousted by rebel groups . The DRC was urged by French president François Hollande to keep its troops in CAR . 
 In July 2014 , the Congolese army carried out a joint operation with UN troops in the <unk> and <unk> territories of the North Kivu province . In the process , they liberated over 20 villages and a mine from the control of two rebel groups , the Mai Mai Cheka and the Alliance for the Sovereign and Patriotic Congo . 
 = = Current organisation = = 
 The President , Major General Joseph Kabila is the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Armed Forces . The Minister of Defence , formally Ministers of Defence , Disarmament , and Veterans ( Ancien <unk> ) , with the French acronym <unk> , is Alexandre Luba <unk> . 
 The Colonel <unk> Military Camp in the Kinshasa suburb of <unk> hosts the defence department and the Chiefs of Staff central command headquarters of the FARDC . Jane 's data from 2002 appears inaccurate ; there is at least one ammunition plant in Katanga . 
 Below the Chief of Staff , the current organisation of the FARDC is not fully clear . There is known to be a Military Intelligence branch - Service du <unk> militaire ( SRM ) , the former <unk> . The FARDC is known to be broken up into the Land Forces ( Forces Terrestres ) , Navy and Air Force . The Land Forces are distributed around ten military regions , up from the previous eight , following the ten provinces of the country . There is also a training command , the Groupement des Écoles <unk> Militaires ( <unk> ) or Group of Higher Military Schools , which , in January 2010 , was under the command of Major General <unk> <unk> . The Navy and Air Forces are composed of various <unk> ( see below ) . There is also a central logistics base . 
 It should be made clear also that Joseph Kabila does not trust the military ; the Republican Guard is the only component he trusts . Major General John Numbi , former Air Force chief , now inspector general of police , ran a parallel chain of command in the east to direct the 2009 Eastern Congo offensive , Operation <unk> <unk> ; the regular chain of command was by @-@ passed . Previously Numbi negotiated the agreement to carry out the mixage process with Laurent Nkunda . Commenting on a proposed vote of no confidence in the Minister of Defence in September 2012 , <unk> Amba <unk> of <unk> described <unk> as a ' scapegoat ' . <unk> said that all key military and security questions were handled in total secrecy by the President and other civil and military personalities trusted by him , such as John Numbi , Gabriel Amisi Kumba ( ' Tango Four ' ) , Delphin <unk> , and others such as <unk> <unk> and Pierre <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Armed Forces Chiefs of Staff = = = 
 The available information on armed forces ' Chiefs of Staff is incomplete and sometimes contradictory . In addition to armed forces chiefs of staff , in 1966 Lieutenant Colonel Ferdinand <unk> was listed as Army Chief of Staff . 
 = = = Command structure in January 2005 = = = 
 Virtually all officers have now changed positions , but this list gives an outline of the structure in January 2005 . Despite the planned subdivision of the country into more numerous provinces , the actual splitting of the former provinces has not taken place . 
 FARDC chief of staff : Major General <unk> <unk> ( PPRD ) 
 FARDC land forces chief of staff : General Sylvain <unk> ( RCD @-@ G ) Major General Gabriel Amisi Kumba appears to have been appointed to the position in August 2006 , and retained this position during the personnel reshuffle of 12 June 2007 . In November 2012 he was succeeded by François <unk> . 
 FARDC navy chief of staff : General Major Dieudonne Amuli <unk> ( MLC ) ( Commander of the <unk> II operation in 2009 ) 
 FARDC air force chief of staff : Brigadier General Jean <unk> Kamara ( MLC ) . Military training at the Ecole de formation d <unk> ( <unk> ) , Kananga , and other courses while in the FAZ . Brigade commander in the MLC , then named in August 2003 ' chef d 'etat @-@ major en second ' of the FARDC air force . 
 1st Military Region / Bandundu : Brigadier General Moustapha <unk> ( MLC ) 
 2nd Military Region / Bas @-@ Congo : Unknown . General Jean <unk> 2009 . 
 3rd Military Region / <unk> : Brigadier @-@ General <unk> Bin <unk> ( PPRD ) 
 4th Military Region / Kasai @-@ Occidental : Brigadier @-@ General <unk> <unk> ( RCD @-@ K / ML ) 
 5th Military Region / Kasai Oriental : General <unk> Obeid ( RCD ) 
 6th Military Region / Katanga : Brigadier @-@ General <unk> <unk> ( MLC ) - 62nd , 63rd , and 67th Brigades in Katanga have committed numerous acts of sexual violence against women . 
 7th Military Region / Maniema : Brigadier @-@ General <unk> <unk> <unk> ( RCD @-@ N ) 
 8th Military Region / North Kivu : General Gabriel Amisi Kumba ( RCD ) . General Amisi , a.k.a. ' Tango Fort ' now appears to be Chief of Staff of the Land Forces . Brig. Gen. <unk> <unk> was Commander 8th MR in September 2008 
 9th Military Region / Province Orientale : Major @-@ General <unk> <unk> ( Mayi @-@ Mayi ) 
 10th Military Region / South Kivu : Major <unk> Mabe ( PPRD ) . General Pacifique <unk> , in 2010 . Region included 112th Brigade on <unk> <unk> . This grouping was " an almost exclusively Banyamulenge brigade under the direct command of the 10th Military Region , [ which ] consider [ ed ] General <unk> as its leader . " 
 = = = Updates to command structure in 2014 = = = 
 As of 2014 , several changes took place among the FARDC command staff : 
 Chief of General Staff : Army General Didier <unk> <unk> 
 Land forces chief of staff : Major General Dieudonné <unk> <unk> 
 Navy chief of staff : Vice Admiral <unk> <unk> <unk> 
 Air force chief of staff : Brigadier General Numbi <unk> Enoch 
 = = Land forces = = 
 The land forces are made up of about 14 integrated brigades , of fighters from all the former warring factions which have gone through a brassage integration process ( see next paragraph ) , and a not @-@ publicly known number of non @-@ integrated brigades which remain solely made up from single factions ( the Congolese Rally for Democracy ( RCD ) ' s Armée national congolaise , the ex @-@ government former Congolese Armed Forces ( FAC ) , the ex @-@ RCD <unk> , the ex @-@ Movement for the Liberation of Congo , the armed groups of the Ituri conflict ( the Mouvement des <unk> Congolais ( MRC ) , Forces de Résistance Patriotique d <unk> ( <unk> ) and the Front <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) ) and the Mai @-@ Mai ) . 
 It appears that about the same time that Presidential Decree 03 / 042 of 18 December 2003 established the National Commission for Demobilisation and <unk> ( CONADER ) , ' .. all ex @-@ combatants were officially declared as FARDC soldiers and the then FARDC brigades [ were to ] rest deployed until the order to leave for brassage . 
 The reform plan adopted in 2005 envisaged the formation of eighteen integrated brigades through the brassage process as its first of three stages . The process consists firstly of regroupment , where fighters are disarmed . Then they are sent to orientation centres , run by CONADER , where fighters take the choice of either returning to civilian society or remaining in the armed forces . Combatants who choose demobilisation receive an initial cash payment of US $ 110 . Those who choose to stay within the FARDC are then transferred to one of six integration centres for a 45 @-@ day training course , which aims to build integrated formations out of factional fighters previously heavily divided along ethnic , political and regional lines . The centres are spread out around the country at Kitona , Kamina , Kisangani , <unk> and <unk> ( within the Virunga National Park ) in Nord @-@ Kivu , and <unk> ( on the border with Burundi ) in South Kivu . The process has suffered severe difficulties due to construction delays , administration errors , and the amount of travel former combatants have to do , as the three stages ' centres are widely separated . Following the first 18 integrated brigades , the second goal is the formation of a ready reaction force of two to three brigades , and finally , by 2010 when MONUC is anticipated to have withdrawn , the creation of a Main Defence Force of three divisions . 
 In February 2008 , the current reform plan was described as : 
 " The short term , 2008 @-@ 2010 , will see the setting in place of a Rapid Reaction Force ; the medium term , 2008 <unk> , with a Covering Force ; and finally the long term , 2015 @-@ 2020 , with a Principal Defence Force . " He added that the reform plan rests on a programme of synergy based on the four pillars of <unk> , production , reconstruction and excellence . " The Rapid Reaction Force is expected to focus on <unk> , through a Rapid Reaction Force of 12 battalions , capable of aiding MONUC to secure the east of the country and to realise constitutional missions , " Defence Minister <unk> <unk> said . 
 Amid the other difficulties in building new armed forces for the DRC , in early 2007 the integration and training process was distorted as the DRC government under Kabila attempted to use it to gain more control over the dissident general Laurent Nkunda . A hastily negotiated verbal agreement in Rwanda saw three government FAC brigades integrated with Nkunda 's former ANC 81st and 83rd Brigades in what was called mixage . <unk> brought multiple factions into composite brigades , but without the 45 @-@ day retraining provided by brassage , and it seems that actually , the process was limited to exchanging battalions between the FAC and Nkunda brigades in North Kivu , without further integration . Due to Nkunda 's troops having greater cohesion , Nkunda effectively gained control of all five brigades , which was not the intention of the DRC central government . However , after Nkunda used the mixage brigades to fight the FDLR , strains arose between the FARDC and Nkunda @-@ loyalist troops within the brigades and they fell apart in the last days of August 2007 . The International Crisis Group says that ' by 30 August [ 2007 ] Nkunda 's troops had left the mixed brigades and controlled a large part of the <unk> and Rutshuru territories ' ( of North Kivu ) . 
 Both formally integrated brigades and the non @-@ integrated units continue to conduct arbitrary arrests , rapes , robbery , and other crimes and these human rights violations are " regularly " committed by both officers and members of the rank and file . Members of the Army also often strike deals to gain access to resources with the militias they are meant to be fighting . 
 The various brigades and other formations and units number at least 100 @,@ 000 troops . The status of these brigades has been described as " pretty chaotic . " A 2007 disarmament and repatriation study said " army units that have not yet gone through the process of brassage are usually much smaller than what they ought to be . Some non @-@ integrated brigades have only 500 men ( and are thus nothing more than a small battalion ) whereas some battalions may not even have the size of a normal company ( over a 100 men ) . " 
 = = = Known integrated brigades in 2007 = = = 
 See also U.S. State Department , <unk> Congolese Military Proposes Redeployment , Renaming Of Integrated Brigades , 19 April 2007 . Like the Force Publique in the Congo Free State , FARDC brigades have been deploying to their areas of operation with their families in tow . 2nd Commando Battalion of the Belgian Paracommando Brigade trained one of the first integrated brigades from January to June 2004 . By 13 September 2006 , the Government had established 13 out of the 18 integrated brigades it had planned to create before the elections . ( S / 2006 / 759 , 21 September 2006 , 12 ) A fourteenth brigade was created by March 2007 . ( S / 2007 / 156 , 20 March 2007 , 7 ) 
 1st Brigade ( integrated ) , Belgium began training this brigade in Kisangani on 9 February 2004 , graduated June 2004 . Human rights reports in April and August 2007 place the Brigade in the <unk> territory , Ituri area , Orientale Province . At Bavi , 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) south of <unk> , between August and November 2006 forty civilians were slaughtered and buried in three different graves by soldiers of the 1st integrated Brigade . 
 2nd Brigade ( integrated ) , trained by Angola at <unk> ordered to move to North Kivu from Kinshasa , February 2006 . ( <unk> , 2 February 2006 ) <unk> , North Kivu , 28 July 2007 See also U.S. State Department , <unk> North Kivu : Struggling to Survive in Rutshuru Territory , 20 April 2006 . 
 3rd Brigade ( integrated ) , trained by Belgium and South Africa at Kamina . Graduated 1 June 2005 . ( <unk> , 10 June 2005 ) In the Bukavu area , late March 2007 ( now 101st Brigade ) 
 4th Brigade ( integrated ) , training process finished [ Monday ] c.23 August 2005 , then under the command of Colonel Willy <unk> RCD @-@ G ) , a Tutsi officer close to Governor Eugene <unk> , and was dispatched to Ituri . ( ICG Africa Report 108 , 27 April 2006 , p . 16 , and IRIN , Former militiamen now form army 's 4th Brigade , 23 August 2005 ) Cholera broke out amongst the brigade , Aug @-@ Sept 2005 . Elements reported at <unk> , Ituri area , 24 – 25 July 2007 
 5th Brigade ( integrated ) , deployed to North Kivu in August – September 2005 . See ICG Africa Report 108 , 27 April 2006 , p . 16 . " In January [ 2006 ] , tensions escalated after human rights abuses were committed by soldiers of the FARDC 5th integrated brigade against Kinyarwanda speakers in Rutshuru territory , in command the colonel Thierry <unk> . <unk> belonging to the Laurent Nkunda militia , with elements of the 83rd brigade , attacked the FARDC 5th integrated brigade . They subsequently took over <unk> and <unk> , prompting the withdrawal of FARDC from Rutshuru to <unk> . On 21 January , MONUC launched operations and successfully cleared <unk> and <unk> of rebel elements . " Brigade now at Kananga , Kasai @-@ Occidental . See also U.S. State Department , <unk> , 23 March 2006 . 
 6th Brigade ( integrated ) , said that ' the sixth and last brigade from the first phase of army integration is expected to be ready for deployment in late September ' [ 2005 ] . Located Jiba , Ituri area , Orientale Province , May 2007 . Ordered to leave Ituri for North Kivu for offensive against Laurent Nkunda , June 2007 . 
 7th Brigade ( integrated ) , finished forming Kitona March 2006 . On 3 May 2006 , it was reported that ' elements such as the 7th Integrated Brigade are still taking up space at the <unk> brassage center ( North Kivu ) , for instance , and because they have not been fully deployed to <unk> ( North Kivu ) , it isn 't possible for the next group of soldiers to arrive at <unk> for integration . ' ( State Department , <unk> , SSR : <unk> Remain , 8 May 2006 ) Stationed in Maluku , Kinshasa August 2006 Elements of this brigade at <unk> , Bandundu province , May 2007 . 
 8th Brigade ( integrated ) , Elements at <unk> & <unk> , in South Kivu , May 2007 . 
 9th Brigade ( integrated ) , North Kivu . Involved in a 5 August 2006 , firefight between the 94th Battalion ( of the 9th Integrated Brigade ) against the 834th Battalion ( of the non @-@ integrated 83rd Brigade ) , at Sake , North Kivu . 
 10th Brigade ( integrated ) , headquartered at <unk> , <unk> , 31 August 2007 . ( <unk> , 31 August 2007 ) Deployed to the Dongo crisis in October 2009 , suffering two defeats at the hands of <unk> <unk> 's forces . ( Congo <unk> ) 
 12th Brigade ( integrated ) , HQ at Baraka , South Kivu 
 13th Brigade ( integrated ) , <unk> , North Kivu , mid June 2007 . Second battalion of this brigade in process of formation near <unk> mid August 2007 . 
 14th Brigade ( integrated ) , <unk> , South Kivu , May 2007 , now numbered 105th Brigade . Africa Confidential reported in January 2008 that the brigade was a part of a 25 @,@ 000 strong government attack on 4 @,@ 000 of Laurent Nkunda 's soldiers in December 2007 , but was beaten back , with the loss of its ' entire arms and equipment . ' Human Rights Watch 's ' Soldiers Who Rape , Commanders Who <unk> : Sexual Violence and Military Reform in the Democratic Republic of Congo , ' July 2009 , is a detailed study of this brigade 's history and crimes . 
 15th Brigade ( integrated ) ( waiting for deployment on 30 May 2007 , with 2 @,@ 837 men assigned . Ordered to leave Kisangani for North Kivu for offensive against Laurent Nkunda , June , and then routed by Nkunda troops in the Sake area , early September 2007 . 
 16th and 17th Brigades ( integrated ) ( beginning ' brassage ' integration process on 30 May 2007 , both over 4 @,@ 000 strong at the beginning of the process ) 17th Bde was later referred to in the Oxfam report ' Waking the Devil , ' as well as later being in the <unk> / <unk> localities of <unk> <unk> . 
 18th Brigade 
 103rd Brigade ( integrated ) — previously designated 11th Brigade . Elements reported at <unk> , 110 km SW of Bukavu , South Kivu in the course of rape allegation 27 March 2007 . 
 A number of outside donor countries are also carrying out separate training programmes for various parts of the Forces du Terrestres ( Land Forces ) . The People 's Republic of China has trained Congolese troops at Kamina in Katanga from at least 2004 to 2009 , and the Belgian government is training at least one ' rapid reaction ' battalion . When Kabila visited U.S. President George W. Bush in Washington D.C. , he also asked the U.S. Government to train a battalion , and as a result , a private contractor , Protection Strategies Incorporated , started training a FARDC battalion at Camp Base , Kisangani , in February 2010 . The company is being supervised by Special Operations Command @-@ Africa Command . The various international training programmes are not well integrated . 
 = = = Equipment = = = 
 Attempting to list the equipment available to the DRC 's land forces is difficult ; most figures are unreliable estimates based on known items delivered in the past . The IISS 's Military Balance 2007 and <unk> 's Concise World Armies 2005 give only slightly differing figures however ( the figures below are from the IISS Military Balance 2007 ) . Much of the Army 's equipment is non @-@ operational due to insufficient maintenance — in 2002 only 20 percent of the Army 's armoured vehicles were estimated as being serviceable . 
 Main Battle Tanks : 30 x Type 59 , 30 x T @-@ 55 , 100 x T 72 
 Reconnaissance vehicles : 40 + Type 62 light tanks , 40 + Panhard AML armoured cars 
 Infantry Fighting Vehicles : 20 BMP @-@ 1 
 Armoured Personnel Carriers : IISS reports M @-@ 113 , Type 63 , and wheeled vehicles including <unk> , Panhard M3 , TH 390 Fahd , Wolf Turbo 2 
 Artillery : 100 field guns , ranging from <unk> howitzer 75 mm to D @-@ 30 130 mm , and 30 Type 81 MRL 
 In addition to these 2007 figures , In March 2010 , it was reported that the DRC 's land forces had ordered USD $ 80 million worth of military equipment from Ukraine which included 20 T @-@ 72 main battle tanks , 100 trucks and various small arms . 20 x T @-@ 72 have been reported by World Defence Almanac . Tanks have been used in the <unk> in the 2005 @-@ 9 period . 
 In February 2014 , Ukraine revealed that it had achieved the first export order for the T @-@ 64 tank to the DRC Land Forces for 50 T @-@ <unk> @-@ 1s . 
 In June 2015 it was reported that Georgia had sold 12 of its <unk> @-@ 2 to the DRC for $ 4 million . The vehicles were specifically designed for reconnaissance and special operations . Two of the vehicles are a recently developed conversion to serve for medical field evacuation . 
 = = = Republican Guard = = = 
 In addition to the other land forces , President Joseph Kabila also has a Republican Guard presidential force ( Garde Républicaine or GR ) , formerly known as the Special Presidential Security Group ( <unk> ) . FARDC military officials state that the Garde Républicaine is not the responsibility of FARDC , but of the Head of State . Apart from Article 140 of the Law on the Army and Defence , no legal stipulation on the DRC 's Armed Forces makes provision for the GR as a distinct unit within the national army . In February 2005 President Joseph Kabila passed a decree which appointed the GR 's commanding officer and " repealed any previous provisions contrary " to that decree . The GR , more than 10 @,@ 000 strong ( the ICG said 10 @,@ 000 to 15 @,@ 000 in January 2007 ) , has better working conditions and is paid regularly , but still commits rapes and robberies in the vicinity of its bases . 
 In an effort to extend his personal control across the country , Joseph Kabila has deployed the GR at key airports , ostensibly in preparation for an impending presidential visit . At the beginning of 2007 there were Guards deployed in the central prison of Kinshasa , N 'djili Airport , Bukavu , Kisangani , <unk> , Lubumbashi , Matadi , and <unk> , where they appear to answer to no local commander and have caused trouble with MONUC troops there . 
 The GR is also supposed to undergo the integration process , but in January 2007 , only one battalion had been announced as having been integrated . Formed at a brassage centre in the Kinshasa suburb of <unk> , the battalion included 800 men , half from the former <unk> and half from the MLC and RCD Goma . 
 = = = Other forces active in the country = = = 
 There are currently large numbers of United Nations troops stationed in the DRC . The United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ( MONUSCO ) , on had a strength of over 19 @,@ 000 peacekeepers ( including 16 @,@ 998 military personnel ) and has a mission of assisting Congolese authorities maintain security . The UN and foreign military aid missions , the most prominent being <unk> RD Congo , are attempting to assist the Congolese in rebuilding the armed forces , with major efforts being made in trying to assure regular payment of salaries to armed forces personnel and also in military justice . Retired Canadian Lieutenant General Marc Caron also served for a time as Security Sector Reform advisor to the head of MONUC . 
 Groups of anti @-@ Rwandan government rebels like the FDLR , and other foreign fighters remain inside the DRC . The FDLR which is the greatest concern , was some 6 @,@ 000 strong , in July 2007 . By late 2010 the FDLR 's strength however was estimated at 2 @,@ 500 . The other groups are smaller : the Ugandan Lord 's Resistance Army , the Ugandan rebel group the Allied Democratic Forces in the remote area of Mt Rwenzori , and the Burundian Parti pour la Libération du Peuple Hutu — Forces Nationales de Liberation ( <unk> @-@ FNL ) . 
 Finally there is a government paramilitary force , created in 1997 under President Laurent Kabila . The National Service is tasked with providing the army with food and with training the youth in a range of reconstruction and developmental activities . There is not much further information available , and no internet @-@ accessible source details the relationship of the National Service to other armed forces bodies ; it is not listed in the constitution . President Kabila , in one of the few comments available , says National Service will provide a gainful activity for street children . <unk> civil service administered through the armed forces was also proposed under the Mobutu regime during the ' radicalisation ' programme of December 1974 @-@ January 1975 ; the FAZ was opposed to the measure and the plan ' took several months to <unk> 
 = = Air Force = = 
 All military aircraft in the DRC are operated by the Air Force . Jane 's World Air Forces states that the Air Force has an estimated strength of 1 @,@ 800 personnel and is organised into two Air Groups . These Groups command five wings and nine squadrons , of which not all are operational . 1 Air Group is located at Kinshasa and consists of Liaison Wing , Training Wing and Logistical Wing and has a strength of five squadrons . 2 Tactical Air Group is located at <unk> and consists of Pursuit and Attack Wing and Tactical Transport Wing and has a strength of four squadrons . Foreign private military companies have reportedly been contracted to provide the DRC 's aerial reconnaissance capability using small propeller aircraft fitted with sophisticated equipment . Jane 's states that National Air Force of Angola fighter aircraft would be made available to defend Kinshasa if it came under attack . 
 Like the other services , the Congolese Air Force is not capable of carrying out its responsibilities . Few of the Air Force 's aircraft are currently flyable or capable of being restored to service and it is unclear whether the Air Force is capable of maintaining even unsophisticated aircraft . Moreover , Jane 's states that the Air Force 's Ecole de Pilotage is ' in near total disarray ' though Belgium has offered to restart the Air Force 's pilot training program . 
 = = Navy = = 
 The 2002 edition of Jane 's Sentinel described the Navy as being " in a state of near total disarray " and stated that it did not conduct any training or have operating procedures . The Navy shares the same discipline problems as the other services . It was initially placed under command of the MLC when the transition began : the current situation is uncertain . 
 The 2007 edition of Jane 's Fighting Ships states that the Navy is organised into four commands , based at Matadi , near the coast ; the capital Kinshasa , further up the Congo river ; Kalemie , on Lake Tanganyika ; and Goma , on Lake Kivu . 
 The IISS , in its 2007 edition of the Military Balance , confirms the bases listed in Jane 's and adds a fifth base at Boma , a coastal city near Matadi . 
 Various sources also refer to numbered Naval Regions . Operations of the 1st Naval Region have been reported in Kalemie , the 4th near the northern city of Mbandaka , and the 5th at Goma . 
 The IISS lists the Navy at 1 @,@ 000 personnel and a total of eight patrol craft , of which only one is operational , a Shanghai II Type 062 class gunboat designated " 102 " . There are five other <unk> as well as two <unk> which are not currently operational , though some may be restored to service in the future . According to Jane 's , the Navy also operates barges and small craft armed with machine guns . 
 Before the downfall of Mobutu , a small navy operated on the Congo river . One of its installations was at the village of N <unk> near the presidential residence in Gbadolite . The port at N <unk> was the base for several patrol boats , helicopters and the presidential yacht . 
 = Murder of Ross Parker = 
 Ross Andrew Parker ( 17 August 1984 – 21 September 2001 ) , from Peterborough , England , was a 17 @-@ year @-@ old English male murdered in an unprovoked racially motivated crime . He bled to death after being stabbed , beaten with a hammer and repeatedly kicked by a gang of Pakistani youths . The incident occurred in Millfield , Peterborough . 
 In December 2002 , <unk> Nazir , Ahmed Ali Awan , and Sarfraz Ali were all , unanimously , found guilty of Parker 's murder and sentenced to life imprisonment , each receiving minimum terms ranging from 16 to 18 years . A fourth defendant , <unk> Mahrad , was cleared of murder and manslaughter . 
 Parker 's murder is cited as an example of the lack of attention the media and society give to white victims of racist attacks compared with the coverage given to ethnic minorities . Organisations such as the BBC and some newspaper journalists later admitted to failing to cover the case sufficiently . It is also suggested the case demonstrates how society has been forced to redefine racism so as to no longer exclude white victims . 
 A memorial plaque for Parker is located in the Netherton area of Peterborough where a football match is played each year in his memory . 
 = = Background = = 
 Ross Parker was born in Peterborough in 1984 to Davinia and Tony Parker . His mother worked as a waitress and his father ran a car bodywork repair business ; he was one of two children . Parker was an avid football player and , having completed a <unk> in business studies at Jack Hunt School , hoped to join the police force when he was 18 . He was nicknamed " Half @-@ Pint " owing to his 5 feet 5 inch height and had twice broken his leg previously . Parker lived in the Westwood area of the city and worked part @-@ time as bar support at The Solstice , a local public house where he had met his girlfriend Nicola Toms . 
 = = Murder = = 
 Parker was murdered shortly after 1 : 15 am on Friday 21 September 2001 while walking with his girlfriend . The attack took place on a cycle path alongside Bourges Boulevard in Millfield , Peterborough , near to Russell Street . Racial tensions in the area were high as the September 11 attacks had only occurred ten days earlier . 
 Having finished work early , Parker and Toms were walking to visit her friend 's house when they were confronted by a gang of around ten Pakistani youths , some of whom were wearing balaclavas ; they had planned to find " a white male to attack simply because he was white " . They warned Parker he had " better start running " , but then blocked his path and quickly sprayed him in the face with CS gas . He was punched in the stomach then stabbed three times from behind through the throat and chest with a foot @-@ long hunting knife . The knife penetrated completely through his body on two occasions and as he was lying on the ground he was repeatedly kicked and struck with a panel beater 's hammer . 
 Toms ran to a nearby petrol station for help and a man there gave her his mobile phone to call the police . While making the call , she twice heard Parker cry out in pain . By chance she spotted a passing police car . She entered the car and guided the officer to the scene of the assault . Although Toms had only been away for a few minutes , by the time she returned Parker had already bled to death and the gang had disappeared . 
 After the murder , four of the gang returned to a garage which they used as their headquarters . Ahmed Ali Awan , brandishing the bloodied knife , exclaimed " cherish the blood " . The police informed Parker 's family of his death at 4 : 30 am ; his body remained at the scene during the day while an investigation was conducted . A post @-@ mortem revealed Parker had died as a result of stab wounds inflicted by a bladed instrument . 
 = = Arrests and charges = = 
 Parker 's murder sparked what became one of the biggest police inquiries in the history of Peterborough . During the weekend following the attack , twelve suspects of Pakistani descent were arrested on suspicion of murder . Members of the local community posted a £ 1 @,@ 000 reward for information leading to the arrest of the killers , later increasing to £ 1 @,@ 500 . A number of those arrested were recorded chanting " Taliban , Osama bin Laden " in their cells and while being transported in the police van , which they also vandalised . Detective Chief Inspector Dick Harrison , who was overseeing the case , praised the city 's Muslim community for their involvement in capturing the murderers . 
 On 26 September 2001 , Sarfraz Ali , Ahmed Ali Awan and <unk> Nazir appeared in court charged with Parker 's murder . <unk> Mahrad was charged the following day . However , by March 2002 all four defendants had been controversially released on police bail . Parker 's sister , Leanne , stated " we can 't begin to comprehend why they 've been allowed out of prison at this stage " . Parker 's family were so concerned about the decision that they wrote a letter of complaint to the Home Secretary , David Blunkett . The Home Office refused to comment on the case and the men remained free on bail . 
 = = Trial = = 
 On 7 November 2002 , Awan , Nazir , Ali and Mahrad all of Millfield , Peterborough , stood trial for Parker 's murder at Northampton Crown Court , pleading not guilty . 
 Awan , 22 , ran a recruitment company and had previously attended the city 's Deacon 's School . He was an unofficial police informer and the court was told he thought of himself as a gangster and had a " fantasy for knives " . Nazir , 22 , was close friends with Awan . He was married in Kashmir the month prior to the murder and had a son . He was educated at Bretton Woods School , had worked in a factory and later in a takeaway restaurant with Mahrad , whom he had known since childhood . Ali , 25 , had also attended Bretton Woods School and was also married , though his wife left him during the trial . He was given a reference at the trial by the Deputy Mayor of Peterborough , Raja <unk> and Labour Party councillor Mohammed Choudhary , with Akhtar stating he had " known him to be caring and responsible " . Mahrad , 21 , owned a takeaway restaurant business in King 's Lynn . 
 During the six week trial , transcripts of covert police recordings of the suspects discussing the attack were submitted as evidence . These conversations took place in police vehicles when the suspects were arrested and were translated from Punjabi . Nazir was heard describing Parker 's death as a " bloodbath " , and how the third blow from the knife had split the whole of his neck open . Awan and Nazir were both heard discussing the statements they had given to police and the plan they had " made up " . The court was also told of an exchange between Awan and an inmate at Bedford Prison , in which Awan described the killing of Parker in lurid detail . Contents of a letter written by Mahrad were also presented in which he stated he would " pray to Allah for forgiveness " . 
 The jury heard how the murder weapons had been found in a shed at Nazir 's house along with two bags of bloodied clothes . DNA and fingerprints belonging to Nazir was found on the hunting knife and Parker 's blood was found on both the hammer and knife . His blood was also found on the clothes of two of the accused , along with Nazir and Mahrad 's DNA and a pathologist told how marks on Parker 's body matched the hammer found in Nazir 's shed . Three balaclavas were also recovered from the property , again containing traces of Parker 's blood , Nazir 's younger brother <unk> told the court he had seen his brother cleaning the murder weapon on the night of the killing and witnessed all four defendants with blood on their clothing . Further witnesses reported Nazir admitting to beating someone up , Mahrad admitting to kicking Parker and Awan recalling stabbing him . A witness also saw all four defendants kicking Parker . 
 In court Nazir admitted to seeing the victim lying on the ground and attempting to spray him with CS gas and kicking him . He also acknowledged washing the murder weapon and stated Ali had hit Parker with the hammer and Awan used the knife . Nazir also alleged prosecution witnesses Zaheer Abbas and <unk> Rehman had been involved in the attack too . Mahrad had also admitted to being present at the murder scene , and claimed that the blood stains found on his trousers occurred as a result of his accidentally falling across Parker . Ali , defended by Mohammed Latif , denied being at the scene and claimed to have been asleep at the time of the murder , although a recording from a police van indicated this was a " story " that he had encouraged the others to " stick to " . Awan also denied being present and claimed he had been at home playing on his PlayStation with <unk> Awan , his brother . Nigel <unk> QC , defending Awan , summarised the crime by stating : " These people were not taking the night air . Every member of the group knew what was going on . These weapons had been selected before they set off . The knife was far too big to be hidden from the others . There is no doubt there was a hunting party looking for a victim . " 
 On 19 December 2002 , Nazir , Awan and Ali were all found guilty of murder in unanimous verdicts . The judge summarised the murder during sentencing : 
 You put your heads together with the purpose of arming yourselves and of attacking an innocent man you might find by chance simply because he was of a different race to yourselves . A racist killing must be one of the gravest kinds of killing . 
 The judge concluded that Awan had wielded the knife , was the ringleader of the group and had intended to kill . The three received life sentences , with Awan to serve a minimum of 18 years and the others at least 16 . Mahrad was cleared of murder and manslaughter . 
 = = Post @-@ trial and appeals = = 
 After the trial it was revealed that Nazir had previously been cautioned for using threatening behaviour in 1999 and fined for resisting arrest . The two Labour politicians , Akhtar and Choudhary , who provided Ali 's references were later jailed themselves for forgery in relation to vote rigging . 
 Awan and Nazir appealed against their jail terms in January 2008 but the original sentences were upheld . Judge Justice Davis said he had taken into account " moving " statements from Parker 's family . Ali appealed his sentence in July 2009 and also had his sentence upheld . In his appeal Ali continued to deny his guilt in the murder , Davis adjudged " true remorse is therefore lacking " . After the first two appeals Parker 's father suggested that the killers of his son should never be freed . As noted by Justice Davis , had the crime occurred post @-@ 2005 , then it is likely that significantly higher minimum terms would have been imposed on the perpetrators owing to reforms in the Criminal Justice Act 2003 . These reforms recommend a minimum term of 30 years for racially aggravated murder . 
 = = Reporting = = 
 The media were criticised for their lack of coverage of the Parker case in comparison to similar racially motivated murders occurring in the UK , such as the killings of Anthony Walker and Stephen Lawrence . The BBC later admitted that " it was a mistake not to report the case of Ross Parker more extensively " , noting the " stark " parallels with the Walker case though also suggesting the story had been " squeezed out " by other news such as a conviction of the killer of Danielle Jones . However it was noted that in hindsight that BBC had " underplayed " the story , and the crime was " worthy of coverage " " by any standards " . 
 Yasmin <unk> @-@ Brown and Kelvin MacKenzie expressed similar sentiments . MacKenzie criticised newspapers including his own employer , The Sun . He stated , " if you believe you 're a victim of an ethnic minority and you 're white there is nowhere to go . Editors are so liberal that they are scared to be seen that they 're moving to the right of their paper " . Parker 's mother Davinia Parker expressed similar concerns that white victims of race crime are ignored . She said " because we are white , English , we didn 't get the coverage " , adding " " it 's as if we don 't count " . In 2006 , a Times investigation by Brendan Montague examined British newspaper archives for coverage of racist crimes , finding " an almost total boycott of stories involving the white victims of attacks " whereas " cases involving black and minority ethnic victims are widely reported " . 
 Others have noted that the lack of coverage is not simply a media issue . Peter Fahy , the spokesman on race issues for the Association of Chief Police Officers said : " A lot of police officers and other professionals feel almost the best thing to do is to try and avoid [ discussing such attacks ] for fear of being criticised . This is not healthy " . Montague suggests the lack of police appeals in cases involving white victims may be a cause of the lack of media coverage . Evidence of this was seen in the Parker case , with the police initially appearing keen to dismiss the possible racist aspect of the murder , stating " there was no reason to believe that the attack was racially motivated " . 
 The newspaper that covered Parker 's murder more extensively faced some criticism . The Government Office for the East of England produced a report by Dr Roger Green examining race relations in Peterborough . The document suggested that the Peterborough Evening Telegraph had a history of insensitivity , and coverage of the case was " possibly adding to any climate of racial and communal unrest " . The criticism of the paper was rejected by a senior police officer and an Asian community leader , both of whom praised its handling of the case . The leader of Peterborough City Council also suggested the accusation was unfair . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Parker 's murder led to increased racial tensions in Peterborough . At his former school , three Asian pupils were suspended for an attack on an Afro @-@ Caribbean pupil ; a relative of the victim then attacked an Asian teacher . A number of taxi firms stopped work early in the days after the attack in fear of reprisals . In November 2001 Home Secretary David Blunkett banned all marches in Peterborough for three months as it was feared violence would be caused by the Anti @-@ Nazi League and National Front who both sought to hold protests on the same day . 
 Parker 's death also had a major impact on his family . His mother , Davinia , was unable to work for three months after Parker 's funeral and came close to attempting suicide on a number of occasions . Parker 's room was left largely untouched for three years after the incident because his parents were reluctant to tidy it . They described the room as a place they " feel close to Ross " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 As a result of the murder of Parker , local authorities set up a unity scheme , whereby gang members from different communities were trained as youth workers to ease racial tensions and reduce violence . However , some problems still persisted , with racist graffiti painted near the murder scene two years after the incident reading " no go area for whites " , " Paki <unk> " and " death to whites " . 
 Some , such as Mark Easton cite the Parker case as demonstrating how society has been forced to redefine racism and discard the erroneous definition of " prejudice plus power " – a definition which , In Easton 's view , tended to only allow ethnic minorities to be victims and whites to be perpetrators . Others such as Yasmin <unk> @-@ Brown condemned the double standards of racial equality campaigners in relation to the case , suggesting black activists should " march and remember victims like Ross Parker " , stating " our values are worthless unless all victims of these senseless deaths matter equally " . She went on to write that " to treat some victims as more worthy of condemnation than others is unforgivable and a betrayal of anti @-@ racism itself " . 
 = = Tributes = = 
 Parker 's funeral took place at Peterborough Crematorium in <unk> on 23 October 2001 and more than 400 mourners attended . His " number 14 " Netherton United football shirt was draped over his coffin and his teammates formed a guard of honour dressed in the same strip ( kit ) . The Reverend Geoffrey Keating described Parker as " a beacon of light who inspired so many people " and " an extremely popular young man " . The murder received little attention from politicians , although in 2003 Peterborough Member of Parliament Helen Clark made a statement in the House of Commons sending condolences to Parker 's family , paying tribute to the Peterborough community and in particular Parker 's former school . She described Parker 's killers as " men older than him " and her tributes were echoed by John Denham . 
 A plaque was installed in Netherton in Peterborough as a memorial to Parker , and a further memorial is located at Peterborough Crematorium . His former football team mates and friends also play a match every May in his memory and formed a team called " Ross ' Rangers " . A rose bush was also planted at the Parker family home in remembrance . 
 = Candice Michelle = 
 Candice Michelle Beckman ( born September 30 , 1978 ) better known as Candice ( Michelle ) is an American model , actress , and retired professional wrestler best known for her time with World Wrestling Entertainment . 
 After spending years modeling and acting , Candice Michelle was hired by WWE in 2004 , after she participated in the WWE Diva Search . Outside of wrestling , she is known as the Go Daddy Girl , performing in the company 's annual Super Bowl commercials . She also posed for a cover and nude pictorial in the April 2006 issue of Playboy . At Vengeance in 2007 , she defeated Melina to win her first WWE Women 's Championship and became the first former Diva Search contestant to win a WWE title . She was released from her WWE contract on June 19 , 2009 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Beckman grew up in Milwaukee , Wisconsin , and she is of German and Costa Rican descent . She played varsity and college basketball and has an avid interest in many sports . Because she is from the state of Wisconsin , Candice is a Green Bay Packers fan . 
 At sixteen , Beckman won a modeling competition at her local skating rink . Around 1999 , she moved to Los Angeles , California to become a professional model and actress . She studied Theater Arts at Santa Monica College and had on @-@ camera acting and Meisner technique training at The Piero <unk> Acting Studio . It was during this time that Beckman adopted her middle name Michelle as her working last name . She appeared in numerous bodybuilding and car magazines such as FLEX and Lowrider Magazine , as well as being named Cyber Girl of the Week in the June 2002 issue of Playboy . Beckman also made appearances on television programs such as Party of Five , 7th Heaven and Hotel Erotica , as well as appearing in such films as Tomcats , Anger Management , DodgeBall and A Man Apart . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = World Wrestling Entertainment = = = 
 = = = = Vince 's Devils ( 2004 – 2006 ) = = = = 
 In July 2004 , Beckman auditioned to be a contestant for World Wrestling Entertainment 's Raw Diva Search . Despite not being chosen to be in the final ten , she was hired by the company under the gimmick of a makeup artist . She competed on Raw in several Diva contests , including lingerie fashion shows and limbo contests , until the end of the year . 
 On June 30 , 2005 , Candice was moved to SmackDown ! where she became involved in a storyline between Torrie Wilson and Melina . On July 24 , Candice made her pay @-@ per @-@ view debut at The Great American Bash where she served as the Special Guest Referee for the Bra and Panties match between Wilson and Melina . She was then moved back to Raw in a trade along with Wilson . In her next storyline , Candice and Torrie became villains by taunting 2005 Diva Search winner Ashley Massaro , and they joined forces with fellow Raw Diva Victoria to form an alliance known as Ladies in Pink ( later Vince 's Devils ) . On the September 5 episode of Raw , Wilson defeated Massaro after the interference from Victoria and Candice . They continued feuding with Massaro until Trish Stratus returned from a legitimate injury to help Massaro " retaliate " against Vince 's Devils . On the October 17 episode of Raw , where she , Torrie and Victoria faced off against the team of Stratus , Massaro , and their new ally Mickie James in a winning effort after Wilson pinned James . On November 28 episode of Raw , Candice teamed up with Victoria and Torrie Wilson in losing effort to Trish , Ashley and Mickie . In November , Candice signed on to pose for the April 2006 issue of Playboy . She had her first shot at the WWE Women 's Championship in a Fulfill Your Fantasy Battle Royal at Taboo Tuesday but was eliminated from the match by Massaro . At the Tribute to The Troops on December 19 , Michelle teamed up with Maria Kanellis in a winning effort defeating then Women 's Champion Trish Stratus and Ashley Massaro in a divas @-@ tag @-@ team match after Candice pinned Ashley . 
 In January , Candice appeared at New Year 's Revolution in the first ever Bra and Panties Gauntlet match , where she was eliminated by Maria . On the February 13 episode of Raw , Michelle accompanied Torrie in a losing effort to Ashley . After winning a number one contender 's Diva battle royal on Raw , Candice got her first singles WWE Women 's Championship match , but lost to then @-@ champion Trish Stratus on February 27 . After the match , Candice slapped Wilson , blaming her , in storyline , for the loss . Vince 's Devils later broke up when Torrie became a fan favorite after Candice and Victoria turned on her during Candice 's Playboy cover unveiling . This feud led to a match at WrestleMania 22 in which both Playboy cover girls competed in a Playboy Pillow Fight . Torrie Wilson won the match . On the June 12 , 2006 episode of Raw , Candice was defeated by Torrie in the first ever " Wet and Wild match " , a wrestling match involving water balloons and squirt guns , in which the winner of the match would be on the cover of the WWE 2006 Summer Special magazine. but the feud continued sporadically in backstage segments where Candice was depicted as Vince McMahon 's " sex slave " . On the July 11 episode of ECW , the villainous Candice appeared as Kelly Kelly 's dance partner on that night 's Kelly 's Exposé segment , and attempted to seduce Kelly in a backstage segment before their performance . 
 = = = = Singles competition and Women 's Champion ( 2006 – 2007 ) = = = = 
 On the July 17 episode of Raw , Candice was the Special Guest Referee during a tag team match of Stratus and Wilson against Victoria and Mickie James . James entered the match without being tagged in , so Candice threw her out of the ring . Afterwards , Victoria tried to clothesline Candice , but she ducked out of the way , allowing Stratus to perform a Stratusfaction for the victory . As a result of her participation in the match , Candice became a fan favorite . On the Raw following Unforgiven , Candice won a match against Lita . The next week , in her second match against Lita , Candice was pinned after she was speared by guest referee Edge , in the first round of the WWE Women 's Championship tournament . On the November 27 episode of Raw , during the Diva battle royal , Candice suffered a legitimate broken nose when Victoria kicked her in the face . She had surgery on November 30 to repair her deviated septum . 
 Candice returned at New Year 's Revolution on January 7 , when she went to the ring with Maria to fight off Melina as she tried to interfere in the Women 's Championship match between then @-@ champion Mickie James and Victoria . Candice made her in @-@ ring return on January 22 when she and Mickie James defeated Victoria and Melina in a tag team match with Candice scoring the pinfall . Candice then resumed her feud with Melina , who claimed in her blogs that no Playboy cover model was capable of defeating her in the ring . Candice took offense to this , which led to a Bra and Panties match between the two , which she lost . During this time , Candice began training on her off @-@ days to improve her in @-@ ring abilities . Weeks later , Candice was beginning to receive more air @-@ time and higher profile matches , and she won tag matches that pitted her with Mickie James against Victoria and Melina . She also picked up several wins against the latter two in singles matches , which culminated at One Night Stand , where Candice defeated Melina in the first ever match held in a swimming pool full of pudding . Candice defeated Melina to capture her first WWE Women 's Championship at Vengeance , becoming the first ever WWE Diva Search contestant to win the Women 's Title . Candice retained her title against Melina in a rematch at The Great American Bash as well as debuting a new finisher called the <unk> . 
 Beth Phoenix became the number one contender for the Women 's Title after winning a Diva battle royal at SummerSlam . At the Unforgiven pay @-@ per @-@ view , however , Candice successfully retained her title in their match by countering one of Phoenix 's moves with a crucifix pin . Their feud continued when Phoenix pinned Candice during a non @-@ title mixed tag team match on Raw on September 24 . At No Mercy on October 7 , Candice dropped the title to Phoenix , ending her reign as Women 's Champion . On October 22 , Candice legitimately cracked her clavicle during her rematch for the Women 's Title against Phoenix in a two out of three falls match ; Phoenix ran into the ropes , causing Candice to fall face @-@ first off of the turnbuckle onto her face , neck , and shoulders necessitating a rushed finish and putting her out of action for 14 weeks . 
 = = = = Injuries and release ( 2008 – 2009 ) = = = = 
 Candice made her on @-@ screen return on the February 18 , 2008 episode of Raw , distracting Beth Phoenix during a match with Maria . She returned to in @-@ ring action on March 17 , teaming up with Maria to defeat Jillian Hall and Victoria . During the match , Candice injured her left shoulder by tearing the scar tissue over her previously broken left clavicle . Unlike her previous injury , Candice broke her clavicle in four separate places , in essence , shattering it . As a result , Candice was replaced by Ashley for her scheduled match at WrestleMania XXIV . On March 23 , Candice underwent successful surgery on her re @-@ broken clavicle . 
 On the September 1 episode of Raw , Candice made her in @-@ ring return match teaming up with Kelly Kelly and Mickie James to defeat Jillian Hall , Katie Lea Burchill and Beth Phoenix , with Candice pinning Phoenix . Candice received a push upon her return as she was named the number one contender for the Women 's Championship , but lost to Beth Phoenix at No Mercy . On the February 2 episode of RAW , Candice unsuccessfully challenged Beth Phoenix for the Women 's Championship after the interference by Mendes and Marella . On the February 16 episode of RAW , Candice , James and Kelly stopped Marella and Mendes from interfering in the Women 's Championship match between Melina and Phoenix , which was won by Melina . 
 On April 15 , 2009 , Candice was drafted to the SmackDown brand as part of the 2009 Supplemental Draft . She , however , never reappeared on the brand and was released from her WWE contract on June 19 , 2009 . 
 = = Other media = = 
 = = = Music videos = = = 
 In December 2011 , Candice along with Torrie Wilson filmed Lilian Garcia 's music video " U Drive Me Loca " . 
 = = = Television and modeling = = = 
 During the week of November 5 , 2007 , Candice appeared on five episodes of Family Feud with several other WWE superstars and Divas . Also in 2007 , Candice Michelle was No. 82 on AskMen.com 's " 100 Most Desirable Women " list . 
 Beckman appeared on the February 6 , 2008 episode of Project Runway , in an episode where the contestants were challenged to design wrestling attire for several of WWE 's female wrestlers . Beckman made a special appearance on the November 12 , 2008 episode of Redemption Song , which is hosted by fellow WWE wrestler Chris Jericho , with several other Divas . She also appeared in the February 2009 issue of FLEX magazine . 
 Go Daddy 
 Beckman gained national attention in 2005 when she appeared in a commercial for internet domain provider Go Daddy , which aired during Super Bowl XXXIX . She played a character named " Nikki <unk> " who had trouble with a snapped spaghetti strap on her tank top as she testified before a panel holding broadcast censorship hearings . The commercial was a parody of the 2004 " wardrobe malfunction " in which Janet Jackson 's right breast was exposed . She then became widely known as " Miss <unk> " and the " Go Daddy Girl " . 
 The following year , she was featured in several more Go Daddy commercials . During the 2006 NFC playoffs , she was featured cleaning windows . She later appeared in a commercial during Super Bowl XL , where she seduced an ABC executive to acquire an advertising slot for Go Daddy . She appeared in another commercial for Super Bowl XLI in 2007 , where she danced in a room being doused with champagne . Beckman appeared on American Chopper to promote the commercial as well as Go Daddy 's custom made chopper . In 2008 , she was featured in her fourth consecutive Go Daddy commercial for Super Bowl XLII , entitled " White Light " , but Fox refused to air it . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 She has a tattoo of the word " faith " on her inner wrist , which she considers a " personal affirmation " . It is also a reminder , in her words , to " believe in myself and have ' faith ' " . She got the tattoo , which was documented on the reality show LA Ink , after breaking her collarbone in 2007 . The tattoo is also related to her Christian beliefs . When Candice made her return , she had new tattoos on her back , her new tattoos are of five stars , which starts at the lower part of her back then finished at the middle of her back . 
 Candice , along with Batista , Shelton Benjamin , and Josh Mathews , represented WWE at the 2008 Democratic National Convention in an effort to persuade fans to register to vote in the 2008 Presidential election . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 <unk> ( Double chickenwing twisted to jumping inverted double underhook facebuster ) – 2007 – 2009 
 Spinning heel kick – 2007 ; used as a signature move from 2008 – 2009 
 Sugar Rush ( Forward Russian legsweep ) – 2005 – 2006 
 Signature moves 
 Bridging northern lights suplex 
 <unk> ( Hanging figure @-@ four necklock ) 
 Diving crossbody 
 Elbow drop , preceded by Go Daddy dance theatrics 
 Hurricanrana 
 Multiple pinning variations 
 Sunset flip 
 Crucifix 
 Multiple kick variations 
 Repeated roundhouse , sometimes while springboarding 
 Rolling neck snap 
 Springboard arm drag 
 Sitout rear mat slam 
 Tilt – a – whirl headscissors takedown 
 Wrestlers managed 
 Torrie Wilson 
 Victoria 
 Maria Kanellis 
 Managers 
 Torrie Wilson 
 Entrance themes 
 " Holla " by Desiree Jackson ( 2004 ) 
 " What Love Is " by Jim Johnston ( 2005 – 2007 ) . 
 " What Love Is " in @-@ house remix by Scooter and Lavelle ( 2007 – 2009 ) . 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI Most Improved Wrestler of the Year ( 2007 ) 
 PWI Woman of the Year ( 2007 ) 
 PWI ranked her # 10 of the best 50 female singles wrestlers in the PWI Female 50 in 2008 . 
 World Wrestling Entertainment 
 WWE Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) 
 = God of War ( comics ) = 
 God of War is a six @-@ issue American comic book limited series set in the God of War universe . The series was written by Marv Wolfman , illustrated by Andrea Sorrentino , and the cover art for each issue was produced by Andy Park , who was also an artist for the video game series . The first five issues of God of War were published by WildStorm . Due to the company 's closure in December 2010 , the final issue was published by their parent company , DC Comics . The series ' launch coincided with the release of the video game God of War III in March 2010 . The final issue was published in January 2011 , and a collected edition was published in March 2011 . 
 The limited series chronicles the adventures of Kratos , the protagonist of the video game series . The majority of the story is told in flashback and shows a past quest for the Ambrosia of Asclepius , and also relates the story of Kratos ' present search for the same object . The two stories are told simultaneously ; Kratos first attempts to save his dying daughter , Calliope , and years later , he is seeking to destroy the Ambrosia to prevent the resurrection of the former God of War , Ares . 
 The series received mixed reviews . Some critics praised Wolfman 's writing , while others said that although the setting was a good comic book incentive and a good prequel for the video game series , the story did not make sense . Sorrentino 's interior artwork was criticized for being " muddy " by critics , but some did praise it for being distinctive and did a good job at setting the tone and atmosphere . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 The comic book series was announced at the 2009 Comic @-@ Con International , and was scheduled to debut in October 2009 , but its launch was delayed to coincide with that of God of War III . Scott A. Steinberg , Vice President of Product Marketing at SCEA said , " we are thrilled to work with the world 's largest comic book publisher to bring one of our most beloved PlayStation franchises ... to comic book fans . " In an interview with IGN , the series writer Marv Wolfman stated that when he heard a rumor of the series , he " put [ in his ] name right away and kept pushing " to be chosen as the writer because God of War is one of his favorite video games . Wolfman said that he had already played the first two games , so there was no research to be done and " it 's because [ he ] loved the game that [ he ] wanted to do the comic . " He received copies of the scripts for all the games to ensure his work was as accurate as possible , and stated that he worked very closely with Sony Santa Monica — the developer of the video games — and tied the comic book 's narrative directly to the story they created for the games . Wolfman said that Santa Monica ensured the mythology was consistent while revealing new facts about Kratos ' past . 
 In an interview with Comic Book Resources , Wolfman stated that Santa Monica suggested the use of two time periods , with past events affecting the narrative in the present . He introduced new characters , including Kratos ' wife — who appeared in the games but was never named . He stated the final script was a combination of his ideas and Santa Monica 's character @-@ appropriate dialog . Series artist Andrea Sorrentino stated , " it was clear from the start that for this project Sony and DC [ Comics ] wanted something a bit different from a ' classical ' comic . So I just took my usual style and added to it something new , like new colors from the videogame palette . " She stated that the games have strong , epic images , and that she easily adapted her style to Wolfman 's writing as he " did really good work showing both dramatic and epic scenes . " Sorrentino used color to give importance to each scene , adding hot colors ( red , orange , or brown ) in action scenes and cold ones ( green or light blue ) in others so that readers could immediately have an emotional reaction . 
 The series was published on a bi @-@ monthly schedule between March 2010 and January 2011 . In March 2011 , the series was collected into a trade paperback . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 As with the video games , the comic book series is set in an alternate version of Ancient Greece , populated by the Olympian Gods and other beings of Greek mythology . The story is split between two chapters in the video game chronology ; a period before Ascension ( 2013 ) , and a later period between God of War ( 2005 ) and Ghost of Sparta ( 2010 ) . For the majority of the series , it narrates the events of the past via flashbacks with occasional focus on present events . In both , protagonist Kratos traverses Ancient Greece and the Aegean Sea on a quest for the Ambrosia of Asclepius . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 As in the video game series , the comic book 's protagonist is Kratos . The story references two periods in Kratos ' life ; his boyhood training and life in the Spartan Army as the unwitting champion of Ares , and the narrative present , in which he has assumed the role of God of War after defeating Ares . The segments of the story set in the past feature several Olympian Gods , including Ares , the God of War ; Artemis , the Goddess of the Hunt ; Hades , the God of the Underworld ; Helios , the God of the Sun ; Hermes , the God of Speed , Thievery , and Wild Animals ; and Poseidon , the God of the Sea . In the present , Kratos encounters his ally and mentor Athena , the Goddess of Wisdom , and the Chaos Giant , Gyges . Minor characters from Kratos ' first adventure include Captain Nikos , the King of Sparta , and Kratos ' wife , Lysandra , and daughter , Calliope . The champions of the gods include : <unk> , champion of Artemis and the warrior @-@ queen of an Amazonian tribe ; Cereyon , fiery champion of Helios ; Danaus , champion of Hermes who can magically control beasts ; <unk> , champion of Poseidon from the village of Thera ; and Alrik , champion of Hades and prince of the Barbarians . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The story is set after Kratos ' defeat of the former God of War , Ares . Now the new God of War , Kratos is on a quest to destroy the legendary Ambrosia of Asclepius , an elixir with magical healing properties that he once found when he was a soldier in Sparta . During his quest , Kratos has flashbacks to this period , as he searches for the Ambrosia to save his newly @-@ born daughter , Calliope , who is suffering from the plague . Given until the next full moon , General Kratos travels with a host of Spartans to find the Ambrosia . During this period , he takes counsel from Captain Nikos , his superior in the Spartan army who instructs him about the Spartan code of honor . 
 Several of the Olympian Gods — Artemis , Hades , Helios , Hermes , and Poseidon — decide to enter into a wager with Ares . Each will choose a champion who is in search of the Ambrosia , with the successful god receiving an award ( e.g. , having statues erected in their honor across Greece ) . Kratos kills two of the champions — <unk> and <unk> — and repels attacks by monsters sent by the gods to thwart him . A desperate Hades kills Nikos , who sacrifices himself to save Kratos , passing on the rank of Captain . Danaus is killed by Alrik , who retains Danaus ' head to possess his magical ability . Kratos locates the " Tree of Life " , the source of the Ambrosia located on a small island , and confronts Cereyon . After being almost burned alive , Kratos drowns his foe and successfully retrieves the Ambrosia , but as he leaves , he and his Spartan troops are ambushed by Alrik 's horde of barbarians . When Hades observes the Spartans defeating the Barbarians , the god attempts to have the Spartans dragged to the Underworld . Alrik uses the head of Danaus to summon <unk> to attack Kratos as he flies away on a similar bird with the stolen Ambrosia . Kratos pursues Alrik on a captured <unk> , knowing that although his men will be taken to the Underworld , they will be honored in Sparta for their sacrifices . Alrik and Kratos battle , with Alrik critically wounding Kratos . The Spartan , however , is sprayed by the Ambrosia and subsequently healed . 
 Kratos gains control of Danaus ' head and uses its power against Alrik , who is torn apart by <unk> . Having also been covered with the Ambrosia , Alrik is revived only to be killed once again until the Ambrosia is spent . Kratos then escapes and returns to Sparta with the Ambrosia , saving his daughter , and giving the King of Sparta the rest of the elixir , who then officially awards Kratos the rank of Captain in the Spartan Army . Bitter at having lost the wager , Hades resurrects Alrik , who becomes King after his father dies and swears vengeance against Kratos . 
 In the present , Kratos overcomes several obstacles in his quest to find the Ambrosia , including defeating a giant spider , ignoring Athena 's pleas to stop his quest , and overcoming the reanimated corpses of Captain Nikos and his men — a final attempt by Hades to stop the Spartan . On returning to the island , Kratos discovers that the island is actually one of the Chaos Giants , the fifty @-@ headed and one hundred armed Gyges . An outraged Gyges explains that Kratos had thwarted the Giant 's plan to use the elixir to resurrect his brothers <unk> and Cottus , and then reclaim the world . In his fiery battle with Cereyon , Kratos inadvertently burned off Gyges ' one hundred arms , and then stole the Ambrosia . Without arms and now unable to reach the Ambrosia , Gyges was forced to wait for Kratos ' return . During the battle , Kratos reveals that he seeks to destroy the elixir to prevent the worshipers of the slain god Ares from resurrecting their master . Kratos then uses the Fire of Apollo to destroy both the Tree of Life and Gyges . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The God of War comic series received mixed reviews . Mike Murphy of Platform Nation stated that although the comic series serves as a good prequel to the video game series , " the story is bogged down by horrible art ... [ it 's ] muddy , confusing , and consistently pulls you out of the story as you try to figure out just what is going on from panel to panel . " Rating it 5 out of 10 , Murphy said that he " can ’ t give this one a pass , even to the hardcore God of War fans " who should " skip it . " 
 After reading God of War # 1 , Joe Juba of Game Informer said " If you have a choice between reading this comic and doing something else , you should do something else ... like play God of War III again . " He said that the story adds nothing of value and it is rough . Despite being written by Marv Wolfman , he said the story does not satisfy fans of the video game series : " I didn 't think the story made much sense , and it doesn 't contribute to the overall lore of the universe ; it just seems to be setting Kratos up for another fetch @-@ quest . " He also felt that the writing was exceptionally low in quality . Comic Vine said , " The idea here screams comic books , " however , the " results were a mixed offering . " The reviewer stated that the idea of Kratos finding the Ambrosia to save Calliope was a " perfect comic book incentive , " however , things started to disintegrate when the distinction between the present and the past became unclear . A four out of five star review from Binary Messiah praised the comic series , saying that it could be made into a full game : " That 's one freaking awesome story . That right there is a premise to a whole new God of War game . " They said that it " does a good job showing the hot headedness of Kratos and his selfishness . " Saying that the comics do the video game series justice , for fans of God of War , this should be in their comic collection . 
 GameSpot stated that the art appears moody , but also said it is " muddy ... with a heavy digital assist from Photoshop . " Although the effects were sometimes stunning , other times they were " distracting , or even chuckle @-@ inducing . " Despite the criticism over the art , GameSpot said that the art is " distinctive , and lends the story a very specific tone " , and that " [ it ] matches the world of God of War well enough , ... the same way Kratos ' anger overshadows any possible storytelling subtlety in the [ video game ] series . " Joe Juba gave some praise to the art , stating that it " is kind of neat " and " it 's stylish , if nothing else " . Binary Messiah was disappointed in the art . They said it is very murky and washed out with black . Although there is some realism in the art , it does not match the art of the games . They also noted a mistake with the flashback scenes , as in these scenes , it shows Kratos with his ash @-@ white skin and red tattoo , but he did not receive these until after he slayed his family . They did praise it for being gory like the games , and said " While the art may be iffy , it does have an excellent atmosphere of darkness and constant betrayal . " 
 = = = Issues = = = 
 Wolfman , Marv ( w ) , Sorrentino , Andrea ( a ) , Temofonte , Saida ( let ) , Abernathy , Ben ( ed ) . God of War # 1 ( March 2010 ) , WildStorm 
 Wolfman , Marv ( w ) , Sorrentino , Andrea ( a ) , Temofonte , Saida ( let ) , Abernathy , Ben ( ed ) . God of War # 2 ( May 2010 ) , WildStorm 
 Wolfman , Marv ( w ) , Sorrentino , Andrea ( a ) , Temofonte , Saida ( let ) , Abernathy , Ben ( ed ) . God of War # 3 ( July 2010 ) , WildStorm 
 Wolfman , Marv ( w ) , Sorrentino , Andrea ( a ) , Temofonte , Saida ( let ) , Abernathy , Ben ( ed ) . God of War # 4 ( September 2010 ) , WildStorm 
 Wolfman , Marv ( w ) , Sorrentino , Andrea ( a ) , Temofonte , Saida ( let ) , Abernathy , Ben ( ed ) . God of War # 5 ( November 2010 ) , WildStorm 
 Wolfman , Marv ( w ) , Sorrentino , Andrea ( a ) , Temofonte , Saida ( let ) , Abernathy , Ben ( ed ) . God of War # 6 ( January 2011 ) , DC Comics 
 = Ohio State Route 372 = 
 State Route 372 ( SR 372 ) is a very short , two @-@ lane east – west state highway in the southern part of the U.S. state of Ohio . The western terminus of this spur route is at a T @-@ intersection with the concurrency of U.S. Route 23 ( US 23 ) and SR 104 about six and a half miles ( 10 @.@ 5 km ) north of Waverly . Its eastern terminus is just 0 @.@ 68 miles ( 1 @.@ 09 km ) to the east of that point at the boundary of Scioto Trail State Forest . Continuing east of that point is Stoney Creek Road , which traverses through the state forest in the direction of the Scioto River . From its inception in the middle of the 1930s , the primary function of SR 372 has been to provide access to the state forest from the state highway system . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The entirety of SR 372 is located within Franklin Township in rural southern Ross County . Beginning at a T @-@ intersection with the US 23 / SR 104 concurrency , SR 372 travels easterly into a series of curves in the shape of an " S " , taking the route to the north and then bending to the southeast . As it passes amidst heavily wooded terrain with some houses alongside the roadway , SR 372 travels past an intersection with North Ridge Road , then abruptly comes to an end as it crosses the western boundary of Scioto Trail State Forest . The roadway continues eastward from this point as Stoney Creek Road . 
 The Ohio Department of Transportation ( ODOT ) regularly does surveys to determine the amount of traffic that utilizes its highway system . Commonly , the volumes measured in these surveys are expressed in terms average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , or the amount of traffic volume on a given segment of a highway on any average day of the year . In 2010 , ODOT determined that an average of 340 passenger vehicles per day and 20 commercial vehicles per day used SR 372 . This state route is not a part of the National Highway System , a network of roadways identified as being most important for the economy , mobility and defense of the nation . 
 = = History = = 
 The SR 372 designation was established in 1934 . Throughout its entire history , the highway has served to provide a connection to Scioto Trail State Forest from US 23 . When it was first designated , all of SR 372 was gravel – surfaced . The state route was paved by 1958 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Franklin Township , Ross County . 
 = Gliese 581 g = 
 Gliese 581 g / ˈɡliːzə / , ( also known as Gl 581 g or GJ 581 g ) , unofficially known as Zarmina , is an unconfirmed ( and disputed ) exoplanet claimed to orbit the red dwarf Gliese 581 , about 20 light @-@ years from Earth in the constellation of Libra . It is the sixth planet purportedly discovered orbiting the star . The discovery was announced by the Lick @-@ Carnegie Exoplanet Survey in late September 2010 , after a decade of observation . However , the ESO / HARPS survey team was not able to confirm that the planet exists . 
 Gliese 581 g has attracted attention because it would be near the middle of the habitable zone of its parent star . That means it could sustain liquid water on its surface and could potentially host life similar to that on Earth ( the planet is predicted to have temperatures around − 37 to − 11 ° C ) . If it is a rocky planet , favorable atmospheric conditions could permit the presence of liquid water , a necessity for all known life , on its surface . With an estimated mass of 2 @.@ 2 times Earth 's , Gliese 581 g would be considered a Super @-@ Earth and would be the planet closest in mass to Earth known in a habitable zone . This would make it one of the most Earth @-@ like Goldilocks planets found outside the Solar System and one of the exoplanets with the greatest recognized potential for harboring life . 
 The supposed detection of Gliese 581 g after such a short period of searching and at such close proximity has led some astronomers to hypothesize that the proportion of stars with habitable planets may be greater than ten percent . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 The planet was claimed to be detected by astronomers in the Lick @-@ Carnegie Exoplanet Survey , led by principal investigator Steven S. Vogt , professor of astronomy and astrophysics at the University of California , Santa Cruz and co @-@ investigator R. Paul Butler of the Carnegie Institution of Washington . The discovery was made using radial velocity measurements , combining 122 observations obtained over 11 years from the High Resolution Echelle Spectrometer ( HIRES ) instrument of the Keck 1 telescope with 119 measurements obtained over 4 @.@ 3 years from the High Accuracy Radial Velocity Planet Searcher ( HARPS ) instrument of the European Southern Observatory 's 3 @.@ 6 m telescope at La Silla Observatory . 
 After subtracting the signals of the previously known Gliese 581 planets , b , c , d and e , the signals of two additional planets were apparent : a 445 @-@ day signal from a newly recognized outermost planet designated f , and the 37 @-@ day signal from Gliese 581 g . The probability that the detection of the latter was spurious was estimated at only 2 @.@ 7 in a million . The authors stated that while the 37 @-@ day signal is " clearly visible in the HIRES data set alone " , " the HARPS data set alone is not able to reliably sense this planet " and concluded , " It is really necessary to combine both data sets to sense all these planets reliably . " The Lick – Carnegie team explained the results of their research in a paper published in the Astrophysical Journal . Although not sanctioned by the IAU 's naming conventions , Vogt 's team informally refers to the planet as " Zarmina 's World " after his wife , and some cases simply as Zarmina . 
 = = = <unk> in new HARPS data analysis = = = 
 Two weeks after the announcement of the discovery of Gliese 581 g , astronomer Francesco Pepe of the Geneva Observatory reported that in a new analysis of 179 measurements taken by the HARPS spectrograph over 6 @.@ 5 years , neither planet g nor planet f was detectable . Vogt responded to the latest concerns by saying , " I am not overly surprised by this as these are very weak signals , and adding 60 points onto 119 does not necessarily translate to big gains in sensitivity . " More recently , Vogt added , " I feel confident that we have accurately and honestly reported our uncertainties and done a thorough and responsible job extracting what information this data set has to offer . I feel confident that anyone independently analyzing this data set will come to the same conclusions . " 
 Differences in the two groups ' results may involve the planetary orbital characteristics assumed in calculations . According to MIT astronomer Sara Seager , Vogt postulated the planets around Gliese 581 had perfectly circular orbits whereas the Swiss group thought the orbits were more eccentric . This difference in approach may be the reason for the disagreement , according to Alan Boss . Butler remarked that with additional observations , " I would expect that on the time scale of a year or two this should be settled . " Other astronomers also supported a deliberate evaluation : Seager stated , " We will have consensus at some point ; I don 't think we need to vote right now . " and Ray <unk> noted , " Given the extremely interesting implications of such a discovery , it 's important to have independent confirmation . " Gliese 581 g is listed as " unconfirmed " in the Extrasolar Planets Encyclopaedia . 
 In December 2010 , a claimed methodological error was reported in the data analysis that led to the discovery of Gliese 581 f and g . The team around Steven Vogt inferred the number of exoplanets by using a reduced chi @-@ square , although the orbital models are nonlinear in the model parameters . Therefore , reduced chi @-@ square is not a trustworthy diagnostic . In fact , an investigation of the fit residuals showed that the data used by Vogt 's team actually prefers a model with four planets , not six , in agreement with the results of Francesco Pepe 's team . 
 = = = Further analyses of HIRES / HARPS data = = = 
 Another re ‐ analysis found no clear evidence for a fifth planetary signal in the combined HIRES / HARPS data set . The claim was made that the HARPS data provided only some evidence for 5 planet signals , while incorporation of both data sets actually degraded the evidence for more than four planets ( i.e. , none for 581 f or 581 g ) . Mikko <unk> of the University of Hertfordshire performed a Bayesian re @-@ analysis of the HARPS and HIRES data with the result that they " do not imply the conclusion that there are two additional companions orbiting GJ 581 " . 
 " I have studied [ the paper ] in detail and do not agree with his conclusions , " Steven Vogt said in reply , concerned that Gregory has considered the HIRES data as more uncertain . " The question of Gliese 581g 's existence won 't be settled definitively until researchers gather more high @-@ precision radial velocity data " , Vogt said . However Vogt expects further analysis to strengthen the case for the planet . 
 By performing a number of statistical tests , Guillen Anglada @-@ <unk> of the Carnegie Institute of Washington concluded that the existence of Gl 581 g was well supported by the available data , despite the presence of a statistical degeneracy that derives from an alias of the first eccentric harmonic of another planet in the system . In a forthcoming paper , Anglada @-@ <unk> and Rebekah Dawson claim " With the data we have , the most likely explanation is that this planet is still there . " 
 = = = 2012 Reanalysis of HARPS Data = = = 
 In July 2012 , Steven S. Vogt <unk> the 2011 data proposed by <unk> et al. noting that there were 5 objects ( GJ 581 b , e , c , g , d with no evidence for f ) . Planet g was orbiting around 0 @.@ 13 AU with an orbital period of 32 days placing it inside the habitable zone . Vogt concluded that the object had a minimum mass of 2 @.@ 2 M and has a false positive probability of less than 4 % . 
 = = = Further studies = = = 
 A study in 2014 by Paul Robertson , <unk> Mahadevan , Michael End , and <unk> Roy concluded that Gliese 581 d is " an artifact of stellar activity which , when incompletely corrected , causes the false detection of planet g . " An additional study concluded that Gliese 581 g 's existence depends on Gliese 581 d 's eccentricity . 
 In 2015 , a team of researchers <unk> the data and suggested planet Gliese 581 d really could exist , despite stellar variability , and that last year 's claim of the existence of Gliese 581 d and g was triggered by poor and inadequate analysis of the data . Now that Gliese 581 d is widely accepted it is likely that Gliese 581 g 's existence is dependent on the eccentricity of the further out exoplanet Gliese 581 d as suggested by Paul Robertson . 
 = = Tidal locking and habitability = = 
 Because of Gliese 581 g 's proximity to its parent star , it is predicted to be tidally locked to Gliese 581 . Just as Earth 's Moon always presents the same face to the Earth , the length of Gliese 581 g 's sidereal day would then precisely match the length of its year , meaning it would be permanently light on one half and permanently dark on the other half of its surface . Tidal locking also means the planet would have no axial tilt and therefore no seasonality in a conventional sense . 
 With one side of the planet always facing the star , temperatures could range from blazing hot in the bright side to freezing cold in the dark side if atmospheric heat transport is limited . The atmosphere 's inventory of volatile compounds such as water and carbon dioxide could then permanently freeze on the dark side . However , an atmosphere of the expected density would be likely to moderate these extremes . 
 = = = Atmospheric effects = = = 
 An atmosphere that is dense will circulate heat , potentially allowing a wide area on the surface to be habitable . For example , Venus has a solar rotation rate approximately 117 times slower than Earth 's , producing prolonged days and nights . Despite the uneven distribution of sunlight over time intervals shorter than several months , unilluminated areas of Venus are kept almost as hot as the day side by globally circulating winds . Simulations have shown that an atmosphere containing appropriate levels of CO2 and H2O need only be a tenth the pressure of Earth 's atmosphere ( 100 mbar ) to effectively distribute heat to the night side . Current technology cannot determine the atmospheric or surface composition of the planet due to the overpowering light of its parent star . 
 Whether or not a tide @-@ locked planet with the orbital characteristics of Gliese 581g is actually habitable depends on the composition of the atmosphere and the nature of the planetary surface . A comprehensive modeling study including atmospheric dynamics , realistic radiative transfer and the physics of formation of sea ice ( if the planet has an ocean ) indicates that the planet can become as hot as Venus if it is dry and allows carbon dioxide to accumulate in its atmosphere . The same study identified two habitable states for a water @-@ rich planet . If the planet has a very thin atmosphere , a thick ice crust forms over most of the surface , but the substellar point remains hot enough to yield a region of thin ice or even episodically open water . If the planet has an atmosphere with Earthlike pressures , containing approximately 20 % ( molar ) carbon dioxide , then the greenhouse effect is sufficiently strong to maintain a pool of open water under the substellar point with temperatures comparable to the Earth 's tropics . This state has been dubbed " Eyeball Earth " by the author . 
 Modeling of the effect of tidal locking on Gliese 581 g 's possible atmosphere , using a general circulation model employing an atmosphere with Earthlike surface pressure but a highly idealized representation of radiative processes , indicates that for a solid @-@ surface planet the locations of maximum warmth would be distributed in a sideways chevron @-@ shaped pattern centered near the substellar point . 
 = = = Temperatures = = = 
 It is estimated that the average global equilibrium temperature ( the temperature in the absence of atmospheric effects ) of Gliese 581 g would range from 209 to 228 K ( − 64 to − 45 ° C , or − 84 to − 49 ° F ) for Bond albedos ( reflectivities ) from 0 @.@ 5 to 0 @.@ 3 ( with the latter being more characteristic of the inner Solar System ) . Adding an Earth @-@ like greenhouse effect would yield an average surface temperature in the range of 236 to 261 K ( − 37 to − 12 ° C , or − 35 to 10 ° F ) . Gliese 581g would be in an orbit where a silicate weathering thermostat could operate , and this could lead to accumulation of sufficient carbon dioxide in the atmosphere to permit liquid water to exist at the surface , provided the planet 's composition and tectonic behavior could support sustained outgassing . 
 By comparison , Earth 's present global equilibrium temperature is 255 K ( − 18 ° C ) , which is raised to 288 K ( 15 ° C ) by greenhouse effects . However , when life evolved early in Earth 's history , the Sun 's energy output is thought to have been only about 75 % of its current value , which would have correspondingly lowered Earth 's equilibrium temperature under the same albedo conditions . Yet Earth maintained equable temperatures in that era , perhaps with a more intense greenhouse effect , or a lower albedo , than at present . 
 Current Martian surface temperatures vary from lows of about − 87 ° C ( − 125 ° F ) during polar winter to highs of up to − 5 ° C ( 23 ° F ) in summer . The wide range is due to the rarefied atmosphere , which cannot store much solar heat , and the low thermal inertia of the soil . Early in its history , a denser atmosphere may have permitted the formation of an ocean on Mars . 
 Two previously discovered planets in the same system , Gliese 581 c and d ( inward and outward from planet g , respectively ) , were also regarded as potentially habitable following their discovery . Both were later evaluated as being outside the conservatively defined habitable zone , leading Vogt et al. to remark that " The GJ 581 system has a somewhat checkered history of habitable planet claims " . However , a subsequent downward revision of the period of planet d from 83 to 67 days has bolstered its habitability prospects , although a large greenhouse effect would be needed . 
 = = = Potential for life = = = 
 In an interview with Lisa @-@ Joy <unk> of the National Science Foundation , Steven Vogt was asked what he thought about the chances of life existing on Gliese 581 g . Vogt was optimistic : " I 'm not a biologist , nor do I want to play one on TV . Personally , given the ubiquity and propensity of life to flourish wherever it can , I would say that ... the chances of life on this planet are 100 % . I have almost no doubt about it . " In the same article Dr. Seager is quoted as saying " Everyone is so primed to say here 's the next place we 're going to find life , but this isn 't a good planet for follow @-@ up . " According to Vogt , the long lifetime of red dwarfs improves the chances of life being present . " It 's pretty hard to stop life once you give it the right conditions " , he said . " Life on other planets doesn 't mean E.T. Even a simple single @-@ cell bacteria or the equivalent of shower mold would shake perceptions about the uniqueness of life on Earth . " 
 = = Implications = = 
 Scientists have monitored only a relatively small number of stars in the search for exoplanets . The discovery of a potentially habitable planet like Gliese 581 g so early in the search might mean that habitable planets are more widely distributed than had been previously believed . According to Vogt , the discovery " implies an interesting lower limit on the fraction of stars that have at least one potentially habitable planet as there are only ~ 116 known solar @-@ type or later stars out to the 6 @.@ 3 parsec distance of Gliese 581 " . This finding foreshadows what Vogt calls a new , second Age of Discovery in <unk> : 
 Confirmation by other teams through additional high @-@ precision RVs would be most welcome . But if GJ 581g is confirmed by further RV scrutiny , the mere fact that a habitable planet has been detected this soon , around such a nearby star , suggests that η ⊕ could well be on the order of a few tens of percent , and thus that either we have just been incredibly lucky in this early detection , or we are truly on the threshold of a second Age of Discovery . 
 If the fraction of stars with potentially habitable planets ( η ⊕ , " eta @-@ Earth " ) is on the order of a few tens of percent as Vogt proposes , and the Sun 's stellar neighborhood is a typical sample of the galaxy , then the discovery of Gliese 581 g in the habitable zone of its star points to the potential of billions of Earth @-@ like planets in our Milky Way galaxy alone . 
 = Trustee Investments Act 1961 = 
 The Trustee Investments Act 1961 ( c 62 ) was an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom that covers where trustees can invest trust funds . Given the royal assent on 3 August 1961 , it removed the " Statutory Lists " system and replaced it with sets of specific investment areas . The Act was heavily criticised for the way it set these areas out , particularly the requirement that trusts trying to invest in multiple areas would need to be permanently divided . A 1997 Law Commission paper called its terms " overly cautious and restrictive " , suggesting that some trusts were underperforming as a result . The passing of the Trustee Act 2000 effectively nullified the 1961 Act 's terms in relation to trustee investment , and the 2000 Act is now the principal piece of legislation in this area . 
