 A large portion of Mendelssohn 's 750 works still remained unpublished in the 1960s , but most of them have now been made available . A scholarly edition of Mendelssohn 's complete works and correspondence is in preparation but is expected to take many years to complete , and will be in excess of 150 volumes . This includes a modern and fully researched catalogue of his works , the Mendelssohn @-@ <unk> ( MWV ) . All of Mendelssohn 's oeuvre – including the most popular works such as the E minor Violin Concerto and the Italian Symphony – has been explored more deeply , and prior concepts about the Victorian conventionality of the oratorio Elijah have been shed . The frequently intense and dramatic world of Mendelssohn 's chamber works has been more fully recognized . Virtually all of Mendelssohn 's published works are now available on CD , and his works are frequently heard in the concert hall and on broadcasts . An English Heritage blue plaque commemorating Mendelssohn was placed at 4 Hobart Place in Belgravia , London , in 2013 . As the critic H. L. Mencken concluded , if Mendelssohn indeed missed true greatness , he missed it " by a hair " . 
 = = = Recordings = = = 
 See articles on individual works for links to recordings 
 = = = Music scores = = = 
 Free scores by Felix Mendelssohn at the International Music Score Library Project 
 The Mutopia Project has compositions by Felix Mendelssohn 
 Free scores by Felix Mendelssohn in the Choral Public Domain Library ( ChoralWiki ) 
 Mendelssohn Bartholdy 
 = Willamette University College of Law = 
 Willamette University College of Law is a private law school located in Salem , Oregon , United States . Founded in 1842 , Willamette University is the oldest university in the Western United States . The College of Law , which was founded in 1883 and is the oldest law school in the Pacific Northwest , has approximately 30 law professors and enrolls about 300 students , with about 125 of those of students enrolled in their first year of law school . The campus is located across the street from the Oregon State Capitol and the Oregon Supreme Court Building . 
 Housed in the Truman Wesley Collins Legal Center , Willamette 's College of Law offers both full @-@ time and part @-@ time enrollment for the juris doctorate ( JD ) degree , joint @-@ degree programs , and a Master of Laws ( LL.M. ) program . The joint @-@ degree programs allow students to earn both a JD and a Master of Business Administration ( MBA ) concurrently in a four @-@ year program , or complete a bachelor and JD in six years . Willamette Law 's oldest legal journal is the Willamette Law Review , which started in 1960 and is housed in the Oregon Civic Justice Center . The center is a community outreach center housed in a renovated library that Willamette opened in 2008 . According to Willamette 's 2013 ABA @-@ required disclosures , 61 @.@ 7 % of the Class of 2013 obtained full @-@ time , long @-@ term , JD @-@ required employment nine months after graduation . 
 = = History = = 
 In July 1866 , Willamette University 's trustees formed a committee to explore the possibility of a legal department . At that time , legal education was traditionally taught as an apprenticeship in which those wishing to be lawyers would study under an existing attorney for several years before being allowed to pass the bar . Although the school did not begin a legal department in 1866 , Willamette did confer a Doctor of Laws degree on Matthew P. Deady , who later helped establish the University of Oregon School of Law , Oregon ’ s second law school . 
 The College of Law was founded in 1883 , and is the oldest law school in the Pacific Northwest . In April 1884 , the Board of Trustees officially approved the new legal department ; tuition for the two @-@ year course was $ 50 per year . William Marion Ramsey served as the school 's first dean . He was dean from 1883 until 1888 , and led a faculty of three . The three professors were George H. Burnett , who taught contracts , commercial law , and torts ; J. T. Gregg , who taught evidence and common law ; and William H. Holmes , who was the instructor for admiralty and criminal law . 
 The school 's first entering class had three students ; with Charles A. Packenham as the first graduate in 1886 . In addition to being the oldest law school in Oregon and the Pacific Northwest , Willamette College of Law was the 75th law school founded in the United States , and is the second oldest in the Western U.S. , behind Hastings College of Law in California . From its founding until 1923 , the law school was located in Waller Hall . 
 During the early years of the law school , enrollment fluctuated from as many as 17 graduates in 1898 to as few as zero graduates in 1903 and 1905 . Dean Ramsey resigned in 1888 and was replaced by George G. Bingham , who served until 1891 when replaced by his pupil Samuel T. Richardson . Women were allowed to enroll beginning in 1892 ; in 1898 , the first women , Olive S. England and Gabrielle Clark , graduated . The third female graduate , in 1899 , was Anna Carson , who was part of the Carson legal family of Salem that includes Wallace P. Carson ( 1923 graduate ) a state legislator and Wallace P. Carson , Jr . ( 1962 graduate ) a state legislator and longtime chief justice of the Oregon Supreme Court . 
 In 1902 , Dean Richardson left the school and was replaced by John W. Reynolds who served until 1907 . In 1908 , Charles L. McNary was appointed dean , serving until 1913 , when Willamette selected future Oregon Attorney General Isaac Homer Van Winkle . Van Winkle was an alumnus of both Willamette and the law school , serving as dean until 1927 . 
 From 1923 until 1938 , the school was located in Eaton Hall . Roy R. Hewitt was dean from 1927 to 1932 , followed by Roy <unk> , who served until 1939 . Willamette University College of Law was first accredited by the American Bar Association in 1938 , and in 1946 it became a member of the Association of American Law Schools . In 1938 the school moved to <unk> Hall , a former United States Post Office . The law school was housed there until 1967 . 
 During this time deans of the law school included George M. McLeod ( 1940 – 1942 ) , Ray L. Smith ( 1942 – 1946 ) , and Seward P. Reese ( 1946 – 1968 ) . During World War II , enrollment declined to only five graduates between 1943 and 1945 , and classes were moved to the undergraduate library as the United States Navy used the <unk> Hall . In 1946 , enrollment rebounded with a total of 92 students , the largest student body of the law school up to that date . 
 After 1952 , Willamette ’ s law school received a large Lady Justice statue when the Marion County Courthouse was demolished to make way for a new one . In 1959 , the school started a law review , while enrollment increased to 185 by the mid @-@ 1960s . Because of the increased enrollment , the College of Law Foundation was created by the university 's trustees in 1959 to explore the construction of a new facility . Willamette switched to the awarding of the Juris Doctor from the bachelor of laws , phased in beginning in 1965 . 
 In 1967 , a new $ 1 @.@ 1 million facility , the Truman Wesley Collins Legal Center , opened in September . The College of Law moved across campus to the Collins Legal Center along with Lady Justice , a 12 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) -tall , 300 @-@ pound ( 140 kg ) statue , which was formerly located on the roof of the Marion County Courthouse . In 1968 , Arthur B. <unk> became dean and served until 1971 , during which time the admissions standards changed at Willamette to require a bachelor 's degree and taking the Law School Admission Test . Later deans of the school include Larry K. Harvey ( 1971 – 1977 ) and Leroy <unk> ( 1979 – 1987 ) . 
 In 1984 the law school established the Center for Dispute Resolution , an alternative dispute resolution program . In 1992 , the Collins Legal Center went through an award @-@ winning renovation and expansion that ended with a dedication ceremony with a speech by U.S. Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O ’ Connor . In her dedication speech , O 'Connor advocated for civility among those in the legal profession and for avoiding personal attacks among lawyers . In December 2005 , the school 's moot courtroom was used for a real civil trial after the Marion County Courthouse was damaged the previous month . 
 Deans of the school in recent years include David R. <unk> ( 1994 – 1996 interim ) , Robert M. Ackerman ( 1996 – 1999 ) , and Symeon <unk> ( 1999 to 2011 ) . In 2008 , the school opened the Oregon Civic Justice Center to house programs including the Oregon Law Commission , the Center for Dispute Resolution , the Clinical Law Program , Center for Law and Government , and the Willamette Law Review . The dedication ceremony featured U.S. Supreme Court Associate Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg and was part of the school 's celebration of their 125th anniversary . Willamette admitted part @-@ time students for the first time for Fall 2012 , and added a joint degree program with Oregon State University . 
 = = Academics = = 
 = = = Acceptance = = = 
 The College of Law offers full @-@ time enrollment exclusively for its JD program , with an admissions deadline of March 1 for the JD program . In 2013 , the school accepted 63 % of all applicants who applied to the school . Enrolled students from that entering class had Law School Admission Test ( LSAT ) scores in the range of 151 to 156 ( 25th – 75th percentile ) and a median score of 153 . In 2007 and 2010 , U.S. News & World Report ranked the school in their Third Tier , while in 2008 the school was ranked sixth by The Princeton Review in the " Most Welcoming of Older Students " category . As of 2015 , Willamette was ranked as the 118th best law school by U.S. News & World Report , an improvement from 121st in 2014 . 
 = = = Programs = = = 
 The JD program has both a traditional three @-@ year , full @-@ time curriculum or a part @-@ time day program that can take a maximum of six years . Students ' initial enrollment can only begin with the fall term each year . Through a partnership between the College of Law and Willamette 's Atkinson Graduate School of Management , a joint degree program is offered to students interested in earning both a JD and an MBA concurrently . The program allows students to earn both degrees in four years instead of five years if completed separately . The business portion of the program is accredited through the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business , while the law portion , along with the entire law school , is accredited by the American Bar Association . 
 Willamette also offers two three @-@ plus @-@ three programs to allow students to earn both an undergraduate degree and law degree in a total of six years . Through partnerships with Willamette 's College of Liberal Arts , Oregon State University , and University of Alaska Anchorage , students can earn a bachelor 's degree in three years and a law degree in three years , amounting to a decrease of one year from the standard seven years combined to earn both a bachelor and law degree . Both JD and joint @-@ degree students have the option of enrolling in the certificate programs , studying abroad , working at the Clinical Law Program , and taking classes from the Center for Dispute Resolution . 
 The Center for Dispute Resolution , founded in 1983 , was one of the first in the western United States to offer coursework in the areas of arbitration , negotiation and mediation . Focusing on Alternative Dispute Resolution ( ADR ) , its program is a national model , and the center is annually recognized as one of the top ten programs in the nation . In 2006 , the Dispute Resolution program was ranked 7th by U.S. News & World Report . 
 Willamette 's College of Law also offers a Clinical Law Program that gives law students hands @-@ on professional experience in law offices and courtrooms across the country . The program consists of two main components , the <unk> Program and the Civil Practice Clinic . Both parts allow students to participate in real @-@ life legal work . 
 Students have the opportunity to participate in study abroad programs in Germany , Ecuador and China . The China program began in 1984 , followed by the Ecuador program in 1995 , and in 2002 Germany was added . 
 = = = LL.M. = = = 
 The LL.M. in Transnational Law educates law students on a variety of international law topics such as international business transactions , comparative law , as well as private international law . The program also covers dispute resolution and allows students to enroll in classes at the Atkinson Graduate School of Management . LL.M. students can attend either full @-@ time or part @-@ time , but must complete the ten @-@ credit @-@ hour program within two academic years . 
 = = = Certificate programs = = = 
 The law school offers five certificate programs for students in both the JD program and the joint degree program : Dispute Resolution , Law and Business , International and Comparative Law , Sustainability Law , and Law and Government . The business law , law and government , and international and comparative law certificate programs were introduced to the curriculum in 2002 . These programs allow students to specialize in those areas of study and earn a certificate demonstrating that specialization . 
 = = Law journals = = 
 The College of Law produces five publications , including three law reviews . In 1992 , the Willamette Journal of International Law and Dispute Resolution began publication with a focus on dispute resolution and the law on the international level . 
 Willamette Law Review began in 1959 , with four editions each year . This general interest legal review also sponsors an annual symposium at the school . The first journal on sports law in the Pacific Northwest was the Willamette Sports Law Journal . The official <unk> abbreviations used for citations are " Willamette J. Int 'l L. & <unk> . <unk> . " for the Journal of International Law and Dispute Resolution and " Willamette L. Rev. " for the Willamette Law Review . 
 Willamette 's College of Law also produces Willamette Lawyer and Willamette Law Online . Willamette Lawyer is the school ’ s alumni magazine , published twice annually with one edition in the spring and the second in the fall . Produced primarily by students , Willamette Law Online is a subscription service that provides case summaries free to legal professionals in the Pacific Northwest . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Willamette ’ s College of Law is primarily housed in the Truman Wesley Collins Legal Center ( Collins Legal Center ) . Students have 24 @-@ hour secure access to the 75 @,@ 000 + square foot building , which was renovated in 1992 . The building is located on Winter Street in Salem , just south of the Oregon State Capitol . In addition to classrooms , the building houses the law library , administrative offices , and faculty offices . The building also contains a fully functioning trial courtroom used for moot court . 
 = = = Oregon Civic Justice Center = = = 
 Opened in 2008 , the Oregon Civic Justice Center is one block north of the Collins Legal Center . Built within Salem 's 1912 Carnegie library building , the school remodeled the structure at a cost of $ 4 million . The building is home to the Willamette Law Review ; the Oregon Law Commission ; Willamette 's Center for Democracy , Religion and Law ; the Center for Dispute Resolution ; the law school 's clinical program ; and the Center for Law and Government . These programs were chosen due to their community outreach programs , as the school plans to create a community atmosphere between students , faculty , and the general community . 
 = = = Library = = = 
 The J. W. Long Law Library has 296 @,@ 000 volumes and microform equivalents , which include both state and federal primary law sources , as well as treatises , periodicals and other secondary legal sources . The three @-@ story structure is attached to the Collins Legal Center and contains study rooms , video rooms , conference rooms , computer labs , and is staffed by reference librarians . Additionally , it has special collections in tax law , public international law , labor law , and is a Selective Federal Government Documents Depository . Members of the public may access the library when the library is staffed by librarians , while students and faculty have 24 @-@ hour access to the library . Law students also have access to Willamette University 's Mark O. Hatfield Library , the Oregon Supreme Court Law Library , the Oregon State Library , and the Oregon State Archives . 
 = = Employment = = 
 According to Willamette 's official 2013 ABA @-@ required disclosures , 61 @.@ 7 % of the Class of 2013 obtained full @-@ time , long @-@ term , JD @-@ required employment nine months after graduation . Willamette 's Law School Transparency under @-@ employment score is 17 @.@ 1 % , indicating the percentage of the Class of 2013 unemployed , pursuing an additional degree , or working in a non @-@ professional , short @-@ term , or part @-@ time job nine months after graduation . 
 = = Costs = = 
 The total cost of attendance ( indicating the cost of tuition , fees , and living expenses ) at Willamette for the 2014 @-@ 2015 academic year is $ 56 @,@ 713 . The Law School Transparency estimated debt @-@ financed cost of attendance for three years is $ 210 @,@ 586 . 
 = = Distinguished faculty = = 
 Paul De Muniz - Former Chief Justice of the Oregon Supreme Court 
 Susan M. Leeson – Former Justice of the Oregon Supreme Court 
 Hans A. Linde – Former Chief Justice of the Oregon Supreme Court 
 Charles L. McNary – Former United States Senator 
 Edwin J. Peterson – Former Chief Justice of the Oregon Supreme Court 
 = = Distinguished alumni = = 
 William A. Barton – trial attorney , author 
 Bruce Botelho – current mayor of Juneau , Alaska 
 Jay Bowerman – former Governor of Oregon 
 Wallace P. Carson , Jr . – former Chief Justice of the Oregon Supreme Court 
 Willis C. Hawley – former member of the United States House of Representatives 
 Fern Hobbs – former secretary to Governor Oswald West 
 Jay Inslee – current Governor of the State of Washington 
 Virginia Linder – current Associate Justice of the Oregon Supreme Court 
 Conde McCullough – bridge engineer 
 <unk> McGuire – current member of the Alaska Senate 
 Bob <unk> – trial attorney , author , Olympian 
 John Mizuno - Vice Speaker of the Hawaii House of Representatives 
 Paul De Muniz – current Chief Justice of the Oregon Supreme Court 
 Lisa <unk> – current United States Senator 
 Norma Paulus – former Oregon Secretary of State 
 Leonardo <unk> – current attorney general of Guam 
 Stephen Yamashiro – Mayor of Hawaii County 1992 – 2000 
 = Shiloh ( Naylor novel ) = 
 Shiloh is a Newbery Medal @-@ winning children 's novel by Phyllis Reynolds Naylor published in 1991 . The 65th book by Naylor , it is the first in a quartet about a young boy and the title character , an abused dog . Naylor decided to write Shiloh after an emotionally taxing experience in West Virginia where she encountered an abused dog . 
 Narrator and protagonist Marty Preston lives in the hills of Friendly , West Virginia . After finding an abused beagle owned by his brutal neighbor Judd Travers , Marty defies his society 's standards of not meddling with each other 's business . Marty resolves to steal and hide the dog , naming him Shiloh and fabricating a web of lies to keep his secret . After his theft is discovered , Marty discovers Judd shooting a deer out of season and blackmails him into selling Shiloh to him . Because he lacks the money to buy Shiloh , Marty resolutely works for Judd doing numerous chores . 
 Primarily a Bildungsroman and adventure novel , the novel depicts the emotional tribulations and maturing of an 11 @-@ year @-@ old boy . Some themes of the novel are ethics , consequentialism , religion and morality , and animal – human relationships . Marty learns that morality is confounding and must choose between two unpalatable choices : rescuing the abused Shiloh through stealing and lying and allowing Judd to keep abusing Shiloh . 
 Reviewers generally gave positive reviews of the book and were impressed by the novel 's suspense and vernacular language . In addition to the Newbery Medal , Shiloh has received several state awards voted upon by children , including the Sequoyah Children 's Book Award , the Mark Twain Readers Award , and the William Allen White Children 's Book Award . In 1996 , the book was adapted into a movie of the same name . The novel spawned three sequels , Shiloh Season , Saving Shiloh , and A Shiloh Christmas published in 1996 , 1997 , and 2015 , respectively . Shiloh is taught in many elementary school courses in the United States . 
 = = Background and publishing = = 
 Born in 1933 in Anderson , Indiana , Phyllis Reynolds Naylor was raised in Indiana and Illinois in the 1930s during the Great Depression . During her childhood she was hardly given any toys . Instead , with her parents reading to her every night , books formed a major part of her early years — " the happiest part " . Her parents read a variety of literature to her , including Bible stories , The Wind in the Willows , and Mark Twain 's novels , until she was 14 . After she became a parent , she read to her children in the mornings because of their evening activities . At 16 , Naylor wrote a short story for a church magazine , and in her early thirties she published her first book . She has published over 100 books . When she wrote and published Shiloh , her 65th novel , she was living in Bethesda , Maryland with her husband Rex , a speech pathologist whom she married in May 1960 . She has two adult sons and four grandchildren . 
 Naylor writes books for children , teens , and adults . Writing sporadically , Naylor typically takes several years to finish a book . With about 10 notebooks next to her workspace , she writes down story ideas and character traits when she thinks of them . She considered Shiloh to be a deviation from the norm because she finished the first draft in just eight weeks . 
 Edited by Jonathan Lanman , Shiloh was published by Atheneum Books on September 30 , 1991 . The novel has been translated into at least 10 languages : Chinese , Dutch , French , German , Hebrew , Italian , Japanese , Korean , Spanish , and Swedish . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The novel is set in the small town of Friendly , West Virginia , where an eleven @-@ year @-@ old boy named Marty Preston finds a stray beagle wandering in the hills near his house . The dog follows him home , and Marty names him Shiloh , a tribute to a neighborhood schoolhouse . Shiloh 's real owner is Judd Travers , who owns several hunting dogs . Fearing for the dog 's safety because Judd drinks and treats his hunting dogs poorly , Marty does not want to return Shiloh . His father insists that Shiloh be returned to his rightful owner and they take the dog home to Judd . 
 Shiloh returns to Marty who hides him from his family . Concealing Shiloh in the woods in a wire pen he builds , Marty smuggles some of his dinner to the dog each evening . After his mother discovers Marty feeding the dog , he persuades her not to reveal the secret . That night , Shiloh is attacked by a German Shepherd Dog while in his makeshift cage and his family discovers Marty has been lying and hiding the dog . After taking the dog to the town doctor , the family must return Shiloh to his rightful owner by Sunday . 
 Before doing so , Marty travels up to Travers ' house to try to convince Travers to allow him to keep Shiloh . Judd does not see Marty approaching , and shoots a doe out of season , which would mean a stiff fine Judd cannot afford . Marty lets Judd know he knows , and attempts to blackmail him out of Shiloh . Judd and Marty eventually negotiate a deal in which Marty will earn Shiloh for 40 dollars , paid with 20 hours of working for Judd . At the end of the first week , Judd says that he will not keep his end of the deal because the evidence of the dead doe has with the passage of time disappeared . Second , the contract that Marty had him sign is worthless in the state of West Virginia without the signature of a witness . Despite Judd 's pointed disapproval of his work , Marty continues to work for him . They begin discussing dogs and Judd 's father who began physically abusing Judd when he was four years old . In the end , Judd warms to Marty , relents , and lets him keep Shiloh . 
 = = Autobiographical elements = = 
 In a 1992 interview about Shiloh , Naylor said : " Like a patchwork quilt , a novel is made up of things that have happened to me and things I have heard or read about , all mixed up with imaginings . " Naylor 's characters are frequently based on herself and her two sons . She penned the novel following an excursion with her husband , Rex , to visit their friends , Frank and Trudy Madden , in West Virginia . Naylor and Rex were strolling along a river when they discovered a dog in the grass following them . Dejected and frightened , the dog was " the saddest , most mistreated @-@ looking beagle I 'd ever seen " , Naylor later said . Because the dog frequently shuddered and <unk> forward on her belly , Naylor suspected she had been abused . On a whim , Naylor whistled and the dog rushed forward , lapping Naylor 's face . <unk> them until they reached the Maddens ' house , the beagle remained under a tree , her paws cushioning her head during the drizzly afternoon . Naylor cried during her and her husband 's trip home that night . 
 Rex asked her if she would have a " nervous breakdown " or if she would " do something about it " . That " something " referred to writing a book , which she did . She believed that someone had abused the dog and was confronted by a series of questions : 
 What if I knew who was abusing it ? What if I knew who it belonged to ? What if the dog kept running to me ? Then , if you write for children , you think about what if I was 11 years old ? 
 The Maddens resided near Shiloh , West Virginia , where Naylor found the abused dog in 1989 , so she decided to name the book 's dog Shiloh . Because the Maddens ' post office address is in Friendly , West Virginia , Naylor chose the town as her book 's setting . Trudy and Frank Madden adopted the abused dog Naylor had seen . Trudy Madden said in a 1997 interview that Naylor 's description of Shiloh , West Virginia , was precise . By following the directions in Shiloh and its sequels , the town 's houses , mill , and schoolhouse could be located easily . 
 = = Style = = 
 Shiloh is told in the first person in main character Marty Preston 's voice . The prose has perceptible grammatical errors and a bucolic tone . Arlene <unk> Rae of Toronto Star wrote that the novel is written in the " uncomplicated style " for which Naylor is distinguished . Jane Langton of The New York Times Book Review stated that the novel was written in a " comfortable , down @-@ home style " . Writing that the main story in Shiloh is Marty 's struggle in his mind with morality , Langston noted that it is " presented simply , in a way any third- or fourth @-@ grade reader can understand " . Scholar Kathie Cerra praised the novel for its " vivid sensory detail " , which enables readers to experience Marty 's " inner life of thought and feeling " . In Marty 's " teem [ ing ] with life " first @-@ person narrative , he shows how he feels when he tells lies to his parents and when he embraces the wriggling Shiloh . 
 Academic Leona W. Fisher wrote in Children 's Literature Association Quarterly that the novel employs a seldom used yet ingenious literary technique : the story is told with " the sustained internal monologue presented almost exclusively in the present tense " . The mores of his society and the actions of adults are strained through Marty 's mind concurrently with his emotional agony and ethical judgments . The dialogue of the other characters tempers but does not counteract the " exclusivity of his linguistic point of view " because Marty is the sole narrator . Shiloh has a " compacted time @-@ frame , bounded by the past @-@ tense opening and closing " . Fisher noted that because the novel 's events are confined to several weeks in the summer , there is no need for a " panoramic sweep " of the actions . The reader can concentrate solely on Marty 's ethical crisis . <unk> the mood of the novel is also mostly confined to Marty 's thoughts and current action . Naylor uses the past @-@ perfect verb " had " on several occasions to depict the tones of the scenes . This usage conveys turning @-@ points in the story , transferring the reader from the " immediate tension " of the present to a growing cognizance . 
 Scholars Alethea Helbig and Agnes Perkins wrote that the " Appalachian setting is well evoked , in both its beauty and its code of ethics that Marty must defy to save the dog " . Reviewer Ellen Mandel of Booklist wrote that the " West Virginia dialect richly seasons the true @-@ to @-@ life dialogue " . Kenneth E. <unk> of School Library Journal perceived an incongruity in Naylor 's depiction of Marty 's family . He noted that Marty 's father is a postman , one of the best paid jobs in suburban settings . In the novel , however , the family is poverty @-@ stricken . 
 Reviewer Cecilia Goodnow noted that Shiloh is a Bildungsroman and adventure novel . Marty undergoes a physical and emotional transformation in his quest to save Shiloh . After confronting an abusive adult , he mentally grows , concluding : " I saved Shiloh and opened my eyes some . Now that ain 't bad for eleven . " Salem Press 's Carol Ann Gearhart has characterized the novel as domestic realism . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Abuse and love = = = 
 Physically abused as a child , Judd wants to keep Shiloh because he does not comprehend why people are so interested in rescuing the abused dog . No one cared to rescue Judd when he was harmed throughout his youth . Despite Judd 's growing into a harsh man , reviewer Hary Sheehan noted , he preserves a glimmer of empathy . Journalist Kate Cavanaugh wrote that Judds ' inability to love and cherish Shiloh is borne because of the love his family nurtured in him . 
 = = = Animal – human relationships = = = 
 Author Timothy Morris wrote that the plot and themes in Shiloh had many parallels to the 1940 novel Lassie Come @-@ Home by Eric Knight . In both novels , boys fall in love with dogs owned by others . The dogs repeatedly return to the children in " mirror <unk> [ e ] scenes " , while the ethical fathers try to convince them not to betray their morals and fall for the dogs . 
 Morris wrote that Shiloh 's faithfulness to Marty is portrayed in " affective human terms " . In the secluded , bucolic West Virginia , Shiloh becomes the masculine friend Marty did not have . The beagle adopts the persona of the brother Marty never had . Marty doggedly believes that Shiloh and other animals are creatures with feelings . <unk> with Marty 's emotions , the beagle is considered by Marty to be a confidante . On the other hand , in pastoral West Virginia , some adults consider animals to bring only economic benefits to humans . Morris stated that children like Marty defy their rural culture and advance to an upper @-@ class mindset . 
 Scholar Claudia Mills wrote that Marty 's parents subscribe to the belief that because Shiloh is Judd 's property , they should not be concerned with how Judd treats Shiloh . They tell Marty : " You 've got to go by the law . The law says that a man that pays money for a dog owns that dog . " At odds with this philosophy , Marty strongly believes that love — not money — should determine ownership . 
 = = = Ethics = = = 
 In Shiloh , Naylor does not impart an explicit meaning of " honesty " to her juvenile readers , journalist Nancy Gilson observed . Instead , she conveys how " confusing and unanswerable " morality is using main character Marty 's ethical predicaments and plot twists . To harbor Shiloh from the antagonist Judd and his principled parents , Marty must steal food and tell falsehoods . His dishonest actions serve as a contrast to his conscientious persona and his benevolent rescuing of the dog . Every night , Marty prays , " Jesus ... which do you want me to do ? Be one hundred percent honest and carry that dog back to Judd so that one of your creatures can be kicked and starved all over again , or keep him here and fatten him up to glorify your creation ? " 
 According to Judith B. Rosenfeld of the Knoxville News @-@ Sentinel , Naylor makes the statement that children raised in healthy families make ethical choices and ultimately thrive . In a 1994 interview Naylor said : 
 One of the pluses of writing for children is that the child may very well be reading about the subject for the first time . In Shiloh , there 's a moral dilemma with no black or white answer ; the character compromises . It may be the child 's first time to realize that there are not sure answers . It 's sort of thrilling to have a child meet a problem like this for the first time . " 
 Naylor believes that there is much " gray area between right and wrong " . Instead of following the straightforward correct path , Marty is forced to select between two unpalatable choices . Reviewer Matt Berman of The Times @-@ Picayune believed that the book 's main moral is that " nothing is as simple as it seems " . Entertainment Weekly 's Michele Landsberg praised the novel , writing that Shiloh is a " strongly persuasive story of moral growth , told without a hint of moralizing and with acute insight into a preadolescent 's inner life " . 
 In the children 's literature journal The ALAN Review published by The Assembly on Literature for Adolescents , Edgar H. Thompson , Connie B. Blevins , and Allison Fitzgerald argued that protagonist Marty " consistently behaves " at levels 5 and 6 of Kohlberg 's stages of development . For instance , on his walk to Judd 's house , he wonders : " Easy as pie for Judd Travers to put a bullet hole in my head , say he didn 't see me . " Despite his fears , Marty continues walking to Judd 's house , persistent on protecting Shiloh despite potential bodily harm and even death to himself . The authors brooded over whether an 11 year old could attain such an elevated level despite most adults ' never being able to do so . Ultimately noting that the Newbery Committee and thousands of readers consider Marty to be realistic , they concluded that Marty is a positive role model for children to strive to be . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In her essay " The Structure of the Moral Dilemma in Shiloh " for Children 's Literature , Claudia Mills wrote that Shiloh deals with " consequentialism pitted against deontological respect for moral duty " . Taught from his youth to be respectful to others and worship God , Marty is confounded by the injustice of Shiloh 's being abused . He seeks to justify his unethical actions by thinking that " [ a ] lie don 't seem a lie anymore when it 's meant to save a dog . " <unk> base the worthiness of a person 's act on its result . Marty 's act of saving Shiloh is worse for Shiloh 's well @-@ being . After Shiloh is concealed in the woods , a German shepherd attacks the beagle , causing to become permanently lame . Marty laments : " Worst of all , I 'd brought Shiloh here to keep him from being hurt , and what that German shepherd done to him was probably worse than anything Judd Travers would have brought himself to do , short of shootin ' him , anyways . " 
 Mills noted that consequentialism does not merely expect that the consequences to one entity is determined . It requires a review of the consequences to all . When Marty observes Judd 's out @-@ of @-@ season shooting of a deer , he uses the incident to blackmail him to sell Shiloh to him . However , this places deer in the future in danger of Judd 's hunting . Marty sadly reflects : " By <unk> ' him get away with this , I 'm putting other deer in danger . He kill this one out of season , he 'll figure maybe he can kill some more . To save Shiloh , I 'm making it harder for deer " . In essence , he selects the " domestic love over the grander principle " . 
 = = = Religion and morality = = = 
 Reviewers observed that religion plays an influential role in Marty 's moral decisions . After Marty takes a forbidden bite from his sister Dara Lynn 's chocolate Easter rabbit and refuses to own up , his mother is disappointed . She tells him : " Dara Lynn don 't know who ate the ear off her candy rabbit and I don 't know who did it , but Jesus knows . And right this minute Jesus is looking down with the saddest eyes on the person who ate that chocolate . " Marty 's very religious mother teaches him that people should not sin or they will be " separated forever from God 's love . " 
 Academic Claudia Mills wrote that Marty determines to save Shiloh in a scene that is reminiscent of Huckleberry Finn 's well @-@ known resolution to save Jim from slavery : " All right , then , I 'll go to hell . " Thinking about the falsehoods he has told to save Shiloh , he believes he is bound for hell . He reflects : 
 If what Grandma Preston told me once about heaven and hell is true , and liars go to hell , then I guess that 's where I 'm headed . But she also told me that only people are allowed in heaven , not animals . And if I was to go to heaven and look down to see Shiloh left below , head on his paws , I 'd run away from heaven sure . 
 Near the novel 's conclusion , Judd refuses to honor his agreement with Marty because there was no witness . When Marty asks his mother what a witness is , she responds : " Somebody who knows the Lord Jesus and don 't mind <unk> ' about it . " Despite Judd 's refusal to honor the agreement , Marty persistently maintains his part of it . He decides : " I got no choice . All I can do is stick to my side of the deal and see what happens . All in the world I can do . " After ultimately ceding Shiloh to Marty , Judd asks : " What you going to do with that dog once he 's yours ? " Marty 's simple reply is : " Love him . " Scholar Claudia Mills noted that : " The resolution of the stand @-@ off comes when Marty , in essence , stands witness , in his mother 's religious sense of witness , for an ethic of love , crystallized in his love for Shiloh . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The News & Observer 's Elizabeth Ward listed Shiloh as one of the best children 's books in 1991 . She called the book a " heartstopping , but tough @-@ as @-@ steel story of a boy and an abused dog in the hardscrabble hill country of West Virginia " . Author Timothy Morris deemed Shiloh to be the " most celebrated dog novel of the nineties " . Michele Landsberg of Entertainment Weekly called Shiloh a " compelling read " and rated the novel an A. Equating Shiloh to classics like Charlotte 's Web , author Laura Elliott praised the novel 's " voice , suspense , and layer of themes " . 
 After Shiloh received the Newbery Award , Jane Langton wrote in The New York Times Book Review : " Did Shiloh really deserve the prize ? Surely there must have been a book more important than this agreeable but slight story . " Langton opined that Shiloh was " a good book , not a great book " and that there must have been few worthy children 's books that year . The Sacramento Bee 's Judy Green disagreed , believing that Shiloh was " worthy of its award , which labels it the best fiction for children written last year " . Green lauded Naylor for her " excellent portrayal of Marty 's introspection and superb storytelling in the area 's vernacular " . 
 The Booklist 's Ellen Mandel extolled the novel for its " moving and powerful look " at the virtues and vices of human nature and the murky moral choices in conflicts of everyday life . In her favorable review of Shiloh , Betsy Hearne of The Bulletin of the Center for Children 's Books wrote that " readers will be absorbed by the suspenseful plot , which will leave them with some memorable characterizations as well as several intriguing ethical questions " . K.B. Cartwright of The Reading Teacher also praised the novel for providing a " gripping account of family conflict and honesty " . In a similarly positive review , Kirkus Reviews praised the book for being a " gripping account of a mountain boy 's love for a dog he 's hiding from its owner " . Calling it " unusually warm and moving " , Heather Vogel Frederick of The Christian Science Monitor praised the novel for being an " excellent choice as a family read @-@ aloud " . 
 Censors have objected to the profanity in Shiloh . Naylor received an angry letter from the parents of a 10 @-@ year @-@ old boy , who were angered by the language in the book . The character Judd had sworn , " dammit " . The author replied in an interview with The Virginian @-@ Pilot that some people in the world " speak crudely " and " you can 't put your child in a glass bubble and protect him always " . Several West Virginian book reviewers have complained about the dialect in the novel , believing that West Virginians do not speak with a dialect . In one review , a newspaper writer said that when she read the book to her children , she chose not to read with the dialect . 
 = = Honors = = 
 In 1992 , Shiloh received the John Newbery Medal . The annual award , bestowed by the children 's librarians division of the American Library Association , is given for " the most distinguished contribution to American literature for children " . Shiloh was a dark horse for the award . Ohio State University Professor <unk> Sims Bishop , a member of the 1992 Newbery committee , said in an interview that Shiloh was a " sleeper " that surfaced as a serious contender deep in their debate . After the January 27 , 1992 announcement of Shiloh 's winning the Newbery Medal , Naylor was flooded with numerous phone calls , requests for interviews , and mail . In an April 1992 interview , Naylor said : " Frankly , to go the bathroom , I have had to take the phone off the hook . " The book was also selected as an American Library Association Notable Children 's Book . 
 In January 1994 , over 60 @,@ 000 third – sixth graders in the state of Oklahoma selected from Shiloh 23 nominees as the winner of the Sequoyah Children 's Book Award . The Sequoyah Award was presented to Naylor in April 1994 during the yearly Oklahoma Library Association conference . On April 14 , 1994 , at the annual conference of the Missouri Association of School Librarians , Shiloh received that year 's Mark Twain Readers Award . The Mark Twain Award is decided annually through a vote by fourth – eighth graders in the state of Missouri . On October 29 , 1994 , Naylor received the William Allen White Children 's Book Award for Shiloh . The award is decided through the tallying of over 55 @,@ 000 children in the state of Kansas . 
 In 1997 , The Virginian @-@ Pilot chose Shiloh as the subject of a " community @-@ wide effort to get people of all ages reading and talking about books " . Beginning in October , the newspaper serialized Shiloh , publishing two chapters every week until the end of November . It also created a book guide about Shiloh and printed 1 @,@ 000 copies for parents and teachers . A chat room was created for children to direct questions and comments about Shiloh . In 1999 , Shiloh was selected as a recommended novel for children ages nine to twelve in the Read Across America initiative . In 2000 , the Shiloh trilogy placed at number seven on the National Education Association 's Children 's Top 100 book list . Naylor was delighted that children had given her work such a high ranking . Shiloh is taught in many American elementary school courses . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 Shiloh has three sequels , Shiloh Season , Saving Shiloh , and A Shiloh Christmas published in 1996 , 1997 , and 2015 respectively . In Shiloh Season , Naylor renews the strife by restoring Judd 's hostility and aggravating it with a bout of drinking issues . Marty fears Judd will take back Shiloh and be faithless to the deal they made . Whereas in Shiloh Marty confronts the confusing and ambiguous concept of morality , in Shiloh Season he must face the notion of wickedness . 
 In the third book , Saving Shiloh , Marty 's parents persuade Marty that people who have wronged are worthy of forgiveness . In the midst of several robberies and a murder , the community hastily faults Judd . Willing to grant Judd a second chance , Marty attempts to help him . Meanwhile , Marty and his family must face the intricacies of life such as death , hostility , and sibling rivalry . 
 Published on September 22 , 2015 , the fourth book , A Shiloh Christmas , was published by Atheneum , which printed 200 @,@ 000 copies . A ferocious drought strikes Marty 's community , and a new pastor joins blaming remorseless sinners for instigating it . Looking for a scapegoat , community members lie the responsibility squarely on people like Judd , an alcoholic and animal abuser who has reformed . A fire ravages multiple houses , including Judd 's , prompting Marty and his family to help the homeowners reconstruct their homes . One day , Marty and a friend stumble upon Rachel , the pastor 's daughter , confined to the pastor 's <unk> . The incident forces Marty 's parents to determine whether the disciplinary action has crossed the line from being disciplinary to being abusive . The book ends with characters who have vehemently differing views having a therapeutic Christmas meal together . 
 Naylor penned the sequels in response to " the surprising degree of hatred which children show toward Judd Travers " . Noting that Judd 's life had been molded by the abuse he suffered as a child , she hoped that the novels would enable children to see Judd as a person like Marty who must make difficult moral choices . 
 The first three books in the quartet each were made into a movie : Shiloh in 1996 , Shiloh Season in 1999 , and Saving Shiloh in 2006 . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 In 1996 Warner Bros. Pictures released Shiloh , which was directed by Dale Rosenbloom . The first of Naylor 's more than 100 juvenile and adult works to be adapted into a movie , it starred Blake Heron as Marty and Scott Wilson as Judd Travers . Budgeted at less than $ 2 million , Shiloh was filmed in 30 days in October 1996 at Topanga , California . 
 Rosenbloom 's film differed from Naylor 's novel in several key aspects . In the novel , Marty 's family is poor and economic opportunities are limited . The family 's four @-@ room homestead is ancient and has not seen remodeling in decades . In the film , the family is wealthy and there are numerous economic opportunities . The family 's two @-@ story house is a " stunning showplace of hardwoods , elegant color schemes , and tasteful appointments " . Marty makes money very quickly by doing various chores . By transforming Marty 's family from being poor to being well off , Rosenbloom makes the conflict between Marty and Judd an emotional , instead of an economic one . In the novel , Marty and his family hunt animals , while in the film , his father does not hunt . Author Timothy Morris states that " [ t ] he force of the film 's ideology is to blur all distinctions between humans and animals " . Judd is transformed from a native in the novel into an interloper in the film who holds the contrarian view that humans and animals are different , that " [ a ] <unk> were put here for us . They ain ' got no other purpose or feelin 's . " 
 Instead of being about Marty 's love for Shiloh , most of the novel occurs in Marty 's thoughts such as when he ponders about telling falsehoods to his parents . Because the book was considered " very internal " by the major film studios , director Dale Rosenbloom labored over making the film more external . Rosenbloom added new characters and scenes to the story and faxed each change to the novel 's author . Naylor was neither fearful of Rosenbloom 's changes nor unhesitant at suggesting changes . After the film was released , Naylor said that Rosenbloom " did a very good job " , and Rosenbloom said , " We did do right by the book and her ... She lives by her code and if you honor it , she appreciates it . " By June 1997 , Naylor had seen the film six times . In an interview that month , she noted that she was always struck by the hush of the theater and by how the film entrances everyone , even the children . 
 Despite an underwhelming performance in the movie theaters , the film received high video sales . Ranking Shiloh as one of his top 10 selections , Roger Ebert praised the film for being a " remarkably mature and complex story about a boy who loves a dog and cannot bear to see it mistreated " , depicting " the real world with all of its terrors and responsibilities " . Shiloh was honored with " best film " at the Chicago International Film Festival . 
 = = = Audiobook = = = 
 The audiobook version of Shiloh was released by Bantam Books in 1992 . Performed by Peter MacNicol , the three @-@ hour @-@ long audiobook is unabridged . Author John Wynne praised MacNicol 's delivery , writing that he " does character voices well — both male and female — and creates a folksy atmosphere appropriate to the material " . 
 = Massachusetts Institute of Technology = 
 The Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) is a private research university in Cambridge , Massachusetts . Founded in 1861 in response to the increasing industrialization of the United States , MIT adopted a European polytechnic university model and stressed laboratory instruction in applied science and engineering . Researchers worked on computers , radar , and inertial guidance during World War II and the Cold War . Post @-@ war defense research contributed to the rapid expansion of the faculty and campus under James Killian . The current 168 @-@ acre ( 68 @.@ 0 ha ) campus opened in 1916 and extends over 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) along the northern bank of the Charles River basin . 
 MIT , with five schools and one college which contain a total of 34 departments , is often cited as among the world 's top universities . The Institute is traditionally known for its research and education in the physical sciences and engineering , and more recently in biology , economics , linguistics , and management as well . The " Engineers " sponsor 31 sports , most teams of which compete in the NCAA Division III 's New England Women 's and Men 's Athletic Conference ; the Division I rowing programs compete as part of the <unk> and <unk> . 
 As of 2015 , 85 Nobel laureates , 52 National Medal of Science recipients , 65 Marshall Scholars , 45 Rhodes Scholars , 38 MacArthur Fellows , 34 astronauts , 19 Turing award winners , and 6 Fields Medalists have been affiliated with MIT . The school has a strong entrepreneurial culture , and the aggregated revenues of companies founded by MIT alumni would rank as the eleventh @-@ largest economy in the world . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Foundation and vision = = = 
 In 1859 , a proposal was submitted to the Massachusetts General Court to use newly filled lands in Back Bay , Boston for a " Conservatory of Art and Science " , but the proposal failed . A charter for the incorporation of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , proposed by William Barton Rogers , was signed by the governor of Massachusetts on April 10 , 1861 . 
 Rogers , a professor from the University of Virginia , wanted to establish an institution to address rapid scientific and technological advances . He did not wish to found a professional school , but a combination with elements of both professional and liberal education , proposing that : 
 The true and only practicable object of a polytechnic school is , as I conceive , the teaching , not of the minute details and manipulations of the arts , which can be done only in the workshop , but the inculcation of those scientific principles which form the basis and explanation of them , and along with this , a full and methodical review of all their leading processes and operations in connection with physical laws . 
 The Rogers Plan reflected the German research university model , emphasizing an independent faculty engaged in research , as well as instruction oriented around seminars and laboratories . 
 = = = Early developments = = = 
 Two days after the charter was issued , the first battle of the Civil War broke out . After a long delay through the war years , MIT 's first classes were held in the Mercantile Building in Boston in 1865 . The new institute was founded as part of the Morrill Land @-@ Grant Colleges Act to fund institutions " to promote the liberal and practical education of the industrial classes " , and was a land @-@ grant school . In 1863 under the same act , the Commonwealth of Massachusetts founded the Massachusetts Agricultural College , which developed as the University of Massachusetts Amherst . In 1866 , the proceeds from land sales went toward new buildings in the Back Bay . 
 MIT was informally called " Boston Tech " . The institute adopted the European polytechnic university model and emphasized laboratory instruction from an early date . Despite chronic financial problems , the institute saw growth in the last two decades of the 19th century under President Francis Amasa Walker . Programs in electrical , chemical , marine , and sanitary engineering were introduced , new buildings were built , and the size of the student body increased to more than one thousand . 
 The curriculum drifted to a vocational emphasis , with less focus on theoretical science . The fledgling school still suffered from chronic financial shortages which diverted the attention of the MIT leadership . During these " Boston Tech " years , MIT faculty and alumni rebuffed Harvard University president ( and former MIT faculty ) Charles W. Eliot 's repeated attempts to merge MIT with Harvard College 's Lawrence Scientific School . There would be at least six attempts to absorb MIT into Harvard . In its cramped Back Bay location , MIT could not afford to expand its overcrowded facilities , driving a desperate search for a new campus and funding . Eventually the MIT Corporation approved a formal agreement to merge with Harvard , over the vehement objections of MIT faculty , students , and alumni . However , a 1917 decision by the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court effectively put an end to the merger scheme . 
 In 1916 , the MIT administration and the MIT charter crossed the Charles River on the ceremonial barge Bucentaur built for the occasion , to signify MIT 's move to a spacious new campus largely consisting of filled land on a mile @-@ long tract along the Cambridge side of the Charles River . The neoclassical " New Technology " campus was designed by William W. Bosworth and had been funded largely by anonymous donations from a mysterious " Mr. Smith " , starting in 1912 . In January 1920 , the donor was revealed to be the industrialist George Eastman of Rochester , New York , who had invented methods of film production and processing , and founded Eastman Kodak . Between 1912 and 1920 , Eastman donated $ 20 million ( $ 236 @.@ 2 million in 2015 dollars ) in cash and Kodak stock to MIT . 
 = = = Curricular reforms = = = 
 In the 1930s , President Karl Taylor Compton and Vice @-@ President ( effectively Provost ) Vannevar Bush emphasized the importance of pure sciences like physics and chemistry and reduced the vocational practice required in shops and drafting studios . The Compton reforms " renewed confidence in the ability of the Institute to develop leadership in science as well as in engineering . " Unlike Ivy League schools , MIT catered more to middle @-@ class families , and depended more on tuition than on endowments or grants for its funding . The school was elected to the Association of American Universities in 1934 . 
 Still , as late as 1949 , the Lewis Committee lamented in its report on the state of education at MIT that " the Institute is widely conceived as basically a vocational school " , a " partly unjustified " perception the committee sought to change . The report comprehensively reviewed the undergraduate curriculum , recommended offering a broader education , and warned against letting engineering and government @-@ sponsored research detract from the sciences and humanities . The School of Humanities , Arts , and Social Sciences and the MIT Sloan School of Management were formed in 1950 to compete with the powerful Schools of Science and Engineering . Previously marginalized faculties in the areas of economics , management , political science , and linguistics emerged into cohesive and assertive departments by attracting respected professors and launching competitive graduate programs . The School of Humanities , Arts , and Social Sciences continued to develop under the successive terms of the more <unk> oriented presidents Howard W. Johnson and Jerome Wiesner between 1966 and 1980 . 
 = = = Defense research = = = 
 MIT 's involvement in military research surged during World War II . In 1941 , Vannevar Bush was appointed head of the federal Office of Scientific Research and Development and directed funding to only a select group of universities , including MIT . Engineers and scientists from across the country gathered at MIT 's Radiation Laboratory , established in 1940 to assist the British military in developing microwave radar . The work done there significantly affected both the war and subsequent research in the area . Other defense projects included gyroscope @-@ based and other complex control systems for gunsight , bombsight , and inertial navigation under Charles Stark Draper 's Instrumentation Laboratory ; the development of a digital computer for flight simulations under Project Whirlwind ; and high @-@ speed and high @-@ altitude photography under Harold Edgerton . By the end of the war , MIT became the nation 's largest wartime R & D contractor ( attracting some criticism of Bush ) , employing nearly 4000 in the Radiation Laboratory alone and receiving in excess of $ 100 million ( $ 1 @.@ 2 billion in 2015 dollars ) before 1946 . Work on defense projects continued even after then . Post @-@ war government @-@ sponsored research at MIT included SAGE and guidance systems for ballistic missiles and Project Apollo . 
 These activities affected MIT profoundly . A 1949 report noted the lack of " any great slackening in the pace of life at the Institute " to match the return to peacetime , remembering the " academic tranquility of the prewar years " , though acknowledging the significant contributions of military research to the increased emphasis on graduate education and rapid growth of personnel and facilities . The faculty doubled and the graduate student body quintupled during the terms of Karl Taylor Compton , president of MIT between 1930 and 1948 ; James Rhyne Killian , president from 1948 to 1957 ; and Julius Adams Stratton , chancellor from 1952 to 1957 , whose institution @-@ building strategies shaped the expanding university . By the 1950s , MIT no longer simply benefited the industries with which it had worked for three decades , and it had developed closer working relationships with new patrons , philanthropic foundations and the federal government . 
 In late 1960s and early 1970s , student and faculty activists protested against the Vietnam War and MIT 's defense research . The Union of Concerned Scientists was founded on March 4 , 1969 during a meeting of faculty members and students seeking to shift the emphasis on military research toward environmental and social problems . MIT ultimately divested itself from the Instrumentation Laboratory and moved all classified research off @-@ campus to the Lincoln Laboratory facility in 1973 in response to the protests . The student body , faculty , and administration remained comparatively <unk> during what was a tumultuous time for many other universities . Johnson was seen to be highly successful in leading his institution to " greater strength and unity " after these times of turmoil . 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 MIT has kept pace with and helped to advance the digital age . In addition to developing the predecessors to modern computing and networking technologies , students , staff , and faculty members at Project MAC , the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory , and the Tech Model Railroad Club wrote some of the earliest interactive computer video games like Spacewar ! and created much of modern hacker slang and culture . Several major computer @-@ related organizations have originated at MIT since the 1980s : Richard Stallman 's GNU Project and the subsequent Free Software Foundation were founded in the mid @-@ 1980s at the AI Lab ; the MIT Media Lab was founded in 1985 by Nicholas Negroponte and Jerome Wiesner to promote research into novel uses of computer technology ; the World Wide Web Consortium standards organization was founded at the Laboratory for Computer Science in 1994 by Tim Berners @-@ Lee ; the OpenCourseWare project has made course materials for over 2 @,@ 000 MIT classes available online free of charge since 2002 ; and the One Laptop per Child initiative to expand computer education and connectivity to children worldwide was launched in 2005 . 
 MIT was named a sea @-@ grant college in 1976 to support its programs in oceanography and marine sciences and was named a space @-@ grant college in 1989 to support its aeronautics and astronautics programs . Despite diminishing government financial support over the past quarter century , MIT launched several successful development campaigns to significantly expand the campus : new dormitories and athletics buildings on west campus ; the Tang Center for Management Education ; several buildings in the northeast corner of campus supporting research into biology , brain and cognitive sciences , genomics , biotechnology , and cancer research ; and a number of new " backlot " buildings on Vassar Street including the Stata Center . Construction on campus in the 2000s included expansions of the Media Lab , the Sloan School 's eastern campus , and graduate residences in the northwest . In 2006 , President Hockfield launched the MIT Energy Research Council to investigate the interdisciplinary challenges posed by increasing global energy consumption . 
 In 2001 , inspired by the open source and open access movements , MIT launched OpenCourseWare to make the lecture notes , problem sets , syllabuses , exams , and lectures from the great majority of its courses available online for no charge , though without any formal accreditation for coursework completed . While the cost of supporting and hosting the project is high , OCW expanded in 2005 to include other universities as a part of the OpenCourseWare Consortium , which currently includes more than 250 academic institutions with content available in at least six languages . In 2011 , MIT announced it would offer formal certification ( but not credits or degrees ) to online participants completing coursework in its " <unk> " program , for a modest fee . The " <unk> " online platform supporting <unk> was initially developed in partnership with Harvard and its analogous " <unk> " initiative . The <unk> platform is open source , and other universities have already joined and added their own course content . 
 Three days after the Boston Marathon bombing of April 2013 , MIT Police patrol officer Sean Collier was fatally shot by the suspects Dzhokhar and Tamerlan Tsarnaev , setting off a violent manhunt that shut down the campus and much of the Boston metropolitan area for a day . One week later , Collier 's memorial service was attended by more than 10 @,@ 000 people , in a ceremony hosted by the MIT community with thousands of police officers from the New England region and Canada . On November 25 , 2013 , MIT announced the creation of the Collier Medal , to be awarded annually to " an individual or group that embodies the character and qualities that Officer Collier exhibited as a member of the MIT community and in all aspects of his life " . The announcement further stated that " Future recipients of the award will include those whose contributions exceed the boundaries of their profession , those who have contributed to building bridges across the community , and those who consistently and selflessly perform acts of kindness " . 
 = = Campus = = 
 MIT 's 168 @-@ acre ( 68 @.@ 0 ha ) campus in the city of Cambridge spans approximately a mile along the north side of the Charles River basin . The campus is divided roughly in half by Massachusetts Avenue , with most dormitories and student life facilities to the west and most academic buildings to the east . The bridge closest to MIT is the Harvard Bridge , which is known for being marked off in a non @-@ standard unit of length – the <unk> . 
 The Kendall MBTA Red Line station is located on the northeastern edge of the campus , in Kendall Square . The Cambridge neighborhoods surrounding MIT are a mixture of high tech companies occupying both modern office and rehabilitated industrial buildings , as well as socio @-@ economically diverse residential neighborhoods . In early 2016 , MIT presented its updated Kendall Square Initiative to the City of Cambridge , with plans for mixed @-@ use educational , retail , residential , startup incubator , and office space in a dense high @-@ rise transit @-@ oriented development plan . The MIT Museum will eventually be moved immediately adjacent to a Kendall Square subway entrance , joining the List Visual Arts Center on the eastern end of the campus . 
 Each building at MIT has a number ( possibly preceded by a W , N , E , or NW ) designation and most have a name as well . Typically , academic and office buildings are referred to primarily by number while residence halls are referred to by name . The organization of building numbers roughly corresponds to the order in which the buildings were built and their location relative ( north , west , and east ) to the original center cluster of Maclaurin buildings . Many of the buildings are connected above ground as well as through an extensive network of underground tunnels , providing protection from the Cambridge weather as well as a venue for roof and tunnel hacking . 
 MIT 's on @-@ campus nuclear reactor is one of the most powerful university @-@ based nuclear reactors in the United States . The prominence of the reactor 's containment building in a densely populated area has been controversial , but MIT maintains that it is well @-@ secured . In 1999 Bill Gates donated US $ 20 million to MIT for the construction of a computer laboratory named the " William H. Gates Building " , and designed by architect Frank O. Gehry . While Microsoft had previously given financial support to the institution , this was the first personal donation received from Gates . 
 Other notable campus facilities include a pressurized wind tunnel and a towing tank for testing ship and ocean structure designs . MIT 's campus @-@ wide wireless network was completed in the fall of 2005 and consists of nearly 3 @,@ 000 access points covering 9 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 square feet ( 870 @,@ 000 m2 ) of campus . 
 In 2001 , the Environmental Protection Agency sued MIT for violating the Clean Water Act and the Clean Air Act with regard to its hazardous waste storage and disposal procedures . MIT settled the suit by paying a $ 155 @,@ 000 fine and launching three environmental projects . In connection with capital campaigns to expand the campus , the Institute has also extensively renovated existing buildings to improve their energy efficiency . MIT has also taken steps to reduce its environmental impact by running alternative fuel campus shuttles , subsidizing public transportation passes , and building a low @-@ emission cogeneration plant that serves most of the campus electricity , heating , and cooling requirements . 
 The MIT Police with state and local authorities , in the 2009 @-@ 2011 period , have investigated reports of 12 forcible sex offenses , 6 robberies , 3 aggravated assaults , 164 burglaries , 1 case of arson , and 4 cases of motor vehicle theft on campus ; affecting a community of around 22 @,@ 000 students and employees . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 MIT 's School of Architecture , now the School of Architecture and Planning , was the first in the United States , and it has a history of commissioning progressive buildings . The first buildings constructed on the Cambridge campus , completed in 1916 , are sometimes called the " Maclaurin buildings " after Institute president Richard Maclaurin who oversaw their construction . Designed by William Welles Bosworth , these imposing buildings were built of reinforced concrete , a first for a non @-@ industrial – much less university – building in the US . Bosworth 's design was influenced by the City Beautiful Movement of the early 1900s , and features the Pantheon @-@ esque Great Dome housing the Barker Engineering Library . The Great Dome overlooks Killian Court , where graduation ceremonies are held each year . The friezes of the limestone @-@ clad buildings around Killian Court are engraved with the names of important scientists and philosophers . The spacious Building 7 atrium at 77 Massachusetts Avenue is regarded as the entrance to the Infinite Corridor and the rest of the campus . 
 Alvar Aalto 's Baker House ( 1947 ) , Eero Saarinen 's MIT Chapel and Kresge Auditorium ( 1955 ) , and I.M. Pei 's Green , Dreyfus , Landau , and Wiesner buildings represent high forms of post @-@ war modernist architecture . More recent buildings like Frank Gehry 's Stata Center ( 2004 ) , Steven Holl 's Simmons Hall ( 2002 ) , Charles Correa 's Building 46 ( 2005 ) , and Fumihiko Maki 's Media Lab Extension ( 2009 ) stand out among the Boston area 's classical architecture and serve as examples of contemporary campus " <unk> " . These buildings have not always been well received ; in 2010 , The Princeton Review included MIT in a list of twenty schools whose campuses are " tiny , unsightly , or both " . 
 = = = Housing = = = 
 Undergraduates are guaranteed four @-@ year housing in one of MIT 's 12 undergraduate dormitories . Those living on campus can receive support and mentoring from live @-@ in graduate student tutors , resident advisors , and faculty housemasters . Because housing assignments are made based on the preferences of the students themselves , diverse social atmospheres can be sustained in different living groups ; for example , according to the Yale Daily News staff 's The Insider 's Guide to the Colleges , 2010 , " The split between East Campus and West Campus is a significant characteristic of MIT . East Campus has gained a reputation as a thriving counterculture . " MIT also has 5 dormitories for single graduate students and 2 apartment buildings on campus for married student families . 
 MIT has an active Greek and co @-@ op housing system , including thirty @-@ six fraternities , sororities , and independent living groups ( FSILGs ) . As of 2015 , 98 % of all undergraduates lived in MIT @-@ affiliated housing ; 54 % of the men participated in fraternities and 20 % of the women were involved in sororities . Most FSILGs are located across the river in Back Bay near where MIT was founded , and there is also a cluster of fraternities on MIT 's West Campus that face the Charles River Basin . After the 1997 alcohol @-@ related death of Scott Krueger , a new pledge at the Phi Gamma Delta fraternity , MIT required all freshmen to live in the dormitory system starting in 2002 . Because FSILGs had previously housed as many as 300 freshmen off @-@ campus , the new policy could not be implemented until Simmons Hall opened in that year . 
 = = Organization and administration = = 
 MIT is chartered as a non @-@ profit organization and is owned and governed by a privately appointed board of trustees known as the MIT Corporation . The current board consists of 43 members elected to five @-@ year terms , 25 life members who vote until their 75th birthday , 3 elected officers ( President , Treasurer , and Secretary ) , and 4 ex officio members ( the president of the alumni association , the Governor of Massachusetts , the Massachusetts Secretary of Education , and the Chief Justice of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court ) . The board is chaired by Robert Millard , a co @-@ founder of L @-@ 3 Communications Holdings . The Corporation approves the budget , new programs , degrees and faculty appointments , and elects the President to serve as the chief executive officer of the university and preside over the Institute 's faculty . MIT 's endowment and other financial assets are managed through a subsidiary called MIT Investment Management Company ( <unk> ) . Valued at $ 9 @.@ 7 billion in 2011 , MIT 's endowment is the sixth @-@ largest among American colleges and universities . 
 MIT has five schools ( Science , Engineering , Architecture and Planning , Management , and Humanities , Arts , and Social Sciences ) and one college ( Whitaker College of Health Sciences and Technology ) , but no schools of law or medicine . While faculty committees assert substantial control over many areas of MIT 's curriculum , research , student life , and administrative affairs , the chair of each of MIT 's 32 academic departments reports to the dean of that department 's school , who in turn reports to the Provost under the President . The current president is L. Rafael Reif , who formerly served as provost under President Susan Hockfield , the first woman to hold the post . 
 = = Academics = = 
 MIT is a large , highly residential , research university with a majority of enrollments in graduate and professional programs . The university has been accredited by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges since 1929 . MIT operates on a 4 – 1 – 4 academic calendar with the fall semester beginning after Labor Day and ending in mid @-@ December , a 4 @-@ week " Independent Activities Period " in the month of January , and the spring semester beginning in early February and ending in late May . 
 MIT students refer to both their majors and classes using numbers or acronyms alone . Departments and their corresponding majors are numbered in the approximate order of their foundation ; for example , Civil and Environmental Engineering is Course 1 , while Linguistics and Philosophy is Course 24 . Students majoring in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science ( <unk> ) , the most popular department , collectively identify themselves as " Course 6 " . MIT students use a combination of the department 's course number and the number assigned to the class to identify their subjects ; the introductory calculus @-@ based classical mechanics course is simply " 8 @.@ 01 " at MIT . 
 = = = Undergraduate program = = = 
 The four @-@ year , full @-@ time undergraduate program maintains a balance between professional majors and those in the arts and sciences , and has been dubbed " most selective " by U.S. News , admitting few transfer students and 8 @.@ 0 % of its applicants in the 2015 admissions cycle . MIT offers 44 undergraduate degrees across its five schools . In the 2010 – 2011 academic year , 1 @,@ 161 bachelor of science degrees ( abbreviated " SB " ) were granted , the only type of undergraduate degree MIT now awards . In the 2011 fall term , among students who had designated a major , the School of Engineering was the most popular division , enrolling 63 % of students in its 19 degree programs , followed by the School of Science ( 29 % ) , School of Humanities , Arts , & Social Sciences ( 3 @.@ 7 % ) , Sloan School of Management ( 3 @.@ 3 % ) , and School of Architecture and Planning ( 2 % ) . The largest undergraduate degree programs were in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science ( Course 6 – 2 ) , Computer Science and Engineering ( Course 6 – 3 ) , Mechanical Engineering ( Course 2 ) , Physics ( Course 8 ) , and Mathematics ( Course 18 ) . 
 All undergraduates are required to complete a core curriculum called the General Institute Requirements ( <unk> ) . The Science Requirement , generally completed during freshman year as prerequisites for classes in science and engineering majors , comprises two semesters of physics , two semesters of calculus , one semester of chemistry , and one semester of biology . There is a Laboratory Requirement , usually satisfied by an appropriate class in a course major . The Humanities , Arts , and Social Sciences ( HASS ) Requirement consists of eight semesters of classes in the humanities , arts , and social sciences , including at least one semester from each division as well as the courses required for a designated concentration in a HASS division . Under the Communication Requirement , two of the HASS classes , plus two of the classes taken in the designated major must be " communication @-@ intensive " , including " substantial instruction and practice in oral presentation " . Finally , all students are required to complete a swimming test ; non @-@ varsity athletes must also take four quarters of physical education classes . 
 Most classes rely on a combination of lectures , recitations led by associate professors or graduate students , weekly problem sets ( " p @-@ sets " ) , and periodic quizzes or tests . While the pace and difficulty of MIT coursework has been compared to " drinking from a fire hose " , the freshmen retention rate at MIT is similar other research universities . The " pass / no @-@ record " grading system relieves some pressure for first @-@ year undergraduates . For each class taken in the fall term , freshmen transcripts will either report only that the class was passed , or otherwise not have any record of it . In the spring term , passing grades ( A , B , C ) appear on the transcript while non @-@ passing grades are again not recorded . ( Grading had previously been " pass / no record " all freshman year , but was amended for the Class of 2006 to prevent students from gaming the system by completing required major classes in their freshman year . ) Also , freshmen may choose to join alternative learning communities , such as Experimental Study Group , Concourse , or <unk> . 
 In 1969 , Margaret MacVicar founded the Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program ( UROP ) to enable undergraduates to collaborate directly with faculty members and researchers . Students join or initiate research projects ( " <unk> " ) for academic credit , pay , or on a volunteer basis through postings on the UROP website or by contacting faculty members directly . A substantial majority of undergraduates participate . Students often become published , file patent applications , and / or launch start @-@ up companies based upon their experience in <unk> . 
 In 1970 , the then @-@ Dean of Institute Relations , Benson R. Snyder , published The Hidden Curriculum , arguing that education at MIT was often slighted in favor of following a set of unwritten expectations , and that graduating with good grades was more often the product of figuring out the system rather than a solid education . The successful student , according to Snyder , was the one who was able to discern which of the formal requirements were to be ignored in favor of which unstated norms . For example , organized student groups had compiled " course bibles " — collections of problem @-@ set and examination questions and answers for later students to use as references . This sort of gamesmanship , Snyder argued , hindered development of a creative intellect and contributed to student discontent and unrest . 
 = = = Graduate program = = = 
 MIT 's graduate program has high coexistence with the undergraduate program , and many courses are taken by qualified students at both levels . MIT offers a comprehensive doctoral program with degrees in the humanities , social sciences , and STEM fields as well as professional degrees . The Institute offers graduate programs leading to academic degrees such as the Master of Science ( MS ) , various Engineer 's Degrees , Doctor of Philosophy ( PhD ) , and Doctor of Science ( <unk> ) and interdisciplinary graduate programs such as the MD @-@ PhD ( with Harvard Medical School ) . 
 Admission to graduate programs is decentralized ; applicants apply directly to the department or degree program . More than 90 % of doctoral students are supported by fellowships , research assistantships ( <unk> ) , or teaching assistantships ( <unk> ) . 
 MIT awarded 1 @,@ 547 master 's degrees and 609 doctoral degrees in the academic year 2010 – 11 . In the 2011 fall term , the School of Engineering was the most popular academic division , enrolling 45 @.@ 0 % of graduate students , followed by the Sloan School of Management ( 19 % ) , School of Science ( 16 @.@ 9 % ) , School of Architecture and Planning ( 9 @.@ 2 % ) , Whitaker College of Health Sciences ( 5 @.@ 1 % ) , and School of Humanities , Arts , and Social Sciences ( 4 @.@ 7 % ) . The largest graduate degree programs were the Sloan MBA , Electrical Engineering and Computer Science , and Mechanical Engineering . 
 = = = University rankings = = = 
 MIT places among the top ten in many overall rankings of universities ( see right ) and rankings based on students ' revealed preferences . For several years , U.S. News & World Report , the QS World University Rankings , and the Academic Ranking of World Universities have ranked MIT 's School of Engineering first , as did the 1995 National Research Council report . In the same lists , MIT 's strongest showings apart from in engineering are in computer science , the natural sciences , business , economics , linguistics , mathematics , and , to a lesser extent , political science and philosophy . 
 In 2014 , Money magazine ranked MIT as third in the US " Best Colleges for Your Money " , based on its assessment of " the most bang for your tuition buck " , factoring in quality of education , affordability , and career outcomes . As of 2014 , Forbes magazine rated MIT as the second " Most Entrepreneurial University " , based on the percentage of alumni and students self @-@ identifying as founders or business owners on LinkedIn . In 2015 , Brookings Fellow Jonathan Rothwell issued a report " Beyond College Rankings " , placing MIT as third in the US , with an estimated 45 % value @-@ added to mid @-@ career salary . 
 = = = Collaborations = = = 
 The university historically pioneered research and training collaborations between academia , industry and government . In 1946 , President Compton , Harvard Business School professor Georges Doriot , and Massachusetts Investor Trust chairman Merrill <unk> founded American Research and Development Corporation , the first American venture @-@ capital firm . In 1948 , Compton established the MIT Industrial Liaison Program . Throughout the late 1980s and early 1990s , American politicians and business leaders accused MIT and other universities of contributing to a declining economy by transferring taxpayer @-@ funded research and technology to international – especially Japanese — firms that were competing with struggling American businesses . On the other hand , MIT 's extensive collaboration with the federal government on research projects has led to several MIT leaders serving as presidential scientific advisers since 1940 . MIT established a Washington Office in 1991 to continue effective lobbying for research funding and national science policy . 
 The U.S. Justice Department began an investigation in 1989 , and in 1991 filed an antitrust suit against MIT , the eight Ivy League colleges , and eleven other institutions for allegedly engaging in price @-@ fixing during their annual " Overlap Meetings " , which were held to prevent bidding wars over promising prospective students from consuming funds for need @-@ based scholarships . While the Ivy League institutions settled , MIT contested the charges , arguing that the practice was not anti @-@ competitive because it ensured the availability of aid for the greatest number of students . MIT ultimately prevailed when the Justice Department dropped the case in 1994 . 
 MIT 's proximity to Harvard University ( " the other school up the river " ) has led to a substantial number of research collaborations such as the Harvard @-@ MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology and the Broad Institute . In addition , students at the two schools can cross @-@ register for credits toward their own school 's degrees without any additional fees . A cross @-@ registration program between MIT and Wellesley College has also existed since 1969 , and in 2002 the Cambridge – MIT Institute launched an undergraduate exchange program between MIT and the University of Cambridge . MIT has more modest cross @-@ registration programs with Boston University , Brandeis University , Tufts University , Massachusetts College of Art , and the School of the Museum of Fine Arts , Boston . 
 MIT maintains substantial research and faculty ties with independent research organizations in the Boston area , such as the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory , the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research , and the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution . Ongoing international research and educational collaborations include the Singapore @-@ MIT Alliance , MIT @-@ <unk> di Milano , MIT @-@ Zaragoza International Logistics Program , and projects in other countries through the MIT International Science and Technology Initiatives ( <unk> ) program . 
 The mass @-@ market magazine Technology Review is published by MIT through a subsidiary company , as is a special edition that also serves as an alumni magazine . The MIT Press is a major university press , publishing over 200 books and 30 journals annually , emphasizing science and technology as well as arts , architecture , new media , current events , and social issues . 
 = = = Libraries , collections and museums = = = 
 The MIT library system consists of five subject libraries : Barker ( Engineering ) , Dewey ( Economics ) , Hayden ( Humanities and Science ) , Lewis ( Music ) , and Rotch ( Arts and Architecture ) . There are also various specialized libraries and archives . The libraries contain more than 2 @.@ 9 million printed volumes , 2 @.@ 4 million microforms , 49 @,@ 000 print or electronic journal subscriptions , and 670 reference databases . The past decade has seen a trend of increased focus on digital over print resources in the libraries . Notable collections include the Lewis Music Library with an emphasis on 20th and 21st @-@ century music and electronic music , the List Visual Arts Center 's rotating exhibitions of contemporary art , and the Compton Gallery 's cross @-@ disciplinary exhibitions . MIT allocates a percentage of the budget for all new construction and renovation to commission and support its extensive public art and outdoor sculpture collection . 
 The MIT Museum was founded in 1971 and collects , preserves , and exhibits artifacts significant to the culture and history of MIT . The Museum now engages in significant educational outreach programs for the general public , including the annual Cambridge Science Festival , the first celebration of this kind in the United States . Since 2005 , its official mission has been , " to engage the wider community with MIT 's science , technology and other areas of scholarship in ways that will best serve the nation and the world in the 21st century " . 
 = = = Research = = = 
 MIT was elected to the Association of American Universities in 1934 and remains a research university with a very high level of research activity ; research expenditures totaled $ 718 @.@ 2 million in 2009 . The federal government was the largest source of sponsored research , with the Department of Health and Human Services granting $ 255 @.@ 9 million , Department of Defense $ 97 @.@ 5 million , Department of Energy $ 65 @.@ 8 million , National Science Foundation $ 61 @.@ 4 million , and NASA $ 27 @.@ 4 million . MIT employs approximately 1300 researchers in addition to faculty . In 2011 , MIT faculty and researchers disclosed 632 inventions , were issued 153 patents , earned $ 85 @.@ 4 million in cash income , and received $ 69 @.@ 6 million in royalties . Through programs like the Deshpande Center , MIT faculty leverage their research and discoveries into multi @-@ million @-@ dollar commercial ventures . 
 In electronics , magnetic core memory , radar , single electron transistors , and inertial guidance controls were invented or substantially developed by MIT researchers . Harold Eugene Edgerton was a pioneer in high speed photography and sonar . Claude E. Shannon developed much of modern information theory and discovered the application of Boolean logic to digital circuit design theory . In the domain of computer science , MIT faculty and researchers made fundamental contributions to cybernetics , artificial intelligence , computer languages , machine learning , robotics , and cryptography . At least nine Turing Award laureates and seven recipients of the Draper Prize in engineering have been or are currently associated with MIT . 
 Current and previous physics faculty have won eight Nobel Prizes , four Dirac Medals , and three Wolf Prizes predominantly for their contributions to subatomic and quantum theory . Members of the chemistry department have been awarded three Nobel Prizes and one Wolf Prize for the discovery of novel syntheses and methods . MIT biologists have been awarded six Nobel Prizes for their contributions to genetics , immunology , oncology , and molecular biology . Professor Eric Lander was one of the principal leaders of the Human Genome Project . <unk> atoms , synthetic penicillin , synthetic self @-@ replicating molecules , and the genetic bases for Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( also known as ALS or Lou Gehrig 's disease ) and Huntington 's disease were first discovered at MIT . Jerome <unk> transformed the study of cognitive science with his paper " What the frog 's eye tells the frog 's brain " . 
 In the domain of humanities , arts , and social sciences , MIT economists have been awarded five Nobel Prizes and nine John Bates Clark Medals . Linguists Noam Chomsky and Morris Halle authored seminal texts on generative grammar and phonology . The MIT Media Lab , founded in 1985 within the School of Architecture and Planning and known for its unconventional research , has been home to influential researchers such as constructivist educator and Logo creator Seymour Papert . 
 Spanning many of the above fields , MacArthur Fellowships ( the so @-@ called " Genius Grants " ) have been awarded to 38 people associated with MIT . Four Pulitzer Prize – winning writers currently work at or have retired from MIT . Four current or former faculty are members of the American Academy of Arts and Letters . 
 Allegations of research misconduct or improprieties have received substantial press coverage . Professor David Baltimore , a Nobel Laureate , became embroiled in a misconduct investigation starting in 1986 that led to Congressional hearings in 1991 . Professor Ted <unk> has accused the MIT administration since 2000 of attempting to whitewash potential research misconduct at the Lincoln Lab facility involving a ballistic missile defense test , though a final investigation into the matter has not been completed . Associate Professor Luk Van <unk> was dismissed in 2005 following allegations of scientific misconduct and found guilty of the same by the United States Office of Research Integrity in 2009 . Researchers developed a system to convert MRI scans into 3D printed physical models . 
 = = Traditions and student activities = = 
 The faculty and student body place a high value on meritocracy and on technical proficiency . MIT has never awarded an honorary degree , nor does it award athletic scholarships , ad eundem degrees , or Latin honors upon graduation . However , MIT has twice awarded honorary professorships : to Winston Churchill in 1949 and Salman Rushdie in 1993 . 
 Many upperclass students and alumni wear a large , heavy , distinctive class ring known as the " Brass Rat " . Originally created in 1929 , the ring 's official name is the " Standard Technology Ring . " The undergraduate ring design ( a separate graduate student version exists as well ) varies slightly from year to year to reflect the unique character of the MIT experience for that class , but always features a three @-@ piece design , with the MIT seal and the class year each appearing on a separate face , flanking a large rectangular bezel bearing an image of a beaver . The initialism <unk> , representing the informal school motto " I Hate This Fucking Place " and jocularly <unk> as " I Have Truly Found Paradise , " " Institute Has The Finest Professors , " " It 's Hard to <unk> Penguins , " and other variations , has occasionally been featured on the ring given its historical prominence in student culture . 
 = = = Activities = = = 
 MIT has over 500 recognized student activity groups , including a campus radio station , The Tech student newspaper , an annual entrepreneurship competition , and weekly screenings of popular films by the Lecture Series Committee . Less traditional activities include the " world 's largest open @-@ shelf collection of science fiction " in English , a model railroad club , and a vibrant folk dance scene . Students , faculty , and staff are involved in over 50 educational outreach and public service programs through the MIT Museum , Edgerton Center , and MIT Public Service Center . 
 The Independent Activities Period is a four @-@ week @-@ long " term " offering hundreds of optional classes , lectures , demonstrations , and other activities throughout the month of January between the Fall and Spring semesters . Some of the most popular recurring IAP activities are the 6 @.@ 270 , 6 @.@ 370 , and <unk> competitions , the annual " mystery hunt " , and Charm School . More than 250 students pursue <unk> annually at companies in the US and abroad . 
 Many MIT students also engage in " hacking " , which encompasses both the physical exploration of areas that are generally off @-@ limits ( such as rooftops and steam tunnels ) , as well as elaborate practical jokes . Recent high @-@ profile hacks have included the abduction of Caltech 's cannon , reconstructing a Wright Flyer atop the Great Dome , and adorning the John Harvard statue with the Master Chief 's Mjölnir Helmet . 
 = = = Athletics = = = 
 MIT sponsors 31 varsity sports and has one of the three broadest NCAA Division III athletic programs . MIT participates in the NCAA 's Division III , the New England Women 's and Men 's Athletic Conference , the New England Football Conference , the Pilgrim League for men 's lacrosse , NCAA 's Division I Eastern Association of Women 's Rowing Colleges ( <unk> ) for women 's crew , and the Collegiate Water Polo Association ( <unk> ) for Men 's Water Polo . Men 's crew competes outside the NCAA in the Eastern Association of Rowing Colleges ( <unk> ) . In April 2009 , budget cuts lead to MIT eliminating eight of its 41 sports , including the mixed men 's and women 's teams in alpine skiing and pistol ; separate teams for men and women in ice hockey and gymnastics ; and men 's programs in golf and wrestling . 
 = = People = = 
 = = = Students = = = 
 MIT enrolled 4 @,@ 384 undergraduates and 6 @,@ 510 graduate students in 2011 – 2012 . Women constituted 45 percent of undergraduate students . Undergraduate and graduate students were drawn from all 50 states as well as 115 foreign countries . 
 MIT received 17 @,@ 909 applications for admission to the undergraduate Class of 2015 ; 1 @,@ 742 were admitted ( 9 @.@ 7 percent ) and 1128 enrolled ( 64 @.@ 8 percent ) . 19 @,@ 446 applications were received for graduate and advanced degree program across all departments ; 2 @,@ 991 were admitted ( 15 @.@ 4 percent ) and 1 @,@ 880 enrolled ( 62 @.@ 8 percent ) . 
 The interquartile range on the SAT was 2090 – 2340 and 97 percent of students ranked in the top tenth of their high school graduating class . 97 percent of the Class of 2012 returned as sophomores ; 82 percent of the Class of 2007 graduated within 4 years , and 93 percent ( 91 percent of the men and 95 percent of the women ) graduated within 6 years . 
 Undergraduate tuition and fees total $ 40 @,@ 732 and annual expenses are estimated at $ 52 @,@ 507 as of 2012 . 62 percent of students received need @-@ based financial aid in the form of scholarships and grants from federal , state , institutional , and external sources averaging $ 38 @,@ 964 per student . Students were awarded a total of $ 102 million in scholarships and grants , primarily from institutional support ( $ 84 million ) . The annual increase in expenses has led to a student tradition ( dating back to the 1960s ) of tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek " tuition riots " . 
 MIT has been nominally co @-@ educational since admitting Ellen Swallow Richards in 1870 . Richards also became the first female member of MIT 's faculty , specializing in sanitary chemistry . Female students remained a minority prior to the completion of the first wing of a women 's dormitory , McCormick Hall , in 1963 . Between 1993 and 2009 , the proportion of women rose from 34 percent to 45 percent of undergraduates and from 20 percent to 31 percent of graduate students . Women currently outnumber men in Biology , Brain & Cognitive Sciences , Architecture , Urban Planning , and Biological Engineering . 
 A number of student deaths in the late 1990s and early 2000s resulted in considerable media attention to MIT 's culture and student life . After the alcohol @-@ related death of Scott Krueger in September 1997 as a new member at the Phi Gamma Delta fraternity , MIT began requiring all freshmen to live in the dormitory system . The 2000 suicide of MIT undergraduate Elizabeth Shin drew attention to suicides at MIT and created a controversy over whether MIT had an unusually high suicide rate . In late 2001 a task force 's recommended improvements in student mental health services were implemented , including expanding staff and operating hours at the mental health center . These and later cases were significant as well because they sought to prove the negligence and liability of university administrators in loco parentis . 
 = = = Faculty and staff = = = 
 As of 2013 , MIT had 1 @,@ 030 faculty members , of whom 225 were women . Faculty are responsible for lecturing classes , advising both graduate and undergraduate students , and sitting on academic committees , as well as conducting original research . Between 1964 and 2009 , a total of seventeen faculty and staff members affiliated with MIT were awarded Nobel Prizes ( thirteen in the last 25 years ) . MIT faculty members past or present have won a total of twenty @-@ seven Nobel Prizes , the majority in Economics or Physics . As of October 2013 , among current faculty and teaching staff there are 67 Guggenheim Fellows , 6 Fulbright Scholars , and 22 MacArthur Fellows . Faculty members who have made extraordinary contributions to their research field as well as the MIT community are granted appointments as Institute Professors for the remainder of their tenures . 
 A 1998 MIT study concluded that a systemic bias against female faculty existed in its School of Science , although the study 's methods were controversial . Since the study , though , women have headed departments within the Schools of Science and of Engineering , and MIT has appointed several female vice presidents , although allegations of sexism continue to be made . Susan Hockfield , a molecular <unk> , was MIT 's president from 2004 to 2012 and was the first woman to hold the post . 
 Tenure outcomes have vaulted MIT into the national spotlight on several occasions . The 1984 dismissal of David F. Noble , a historian of technology , became a cause célèbre about the extent to which academics are granted freedom of speech after he published several books and papers critical of MIT 's and other research universities ' reliance upon financial support from corporations and the military . Former materials science professor Gretchen Kalonji sued MIT in 1994 alleging that she was denied tenure because of sexual discrimination . Several years later , the lawsuit was settled with undisclosed payments , and establishment of a project to encourage women and minorities to seek faculty positions . In 1997 , the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination issued a probable cause finding supporting UMass Boston Professor James Jennings ' allegations of racial discrimination after a senior faculty search committee in the Department of Urban Studies and Planning did not offer him reciprocal tenure . In 2006 – 2007 , MIT 's denial of tenure to African @-@ American stem cell scientist professor James Sherley reignited accusations of racism in the tenure process , eventually leading to a protracted public dispute with the administration , a brief hunger strike , and the resignation of Professor Frank L. Douglas in protest . April Simpson of The Boston Globe reported on February 6 , 2007 : " Less than half of MIT 's junior faculty members are granted tenure . After Sherley was initially denied tenure , his case was examined three times before the university established that neither racial discrimination nor conflict of interest affected the decision . Twenty @-@ one of Sherley 's colleagues issued a statement yesterday saying that the professor was treated fairly in tenure review . " 
 MIT faculty members have often been recruited to lead other colleges and universities . Founding faculty member Charles W. Eliot was recruited in 1869 to become president of Harvard University , a post he would hold for 40 years , during which he wielded considerable influence on both American higher education and secondary education . MIT alumnus and faculty member George Ellery Hale played a central role in the development of the California Institute of Technology ( Caltech ) , and other faculty members have been key founders of Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering in nearby Needham , Massachusetts . 
 As of 2014 , former provost Robert A. Brown is president of Boston University ; former provost Mark <unk> is chancellor of Washington University in St. Louis ; former associate provost Alice Gast is president of Lehigh University ; and former professor Suh Nam @-@ <unk> is president of <unk> . Former dean of the School of Science Robert J. <unk> was the chancellor of the University of California , Berkeley ( 2004 – 2013 ) ; former professor John Maeda was president of Rhode Island School of Design ( RISD , 2008 – 2013 ) ; former professor David Baltimore was president of Caltech ( 1997 – 2006 ) ; and MIT alumnus and former assistant professor Hans Mark served as chancellor of the University of Texas system ( 1984 – 1992 ) . 
 In addition , faculty members have been recruited to lead governmental agencies ; for example , former professor Marcia McNutt is president of the National Academy of Sciences , urban studies professor Xavier de Souza Briggs is currently the associate director of the White House Office of Management and Budget , and biology professor Eric Lander is a co @-@ chair of the President 's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology . In 2013 , faculty member Ernest Moniz was nominated by President Obama and later confirmed as United States Secretary of Energy . Former professor Hans Mark served as Secretary of the Air Force from 1979 to 1981 . Alumna and Institute Professor Sheila Widnall served as Secretary of the Air Force between 1993 and 1997 , making her the first female Secretary of the Air Force and first woman to lead an entire branch of the US military in the Department of Defense . 
 Based on feedback from employees , MIT was ranked # 7 as a place to work , among US colleges and universities as of 2013 . Surveys cited a " smart " , " creative " , " friendly " environment , noting that the work @-@ life balance tilts towards a " strong work ethic " , but complaining about " low pay " . 
 = = = Notable alumni = = = 
 Many of MIT 's over 120 @,@ 000 alumni have had considerable success in scientific research , public service , education , and business . As of 2014 , 27 MIT alumni have won the Nobel Prize , 47 have been selected as Rhodes Scholars , and 61 have been selected as Marshall Scholars . 
 Alumni in American politics and public service include former Chairman of the Federal Reserve Ben Bernanke , former MA @-@ 1 Representative John Olver , former CA @-@ 13 Representative Pete Stark , former National Economic Council chairman Lawrence H. Summers , and former Council of Economic Advisors chairwoman Christina Romer . MIT alumni in international politics include Foreign Affairs Minister of Iran Ali Akbar <unk> , Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu , President of Colombia Virgilio Barco Vargas , President of the European Central Bank Mario Draghi , Governor of the Reserve Bank of India Raghuram Rajan , former British Foreign Minister David Miliband , former Greek Prime Minister Lucas <unk> , former UN Secretary General Kofi Annan , and former Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Ahmed <unk> . 
 MIT alumni founded or co @-@ founded many notable companies , such as Intel , McDonnell Douglas , Texas Instruments , 3Com , Qualcomm , Bose , Raytheon , Koch Industries , Rockwell International , Genentech , Dropbox , and Campbell Soup . According to the British newspaper , The Guardian , " a survey of living MIT alumni found that they have formed 25 @,@ 800 companies , employing more than three million people including about a quarter of the workforce of Silicon Valley . Those firms collectively generate global revenues of about $ 1 @.@ 9 trillion ( £ 1 @.@ 2 trillion ) a year . If MIT were a country , it would have the 11th highest GDP of any nation in the world . " 
 Prominent institutions of higher education have been led by MIT alumni , including the University of California system , Harvard University , New York Institute of Technology , Johns Hopkins University , Carnegie Mellon University , Tufts University , Rochester Institute of Technology , Rhode Island School of Design ( RISD ) , Northeastern University , Lahore University of Management Sciences , Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute , <unk> de Monterrey , Purdue University , Virginia Polytechnic Institute , <unk> , and Quaid @-@ e @-@ Azam University . Berklee College of Music , the largest independent college of contemporary music in the world , was founded and led by MIT alumnus Lawrence Berk for more than three decades . 
 More than one third of the United States ' manned spaceflights have included MIT @-@ educated astronauts ( among them Apollo 11 Lunar Module Pilot Buzz Aldrin ) , more than any university excluding the United States service academies . Alumnus and former faculty member Qian Xuesen was instrumental in the PRC rocket program . 
 Noted alumni in non @-@ scientific fields include author Hugh <unk> , sculptor Daniel Chester French , guitarist Tom Scholz of the band Boston , the British BBC and ITN correspondent and political advisor David Walter , The New York Times columnist and Nobel Prize Winning economist Paul Krugman , The Bell Curve author Charles Murray , United States Supreme Court building architect Cass Gilbert , Pritzker Prize @-@ winning architects I.M. Pei and Gordon <unk> . 
 = Michael J. Daly = 
 Michael Joseph Daly ( September 15 , 1924 – July 25 , 2008 ) was a United States Army infantry officer who received the United States military 's highest decoration for valor — the Medal of Honor — for his actions in World War II . He received the medal for single @-@ handedly eliminating 15 German soldiers including a German patrol , and destroying three machine @-@ gun nests . 
 He resigned from the United States Military Academy after one year to fight in the world war and was sent to Europe , participating in the D @-@ Day landings at Omaha Beach . After the D @-@ Day invasion , he fought on to Germany where he was wounded . He received a battlefield commission to second lieutenant , returned to combat , and participated in the action that earned him the Medal of Honor . 
 After being presented the Medal of Honor in a ceremony at the White House by President Harry S. Truman , he went back to his hometown , started a family , and became a businessman . He died of cancer at his home in 2008 , at the age of 83 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Daly was born September 15 , 1924 in New York City , but resided his entire life in Fairfield , Connecticut , except for one year he and his wife lived in County Wicklow , Ireland . His father , Colonel Paul Daly , was a World War I and World War II veteran who was a recipient of the Distinguished Service Cross and was also nominated for the Medal of Honor twice , but did not receive it . His great @-@ grandfather Thomas F. Gilroy was an Irish immigrant who was the mayor of New York City in the 1890s . Michael Daly had three brothers , Gilroy , Daniel and Dermot and three sisters , Madeleine Potter , Bevin Patterson and Alison Gerard . 
 = = Military service = = 
 World War II 
 Daly graduated from Georgetown Preparatory School in 1941 and joined the Army from Fairfield 's Southport neighborhood in 1942 . He attended the United States Military Academy in West Point , New York , where he was a classmate of George Patton III . While he was at the academy he was , by his own admission , a mediocre student . After having severe disciplinary problems and continuously being placed on special confinement and walking off punishment tours he resigned his appointment after only one year to fight in World War II . Sent to Europe as an eighteen @-@ year @-@ old infantry private , he trained in England and took part in the D @-@ Day landings at Omaha Beach with the 1st Infantry Division . His father also volunteered to serve in the war and was sent first to Guadalcanal , then as a regimental commander to France . 
 He participated in the drive through France and was wounded in Aachen , Germany and was sent to England to recover . After he recovered , he rejoined the front lines reassigned to the 3rd Infantry Division and was given a battlefield commission to second lieutenant . By April 18 , 1945 , he was a first lieutenant in command of Company A , 15th Infantry Regiment , 3rd Infantry Division , 7th Army . On that day , he led his company in their advance through Nuremberg , Germany , and single @-@ handedly engaged German forces several times . As his unit passed a city square , a German machine gun opened fire , causing several casualties . Daly rushed the position and killed the three gunners . Advancing ahead of his men , he came across a German patrol preparing to use rocket launchers to ambush American tanks . He again attacked alone and , despite being outnumbered and outgunned , killed all six patrol members . When a machine gun opened fire at close range , he picked up a dead man 's rifle and killed the two @-@ man German crew . On April 19 , he was shot through the head ; a bullet entered at his ear and exited from the opposite cheek . He was sent to England and eventually the United States to recuperate . At about the same time , his father , who had been wounded in France , was also being evacuated to the United States . 
 Medal of Honor 
 He was subsequently promoted to captain and , on August 23 , 1945 , awarded the Medal of Honor . Although still recovering from his wounds , for which he would continue to receive treatment until mid @-@ 1946 , he attended a ceremony at the White House where President Harry S. Truman formally presented him with the medal . In addition to the Medal of Honor , Daly received three Silver Stars , a Bronze Star with " V " device , and two Purple Hearts . Commenting on his Medal of Honor citation in a speech at Fairfield High School sometime later , Daly said , " We all lose our courage at times . It is something we pray for in the morning , that God will give us the strength and courage to do what is right . " 
 = = Later life = = 
 Daly returned to Fairfield after he was discharged from the Army and began a business career . He worked very briefly as a salesman for an oil company before starting his own manufacturer 's representative business , Michael Daly & Associates , in the Southport neighborhood . He was also involved in the operations of St. Vincent 's Medical Center in Bridgeport , serving on the hospital 's board of directors for more than thirty years , as well as being a trustee and helping to obtain financial support for the hospital . A Democrat , he also supported the political careers of his brother , Judge T. F. Gilroy Daly , and friend , city politician John J. Sullivan , but dismissed suggestions to run for office himself . 
 Daly married Margaret Noble Wallace ( great @-@ granddaughter of Lew Wallace ) in the 1950s and together they had two children , Deirdre and Michael . His brother , T. F. Gilroy Daly , who died in 1996 , was a federal judge in Connecticut who had gained prominence as a lawyer for helping win the exoneration of Peter Reilly , who had been convicted of killing his mother in a highly publicized case of the 1970s . 
 Death and burial 
 Daly died of pancreatic cancer at his Fairfield home on July 25 , 2008 . His funeral was held on July 29 , 2008 at St. Pius X Church in Fairfield and he was buried at Oak Lawn Cemetery with full military honors . The 10th Mountain Division of Fort Drum and the United States Military Academy of West Point performed the ceremony . The ceremony included a three round volley and West Point 's bugle sounding " Taps " as preludes to a military helicopter flying over the cemetery . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 Daly 's exact list of authorized military awards as recorded by the US Army are unknown due to the National Personnel Records Center fire of 1973 , His service records are one of the approximately 16 @-@ 18 million individuals whose military service records were destroyed in the blaze . As a consequence , what follows below is an incomplete list of his military awards either confirmed or thought to have been awarded to Daly : 
 = = Medal of Honor = = 
 Captain Daly 's official Medal of Honor citation reads : 
 Early in the morning of 18 April 1945 , he led his company through the shell @-@ battered , sniper @-@ infested wreckage of Nuremberg , Germany . When blistering machinegun fire caught his unit in an exposed position , he ordered his men to take cover , dashed forward alone , and , as bullets whined about him , shot the 3 @-@ man <unk> with his carbine . Continuing the advance at the head of his company , he located an enemy patrol armed with rocket launchers which threatened friendly armor . He again went forward alone , secured a vantage point and opened fire on the Germans . Immediately he became the target for concentrated machine pistol and rocket fire , which blasted the rubble about him . <unk> , he continued to shoot at the patrol until he had killed all 6 enemy infantrymen . Continuing boldly far in front of his company , he entered a park , where as his men advanced , a German machinegun opened up on them without warning . With his carbine , he killed the gunner ; and then , from a completely exposed position , he directed machinegun fire on the remainder of the crew until all were dead . In a final duel , he wiped out a third machinegun emplacement with rifle fire at a range of 10 yards . By fearlessly engaging in 4 single @-@ handed fire fights with a desperate , powerfully armed enemy , Lt. <unk> , voluntarily taking all major risks himself and protecting his men at every opportunity , killed 15 Germans , silenced 3 enemy machineguns and wiped out an entire enemy patrol . His heroism during the lone bitter struggle with fanatical enemy forces was an inspiration to the valiant Americans who took Nuremberg . 
 = = Other honors and <unk> = = 
 St. Vincent 's Medical Center , Bridgeport , Connecticut plans to name its new emergency wing in his honor . 
 Connecticut State Representative Carl Dickman proposed legislation to name a section of Interstate Route 95 from Bridgeport to Westport north bound and south bound for Captain Daly . When proposing this bill Representative Dickman said : 
 This naming of the highway would honor a well @-@ respected Fairfield resident for his extraordinary service to the people of the United States . I encourage the legislature to adopt this proposal . 
 The legislation , House Bill No. <unk> reads as follows : 
 AN ACT <unk> A <unk> OF <unk> <unk> 95 FROM <unk> TO <unk> . 
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Assembly convened : 
 That the segment of Interstate Route 95 from Bridgeport to Westport north bound and south bound be renamed the " Captain Michael J. Daly Highway " . 
 In 2007 , Daly along with nine other Connecticut veterans were inducted into the Connecticut Veterans Hall of Fame and at the time he was one of only two living inductees who had received the Medal of Honor . 
 Mr. Daly is a U.S. Army veteran of World War II who received the Congressional Medal of Honor for extreme heroism while leading his infantry company through the shell @-@ battered , sniper @-@ infested wreckage of Nuremberg , Germany , in April 1945 . Following his distinctive military service , he became very involved in veterans ’ and community affairs , serving on the Board of Directors of St. Vincent ’ s Hospital and founding the hospital ’ s Daly Foundation . He has also provided decades of volunteer service to handicapped children , the Town of Fairfield and served as a member of the Connecticut Judicial Review Council . 
 = Mac Marcoux = 
 Mac Marcoux ( born 20 June 1997 ) is a Canadian Paralympic Alpine skier who won three titles at the IPC Alpine Skiing World Cup at the age of 15 . With guide Robin <unk> , he won three medals in alpine skiing at the 2014 Winter Paralympics , including gold in the men 's visually impaired giant slalom . He also has numerous awards including being inducted into the Sault Ste . Marie Walk of Fame . He has an older brother and a younger sister . He also enjoys riding BMX and mountain bikes . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Mac Marcoux was born on 20 June 1997 in Haviland Bay , Ontario . He resides there with his parents and two siblings , an older brother and a younger sister . He started skiing at the age of four . He also rode BMX bikes and raced go @-@ karts . In 2006 , he started losing his sight due to <unk> disease , a degenerative condition , and became legally blind in 2007 . He said : " We 've always been a racing family from the beginning . It 's how I 've grown up . Going fast was just a part of it . The faster you go the more fun it is " . 
 After Marcoux had lost his vision , his brother Billy Joe ( B.J. ) Marcoux decided to put his college education on hold in order to assist him with skiing . Alpine Canada introduced them to a new kind of skiing called Para @-@ Alpine . They were inspired by the McKeever brothers to do visually impaired para @-@ alpine . Other than the Paralympics , his brother B.J. has been his sighted guide using radio communication ever since then ; something they had never used before . 
 = = Para @-@ Alpine career = = 
 Marcoux is classified as a B3 ( visually impaired ) athlete . At the age of 15 , he competed at the 2013 IPC Alpine Skiing World Cup in Mount Hutt , New Zealand , with B.J. as his guide , winning three medals . Later that year he won a silver medal in the Giant Slalom at the 2013 IPC Alpine Skiing World Championships in La Molina , Spain , and became the national Slalom and Giant Slalom champion at Sun Peaks , British Columbia . 
 = = = 2014 Winter Paralympics = = = 
 The following year he competed in the 2014 Winter Paralympics in Sochi as the youngest member of the Canadian Paralympic Team at the age of 16 . With Robin <unk> as his guide . He won bronze in both the Downhill and the Super @-@ G , as well as a gold in the Giant Slalom by over two seconds . " It is the best moment of my life " , he said after winning gold . " I can 't even explain how amazing this is . " 
 Mac and his brother B.J. were inducted into the Sault Ste . Marie Walk of Fame on 19 September 2014 . 
 = = Other interests = = 
 He raced BMX bikes and go @-@ karts with his brother B.J. before he was blind . After he lost his sight , he fished and also rode mountain bikes at Whistler with a guide using the same kind of radio communication system . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Marcoux and his brother BJ was presented the H.P. Broughton Trophy and was named into the Sault Ste . Marie Walk of Fame . In October 2014 , the brothers were also inducted into the Sault Ste . Marie Sports Hall of Fame by mayor Debbie <unk> . 
 = Edina Müller = 
 Edina Müller ( born 28 June 1983 ) is a German 2 @.@ 5 point wheelchair basketball player and KL1 canoeist . She played for ASV Bonn in the German wheelchair basketball league , and for the national team . As part of the German women 's national wheelchair basketball team , she won bronze at the 2006 World Cup in Amsterdam , won three time European champions ( in 2007 , 2009 , 2011 ) , a silver medal at the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing , and a gold medal at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London . The team was voted 2008 Team of the Year in disabled sports , and Horst Köhler presented it with Germany 's highest sports award , the Silbernes Lorbeerblatt ( Silver Laurel Leaf ) . President Joachim Gauck awarded the team a second Silver Leaf after it won the gold medal at the 2012 Summer Paralympics . Müller was also a two @-@ time U.S. champion ( 2006 @-@ 2008 ) with her college team Illinois Fighting Illini at the University of Illinois at Urbana @-@ Champaign , and helped ASV Bonn win the European Cup ( Willi Brinkmann Cup ) in Valladolid , Spain in 2009 . From 2011 to 2014 she played for Hamburger SV . 
 Müller retired from wheelchair basketball after the 2014 Women 's World Wheelchair Basketball Championship in Toronto , at which she won silver , and took up canoeing . On 24 May 2105 she won silver in the women 's KL1 200 m race at the 2015 ICF Canoe Sprint World Cup in Duisburg . On 19 May 2016 , she won gold in the event at the 2015 ICF Canoe Sprint World Cup in Duisburg . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Edina Müller was born on 28 June 1983 , and raised in the Rhineland town of Brühl . In 2000 , at the age of 16 , she was playing volleyball , and felt pain in her back . A doctor straightened her back , but within two hours she lost feeling in her legs . She was rushed to hospital where a blood clot was discovered . Diagnosed with paraplegia , she spent the next four months in hospital . She had to repeat Year 10 at Max Ernst Gymnasium , but graduated in 2003 . Although confined to a wheelchair , she longed to return to playing sport , and initially tried sitting volleyball . She then took up wheelchair tennis , winning the Hungarian Open in 2005 , but ultimately switched to wheelchair basketball , playing for ASV Bonn . In 2005 she was invited to attend a German national team training camp by its coach , Holger Glinicki . The following year she made the national team and won bronze at the World Championships in Amsterdam . 
 Müller 's mentor and professor at the University of Cologne , Professor Dr Horst <unk> , advised her to pursue her sporting career in the United States . She attended a one @-@ week basketball camp in Illinois in 2006 , where she was noticed by Michael Frogley , the coach of the Canadian men 's national wheelchair basketball team and the Illinois Fighting Illini college team at the University of Illinois at Urbana @-@ Champaign . In both years they won the National Championship with the team . During the semester break , she travelled with the German women 's national team for tournaments and preparation camps . In 2007 , the German women became European champions before a home crowd at Wetzlar . 
 Müller graduated from the University of Illinois in 2008 with a Bachelor of Science degree in kinesiology , and moved back to Germany , where she helped ASV Bonn win the European Cup ( Willi Brinkmann Cup ) in Valladolid , Spain in 2009 . In 2011 she started playing for Hamburger SV . Her American degree was accepted in Germany , and she qualified as a rehabilitation therapist at BG Trauma Hospital in Hamburg @-@ Boberg . She worked with paraplegic patients , helping them become wheelchair mobile , by strengthening the chest and upper arm muscles . " It makes a difference , " she says " that the therapist also cannot walk . " 
 In September 2008 , Müller participated in the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing , but Germany was beaten in the gold medal game by the team the United States , which contained a number of former teammates and opponents from the University of Illinois . The German team took home Paralympic silver medals instead . After the Paralympics , the team 's performance was considered impressive enough for it to be named the national " Team of the Year " , and it received the Silver Laurel Leaf , Germany 's highest sporting honour , from German President Horst Koehler . Brühl honoured her with an entry in its Golden Book . 
 Müller helped the national team defend their European Championship title with the national team in Stoke Mandeville , England in 2009 . They hoped for a rematch against the United States at the 2012 Summer Paralympic Games in London , but instead faced the team that had beaten the Americans , the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team , which included former Illinois teammates Shelley Chaplin and Bridie Kean . They defeated the Australians in front of a crowd of over 12 @,@ 000 to win the gold medal , They were awarded another Silver Laurel Leaf by President Joachim Gauck in November 2012 , and were again named Team of the Year for 2012 . 
 Müller retired from wheelchair basketball after the 2014 Women 's World Wheelchair Basketball Championship in Toronto , at which she won silver . She then took up canoeing , training at the Hamburg Canoe Club . " From basketball " , she said " I learned to always have the sight set for a big goal . If something doesn ’ t turn out how it should , it ’ s not the end of the world . But it always helps to have a goal set in front of you . " According to her coach , Jens <unk> , " It ’ s easy to motivate her . She ’ s fighting to reach a training target . She never gives up . ” Her hard work paid off . Not only did she earn national team selection , but on 24 May 2105 she won silver in the women 's KL1 200 m race at the 2015 ICF Canoe Sprint World Cup in Duisburg in a personal best time of 59 @.@ 981 seconds , her first time below the one @-@ minute mark . On 19 May 2016 at the 2016 ICF Canoe Sprint World Cup in Duisburg , she went one better , winning gold despite capsizing her canoe that morning during warm up . 
 = = Achievements = = 
 2006 : Bronze World Championship ( Amsterdam , Netherlands ) 
 2007 : Gold National Championship ( Warm Springs , United States ) 
 2007 : Gold European Championship ( Wetzlar , Germany ) 
 2008 : Gold National Championship ( Champaign , United States ) 
 2008 : Silver Paralympics ( Beijing , China ) 
 2009 : Gold European Championship ( Stoke Mandeville , Great Britain ) 
 2010 : Silver World Championships ( Birmingham , Great Britain ) 
 2011 : Gold European Championships ( Nazareth , Israel ) 
 2012 : Gold Paralympic Games ( London , England ) 
 2013 : Silver European Championships ( Frankfurt , Germany ) 
 2014 : Silver at the World Championships ( Toronto , Canada ) 
 2015 : Silver at the ICF Canoe Sprint World Cup ( Duisburg , Germany ) 
 2016 : Gold at the ICF Canoe Sprint World Cup ( Duisburg , Germany ) 
 = = Awards = = 
 2008 : Team of the Year 
 2008 : Silver Laurel Leaf 
 2009 : Entry in the Golden Book of the city of Brühl 
 2012 : Team of the Year 
 2012 : Silver Laurel Leaf 
 2013 : Hamburg Sportswoman of the Year 
 = Barmouth Bridge = 
 Barmouth Bridge ( Welsh : Pont <unk> ) , also known as Barmouth Viaduct , is a single @-@ track largely wooden railway viaduct that carries the Cambrian Coast Railway across the River Mawddach estuary on the coast of Cardigan Bay , Wales . It sits between Morfa Mawddach and Barmouth in Gwynedd and caters for rail , foot and cycle traffic . 
 The bridge opened in 1867 , and originally included a drawbridge section at its north end for tall ships to pass , though this was later replaced by the current swing bridge section . In 1980 , woodworm threatened the safety of the bridge , which needed major repairs to avoid closure . Tolls were collected for foot and cycle traffic until 2013 . The bridge is a Grade II * listed structure , and has one of the longest timber viaducts still in regular use in Britain . 
 = = Location and structure = = 
 The bridge crosses the estuary of the River Mawddach from Morfa Mawddach near <unk> northwards to the edge of Barmouth . The line is operated by Arriva Trains Wales , with connecting services south to Aberystwyth and east to Welshpool and Shrewsbury . The section containing the bridge is on the Cambrian Coast railway between Machynlleth and Pwllheli . The bridge is a Grade II * listed structure about 699 metres ( 764 yd ) long and contains 113 wooded trestles supported by a series of cast iron piers . It is one of the longest timber viaducts still standing in Britain . 
 A footbridge is incorporated on the eastern side and pedestrians , cyclists and motorcycles can cross the estuary by the side of the track . Since 1996 , this has formed part of the National Cycle Route that links North and South Wales . The footbridge is owned by Network Rail but an agreement is in place with Gwynedd County Council , who pay for 10 % of the annual maintenance in exchange for a licence to use the bridge . 
 Most of the bridge is built on a gravel bed covered by shifting sand . The north end by the swing bridge section is next to the rock of <unk> Fawr at the base of Cadair Idris , and the river channel here can flow up to 9 knots ( 16 @.@ 7 km / h ) . The first two spans here are built directly onto the rock . 
 There is no nearby crossing for road traffic . The nearest spanning the Afon Mawddach is a toll bridge at <unk> about 5 miles ( 8 km ) further upstream and permits vehicles up to 2 @.@ 5 tonnes . Heavier vehicles must use the first public road bridge , which is at Dolgellau about 10 miles ( 16 km ) from Barmouth . 
 = = History = = 
 The bridge was first proposed as part of the Cambrian Line between Aberystwyth and Pwllheli by the Aberystwyth and Welsh Coast Railway around 1861 - 2 . It was designed by Benjamin Piercy and Henry Conybeare in 1864 , and opened on 10 October 1867 . Conybeare decided to construct the viaduct from timber as it would be cheaper to import by sea than iron . As built , it included a wooden lifting drawbridge section at the northern end to permit the passage of tall ships . It was never in regular use since the opening of the railway killed off competition from boat traffic . In 1899 , the drawbridge arrangement was changed to the current swing bridge arrangement . It is still theoretically in operation , though it has not been opened since 1987 as part of a test operation . 
 In 1946 , the bridge was nearly destroyed after a live naval mine washed ashore close to the bridge during stormy weather . The mine briefly swept one of the pillars , but did not detonate . 
 Passenger train services over the bridge declined significantly after the Ruabon to Barmouth line via Llangollen and Dolgellau was closed in 1965 , causing all traffic to take the longer and slower route from Shrewsbury via Machynlleth and Dovey Junction . The old trackbed from Morfa Mawddach railway station to Dolgellau now forms the Mawddach Trail , a walk and cycle trail . 
 By 1980 the bridge 's structure had come under attack from marine woodworm , which threatened its closure . British Rail discovered that woodworm had eaten into 69 of the supporting pillars and estimated it would cost £ 2 @.@ 5 million to repair . Locomotive @-@ hauled trains were banned , which immediately resulted in the loss of traffic from Tywyn , including explosives traffic to and from the factory at <unk> . That traffic was re @-@ routed via Maentwrog Road railway station and the Conwy Valley Line . However , Gwynedd County Council were opposed to closing the bridge completely as 40 % of all railway traffic in the area was tourist related . The government applied for a £ 2 @.@ 5 million grant from the EEC to repair the bridge , with a further £ <unk> being spent on improving the signalling . The bridge was closed entirely to traffic for six months during the temporary repair works eventually undertaken , and 30 of the piles were replaced . 
 On 13 April 1986 , a British Rail Class 37 <unk> was named " Bont Y <unk> " to celebrate the ( short @-@ lived ) re @-@ introduction of locomotive @-@ hauled trains following repairs in 1985 – 1986 . Following major repairs the weight restriction was relaxed in 2005 , and locomotive @-@ hauled trains have again been allowed to cross . 
 In March 2013 , the Barmouth Viaduct Access Group ( B @-@ <unk> ) , was established to investigate an alternative route from the town centre to the bridge , as the current walkway is steep , narrow , and unsuitable for buggies or wheelchairs . In June , the toll was removed after the collectors left and were not replaced . The council have not yet decided how to pay for the bridge 's maintenance costs , which were £ 39 @,@ 405 for the year . This has proved to be problematic as the revenue collected from tolls has not been sufficient to cover the council 's share of costs , and there is not a sufficient budget to employ any full @-@ time staff to collect payments . 
 Gwynedd County Council has proposed closing the bridge to pedestrians and cyclists for cost reasons , as it needs to find £ 9 million worth of savings by April 2016 . The potential closure of the bridge is one of over 100 cost saving options totalling £ 13 million to be put to a public consultation in Autumn 2015 ; the council currently pays Network Rail £ 30 @,@ 800 per year towards maintenance costs . A petition calling on the council to " cease considerations of closing this much loved walking and cycling route " attracted 20 @,@ 000 signatures within a week . In February 2016 , it was reported that the bridge would not close . 
 = Evan Lysacek = 
 Evan Frank Lysacek ( / <unk> <unk> / ; born June 4 , 1985 ) is an American figure skater . He is the 2010 Olympic champion , the 2009 World champion , a two @-@ time ( 2005 , 2007 ) Four Continents champion , the 2009 Grand Prix Final champion , and a two @-@ time ( 2007 , 2008 ) U.S. national champion . Lysacek was the 2010 United States Olympic Committee 's <unk> of the Year , and the winner of the James E. Sullivan Award as the top U.S. amateur athlete of 2010 . On January 22 , 2016 , he was inducted into the U.S. Figure Skating Hall of Fame . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Evan Lysacek was born in Chicago , Illinois , and raised in Naperville , Illinois . His mother , Tanya ( née Santoro ) , is a substitute teacher in Naperville , and his father , Don , is a building contractor . He has an older sister , Laura , and a younger sister , Christina , who played on a nationally ranked volleyball team . His cousin Cole <unk> is a former punter for the Clemson Tigers . Lysacek went to Spring Brook Elementary and then to Gregory Middle School . Lysacek graduated from <unk> Valley High School in 2003 . During high school , Lysacek was a member of the honor roll , where he earned a number of academic achievement awards , including the Presidential Award for Academic Excellence in 1999 . 
 Lysacek is of Italian and Czech descent ; his great @-@ grandfather František <unk> , emigrated from Czechoslovakia to Chicago in 1925 . He is a Greek Orthodox Christian , having stated that one of his most prized possessions is his Orthodox cross . He wears Graf figure skating boots . 
 Lysacek moved to Los Angeles , California in 2003 , following his graduation from high school . He has homes in El Segundo , California , Chicago , and Las Vegas . 
 Lysacek studied acting , having taken method acting classes at the Professional Arts School in Beverly Hills . He appeared in the independent short film Skate Great ! , playing a Russian Olympic gold medalist . Lysacek uses power yoga as conditioning training . 
 In September 2014 , Lysacek moved to New York to pursue a career in commercial real estate . In 2015 , he started working for Vera Wang , his former costume designer . 
 = = Career = = 
 Lysacek began skating at the age of eight . His grandmother had always wanted to be in the Ice Capades , so she bought him skates for Christmas . He originally wanted to play hockey , so his mother enrolled him and his sister Laura in figure @-@ skating lessons to learn how to skate . Lysacek was soon competing as a figure skater . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 In 1996 , Lysacek won the U.S. national title at the Juvenile level – the lowest qualifying level in the U.S. Figure Skating competition structure . In 1997 , he moved up to Intermediate and won the pewter medal ( fourth place ) at the Junior Olympics , after winning both his regional and his sectional qualifying competitions . After failing to qualify for Nationals on the novice level in 1998 , Lysacek won the U.S. Novice title at the 1999 U.S. Championships at the age of thirteen . 
 = = = Junior career = = = 
 = = = = 1999 – 2000 season = = = = 
 In the 1999 – 2000 season , Lysacek made his international junior debut and competed on the 1999 – 2000 ISU Junior Grand Prix circuit . He placed seventh at his first event and then won his second event . He was the third alternate to the 1999 – 2000 ISU Junior Grand Prix Final . 
 At the 2000 U.S. Championships , Lysacek won the Junior title at the age of fourteen . He placed fifth in the short program and first in the free skate , placing first overall . He was the first male skater since Terry <unk> to win back @-@ to @-@ back Novice and Junior Men 's titles in the United States . The win on the junior level was unusual in that Lysacek moved from third to first overall while sitting backstage , because he won through a tiebreak in the 6 @.@ 0 ordinal system . Lysacek was tied with Parker Pennington in second place ordinals and had one more first place ordinal , giving him the win in the free skate in the Total <unk> of Majority tiebreaker , which pushed him ahead in overall factored placements , allowing him to win the title overall . Following the U.S. Championships , he was assigned to the 2000 Gardena Spring Trophy in <unk> where he won the silver medal on the junior level . 
 = = = = 2000 – 2001 season = = = = 
 Lysacek had a strong showing in the 2000 – 2001 season . He competed in his second season on the Junior Grand Prix circuit and won two silver medals . He was the 7th qualifier for the 2000 – 2001 Junior Grand Prix Final and placed 8th at the Final . 
 He made his senior national debut at the 2001 U.S. Championships , placing 12th at the age of fifteen . Lysacek was named second alternate to the US team to the 2001 World Junior Championships and was placed on the team after Ryan Bradley withdrew due to injury . Lysacek performed two clean programs and came in second behind fellow American Johnny Weir , giving the United States a gold and a silver on the World Junior podium for the first time since 1987 . 
 = = = = 2001 – 2002 season = = = = 
 Over the next season , Lysacek dealt with several injuries , including broken ribs , which resulted in lost training time . After the September 11 , 2001 attacks , the United States Figure Skating Association cancelled the 2001 – 2002 ISU Junior Grand Prix event to be held in Arizona and did not allow its junior skaters to compete on the Junior Grand Prix circuit for the rest of that season . At the 2002 U.S. Championships , Lysacek repeated his 12th @-@ place finish from the previous year and was not selected for the team to the 2002 World Junior Championships . He was sent to the 2002 Triglav Trophy in April , where he won the gold medal on the junior level . 
 = = = = 2002 – 2003 season = = = = 
 After that , Lysacek changed his diet and his training habits . In the 2002 – 2003 season , he competed on the 2002 – 2003 ISU Junior Grand Prix circuit and won two silver medals . He was the 4th qualifier for the 2002 – 2003 Junior Grand Prix Final , where he placed 5th . For the 2003 U.S. Championships , his goal had been to place in the top ten . He achieved this with a 7th @-@ place finish . 
 Lysacek was named third alternate for the 2003 Four Continents Championships and was placed on the team after other skaters withdrew . He placed 10th at this event in his senior international debut . He was also named to the 2003 Junior Worlds team ; following the withdrawal of Parker Pennington , the higher @-@ ranked man on the two @-@ man team , Lysacek was the only United States men 's skater at the competition . He landed his first clean triple axel jump of his career in the qualifying round of this competition and his second clean one in the free skate . 
 = = = = 2003 – 2004 season = = = = 
 After graduating from high school in 2003 , Lysacek made a coaching change and began to work with Ken Congemi and Frank Carroll in El Segundo , California . With Congemi and Carroll , Lysacek won both of his Junior Grand Prix events . He was the second qualifier to the 2003 – 2004 Junior Grand Prix Final and won the event . He placed 5th at the 2004 U.S. Championships . At the 2004 Four Continents he won the bronze medal , his first senior @-@ level international medal . He then went on to compete at the 2004 World Junior Championships , where he won a third silver medal . 
 = = = Senior career = = = 
 = = = = 2004 – 2005 season = = = = 
 In the 2004 – 2005 season , having aged out of the junior level at age 19 , Evan Lysacek made his senior international debut . Skating through a hip injury , Lysacek placed fifth at the 2004 Skate America , the first Grand Prix event of his career . He repeated that placement a few weeks later at the 2004 Cup of Russia . At the 2005 U.S. Championships , Lysacek won the bronze medal after receiving the only 6 @.@ 0 of his career for his short program . He went on to win his first senior international title at the 2005 Four Continents . He competed next at the 2005 World Championships in Moscow . There , he won a surprising bronze medal at his first senior World Championships , a competition for which his goal had been only to qualify for the free skate . 
 = = = = 2005 – 2006 season = = = = 
 In the 2005 – 2006 season , Lysacek again competed on the Grand Prix . He placed second at the 2005 Skate America , but it was clear that his Grease free skate was not working . Lysacek and coach Frank Carroll made the decision to find a new long program . Lysacek 's new Carmen program was a success at the 2005 NHK Trophy , where Lysacek placed second . Lysacek was the only American man to qualify for the 2005 – 2006 Grand Prix Final , but he withdrew before the event because of bursitis and tendinitis in his right hip . 
 At the 2006 U.S. Championships , the de facto Olympic qualifier , Lysacek was third after the short program , but pulled up to win the free skate , finishing second overall . He was named to the 2006 Winter Olympic team along with Johnny Weir and Matthew Savoie . At the Olympics , following a 10th @-@ place finish in the short program , Lysacek became sick with the stomach flu . Unable to practice , he stayed in bed at the Olympic village , receiving fluids from IVs . After considering withdrawing , he decided to skate the next day and went on to skate a career @-@ best free skate . He finished his free skate with eight triple jumps and was ranked third of the night . He finished fourth overall , seven points below the bronze . He commentated on his free @-@ skating program on Olympic Ice the next day with Scott Hamilton and Mary Carillo . 
 Lysacek ended his season by winning the bronze medal at the 2006 World Championships in Calgary , Alberta . He was once again troubled by illness , having been administered three different antibiotics to fight a bacterial infection , which at one point , caused him to cough up blood . He rose from seventh place in the short to finish third on the strength of his free @-@ skating program . After the World Championships , Lysacek toured with Champions on Ice as a full member of the cast . 
 = = = = 2006 – 2007 season = = = = 
 In the 2006 – 2007 season , Lysacek placed second at the 2006 Skate America . Two weeks later , Lysacek won the gold medal at the 2006 Cup of China by a 20 @-@ point margin . He was the fourth qualifier for the 2006 – 2007 Grand Prix Final in his second consecutive year in qualifying for the event . However , he withdrew from the competition before he was to skate his short program due to an injury to his hip . 
 Lysacek resumed training a few weeks later . At the 2007 U.S. Championships , he performed his first clean short program of the season , then went on to land his first clean quadruple jump in competition , a quadruple toe loop @-@ triple toe loop jump , in the long program , to win his first national title . A week later , Lysacek competed in the 2007 Four Continents . He was fourth after the short program , but made yet another comeback in the free skate , landing a clean quadruple combination , to earn a new personal best and to win his second Four Continents title . 
 At the 2007 World Championships , Lysacek made his first attempt at landing a quadruple jump in the short program . He attempted a quad @-@ triple , but stepped out of the quad and put his hand down , and followed it with a double . He placed fifth in the short program and earned himself his first new short program personal best in two years . In the long program , he completed a quadruple toe @-@ loop as the first part of a quad @-@ triple combination , but lost control of the landing , adding a three turn after it , and was unable to complete the following triple as intended . He performed a double loop instead of a planned triple loop and placed fifth once again in the long program , placing fifth over all . 
 Lysacek toured over the summer of 2007 with Champions on Ice for the second consecutive year . 
 = = = = 2007 – 2008 season = = = = 
 Lysacek began the 2007 – 2008 season at the 2007 Skate America . He <unk> and fell on an attempted quadruple toe loop @-@ triple toe loop in the short program , receiving only one point for that element . He was in second place going into the free skate . He won the free skate , landing a clean quadruple jump , but was unable to pull up to first overall , due to Daisuke Takahashi 's twelve point lead after the short program . He went on to the 2007 Cup of China , where he won the short program with a score of 81 @.@ 55 , improving his personal best by almost thirteen points . He placed second in the free skate after falling on his quadruple jump , and finished second overall to Johnny Weir . 
 At the 2007 – 2008 Grand Prix Final , Lysacek was credited with a quadruple jump in both his programs and won the bronze medal overall , after placing third in both segments of the competition . He earned a new overall personal best of 229 @.@ 78 points . 
 At the 2008 U.S. Championships , Lysacek was second after the short program and won the free skate . Although he tied with Johnny Weir on the overall score , Lysacek won the title on the tiebreaker , thereby earning his second national title . 
 His next event was the 2008 Four Continents , where he placed second in the short program and third in the free skate , and finished third overall . Lysacek was also named to the team for the 2008 World Championships . A week before the event , he was forced to withdraw due to an injury sustained while attempting a triple axel ; the blade broke off of his boot and he injured the left side of his body , from his forearm to his shoulder , and required a cast . Lysacek toured over the summer of 2008 with the Stars on Ice tour . 
 = = = = 2008 – 2009 season = = = = 
 Lysacek began the 2008 – 2009 season at the 2008 Skate America , where he won the bronze medal . The following week , he competed at the 2008 Skate Canada International , where he won a second bronze medal . Lysacek was the second alternate for the 2008 – 2009 Grand Prix Final . 
 At the 2009 U.S. Championships , Lysacek placed second in the short program , 2 @.@ 81 points behind leader Jeremy Abbott and 7 @.@ 42 points ahead of third @-@ place finisher Parker Pennington . In the free skate , Lysacek fell on his quadruple combination attempt and placed fourth in that segment of the competition . He won the bronze medal overall , placing 0 @.@ 60 points behind silver medalist Brandon <unk> and 7 @.@ 70 points ahead of pewter medalist Ryan Bradley . Due to his placement at the U.S. Championships , Lysacek was named to the teams to the 2009 Four Continents Championships and the 2009 World Championships . 
 At the 2009 Four Continents , Lysacek placed second in the short program , 7 @.@ 25 points behind leader Patrick Chan . He placed second in the free skating segment as well , placing 4 @.@ 79 behind Chan . He won the silver medal overall by a margin of 15 @.@ 39 points ahead of bronze medalist Takahiko Kozuka . 
 At the 2009 World Championships , Lysacek placed second in the short program . He then won the free skating segment to win the competition overall , becoming the first American man since Todd Eldredge in 1996 to win the World title . His placement , combined with that of Brandon <unk> , qualified the United States for three entries in the men 's event at the 2010 Winter Olympics . At the World Championships , Lysacek competed with a stress fracture in his left foot , which prevented him from trying a quadruple jump at the competition . During the off @-@ season , Lysacek took two months off from skating to give the injury time to heal . He was called the frontrunner for the 2010 Olympic gold by some journalists . 
 During the later part of the season and during the off @-@ season , Lysacek toured with Stars on Ice . 
 = = = = 2009 – 2010 season = = = = 
 Lysacek began the 2009 – 2010 season at the 2009 Cup of China , where he placed third in the short program and second in the free skating to win the silver medal overall . Afterwards he went on to the 2009 Skate America , where he won both segments of the competition and won the gold medal overall in his sixth time competing at Skate America . Lysacek was the second qualifier for the 2009 – 2010 Grand Prix Final . 
 At the Grand Prix Final , Lysacek placed second in the short program and won the free skating to win the title overall . He became the second consecutive American to win the title , following Jeremy Abbott 's win the year before . At the 2010 U.S. Championships , he placed second in the short program and third in the free skating to win the silver medal overall . He was named to the Olympic team . 
 At the 2010 Winter Olympics , Lysacek placed second in the short program , with a score of 90 @.@ 30 . He won the free skate with a score of 167 @.@ 37 and won the gold medal overall with a total score of 257 @.@ 67 , a margin of 1 @.@ 31 over silver medalist Evgeni <unk> . He became the first American to win the Olympic title in men 's singles since Brian Boitano in 1988 , and the first reigning world champion to win since Scott Hamilton in 1984 . 
 He had originally been named to the team for the 2010 World Championships . He withdrew from the World team following his win at the Olympics . 
 = = = = 2010 – present = = = = 
 Lysacek did not skate competitively in 2010 – 2011 but did not announce a retirement . 
 In June 2011 , he received two Grand Prix assignments for the 2011 – 2012 season – 2011 Skate America and 2011 Trophée Eric Bompard . He resumed training with Frank Carroll at Lake Arrowhead , California , and his publicist said he would make a decision whether to compete later in the summer . In September , he announced that his goal was to participate in the 2014 Winter Olympics . In October , U.S. Figure Skating announced that he would not compete at the 2011 Skate America due to a financial disagreement , and Lysacek confirmed that he would not take part in the Grand Prix series , explaining on his Twitter that " a suitable agreement could not be reached between U.S. Figure Skating and myself by the event entry deadline " . In November , Lysacek confirmed he would not enter the 2012 U.S. Championships in January 2012 but negotiations with U.S. Figure Skating continued . 
 On August 10 , 2012 , U.S. Figure Skating announced that an agreement had been reached and Lysacek would return to competition at the 2012 Skate America . He withdrew after aggravating a groin injury . On November 20 , 2012 , Lysacek underwent surgery to repair a torn muscle in his lower abdomen , i.e. a sports hernia , with an expected period of six weeks off the ice . In January 2013 , he withdrew from the 2013 U.S. Championships , saying he was healthy but needed an additional three weeks to return to competition form . Carroll said it would be a long recovery . 
 On June 3 , 2013 , it was announced that Lysacek would compete at one ISU Grand Prix of Figure Skating event , the 2013 Skate America . However , on September 30 , 2013 , it was announced that he had withdrawn . On December 10 , 2013 , Lysacek announced on The Today Show that he would not attempt to qualify for the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi , due to the labrum injury which he sustained in September . 
 On August 30 , 2014 , during a TV interview , Lysacek mentioned his competitive skating career was coming to an end . 
 On December 15 , 2015 , U.S. Figure Skating announced Lysacek would be a member of the U.S. Figure Skating Hall of Fame Class of 2016 . The induction ceremony was held on January 22 , 2016 at the 2016 U.S. Figure Skating Championships . 
 = = Coaches and choreographers = = 
 Evan Lysacek was originally coached by Candice Brown in Naperville . After that , he worked with Deborah <unk> in Naperville , Illinois and Addison , Illinois for three years . For the next two years , he had an arrangement where he would train under both Addison @-@ based Maria <unk> @-@ Athey and Moscow @-@ based Viktor Kudriavtsev . Kudriavtsev would come to Chicago for part of the year to coach , and Lysacek spent his summers at Kudriavtsev 's summer training camps in Moscow , Russia and <unk> , Switzerland . When that arrangement proved untenable , Kudriavtsev recommended Lysacek to Carroll , who agreed to coach Lysacek on the condition that Lysacek would work more with Congemi than with himself , due to Carroll 's commitments to Timothy Goebel . Lysacek moved to El Segundo , California to work with Frank Carroll and Ken Congemi in June 2003 . Lysacek worked with both Congemi and Carroll through the 2006 @-@ 2007 season , after which he began working solely with Carroll . He has also trained with ballerina Galina <unk> . 
 Lysacek trained with Carroll at the Toyota Sports Center in El Segundo , California . After Carroll moved to Palm Springs , they decided to meet midway at the Ice Castle International Training Center in Lake Arrowhead and Ontario , California , and Karen Kwan @-@ <unk> coached him at the East West Ice Palace in Artesia , California . In June 2013 , Carroll moved back to the Toyota Sports Center . 
 Lysacek has worked with many choreographers over the years , including Oleg Epstein and Kurt Browning . Both his programs for the 2007 – 2008 season were choreographed by Lori Nichol . He worked with Tatiana <unk> on his programs for the 2008 – 2009 season . He returned to Nichol for the 2009 – 2010 season . 
 = = Endorsements and public life = = 
 Lysacek supports a number of charities . He participated in Target – A Time for Heroes , a celebrity charity event benefiting the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation . He also supports the Dana @-@ Farber Cancer Institute ( Jimmy Fund ) . He began supporting Figure Skating in Harlem in 2006 and is a board member of the charity . Lysacek has attended their benefit gala in New York City regularly . 
 Following his win at the 2009 World Figure Skating Championships , Lysacek acquired many sponsors , including Coca @-@ Cola , AT & T , and Ralph Lauren . He also served as a spokesperson for Total Gym . In 2011 , he switched agents from International Management Group to Creative Artists Agency . Lysacek left Creative Artists Agency in April 2012 and was represented by Shep Goldberg until his death in November 2014 . 
 In April 2012 , the U.S. Department of State 's Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs named Lysacek a Sports Envoy . 
 = = = Costumes = = = 
 In the past , Lysacek has worn costumes designed by Christian Dior , Gianfranco Ferre , Alexander McQueen , and Vera Wang , American fashion designer and former figure skater . Wang created the mock tuxedo Lysacek wore when he won the 2009 World Championships . Lysacek and Wang also collaborated to design his costumes for the 2010 Winter Olympics , as well as those worn for the rest of the 2009 – 2010 season . 
 = = = Dancing with the Stars = = = 
 Lysacek was a celebrity contestant on Dancing with the Stars for the tenth season , which premiered on Monday , March 22 , 2010 . He and his professional dance partner Anna <unk> made it to the finals and finished in second place to Nicole Scherzinger and Derek Hough . 
 = = Programs = = 
 = = = Post @-@ 2014 = = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ 2014 = = = 
 = = Competitive highlights = = 
 = Grayrigg derailment = 
 The Grayrigg derailment was a fatal railway accident that occurred at approximately 20 : 15 GMT on 23 February 2007 , just to the south of Grayrigg , Cumbria , in the North West England region of the United Kingdom . The initial conclusion of the accident investigation is that the derailment was caused by a faulty set of points ( number 2B ) on the Down Main running line , controlled from Lambrigg ground frame . The scheduled inspection on 18 February 2007 had not taken place and the faults had gone undetected . 
 Although the accident killed far fewer people than some other accidents on the West Coast Main Line , it had a major negative impact on Network Rail 's safety record . 
 = = Incident = = 
 The 17 : 30 Virgin West Coast Pendolino West Coast Main Line InterCity service from London Euston to Glasgow Central derailed at 20 : 15 by a faulty set of points almost immediately after crossing the Docker Viaduct ( the rear half of the train would still have been crossing the bridge whilst the front derailed at the points ) . The train was reported to have been travelling at 153 km / h ( 95 mph ) when it was derailed . The train , consisting of unit 390 033 City of Glasgow , which was constructed at Washwood Heath , Birmingham in 2002 , had nine carriages and carried 105 passengers and four staff members . 
 Passengers said that the carriages of the train began rocking and swaying violently before the train left the rails and careered down an embankment , with the first carriages jack @-@ knifing and most of the train coming to rest in a field . The train was reported as being evacuated around midnight . Emergency crews scanned the train with thermal imagery equipment to make sure there was no one still inside . Up to 500 rescuers attended the scene , along with at least 12 ambulances , at least five fire engines , three Royal Air Force Sea King search and rescue helicopters , the International Rescue Corps , three civilian mountain rescue teams plus RAF Leeming Mountain Rescue Team , and one Merseyside Police helicopter . The rescue operation was hindered by rain , darkness , and access problems caused by the narrow country lanes and muddy fields . Emergency vehicles experienced difficult conditions , needing to be towed by farm vehicles or tractors after becoming bogged down in mud . The train 's derailment caused severe damage to the Overhead Line Equipment and tripped the entire circuit between Brock ( near Preston ) and Tebay resulting in a number of other electric @-@ powered services coming to a halt and all signalling equipment immediately turning to danger ( red ) in accordance with the system 's fail safe design . 
 Live BBC television coverage at 08 : 15 the following morning showed that although the whole train had been derailed , the rear carriages were standing nearly vertically on the sleepers and ballast . Standard class , the front five carriages , were the worst affected , and the rear four first class carriages were in better condition . The leading carriage , a driving motor coach , had headed down the embankment , and turned end @-@ for @-@ end as it fell . It was lying on its side at the foot of the embankment . The second carriage had jack @-@ knifed against the first , breaking the coupling , and so had not followed it down the bank . This second carriage came to rest some distance further along the track , at a steep angle with one end in the air . The middle part of the train toppled sideways down the embankment . All the partially friction stir welded carriages remained structurally intact , with damage mainly confined to the crumple zones at their ends . None of the windows broke , and lighting remained in all the carriages . Most injuries occurred in the front two carriages . The driver , who had stayed at the controls ( but had little option to move once the accident had started and had no prior indication of derailment ) , was trapped for about an hour while specialist cutting equipment was used to free him from his cab . The other three members of the crew were in the rear first class section of the train . 
 Survivors were initially received at Grayrigg Primary School , which had been opened as a Survivor Reception Centre . Hospitals in the area , including some over the Scottish border in Dumfries and Galloway , were put on standby , but not all received patients . According to BBC News , five passengers were admitted to Royal Preston Hospital in a critical condition . Police later released a statement revealing that one passenger , 84 @-@ year @-@ old Margaret Masson from Glasgow , had died in hospital . Her funeral took place on 31 March 2007 at Craigton crematorium in Glasgow . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 A family liaison centre was set up in Glasgow Central Station for worried relatives . 
 Within three hours of the derailment the site of the accident had been sealed off with a five @-@ mile cordon . The line was expected to be closed for two weeks , with Virgin Trains saying that the line would not reopen to passenger services until 12 March 2007 . The recovery operation was slowed by problems in getting heavy lifting gear to the site which required temporary roads to be constructed . 
 Sir Richard Branson , Virgin Group chairman , visited the site of the derailment at 11 : 00 the following morning to comment on the incident . During his news conference at the site he said that he regarded the driver , named as Iain Black from Dumbarton , as a hero , as he had attempted to stop the train and remained in his seat to ensure the safety of passengers . Black left hospital in late March and stated that " I 've got to be in the cab to help the train and it never crossed my mind to leave . " 
 Branson also later thanked local residents for their help at the accident site , describing how he " was very impressed to hear how those kind people rallied round , opening their hearts and opening their doors to strangers in distress " . Local farmers assisted the emergency services by transporting equipment using quad bikes and four @-@ wheel drive vehicles . Sergeant Jo Fawcett of the Cumbria Constabulary also offered thanks , saying that " There are so many people who have given up their own time to contribute in some way to dealing with the aftermath of the derailment that it would be unfair to name them for fear of missing someone out . " 
 Branson also paid tribute to the Pendolino train , comparing it to a " tank " . He also added " If the train had been old stock then the number of injuries and the mortalities would have been horrendous " . Several sources also gave their praise due to the fact that the carriages generally stayed intact during the accident . 
 As a result of the suspicion that faulty points were the cause of the Grayrigg Derailment , Network Rail checked over 700 sets of similar points across the country as a " precautionary measure " saying later that " nothing of concern " had been found . 
 The operation to remove the train from the site began on the evening of 1 March 2007 with the first carriages moved from the embankment . This allowed passengers ' property to be retrieved and gave investigators access to the train interior , which previously had not been possible because it would have been unsafe . The last of the carriages were removed on 4 March 2007 and the <unk> road was reopened . 
 The points which caused the derailment , and points 2A on the opposite line , were removed from the track following the derailment and the line is now welded continuously for 2 @.@ 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 5 km ) including the line over the Docker viaduct . 
 The derailment also brought down the overhead line equipment which had to be replaced . Modern double @-@ line catenary from a single stand was used for this , which reduces the risk of carriages bending if a derailment occurs , for example becoming wedged between the overhead line stanchions as seen in the Southall crash . 
 In 2013 the British Transport Police ( BTP ) posthumously awarded a Chief Constables Commendation to a member of its staff , Jon Ratcliffe , who was at the time of the disaster Media and Marketing Manager for BTP 's North Western Area . He received the commendation for his good handling of media enquires in the aftermath of the crash . Jon Ratcliffe died in 2008 following a sudden illness . 
 = = Cause = = 
 Lambrigg ground frame , 660 yards ( 600 m ) south @-@ west of the accident site , controls two crossovers , each one comprising two sets of points allowing trains to cross from one running line to the other in emergencies or during track maintenance work . These points are used only occasionally , operated locally after a release is obtained from Carlisle power signal box . They are normally locked in the main line " running " position . Early statements by Chief Superintendent Martyn Ripley of British Transport Police suggested that investigations would focus on these points . 
 Investigations were launched by the Rail Accident Investigation Branch and Her Majesty 's Railway Inspectorate . RMT rail union leader Bob Crow said on BBC News that a points failure was responsible for the incident . Experts compared the cause to that of the Potters Bar rail crash in 2002 . 
 On 26 February , an interim report published by the Rail Accident Investigation Branch outlined the current progress of the investigation . The report contained a single conclusion , that the immediate cause of the accident was the condition of the stretcher bar arrangement at points 2B at Lambrigg crossover , which resulted in the loss of gauge separation of the point switch blades . The stretcher bars ( components that hold the moving blades of the points the correct distance apart ) had been found to be disconnected or missing . Of the three bars , one was not in position , another had nuts and bolts missing , and two were fractured . The points in question were facing the direction of travel of the train . 
 Following the RAIB report , Network Rail released a statement in which its Chief Executive , John Armitt , described how the organisation was " devastated to conclude that the condition of the set of points at Grayrigg caused this terrible accident " . He apologised " to all the people affected by the failure of the infrastructure " . 
 The RAIB report noted that the Network Rail New Measurement Train ran over the site on 21 February . This train uses lasers and other instruments to make measurements of the track geometry and other features such as overhead line height and stagger , and the track gauge , twist and cant . It is not used to inspect points , but it does make a video record of the track which can be reviewed later . Commenting on the possibility that the train 's video might have been used to detect the points damage and thereby prevent the accident , a Network Rail spokesman said : 
 The [ inspection ] train runs at speeds of up to 125 mph , or 95 mph on this stretch . There would be no point somebody watching it at that speed as they wouldn 't be able to pick up any faults . It has to be run in super @-@ slow motion to spot faults . The train runs for up to 18 hours a day , seven days a week . It would probably take someone most of the month to watch one day 's worth of data . It 's not what it 's there for . It 's a backwards reference tool . 
 Network Rail admitted it failed to carry out a scheduled visual track inspection in the area on the Sunday before the derailment . 
 Bob Crow of the RMT union said : 
 This is shutting the stable door after the horse has well and truly bolted . We argued this train should not replace visual inspections . Inspectors who walk the track are the eyes and ears of the railway . They don 't just check the safety of the track , they look at the area surrounding it , check for signs of potential trouble such as gaps in the fence where vandals could get in . 
 Labour Party Member of Parliament John McDonnell added : " The fact that Network Rail apparently had footage of a missing stretcher bar days before the fatal crash is very worrying . " 
 As part of the investigation by the British Transport Police , three Network Rail employees were arrested and bailed , one in July 2007 and two in November 2007 All three were due to answer bail in March 2008 but this was extended until the end of June pending further inquiries . On 9 February 2009 , the British Transport Police confirmed that none of the three Network Rail employees arrested in connection with the derailment will be charged following advice from the Crown Prosecution Service . 
 = = Subsequent service disruption = = 
 Immediately after the accident , all services were suspended and the First ScotRail Sleeper train , the Caledonian Sleeper , was curtailed and passengers transferred to overnight coaches . 
 The line closure that followed the initial service suspension saw most Virgin services terminate at Preston or Lancaster from the south , with buses to Carlisle and all stations along the route . The only exception was an early @-@ morning and late @-@ evening through service from Carlisle to London and return . This was diesel @-@ hauled via Blackburn and Settle . There were also several non @-@ stop trains from Preston to London Euston . Local services all terminated short but many were able to make their journeys as their destinations were off branches . The Caledonian Sleeper was diverted via the East Coast Main Line , along with freight services , although some were diesel @-@ hauled via Blackburn and Settle . 
 Trains began running on the line again on 12 March subject to a speed restriction of 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) at the crash site . The first train was the 05 : 10 Manchester to Glasgow . 
 = = Prior incidents = = 
 The Grayrigg derailment was not the first British railway accident to feature a train or locomotive named City of Glasgow on the West Coast Mainline . In the Harrow and Wealdstone railway accident on 8 October 1952 , the locomotive of the sleeper train from Perth to London Euston , whose crew was responsible for the incident , was Class 8P No. <unk> City of Glasgow . 
 In the area near the accident , south of Tebay in Cumbria , on 15 February 2004 another fatal incident had occurred , the Tebay rail accident , when four rail workers were killed by a runaway track maintenance trailer . Also close by was a collision on the Lambrigg Crossing on 18 May 1947 . 
 = = Prosecution = = 
 On 13 January 2012 , the Office of Rail Regulation announced that Network Rail were to be prosecuted under Section 3 ( 1 ) of the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 for " the company 's failure to provide and implement suitable and sufficient standards , procedures , guidance , training , tools and resources for the inspection and maintenance of fixed stretcher bar points " . At the first hearing at Lancaster Magistrates ' Court on 28 February 2012 , Network Rail indicated an intention to plead guilty to the charges . On 4 April 2012 , Network Rail were fined a total of £ 4 @,@ 118 @,@ 037 including costs following the court case . 
 Critical commentary appeared in the media concerning the knighthood awarded to John Armitt in the 2012 New Year Honours for services to engineering and construction . Armitt had been Chief Executive of Network Rail at the time of the Grayrigg derailment , and the family of a victim of the accident criticised the award , which coincidentally was conferred on the same day that Network Rail were prosecuted for the accident . 
 After a two @-@ week hearing one of the issues Coroner Ian Smith announced that he would be issuing a rule 43 report . The intention of the report is to raise concerns with authorities to prevent similar incidents occurring again . 
 = Princess Charlotte of Wales = 
 Princess Charlotte Augusta of Wales ( 7 January 1796 – 6 November 1817 ) was the only child of George , Prince of Wales ( later to become King George IV ) and Caroline of Brunswick . Had she outlived both her grandfather King George III and her father , she would have become Queen of the United Kingdom , but she died following childbirth at the age of 21 . 
 Charlotte 's parents disliked each other from before their arranged marriage and soon separated . The Prince of Wales left most of Charlotte 's care to governesses and servants , but only allowed her limited contact with the Princess of Wales , who eventually left the country . As Charlotte grew to adulthood , her father pressured her to marry William , Hereditary Prince of Orange ( later King of the Netherlands ) , but after initially accepting him , Charlotte soon broke off the intended match . This resulted in an extended contest of wills between her and her father , and finally the Prince of Wales permitted her to marry Prince Leopold of Saxe @-@ Coburg @-@ Saalfeld ( later King of the Belgians ) . After a year and a half of happy marriage , Charlotte died after giving birth to a stillborn son . 
 Charlotte 's death set off tremendous mourning among the British , who had seen her as a sign of hope and a contrast both to her unpopular father and to her grandfather , whom they deemed mad . As she had been King George III 's only legitimate grandchild , there was considerable pressure on the King 's unmarried sons to find wives . King George III 's fourth son , Edward , Duke of Kent , fathered the eventual heir , Victoria , who was born 18 months after Charlotte 's death . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1794 , George , Prince of Wales , sought a suitable bride . He did not do so out of any particular desire to secure the succession , but because the Prime Minister , William Pitt the Younger , promised him an increased income if he married . George , despite receiving large incomes as Prince of Wales and as Duke of Cornwall , lived well beyond his means , and by 1794 , his income was insufficient to cover even the interest on his debt . 
 George had attempted marriage once , to his mistress , Maria Fitzherbert . The attempted marriage was legally invalid as no attempt had been made to obtain the consent of King George III , the Prince 's father , which was required by the Royal Marriages Act 1772 . Nevertheless , the Prince kept Fitzherbert as his mistress , that is , when other mistresses , such as Lady Jersey , were not in greater favour . 
 George considered two German princesses as possible brides , both of whom were his first cousins . Louise of Mecklenburg @-@ Strelitz was the daughter of George 's mother 's brother , while Caroline of Brunswick was his father 's sister 's daughter . George 's mother , Queen Charlotte , had heard disquieting rumours about Princess Caroline 's behavior , and so favoured Princess Louise , whom she considered prettier , and who was her niece by blood , rather than by marriage . Princess Caroline had , it was said , behaved improperly with an Irish officer in her father 's army , and earlier negotiations for her hand had broken off for unknown reasons . George , under the influence of Lady Jersey ( who considered Caroline a less formidable rival than Louise ) , selected the Brunswick princess although he had never met her , and despatched the diplomat , James Harris , 1st Earl of Malmesbury , to escort her from Brunswick to Britain . 
 Harris found the Princess dressed in a dishevelled manner , and it was obvious that she had not washed in several days . He found her conversation coarse and overly familiar . Harris spent almost four months with her , doing his best to improve her behaviour and habits , before they reached England , a time lengthened by poor winter weather and delays occasioned by the war against France . The diplomat brought Caroline to St. James 's Palace ; on first sight of his bride , the Prince stated , " Harris , I am not well , pray get me a glass of brandy . " After the Prince had left , Caroline said , " I think he is very fat and nothing like as handsome as his portrait . " When the couple dined together that evening , the embittered Princess made coarse allusions to the Prince 's relationship with Lady Jersey ; according to Harris this served to cement George 's dislike of her . Before the wedding on 8 April 1795 , George sent his brother William , Duke of Clarence ( later William IV ) , to tell Fitzherbert that she was the only woman he would ever love , then went to the ceremony , drunk . 
 George later stated that the couple had sex only three times , and that the Princess had commented on how large his penis was , leading him to conclude that she must have had a basis for comparison and so was most likely not a virgin . Caroline on the other hand later hinted that the Prince was impotent . The royal couple separated within weeks , though they remained under the same roof . One day short of nine months after the wedding , Caroline gave birth to a daughter . 
 = = Childhood = = 
 Charlotte was born at the Prince 's residence , Carlton House , London , on 7 January 1796 . While George was mildly unhappy that she was not a boy , the King , who preferred girl babies , was delighted at the birth of his first legitimate grandchild , and hoped that the birth would serve to reconcile George and Caroline . This did not come to pass ; three days after Charlotte 's birth , George made a will directing that his wife have no role in the upbringing of their child , and leaving all his worldly goods to Fitzherbert . Many members of the royal family were unpopular ; however , the nation celebrated Charlotte 's birth . On 11 February 1796 , the little princess was christened Charlotte Augusta , after her grandmothers , Queen Charlotte and Augusta , Duchess of Brunswick @-@ Lüneburg , in the Great Drawing Room at Carlton House by John Moore , Archbishop of Canterbury . Her godparents were the King , Queen and Duchess of Brunswick ( for whom the Princess Royal stood proxy ) . 
 Despite Caroline 's demands for better treatment now that she had given birth to the second @-@ in @-@ line to the throne , George restricted her contact with the child , forbidding her to see their daughter except in the presence of a nurse and governess . Caroline was allowed the usual daily visit which upper class parents paid to their young offspring at this time ; she was not allowed any say in the decisions made about Charlotte 's care . Sympathetic household staff disobeyed the Prince and allowed Caroline to be alone with her daughter . George was unaware of this , having little contact with Charlotte himself . Caroline was even bold enough to ride through the streets of London in a carriage with her daughter , to the applause of the crowds . 
 Charlotte herself was a healthy child , and according to her biographer , Thea Holme , " The impression one gets from all the early recorded stories of Charlotte is of a happy recklessness , and a warm heart . " As Charlotte grew , her parents continued to battle , and to use the young girl as a pawn in their conflict , with both parents appealing to the King and Queen to take their side . In August 1797 , Caroline left Carlton House , establishing herself in a rented home near Blackheath and leaving her daughter behind — English law at the time considered the father 's rights to minor children paramount . However , the Prince took no action to further restrict Caroline 's access to her daughter . In December 1798 , the Prince invited his estranged wife to spend the winter at Carlton House , which she refused to do . It was the last serious effort at reconciliation , and its failure meant there was little likelihood that George would have a legitimate son who would come between Charlotte and the British throne . Caroline visited her daughter at Carlton House , and sometimes Charlotte was driven out to Blackheath to visit her mother , but was never allowed to stay in her mother 's house . During the summers , the Prince leased Shrewsbury Lodge at Blackheath for his daughter , which made visitation easier , and according to Alison Plowden , who wrote of George 's relationship with his wife and daughter , Caroline probably saw as much of her daughter as she wanted to . 
 When Charlotte was eight , her father , whose affections had returned to Fitzherbert , decided that he wanted Carlton House to himself . He took over his wife 's apartments ( Caroline received space in Kensington Palace instead ) , and moved their daughter into Montague House , adjacent to Carlton House . As James Chambers , another Charlotte biographer , put it , the young Princess " lived in a household of her own , in the company of no one who was not paid to be there " . The move took place without the presence of Charlotte 's governess , Lady Elgin ( widow of Charles Bruce , 5th Earl of Elgin ) , with whom she was very close . Lady Elgin had been forced to retire , ostensibly on account of age , but most likely because George was angry that Lady Elgin had taken Charlotte to see the King without George 's permission . George also dismissed the sub @-@ governess , Miss Hayman , for being too friendly with Caroline — and the Princess of Wales promptly hired her . Lady Elgin 's replacement , Lady de Clifford ( widow of Edward Southwell , 20th Baron de Clifford ) , was fond of Charlotte , and too good natured to discipline the child , who had grown into an exuberant tomboy . Lady de Clifford brought one of her grandsons , the Honourable George Keppel , three years younger than Charlotte , as a playmate for her . Forty years later , Keppel , by then Earl of Albemarle , would remember Charlotte in his memoirs , the source of many of the anecdotes of Charlotte as a small girl . In addition to tomboy tales of horses and fisticuffs , he remembered them seeing a crowd gathered outside the Keppel house at Earl 's Court , who were hoping to see the young Princess . The two children went outside and joined the crowd , unrecognised . 
 In 1805 , the King began making plans for Charlotte 's education , and engaged a large staff of instructors for his only legitimate grandchild , with the Bishop of Exeter to instruct her in the faith that King George believed one day Charlotte , as queen , would defend . The King hoped that these teachers would " render her an honour and comfort to her relations , and a blessing to the dominions over which she may hereafter preside " . According to Holme , this instruction made little impression on Charlotte , who chose to learn only what she wanted to learn . Her piano teacher was composer Jane Mary Guest , and Charlotte became an accomplished pianist . 
 Princess Caroline 's unconventional behaviour led , in 1807 , to accusations that she had had sexual relations with other men since the separation . Caroline was caring for a young child , William Austin , who was alleged to be her child by another man . The Prince of Wales hoped that what was termed " the Delicate Investigation " would turn up evidence of adultery that would permit him to get a divorce , and forbade Charlotte to see her mother . The investigators did not interview Caroline or her purported lovers , but concentrated on Caroline 's servants . When the servants were asked if Caroline had appeared pregnant , some said yes , some no , some were uncertain , and others indicated the Princess was so overweight that it was impossible to tell . The servants could confirm no individual as a lover , though Caroline 's footman , Joseph Roberts , stated that the Princess " was very fond of fucking " . Charlotte was aware of the investigation . The ten @-@ year @-@ old was deeply hurt when mother and daughter caught sight of each other in the park , and Caroline , obedient to the Prince 's command to have no contact with Charlotte , pretended not to see her . To George 's bitter disappointment , the investigating committee found no evidence Caroline had had a second child , though it noted that the Princess 's behaviour was very much open to <unk> . The King , who was fond of Caroline , had refused to see her during the investigation , but began to receive her again afterwards . After the conclusion of the Delicate Investigation , the Prince reluctantly allowed Charlotte to see her mother again , with the condition that William Austin not be a playmate . 
 = = Adolescence = = 
 As Charlotte entered her teenage years , members of the Court considered her behaviour undignified . Lady de Clifford complained about Charlotte 's allowing her ankle @-@ length <unk> to show . Lady Charlotte Bury , a lady @-@ in @-@ waiting to Caroline and a diarist whose writings have survived , described the Princess as a " fine piece of flesh and blood " who had a candid manner and rarely chose to " put on dignity " . Her father was proud of her horsemanship . She was fond of music by Mozart and Haydn , and she identified with the character of Marianne in Sense and Sensibility . In 1808 , Charlotte Jones was appointed as Charlotte 's own official miniature portrait painter . 
 In late 1810 , King George III began his final descent into madness . Charlotte and the King were very fond of each other , and the young Princess was greatly saddened by his illness . On 6 February 1811 , Charlotte 's father was sworn in as Prince Regent before the Privy Council , as Charlotte rode back and forth in the gardens outside Carlton House , trying to catch glimpses of the ceremony through the ground @-@ floor windows . Charlotte was an enthusiastic Whig , as her father had been . However , now that he was exercising the powers of the monarchy , he did not recall the Whigs to office as many had expected him to do . Charlotte was outraged by what she saw as her father 's treason , and , at the opera , demonstrated her support by blowing kisses in the direction of the Whig leader , Earl Grey . 
 George had been raised under strict conditions , which he had rebelled against . Despite this , he attempted to put his daughter , who had the appearance of a grown woman at age 15 , under even stricter conditions . He gave her a clothing allowance insufficient for an adult princess , and insisted that if she attended the opera , she was to sit in the rear of the box and leave before the end . With the Prince Regent busy with affairs of state , Charlotte was required to spend most of her time at Windsor with her maiden aunts . Bored , she soon became infatuated with her first cousin , George FitzClarence , illegitimate son of the Duke of Clarence . FitzClarence was , shortly thereafter , called to Brighton to join his regiment , and Charlotte 's gaze fell on Lieutenant Charles Hesse of the Light Dragoons , reputedly the illegitimate son of Charlotte 's uncle , Frederick , Duke of York . Hesse and Charlotte had a number of clandestine meetings . Lady de Clifford feared the Prince Regent 's rage should they be found out , but Princess Caroline was delighted by her daughter 's passion . She did everything that she could to encourage the relationship , even allowing them time alone in a room in her apartments . These meetings ended when Hesse left to join the British forces in Spain . Most of the Royal Family , except the Prince Regent , were aware of these meetings , but did nothing to interfere , disapproving of the way George was treating his daughter . 
 In 1813 , with the tide of the Napoleonic Wars having turned firmly in Britain 's favour , George began to seriously consider the question of Charlotte 's marriage . The Prince Regent and his advisors decided on William , Hereditary Prince of Orange , son and heir @-@ apparent of Prince William VI of Orange . Such a marriage would increase British influence in Northwest Europe . William made a poor impression on Charlotte when she first saw him , at George 's birthday party on 12 August , when he became intoxicated , as did the Prince Regent himself and many of the guests . Although no one in authority had spoken to Charlotte about the proposed marriage , she was quite familiar with the plan through palace whispers . Dr. Henry Halford was detailed to sound Charlotte out about the match ; he found her reluctant , feeling that a future Queen of Britain should not marry a foreigner . Believing that his daughter intended to marry William , Duke of Gloucester , the Prince Regent saw his daughter and verbally abused both her and Gloucester . According to Charlotte , " He spoke as if he had the most improper ideas of my inclinations . I see that he is compleatly [ sic ] poisoned against me , and that he will never come round . " She wrote to Earl Grey for advice ; he suggested she play for time . The matter soon leaked to the papers , which wondered whether Charlotte would marry " the Orange or the Cheese " ( a reference to Gloucester cheese ) , " Slender Billy " [ of Orange ] or " Silly Billy " . The Prince Regent attempted a gentler approach , but failed to convince Charlotte who wrote that " I could not quit this country , as Queen of England still less " and that if they wed , the Prince of Orange would have to " visit his frogs solo " . However , on 12 December , the Prince Regent arranged a meeting between Charlotte and the Prince of Orange at a dinner party , and asked Charlotte for her decision . She stated that she liked what she had seen so far , which George took as an acceptance , and quickly called in the Prince of Orange to inform him . 
 Negotiations over the marriage contract took several months , with Charlotte insisting that she not be required to leave Britain . The diplomats had no desire to see the two thrones united , and so the agreement stated that Britain would go to the couple 's oldest son , while the second son would inherit the Netherlands ; if there was only one son , the Netherlands would pass to the German branch of the House of Orange . On 10 June 1814 , Charlotte signed the marriage contract . Charlotte had become besotted with a Prussian prince whose identity is uncertain ; according to Charles Greville , it was Prince Augustus , although historian Arthur Aspinall disagreed , thinking that her love interest was the younger Prince Frederick . At a party at the Pulteney Hotel in London , Charlotte met a Lieutenant @-@ General in the Russian cavalry , Prince Leopold of Saxe @-@ Coburg @-@ Saalfeld . The Princess invited Leopold to call on her , an invitation he took up , remaining for three quarters of an hour , and writing a letter to the Prince Regent apologising for any indiscretion . This letter impressed George very much , although he did not consider the impoverished Leopold as a possible suitor for his daughter 's hand . 
 The Princess of Wales opposed the match between her daughter and the Prince of Orange , and had great public support : when Charlotte went out in public , crowds would urge her not to abandon her mother by marrying the Prince of Orange . Charlotte informed the Prince of Orange that if they wed , her mother would have to be welcome in their home — a condition sure to be unacceptable to the Prince Regent . When the Prince of Orange would not agree , Charlotte broke off the engagement . Her father 's response was to order that Charlotte remain at her residence at Warwick House ( adjacent to Carlton House ) until she could be conveyed to Cranbourne Lodge at Windsor , where she would be allowed to see no one except the Queen . When told of this , Charlotte raced out into the street . A man , seeing her distress from a window , helped the inexperienced Princess find a hackney cab , in which she was conveyed to her mother 's house . Caroline was visiting friends and hastened back to her house , while Charlotte summoned Whig politicians to advise her . A number of family members also gathered , including her uncle , Frederick , Duke of York — with a warrant in his pocket to secure her return by force if need be . After lengthy arguments , the Whigs advised her to return to her father 's house , which she did the next day . 
 = = Isolation and courtship = = 
 The story of Charlotte 's flight and return was soon the talk of the town ; Henry Brougham , a former MP and future Whig Lord Chancellor , reported " All are against the Prince " , and the Opposition press made much of the tale of the runaway Princess . Despite an emotional reconciliation with his daughter , the Prince Regent soon had her conveyed to Cranbourne Lodge , where her attendants were under orders never to let her out of their sight . She was able to smuggle a note out to her favourite uncle , Augustus , Duke of Sussex . The Duke responded by questioning the Tory Prime Minister , Lord Liverpool , in the House of Lords . He asked whether Charlotte was free to come and go , whether she was allowed to go to the seaside as doctors had recommended for her in the past , and now that she was eighteen , whether the government planned to give her a separate establishment . Liverpool evaded the questions , and the Duke was summoned to Carlton House and castigated by the Prince Regent , who never spoke with his brother again . 
 Despite her isolation , Charlotte found life at Cranbourne Lodge surprisingly agreeable , and slowly became reconciled to her situation . At the end of July 1814 , the Prince Regent visited Charlotte in her isolation and informed her that her mother was about to leave England for an extended stay on the Continent . This upset Charlotte , but she did not feel that anything she might say could change her mother 's mind , and was further aggrieved by her mother 's casualness in the <unk> , " for God knows how long , or what events may occur before we meet again " . Charlotte would never see her mother again . In late August , Charlotte was permitted to go to the seaside . She had asked to go to fashionable Brighton , but the Prince Regent refused , sending her instead to Weymouth . As the Princess 's coach stopped along the way , large , friendly crowds gathered to see her ; according to Holme , " her affectionate welcome shows that already people thought of her as their future Queen " . On arrival in Weymouth , there were illuminations with a centrepiece " Hail Princess Charlotte , Europe 's Hope and Britain 's Glory " . Charlotte spent time exploring nearby attractions , shopping for smuggled French silks , and from late September taking a course of heated seawater baths . She was still infatuated with her Prussian , and hoped in vain that he would declare his interest in her to the Prince Regent . If he did not do so , she wrote to a friend , she would " take the next best thing , which was a good tempered man with good <unk> [ sic ] ... that man is the P of S @-@ C " [ Prince of Saxe @-@ Coburg , i.e. Leopold ] . In mid @-@ December , shortly before leaving Weymouth , she " had a very sudden and great shock " when she received news that her Prussian had formed another attachment . In a long talk after Christmas dinner , father and daughter made up their differences . 
 In the early months of 1815 , Charlotte fixed on Leopold ( or as she termed him , " the Leo " ) as a spouse . Her father refused to give up hope that Charlotte would agree to marry the Prince of Orange . However , Charlotte wrote , " No arguments , no threats , shall ever bend me to marry this detested Dutchman . " Faced with the united opposition of the Royal Family , George finally gave in and dropped the idea of marriage to the Prince of Orange , who became engaged to Grand Duchess Anna Pavlovna of Russia that summer . Charlotte contacted Leopold through intermediaries , and found him receptive , but with Napoleon renewing the conflict on the Continent , Leopold was with his regiment fighting . In July , shortly before returning to Weymouth , Charlotte formally requested her father 's permission to marry Leopold . The Prince Regent replied that with the unsettled political situation on the Continent , he could not consider such a request . To Charlotte 's frustration , Leopold did not come to Britain after the restoration of peace , even though he was stationed in Paris , which she deemed to be only a short journey from Weymouth or London . 
 In January 1816 , the Prince Regent invited his daughter to the Royal Pavilion in Brighton , and she pleaded with him to allow the marriage . On her return to Windsor , she wrote her father , " I no longer hesitate in declaring my partiality in favour of the Prince of Coburg — assuring you that no one will be more steady or consistent in this their present & last engagement than myself . " George gave in and summoned Leopold , who was in Berlin en route to Russia , to Britain . Leopold arrived in Britain in late February 1816 , and went to Brighton to be interviewed by the Prince Regent . After Charlotte was invited as well , and had dinner with Leopold and her father , she wrote : 
 I find him charming , and go to bed happier than I have ever done yet in my life ... I am certainly a very fortunate creature , & have to bless God . A Princess never , I believe , set out in life ( or married ) with such prospects of happiness , real domestic ones like other people . 
 The Prince Regent was impressed by Leopold , and told his daughter that Leopold " had every qualification to make a woman happy " . Charlotte was sent back to Cranbourne on 2 March , leaving Leopold with the Prince Regent . On 14 March , an announcement was made in the House of Commons to great acclaim , with both parties relieved to have the drama of the Princess 's romances at an end . Parliament voted Leopold £ 50 @,@ 000 per year , purchased Claremont House for the couple , and allowed them a generous single payment to set up house . Fearful of a repetition of the Orange fiasco , George limited Charlotte 's contact with Leopold ; when Charlotte returned to Brighton , he allowed them to meet only at dinner , and never let them be alone together . 
 The marriage ceremony was set for 2 May 1816 . On the wedding day , huge crowds filled London ; the wedding participants had great difficulties in travelling . At nine o 'clock in the evening in the Crimson Drawing Room at Carlton House , with Leopold dressing for the first time as a British General ( the Prince Regent wore the uniform of a Field Marshal ) , the couple were married . Charlotte 's wedding dress cost over ₤ 10 @,@ 000 . The only mishap was during the ceremony , when Charlotte was heard to giggle when the impoverished Leopold promised to endow her with all his worldly goods . 
 = = Marriage and death = = 
 The couple honeymooned at Oatlands Palace , the Duke of York 's residence in Surrey . Neither was well and the house was filled with the Yorks ' dogs and the odour of animals . Nevertheless , the Princess wrote that Leopold was " the perfection of a lover " . Two days after the marriage , they were visited by the Prince Regent at Oatlands ; he spent two hours describing the details of military uniforms to Leopold , which according to Charlotte " is a great mark of the most perfect good humour " . Prince Leopold and his wife returned to London for the social season , and when they attended the theatre , they were invariably treated to wild applause from the audience and the singing of " God Save the King " from the company . When she was taken ill at the Opera , there was great public concern about her condition . It was announced that she had suffered a miscarriage . On 24 August 1816 , they took up residence for the first time at Claremont . 
 Leopold 's physician @-@ in @-@ ordinary , Christian Stockmar ( later , as Baron Stockmar , advisor to both Queen Victoria and Prince Albert ) , wrote that in the first six months of the marriage , he had never seen Charlotte wear anything that was not simple and in good taste . He also noted that she was much more calm and in control of herself than she used to be , and attributed this to Leopold 's influence . Leopold wrote later , " Except when I went out to shoot , we were together always , and we could be together , we did not tire . " When Charlotte became too excited , Leopold would say only , " <unk> , <unk> " ( " Gently , my love " ) . Charlotte both accepted the correction and began calling her husband " <unk> " . 
 The Coburgs , as they came to be called , spent the Christmas holidays at the Brighton Pavilion with various other royals . On 7 January , the Prince Regent gave a huge ball there to celebrate Charlotte 's 21st birthday , but the Coburgs did not attend , having returned to Claremont and preferring to remain there quietly . At the end of April 1817 , Leopold informed the Prince Regent that Charlotte was again pregnant , and that there was every prospect of the Princess carrying the baby to term . 
 Charlotte 's pregnancy was the subject of the most intense public interest . Betting shops quickly set up book on what sex the child would be . Economists calculated that the birth of a princess would raise the stock market by 2 @.@ 5 % ; the birth of a prince would raise it 6 % . Charlotte spent her time quietly , spending much time sitting for a portrait by Sir Thomas Lawrence . She ate heavily and got little exercise ; when her medical team began prenatal care in August 1817 , they put her on a strict diet , hoping to reduce the size of the child at birth . The diet , and occasional bleeding , seemed to weaken Charlotte . Stockmar was amazed at a treatment he saw as outdated , and declined to join the medical team , believing that , as a foreigner , he would be blamed if anything went wrong . 
 Much of Charlotte 's day to day care was undertaken by Sir Richard Croft . Croft was not a physician , but an <unk> , or male midwife , much in fashion among the well @-@ to @-@ do . Charlotte was believed to be due to deliver on 19 October , but as October ended , she had shown no signs of giving birth , and drove out as usual with Leopold on Sunday 2 November . On the evening of 3 November , her contractions began . Sir Richard encouraged her to exercise , but would not let her eat : late that evening , he sent for the officials who were to witness and attest to the royal birth . As the fourth of November became the fifth , it became clear that Charlotte might be unable to expel the child , and Croft and Charlotte 's personal physician , Matthew Baillie , decided to send for obstetrician John Sims . However , Croft did not allow Sims to see the patient , and forceps were not used . According to Plowden in her book , they might have saved her and the child , though there was a very high mortality rate when instruments were used in the era before antiseptics . 
 At nine o 'clock in the evening of 5 November , Charlotte finally gave birth to a large stillborn boy . Efforts to resuscitate him were in vain , and the noble observers confirmed that it was a handsome boy , resembling the Royal Family . They were assured that the mother was doing well , and took their leave . An exhausted Charlotte heard the news calmly , stating it was the will of God . She took some nourishment after her lengthy fast and seemed to be recovering . Leopold , who had remained with his wife throughout , apparently took an opiate and collapsed into bed . 
 Soon after midnight , Charlotte began vomiting violently and complaining of pains in her stomach . Sir Richard was called , and was alarmed to find his patient cold to the touch , breathing with difficulty , and bleeding . He placed hot compresses on her , the accepted treatment at the time for postpartum bleeding , but the blood did not stop . He called in Stockmar and urged him to bring Leopold . Stockmar found Leopold difficult to rouse , and went to see the Princess , who grabbed his hand and told him , " They have made me tipsy . " Stockmar left the room , planning to try again to rouse the Prince , but was called back by Charlotte 's voice , " Stocky ! Stocky ! " He entered the room to find her dead . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Henry Brougham wrote of the public reaction to Charlotte 's death , " It really was as though every household throughout Great Britain had lost a favourite child . " The whole kingdom went into deep mourning ; linen @-@ drapers ran out of black cloth . Even the poor and homeless tied armbands of black on their clothes . The shops closed for two weeks , as did the Royal Exchange , the Law Courts , and the docks . Even gambling dens shut down on the day of her funeral , as a mark of respect . Wrote The Times , " It certainly does not belong to us to <unk> at the visitations of Providence ... there is nothing impious in grieving for that as a calamity . " Mourning was so complete that the makers of ribbons and other fancy goods ( which could not be worn during the period of mourning ) petitioned the government to shorten the period , fearing they would otherwise go bankrupt . A dissenting note was struck by poet Percy Bysshe Shelley , who in his An Address to the People on the Death of the Princess Charlotte , indicated that the execution of three men the day after the Princess 's death for plotting to overthrow the government was a greater tragedy . 
 The Prince Regent was prostrated with grief , and was unable to attend his child 's funeral . Princess Caroline heard the news from a passing courier , and fainted in shock . On recovering , she stated , " England , that great country , has lost everything in losing my ever beloved daughter . " Even the Prince of Orange burst into tears at hearing the news , and his wife ordered the ladies of her court into mourning . The greatest effect fell on Prince Leopold . Stockmar wrote years later , " November saw the ruin of this happy home , and the destruction at one blow of every hope and happiness of Prince Leopold . He has never recovered the feeling of happiness which had blessed his short married life . " According to Holme , " without Charlotte he was incomplete . It was as if he had lost his heart . " 
 Prince Leopold wrote to Sir Thomas Lawrence : 
 Two generations gone . Gone in a moment ! I have felt for myself , but I have also felt for the Prince Regent . My Charlotte is gone from the country — it has lost her . She was a good , she was an admirable woman . None could know my Charlotte as I did know her ! It was my study , my duty , to know her character , but it was my delight ! 
 Leopold did not remarry until 1832 , when , as King of the Belgians , he married Louise @-@ Marie of Orleans , daughter of Louis Philippe I , King of the French . They had four children . 
 The Princess was buried , her son at her feet , in St. George 's Chapel , Windsor Castle , on 19 November 1817 . A monument was erected , by public subscription , at her tomb . It was not long before the public began to pin blame for the tragedy . The Queen and the Prince Regent were blamed for not being present at the birth , though Charlotte had specifically requested that they stay away . Although the postmortem was inconclusive , many blamed Croft for his care of the Princess . The Prince Regent refused to blame Croft ; nevertheless , three months after Charlotte 's death and while attending another young woman , Croft snatched up a gun and fatally shot himself . The " triple obstetric tragedy " — death of child , mother , and practitioner — led to significant changes in obstetric practice , with obstetricians who favoured intervention in protracted labour , including in particular more liberal use of forceps , gaining ground over those who did not . 
 Charlotte 's death left the King without any legitimate grandchildren ; his youngest surviving child was over forty . The newspapers urged the King 's unmarried sons towards matrimony . One such leading article reached the King 's fourth son , Prince Edward , Duke of Kent and Strathearn , at his home in Brussels , where he was living with his mistress , Julie de St Laurent . Edward quickly dismissed his mistress and proposed to Leopold 's sister Victoria , Dowager Princess of Leiningen . Their daughter , Princess Alexandrina Victoria of Kent , would eventually ( in 1837 ) become Queen of the United Kingdom . Leopold , by then King of the Belgians , served as long @-@ distance advisor to his niece , and was able to secure her marriage to his nephew , Prince Albert of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Vernon Jones = 
 Vernon Jones ( born October 31 , 1960 ) is an African @-@ American Democratic politician from US state of Georgia . Jones served as chief executive officer of Dekalb County , Georgia , from 2001 until 2009 , and in the Georgia House of Representatives from 1993 to 2001 . As Dekalb County CEO , Jones presided over the Board of Commissioners , oversaw a 7 @,@ 000 employee county workforce , and managed a $ 2 @.@ 6 billion county operating budget . He unsuccessfully ran for the US Senate in 2008 . 
 = = Early life and business career = = 
 Born in Laurel Hill , North Carolina , Jones grew up on a farm in rural North Carolina . His father was a veteran of World War II who worked in a mill ; his mother and siblings worked on the family farm . Jones was the fifth of six children , with four brothers and a sister . He attended North Carolina Central University in Durham , NC and became a member of the Kappa Alpha Psi fraternity there , before graduating with a B.A. in business administration in 1983 . Jones is a graduate of Harvard 's John F. Kennedy School of Government 's Executive Program . 
 Jones began his career in the telecommunications industry , first working with MCI Communications ( now MCI Inc . ) and later BellSouth Corporation . At BellSouth , he was part of a team that established wireless communications in Montevideo , Uruguay . Jones served on the DeKalb Board of Health , the Atlanta Regional Commission , the DeKalb Library Board , the DeKalb Pension Board , and the Board of Visitors for Emory University and North Carolina Central University . 
 = = Political career = = 
 = = = Political positions = = = 
 During his 2008 Senate campaign , Jones described himself as a " conservative Democrat " who favors " tough immigration laws and fiscal responsibility " as well as " supporter of gun rights and a staunch environmental advocate " . During his 2008 campaign , he stated that he opposed same @-@ sex marriage . <unk> rated Jones as a " Moderate Libertarian Conservative " . Jones stated that he voted for George W. Bush in 2004 , and supported Barack Obama in 2008 . Jones donated $ 2 @,@ 464 in two separate donations to the Georgia Republican Party in 2001 . In a 2014 press release , Jones characterized himself as an " advocate for limited government , security and protections for all citizens , balanced budgeting , ethical and efficient elections , [ and ] job creation " . 
 = = = Georgia House of Representatives = = = 
 Jones was elected to the Georgia House of Representatives in 1992 , representing District SH 071 , succeeding Sidney Pope Jones , Jr .. Jones served from 1993 to 2001 , during which time he was a member of the Appropriations Committee , the Insurance Committee , and the Health & Ecology Committee , as well as the Banking Committee , and a special Judiciary Committee . Jones also chaired the Chairman of the Health Professions Subcommittee . Among the proposals Jones sponsored or co @-@ sponsored in the Georgia House was a bill to remove the Confederate battle flag emblem from Georgia State flag , and a bill that would have banned minors from purchasing music with explicit lyrics . Jones did not stand for reelection in 2000 , instead running for DeKalb County CEO , and was succeeded in the Georgia House by Ron Sailor 
 = = = DeKalb County CEO = = = 
 He was elected as chief executive officer of Dekalb County , Georgia in 2000 , winning 64 % of the vote , and was re @-@ elected in 2004 with 54 % of the vote . Jones is the first African American to serve as CEO of the county , and the youngest ever elected in the county . In April 2001 , shortly after Jones became CEO , he voted , along with five other DeKalb County Commissioners , to offer life and health insurance benefits to the domestic partners of gay and unmarried County employees . DeKalb was the first county in Georgia to offer such benefits . During his administration , Dekalb County established the first local Homeland Security Office in 2001 . Under Jones , DeKalb County approved creation of a new senior center , increased funding for roads , libraries , and park improvements while maintaining a balanced budget , and increasing the County 's credit rating to AAA . As CEO , Jones promoted and achieved passage of a $ 125 million bond referendum that allowed for the acquisition of 2 @,@ 735 acre expansion of the DeKalb County 's green space , increasing the county 's parks and green space by 70 % . He requested and received Congressional designation of Arabia Mountain as a National Heritage Area . Jones was also primarily responsible for creation of Dekalb County ’ s first economic development department , which generated $ 4 billion in new investments . 
 However , Jones term as DeKalb County CEO was also known for controversies and accusations of improprieties . Shortly after taking office Jones went back on campaign pledge to keep the homestead exemption sales tax in place . Jones was criticized for vetoing pay raises for police officers . In January 2005 , the Georgia State Ethics Commission sanctioned Jones for campaign contribution limit violations in 2004 reelection campaign . Under a Consent Order , Jones returned all excess contributions and personally paid a $ 7 @,@ 500 @.@ 00 civil penalty . Jones apologized and stated that changes in campaign finance laws between the initial election and the run @-@ off election the reason for his acceptance nineteen improper campaign contributions . He was also accused of illegally using campaign funds to promote the 2005 bond referendum , but the State Ethics Commission " found no reasonable grounds " for the complaint . 
 Jones was also accused excessive spending , questionable real estate transactions , and was sued for racial discrimination ( see Controversies section below ) . 
 = = = 2008 United States Senate campaign = = = 
 Jones ran for the US Senate in 2008 , but was defeated 60 % to 40 % in the 2008 run @-@ off for Georgia 's Democratic US Senate primary . 
 On March 23 , 2007 Jones announced he was running for the United States Senate against incumbent Republican Saxby Chambliss . Jones was criticized by his chief rival Jim Martin over his more conservative politics and past support for George W. Bush . Jones ' campaign was also marred by two new controversies . Jones sent out a flier in which he appeared in a digitally altered picture next to Democratic presidential candidate Barack Obama with the words " Yes We Can . " However , Obama himself stated he not only never posed with Jones , he did not endorse Jones or any other candidate for the Democratic nomination for Senate . In response , Jones blamed his " liberal opponents backed by the liberal media " for trying to ruin his campaign . Jones also received criticism for the appearance of the tagline " Vote Vernon Jones for GA Senate " on tickets , produced using county funds , for the Dekalb County Blues and Jazz Festival . The company who printed the tickets , supporters of Jones ' campaign , took responsibility for the incident ; saying that they were unaware campaign finance laws made such an action illegal . 
 In the July 15 , 2008 Democratic primary election , Jones won a plurality of votes in the Democratic primary . However , Georgia law requires a majority ; if no majority is reached by a candidate , the two top vote @-@ getters must face one another in a runoff . On August 5 , 2008 Jones lost the run @-@ off election to Jim Martin by a margin of 20 points . Jones unexpectedly lost to Martin in his home base of Dekalb County . Jones had lost support within the black community before the runoff election , and only captured two @-@ thirds of the black vote in the head to head match up against Martin . The black turnout in the run @-@ off was also substantially lower than the initial primary election , further hurting Vernon Jones ' chances in the runoff . 
 = = = Unsuccessful races = = = 
 In 2010 , Jones launched an unsuccessful campaign for the U.S. Congress , representing GA Fourth Congressional District . In 2014 , Jones ran unsuccessfully for Sheriff of DeKalb County , GA . He was defeated by incumbent Sheriff Jeff Mann , 76 % to 24 % . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = Official spending and real estate = = = 
 Two grand juries found Jones $ 250 @,@ 000 per year taxpayer funded security detail excessive , and recommended it be decreased , but found no violations of the law . Jones was accused of a questionable real estate transaction involving a house and a 55 @-@ acre tract of land near Arabia Mountain that he purchased for $ 550 @,@ 000 in 2003 in anticipation of a then active quarry becoming part of county green space project that he initiated . In summer of 2007 , Jones sold the site and made a $ 220 @,@ 000 profit . On January 20 , 2013 , a special purpose grand jury , <unk> to investigate corruption in DeKalb County , found widespread " incompetence , patronage , fraud and cronyism " dating to the beginning of the administration of Vernon Jones . The report , which was not released until August 21 , 2013 , recommended further investigations of possible illegal acts by Jones , along with a number of other current and former senior DeKalb County officials . 
 = = = Accusations of racial discrimination = = = 
 On August 24 , 2004 , four senior current and former employees of the Parks Department , Becky Kelley ( former Parks Department Director ) , Michael Bryant ( a Deputy Director of Revenue Management and Support ) , John Drake ( an Assistant Director ) , and Herbert Lowe ( former Deputy Director of Strategic Management and Development ) , filed suit against DeKalb County , Vernon Jones ( as CEO of the county ) and three of Jones ' subordinates ( Marilyn Boyd Drew , Richard <unk> , and Morris Williams ) alleging either racial discrimination , or in the case of Lowe , retaliation for refusing to assist in racial discrimination . Kelly , Bryant , and Drake were white ; Lowe was African @-@ American . 
 Attorneys for the DeKalb County defendants moved for summary judgment on the grounds of qualified immunity as state officials . On November 10 , 2006 , District Court Judge William Duffey rejected their summary judgment petition , holding that the law does not allow " a public official defendant to engage in calculated racial discrimination costumed in a racially neutral garb of administrative actions so it can masquerade as a qualified immunity defense " . On November 21 , 2006 , Duffey ruled that the case could go forward to a jury trial . Jones and his fellow defendants then appealed the denial of their summary judgement motion . On July 31 , 2009 , the 11th Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the District Court judge 's rejection of the Defendants ' motion for summary judgment on the grounds of qualified immunity . Judge Gerald Bard <unk> , writing for the court , stated in the ruling that " DeKalb County , Georgia [ had ] embarked on a wholesale plan to replace its white county managers with African Americans " and that Vernon Jones had " devised the plan and monitored its execution " . 
 In March 2010 , the case was finally heard by a jury . During the trial plaintiffs ' attorneys called witnesses from across county government in an attempt to demonstrate a countywide policy of discrimination . Jones denied any discrimination against white employees . He testified that " I wanted the best and the brightest . That meant blacks , whites , Asians , Latinos , Republicans , Democrats , Independents , gay , straight , anybody who wanted to work for DeKalb County . I wanted everybody to have a seat at the table " . Other testimony revealed that during the first five years of Jones ' term in office , the number of white senior county managers had dropped from 61 to 57 , and the number of African @-@ American senior county managers had risen from 33 to 61 . 
 After seven days of testimony , on April 2 , 2010 the jury awarded damages to two of the four plaintiffs , Michael Bryant ( who had died before the trial ) and John Drake . The jurors found that Jones , his former executive assistant , Richard <unk> , and a former parks director , Marilyn Boyd Drew were liable only for $ 185 @,@ 000 in damages , much less than the $ 2 million requested by plaintiffs . While DeKalb County was found liable for racial discrimination , the jury rejected those claims against Jones , but held that he had " created and maintained a hostile work environment " . Jones was ordered to personally pay $ 27 @,@ 750 of the damages , but DeKalb County 's $ 50 @,@ 000 liability insurance policy on its employees covered the part of the award personally assessed against Jones . 
 While , Jones and his attorneys initially hailed the verdict as a victory for the county because of the relatively low damages award , after the judge awarded the plaintiffs an additional $ 1 @.@ 9 million in legal fees , DeKalb County ultimately agreed to pay the plaintiffs a total of $ 1 @.@ 3 million for legal fees and damages in April 19 , 2011 post @-@ trial settlement . 
 = = = Involvement with Earl Paulk = = = 
 Jones was accused ( in a lawsuit brought by Mona Brewer against Earl Paulk of Chapel Hill Harvester Church ) of using money from a $ 125 million green space bond sale to purchase a Decatur , GA church building from Paulk for $ 2 @.@ 4 million , a sum claimed to be unjustifiably in excess of the land 's actual value . The County made no use of the property , and was the building was later leased to a start @-@ up cable network for a token sum of a dollar per year . During the ensuing court case , the plaintiff alleged that , as part of a questionable relationship , Paulk arranged for a sexual encounter between Jones and one of Paulk 's former mistresses . When deposed , Jones refused to answer questions relating to that incident , as well as a number of other questions involving his dealings with Paulk . That case was ultimately withdrawn by the plaintiff 's attorney , Louis Levenson , who felt that the judge in the case was biased against his client . The case was subsequently <unk> and drew a different judge . 
 = BR Standard Class 7 = 
 The BR Standard Class 7 , otherwise known as the Britannia Class , is a class of 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 2 Pacific steam locomotive designed by Robert Riddles for use by British Railways for mixed traffic duties . Fifty @-@ five were constructed between 1951 and 1954 . The design was a result of the 1948 locomotive exchanges undertaken in advance of further locomotive classes being constructed . Three batches were constructed at Crewe Works , before the publication of the 1955 Modernisation Plan . 
 The Britannia Class was based on several previous LMS locomotive designs , and also significantly influenced by the Bulleid SR Pacifics , notably in the boiler and rear truck design , incorporating the best practices in locomotive technology as regards labour @-@ saving and lowering maintenance costs ; various weight @-@ saving measures also increased the route availability of a Pacific @-@ type locomotive on the British Railways network . The Britannias received a positive reception from their crews , with those regularly operating the locomotives giving them favourable reports as regards performance . However , trials in some areas of the British Railway network returned negative feedback , primarily due to indifferent operation of the locomotive , with its effects on adhering to timetables . 
 The Britannias took their names from great Britons , former Star Class locomotives , and Scottish firths . The class remained in service until the last was withdrawn in 1968 . Two survived into preservation , the first @-@ of @-@ class , number 70000 Britannia , and 70013 Oliver Cromwell . Number 70000 has hauled mainline excursions and 70013 , after a period of display following limited steaming , returned to mainline steam in 2008 for the first time since leaving British Railways ownership . 70000 was returned to the main line in 2011 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Locomotive exchanges were commissioned by the fledgling British Railways ( BR ) during 1948 , to test the best and worst aspects of locomotive design within the Big Four railway companies that had existed before nationalisation . The research gained from operating the best designs of the GWR , LMS , LNER and Southern railways on different areas of the British Railways network paved the way for several new classes of standardised locomotives to be constructed . These new locomotive designs were intended to replace some of the ageing designs inherited by British Railways . 
 The new classes were designed by Robert Riddles , who had previously designed the WD Austerity 2 @-@ 8 @-@ 0 and WD Austerity 2 @-@ 10 @-@ 0 locomotives for wartime use . The first design requested by the Railway Executive was for a new express passenger " Pacific " locomotive , designed specifically to reduce maintenance and using the latest available innovations in steam technology from home and abroad . Various labour @-@ saving devices were utilised to produce a simple , standard and effective design , able to produce equivalent power to some of the " Pacifics " that were still available as legacies of the Big Four . 
 = = Design features = = 
 The basic design of the " Britannias " owed much to LMS building practices , especially when considering Riddles ' previous career with the said railway . However , in keeping with the necessity to follow best practice in creating standardised steam locomotives , they utilised a variation of both boiler and trailing wheel of the Merchant Navy Class , while weight was kept within the margins laid down by the Light Pacifics , all of which were designed by Oliver Bulleid . The firebox was also similar in having a rocking grate , which allowed the fire to be rebuilt without stopping the locomotive , removing both ash and clinker on the move ; but unlike the SR Pacifics , the inner firebox was constructed of copper instead of steel , and lacked thermic syphons . A self @-@ cleaning smokebox was used , which enabled ash to flow into the atmosphere , reducing the workload of the engine cleaner at the end of a working day . A single chimney was placed on top of the smokebox , which was unusual for a " Pacific " type of locomotive . This was because the blastpipe was designed by <unk> Ell at Swindon Works , who claimed that " better results could be obtained from a well @-@ designed single chimney than some of the previous double chimney arrangements " . The " Britannias " had 6 ft 2 in ( 1 @.@ 88 m ) driving wheels , a compromise that took into account the intended mixed @-@ traffic role they were designed for . This meant that they were large enough for sustained fast running with heavy passenger trains , yet small enough to allow them to undertake more mundane tasks such as freight haulage . 
 The design also featured raised running plates above the wheels , which allowed easy access to the inside of the frames for purposes of lubrication . The lack of wheel splashers on this running plate also reduced the risk of the bearings overheating , by allowing more air to flow around the axles when at speed . Wheel splashers were used on older locomotive designs to box @-@ in the top portion of the driving wheels for aesthetic reasons , and to prevent water and dirt from being thrown at the cab windows . The " <unk> ' " footplate was designed around the requirements of the operating crews , with a mock @-@ up being constructed at Crewe to test ergonomics and usability . For ease of maintenance , availability of spare parts and increased reliability , two sets of Walschaerts valve gear were used , along with the largest cylinders capable of staying within the British loading gauge . The " inside " cylinders located between the frames of a three- or four @-@ <unk> locomotive are difficult to access for maintenance ; the two @-@ cylinder design of the Class 7 – with all the valve gear on the outside – avoided these maintenance problems . Boiler ' plumbing ' was also generally exposed to maintain ease of access . In common with other BR standard designs there was no exhaust injector , as this device was temperamental unless rigorously maintained . 
 Following experience of occasional cracks appearing near the spring brackets had one or more further batches of Class 7 Standard Pacifics been built to complete the intended 91 engines the chassis would have been rearranged to be similar to that used on the solitary BR Standard Class 8 Duke of Gloucester and that drawn up by Derby Drawing Office for the 2nd batch of Class 6 Standard Pacifics . This would have resulted in the locomotive riding on cast steel " sub @-@ frames " carrying the spring brackets . Unlike the smaller BR Standards the exhaust steam manifold within the smokebox saddle ( along with the BR Standard Class 6 engines ) was an intricate steel casting . 
 = = Construction history = = 
 Designed at British Railways ' Derby Works , the new class was constructed at British Railways ' Crewe Works between 1951 and 1954 . The initial order was for 25 locomotives , but such was the demand for the Britannias on the Eastern Region that more were rushed through construction before the teething problems had been ironed out on the prototypes . In total , 55 members of the class were constructed over three batches at Crewe Works , where each was given improvements to improve reliability and efficiency , and to overcome flaws with the original design . 
 First batch : 70000 – <unk> , constructed between January and October , 1951 
 Second batch : <unk> – <unk> , constructed between September 1952 and October 1953 
 Third batch : 70045 – 70054 , constructed in 1954 . 
 = = = Variations and modifications = = = 
 Problems with the class were experienced immediately , with the first 25 locomotives being withdrawn in October 1951 after several complaints were received from crews regarding the driving wheels shifting on their axles . They were subsequently modified , and released back into revenue @-@ earning service . Initially the return cranks on the main driving wheels were of LNER block type , as seen on Arthur Peppercorn 's A1s and A2s , but this was changed to the simpler LMS four @-@ stud fitting . This was the result of a problem of overheating bearings within the cranks , and difficulty in removing the LNER @-@ type casings . <unk> – <unk> were built with roller bearings on the leading and trailing coupled axles only and plain bearings on the remaining axles , whilst <unk> – <unk> were built with plain bearings throughout . However throughout their service the roller bearings used in remaining cases showed no advantage in reliability or cost . 
 An unusual fault with the first engines of the class was fore @-@ and @-@ aft vibration , strong enough to prompt passengers to complain and to cause fire @-@ irons stowed in a longitudinal compartment on top of the tender to work their way forward into the cab . The passengers ' complaints were dealt with by reducing the tension in the drawbar spring . 
 Locomotive tenders were also changed as new , improved designs became available . Some examples of the second batch ( <unk> – <unk> ) were equipped with the <unk> tender , which had a higher water capacity of 5 @,@ 000 gallons . Members of the third batch ( 70045 – 70054 ) were equipped with another tender design , the <unk> , which had 9 tons of coal and 4 @,@ 750 gallons of water , due to the fact that they were intended for use on longer runs in the north of the railway network . This tender design also featured a steam @-@ powered coal pusher , which eliminated the need for crew members to mount the tender to pull forward coal when the locomotive was at a stop . 
 <unk> and <unk> were delivered with Westinghouse airbrakes fitted alongside the smokebox and with no smoke deflectors . The two locomotives , which looked radically different from the rest of the class , were allocated to Manchester ( Longsight ) and ran a series of brake trials on the London Midland main line during the mid @-@ 1950s . Subsequently both had the equipment removed and deflectors fitted . 
 No. 70045 was fitted with LMS @-@ style oval buffers in the course of repairs after collision damage ( see photograph ) . 
 On 21 January 1960 , the Settle rail crash , which cost the lives of five passengers , was caused when the piston rod , cross @-@ head and connecting rod of No. 70052 came loose and damaged the opposite line as a freight train was approaching . The locomotive of the freight train was derailed towards 70052 's train and tore out the sides of three passenger coaches . Part of the slide assembly was redesigned , and was fitted as the locomotives were routinely " shopped " . 
 Western Region based examples had hand / foot holds cut into the smoke deflectors rather than steps , to improve forward visibility after one of the class was involved in a major derailment . 
 = = = Naming = = = 
 From 1948 until the mid @-@ 1950s , the responsibility for recommending names for locomotives on British Railways rested with a Locomotive Naming Committee of three senior railway officers , E.S. Cox , George Dow with Derek Barrie as chairman . 
 The Committee set itself several rules and over the years developed many practices . The names had to be euphonious ( they had to have a pleasant sound ) . Also , their meaning had to be readily apparent to anyone interested , whether railwayman or member of the public . There had to be good publicity value in the names as well as providing good morale for the staff , and the collection of names for a class had to provide some form of class identity . Another rule was not to use names of people who were still alive at the time , and some on the Committee had a strong dislike of names or associations with the military ( largely because they were fed @-@ up with the recently ended war ) . There was a preference for names of heroes and other well @-@ known people . However , slavishly following a single theme to an absurd extent was discouraged . 
 The name that was to be bestowed on the first class member caused great debate on the Committee and the wider executive of British Railways . However noted enthusiast Bishop Eric Treacy suggested the name " Britannia " . This set the general theme of the naming process , which featured great Britons , although several deviations from the theme were allowed . These exceptions were allocated to those that operated on the Western Region , which were given names of former Star Class locomotives , and those of the Scottish Region , which were granted the names of the various Scottish firths . The locomotive naming ceremonies were carried out at various railway stations around the British Railways network . No. <unk> was never named . 
 = = Operational details = = 
 The class was well liked by crews in most regions of British Railways , with especially glowing reports from those operating them from Stratford depot on the Eastern Region , where its lower weight and high power transformed motive power over the restricted East Anglian lines . However , negative feedback was received from various operating departments , most notably on the Western Region . The criticism was primarily out of partisan preference for GWR @-@ designed locomotive stock among Western Region staff ; in particular , the class was ' left @-@ hand drive ' in contrast to ' right @-@ hand drive ' GWR locomotive and signalling practice , a factor in the Milton rail crash of 1955 . 
 For this reason , the Western Region locomotive depots at Old Oak Common and Plymouth <unk> declared that the class was surplus to requirements . However Cardiff Canton depot displayed its liking for the class ( despite being part of the former GWR empire ) and managed to obtain good results on South Wales passenger traffic . 
 The Midland Region also had favourable reports , but a marked consistency in losing time on the longer runs between Holyhead and Euston was recorded , although all complaints were down to the individual techniques of the operating crews . This was compounded by the irregular allocation of the class to depots all over the network , meaning that few crews ever had a great deal of experience in driving them . The Southern Region also had an allocation of seven in May 1953 , when all Merchant Navy Class locomotives were temporarily withdrawn for inspection after 35020 " Bibby Line " sheared a crank axle on the central driving wheel . 
 Repairs to the class were undertaken at Crewe , Swindon and Doncaster Works until the financial constraints of the British Railways Modernisation Plan in terms of expenditure on steam began to preclude the regular overhaul of locomotives . During the mid @-@ 1960s overhauls were carried out exclusively at Crewe Works . The first locomotive to be withdrawn from service was number <unk> " Coeur @-@ de @-@ Lion " in 1965 , and the entire class was gradually transferred to Carlisle Kingmoor and Glasgow Polmadie depots as steam was displaced by the dieselisation of British Railways . A succession of bulk withdrawals began in 1967 , and the last , of number 70013 " Oliver Cromwell " , took place in 1968 , at the very end of steam operation in Britain . Subsequently that locomotive was selected to represent the class in the National Collection . Only 70000 " Britannia " , which was privately preserved , saw main line service during the preservation era – until 2008 , when 70013 " Oliver Cromwell " ' s restoration was completed , and she worked part of the " 15 Guinea Special " – a special train run to commemorate the final BR steam working in 1968 . 70013 is now to be found operating main line railtours over the Network Rail system . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 On 20 November 1955 , locomotive No. <unk> Polar Star was hauling an excursion train that was derailed at Milton , Oxfordshire due to excessive speed through a crossover . Eleven people were killed and 157 were injured . 
 On 21 January 1960 , locomotive No. 70052 Firth of Tay was hauling an express passenger train that was derailed at Settle , Yorkshire due to a defect on the locomotive . Five people were killed and nine were injured . 
 = = Livery and numbering = = 
 The first member of the class was given a livery of plain black without lining ; this was changed to the new standard British Railways Brunswick green that was applied to express passenger locomotives after nationalisation , despite the locomotive being classed as mixed traffic . This was lined in orange and black , and the class was given the power classification 7MT . The " Britannias " were numbered under the new British Railways standard numbering system in the <unk> series . The locomotives were numbered between 70000 and 70054 , and featured brass nameplates with an initial black background , followed by red , located on the smoke deflectors . Towards the end of steam plain green livery was substituted , with the touching @-@ up of existing paintwork being preferred to full aesthetic overhaul . 
 = = Preservation = = 
 Two Britannias have survived , the original , number 70000 Britannia , and 70013 Oliver Cromwell . Number 70000 was originally selected to represent the class in the embryonic form of the future National Railway Museum , but she was ultimately rejected due to the poor mechanical condition the locomotive was in . As a result , 70013 was eventually selected to represent the class for the benefit of future generations . 
 However , 70000 had been purchased privately from British Railways by the Britannia Locomotive Group , therefore ensuring that the doyen of the class was to survive into the preservation era . Subsequently utilised on mainline railtours , the locomotive was out of use in the late 1990s , requiring work to bring it back to steam ; it was eventually sold to Pete Waterman and stored at Crewe . After a spell in storage on the Bressingham Steam Museum in Diss , Norfolk , 70013 was moved to the Great Central Railway ( preserved ) , following an ownership dispute between Bressingham and the National Railway Museum . The locomotive returned to steam in May 2008 on the Great Central Railway after the readers of Steam Railway magazine contributed towards its overhaul . In July 2008 it appeared in <unk> 's Open Weekend at Steamtown , Carnforth . August saw the locomotive return to the main line . Its first turn was the <unk> ' Fifteen Guinea Special ' re @-@ run from Manchester to Carlisle , 40 years after it performed the same duty in 1968 . As a result , both preserved members of the class have operated on the mainline in preservation . 
 After its sale to the Royal Scot Locomotive and General Trust , 70000 was overhauled at Crewe and returned to the main line in 2011 ( its 60th anniversary ) , initially in unlined black without name plates as originally outshopped in 1951 ( the plates were first fitted for the Festival of Britain later that year ) . 
 For location details of the preserved locomotives , see : List of BR ' Britannia ' Class locomotives 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Live . Love . ASAP = 
 Live . Love . ASAP ( stylized as <unk> $ AP ) is the debut mixtape by American rapper ASAP Rocky , who released it as a free digital download on October 31 , 2011 . It features production by Clams Casino , ASAP Ty Beats , DJ Burn One , and SpaceGhostPurrp , among others . The mixtape also features guest rappers Schoolboy Q and Fat Tony , as well as members of ASAP Mob , ASAP Rocky 's hip hop collective . 
 The mixtape 's music incorporates stylistic and production elements of hip hop scenes distinct from ASAP Rocky 's hometown New York scene , particularly Southern hip hop . Its production features woozy soundscapes , low and mid @-@ tempo beats , and chopped and screwed choruses . His lyrics deal with themes about moral decay , including promiscuity and drug use , expressed through his boastful , tempered flow . 
 The mixtape was promoted with two singles , " Peso " and " Purple Swag " , which garnered ASAP Rocky mainstream attention and led to his first record deal . Live . Love . ASAP received widespread acclaim from critics , who praised the production aesthetic and his charismatic style . It was included in several year @-@ end top album lists by critics and publications . 
 = = Background = = 
 In May 2011 , ASAP Rocky quit selling drugs and decided to focus on a career in rapping . He released a music video for his song " Purple Swag " in July , garnering Internet buzz and attention from record labels , despite negative feedback from his native hip hop scene in New York . He was courted by several labels , including the RCA @-@ distributed Polo Grounds Music . However , he held off from any deal with a label , instead wanting to explore other pursuits . He and Polo Grounds president Bryan Leach , also a Harlem native , subsequently spent time talking about music and lifestyles . 
 In August 2011 , ASAP Rocky followed with " Peso " , which first appeared on Internet blogs and eventually received radio airplay on New York City 's Hot 97 . The song also earned him respect in the New York scene , of which he later said , " It bring a tear to my eye to see native New York people give me my props because New York is stubborn and arrogant " . After a bidding war among labels , he signed a record deal with Polo Grounds and RCA on October 14 . It was worth $ 3 million , with $ 1 @.@ 7 million for his solo work and $ 1 @.@ 3 million to fund his company ASAP Worldwide . He said that he sought a " bigger platform " for him and his collective with the deal . His first studio album planned to be under the deal , but it allowed him to continue releasing mixtapes through RED Distribution . 
 = = Recording = = 
 ASAP Rocky recorded <unk> at <unk> Music Studio in Dumbo , a neighborhood in Brooklyn , New York . It was engineered by the studio 's primary technicians Daniel Lynas and Frans <unk> . Several producers on the mixtape were associated with ASAP Mob , a collective that was formed by ASAP Rocky in 2007 and featured rappers , record producers , and music video directors . ASAP Ty Beats , SpaceGhostPurrp , and Clams Casino , who had produced several of ASAP Rocky 's previous songs , were his principal collaborators in developing the songs ' woozy soundscapes . Casino previously produced for Lil B and Main Attrakionz , who appears on the mixtape . ASAP Rocky met him after he remixed Casino 's song " Numb " , which was later recorded as " Demons " for the mixtape , and they both tried to contact one another as respective fans . Their first recording for the mixtape was " Wassup " . In August , he rented a pied @-@ à @-@ terre in Midtown Manhattan and housed members of ASAP Mob during Hurricane Irene 's landfall in New York City . 
 = = Music = = 
 Musically , Live . Love . ASAP incorporates characteristics from hip hop scenes outside of ASAP Rocky 's hometown scene in Harlem , New York , including Midwest and Southern hip hop , particularly the hip hop production of Houston 's scene . He grew up listening to Southern hip hop artists such as Geto Boys , UGK , <unk> , Mike Jones , Paul Wall , and Slim Thug . He also grew up listening to artists of disparate music genres , including Hope Sandoval , Cee Lo Green , and MGMT , influences that music journalist Paul Lester attributes to the mixtape 's " languid but futuristic sonics " . The beats on Live . Love . ASAP are generally low or mid @-@ tempo and hazy @-@ sounding . The songs also have chopped and screwed choruses . Clams Casino 's moody , atmospheric production is characterized by fragmented , downbeat vocal samples , basic drum tracks , and ambient , hypnotic synths . Songs produced by DJ Burn One , Beautiful Lou , and <unk> incorporate more Southern hip hop elements . 
 Allmusic editor Andre Barnes views the mixtape 's music as distinct from East Coast hip hop , calling it " sonically out of place , recasting the feel of East Coast hip @-@ hop into a quintessential , albeit progressive southern aesthetic with its country funk and cosmic , syrupy backdrops . " Jon Caramanica calls Live . Love . ASAP " placeless and universal , an album that sounds as if it has ingested the last 20 years of hip @-@ hop ’ s travels and would be comfortable anywhere . " Caramanica notes characteristics of various hip hop scenes other than that of New York 's scene , including " chewy , slowed @-@ down homages to Houston " and " nods to New Orleans and Atlanta and the Bay Area and everywhere else hip @-@ hop is made . " Alvin Aqua Blanco of HipHopDX writes that the music 's grooves " generally stay on the DJ Screw side of the BPMs " . Consequence of Sound editor Mike Madden notes its musical dynamic as " Southern flavors crossbreed [ ing ] with plenty of cloudy ambient @-@ rap moments " and views that the cadences of the beats consequently " dictate " ASAP Rocky 's rapping style . 
 The epic @-@ sounding , Clams Casino @-@ produced opening track , " Palace " , has Rocky acknowledging Southern hip hop 's influence on his sound : " Influenced by Houston / you can hear it in my music " . " Wassup " has an ethereal , Houston @-@ inspired soundscape . However , Chase McMullen of Beats Per Minute observes from the mixtape 's sound the " threatening vibe " of Raekwon 's 1995 album Only Built 4 Cuban Linx ... and a grime influence , commenting that " while southern influences currently dominate much of current hip hop , Rocky places as much importance on the Wu as he does Three 6 . " Paul Lester of The Guardian compares " Peso " to the stylings of The Jet Age of Tomorrow . " <unk> " has a funk and boom bap influence in its production . 
 = = Lyrics = = 
 The mixtape 's subject matter of moral decay incorporates controversial thematic elements of mainstream hip hop , including misogyny , glorified male promiscuity , and excessive drug use . Songs such as " Leaf " , " Get Lit " , and " Roll One Up " are odes to cannabis smoking . Music writers note the mixtape 's perspective as that of a self @-@ assured youth concerned with simple pleasures and " keeping it trill ( true and real ) " . Evan Rytlewski of The A.V. Club comments that ASAP Rocky mostly " riffs on his four great loves : syrup , weed , women , and fashion " . Calling it a " guilty pleasure " for hip hop purists , Allmusic 's Andre Barnes characterizes the mixtape 's subject matter as " the antithesis of conscious rap " and his lyricism as " sedate charisma and mannerisms leaning toward UGK @-@ inspired bravado " , adding that it displaces " the intricate lyrical concepts that evoke intense listening and the undeniable slang definitive of traditional East Coast rap music " . 
 " Purple Swag " , a woozy @-@ sounding homage to Houston 's hip hop scene , references the purple drank popularized by the scene 's community and used recreationally by ASAP Rocky and his collective . His lyrics on " Peso " depict a charismatic , attractive persona , with him referring to himself as a " pretty motherfucker " . The song also features lyrics about his eccentric and flamboyant fashion sense : " Raf Simons , Rick Owens / usually what I ’ m dressed in " . He also name @-@ drops fashion designer Jeremy Scott throughout the mixtape . 
 ASAP Rocky 's flow throughout the mixtape is tempered , and his delivery ranges from nonchalant rhymes to forceful double time . Jon Caramanica writes that the subject matter , including " straight @-@ talking boasts " and " heavy intake of drugs and women " , is revealed by his " bursts of short phrases , rhymed in their entirety . " On " Palace " , ASAP Rocky demonstrates alliterative lyricism and singsong cadence and flow . His flow patterns have been compared by writers to those of Cleveland @-@ based hip hop group Bone Thugs @-@ N @-@ Harmony . August Brown of the Los Angeles Times writes that " his reserved , steely delivery owes equal debts to Houston 's syrup daze and <unk> 's uptown intensity " . He addresses his rapping style on " Purple Swag " : " I 'm Texas trill , Texas trill , but in NY we spit it slow " . On " Leaf " , he addresses hip @-@ hoppers ' criticism of his style : " They say I sound like André / mixed with Kanye / a little bit of Max / a little bit of Wiz / a little bit of that / a little bit of this / get off my dick " . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 An anticipated release among Internet tastemakers , Live . Love . ASAP was released as a free digital download on October 31 , 2011 . Two days after its release , he proclaimed it to be " better than a lot of people 's albums " . The mixtape did not chart after its release . 
 The mixtape 's lead single " Peso " was officially released on November 16 . It charted for nine weeks and peaked at number 81 on the US Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs in February 2012 . The second single " Purple Swag " was released on December 5 . Previously released as a YouTube video , the mixtape version features guest verses by SpaceGhostPurrp and ASAP Nast . A music video for " Wassup " was directed by ASAP Rocky with magazine editor and journalist Andy Capper . His videos depicted a glamorous and dissolute lifestyle led by him and his crew , with images of excess and fashion , including gold fronts , liquor containers , and designer clothing . 
 In the months leading up to the mixtape 's release , ASAP Rocky performed several low @-@ key venues in New York , including the <unk> Rivington Club , a party for Fool 's Gold Records , a Diplomats concert , and Santos Party House . He also played CMJ 's music festival in October . In 2012 , he toured on Drake 's Club Paradise Tour and performed at several music festivals , including South by Southwest , Summer Jam , Pitchfork Music Festival , and Rock the Bells . The touring experience allowed ASAP Rocky to work on his live performance and stage presence . Reportedly , as a part of his record deal in October , there were plans for Live . Love . ASAP to be re @-@ released for retail by Polo Grounds , RCA , and ASAP Worldwide in 2012 . He had said that it would have been a " deluxe version " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Live . Love . ASAP received widespread acclaim from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the mixtape received an average score of 83 , based on 12 reviews . Jim Carroll of The Irish Times dubbed it " a dashing statement of intent . " Allmusic 's Andre Barnes wrote of its appeal to hip hop purists and listeners , " For the saints , Live Love ASAP is nothing short of a guilty pleasure ... But for the aesthetically inclined , Live Love ASAP is a marvel of contemporary rap music , despite its abounding moral decay . " Pitchfork Media 's Jeff Weiss dubbed the mixtape a " triumph of immaculate taste " and wrote that throughout , " Rocky embodies the sweat @-@ free cool of someone who has stolen the test and memorized the answers ahead of time . " Colin McGowan of Cokemachineglow cited his ability to " command a variety of sounds " as the reason it sounds " unified without drifting into monochrome territory " . McGowan viewed that , although his " Wayne @-@ ian pattern " is not as " fluid " nor " dotted with exuberant metaphors " , his sensibilities make up for technical shortcomings : 
 BBC Music 's Ele Beattie advised listeners , " If you 've come looking for tight flows and witty wordplay , Rocky ain 't your man . But attitude and production will win you over . " Evan Rytlewski of The A.V. Club felt that " he 's a magnetic rapper , and his delivery is reliably sharp , but he rarely uses it to say anything " , and instead commended him for " curating exceptional beats and knowing when to get out of their way . " He added that , " by enlisting some of the Internet 's most forward @-@ thinking young producers ... [ Rocky ] ' s crafted the year 's most stylish mix @-@ tape , a melting pot of nearly every major underground rap trend of the last 16 months , all pitched to the intoxicating slow crawl of Houston screw music . " Although he noted a " lack of so @-@ called substance " , David Amidon of PopMatters viewed that the mixtape 's release helped materialize " the positive influence of the internet on the next generation of hip @-@ hop " . Jon Caramanica of The New York Times cited its two singles as " among the year 's best hip @-@ hop songs . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The mixtape was included in several year @-@ end top album lists by critics and publications . It was named the ninth @-@ best album of 2011 by Stereogum in the publication 's year @-@ end list . It was ranked number 10 on Filter 's top albums list . Gorilla vs. Bear ranked the mixtape number five and stated , " Sometimes good instincts , an effortless flow , off @-@ the @-@ charts charisma , and just sounding a lot cooler than everyone else goes a long way . " In ranking it number nine , Complex commended ASAP Rocky 's " defined sound and unique aesthetic " , calling him " electric and precise on the microphone " and writing that the mixtape 's beats " bang so hard they bring Houston to Harlem . " Los Angeles Times staff writer August Brown ranked the mixtape number two on her top albums list and wrote that it " cemented " his reputation , while citing Clams Casino 's beats as " some of the year ’ s most imaginative , evocative hip @-@ hop productions . " Jonah Weiner of Slate ranked the it number five on his list and , although he cited him as part of " hip @-@ hop ’ s abiding misogynist " in 2011 , saying that he and his contemporaries " trash so many other genre orthodoxies . " 
 Live . Love . ASAP also earned ASAP Rocky a nomination for BBC 's Sound of 2012 poll . In October 2013 , Complex named the mixtape the tenth best hip hop album of the last five years . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Sample credits 
 Information adapted from <unk> . 
 " Palace " contains a sample of " Adiemus " by Adiemus . 
 " Peso " contains a sample of " No One 's Gonna Love You " by The S.O.S. Band . 
 " Bass " contains a sample of " Guy on Subway Flipping Out – the <unk> Bloody Loco " by <unk> . 
 " Brand New Guy " contains a sample of " John " by Lil Wayne featuring Rick Ross . 
 " Purple Swag " contains samples of " Still Tippin ' " by Mike Jones featuring Slim Thug and Paul Wall , and " Stay with Me " by Clint Mansell featuring Kronos Quartet and Mogwai . 
 " <unk> " contains samples of " Friendship Train " by The Undisputed Truth and " They Want EFX " by Das EFX . 
 " Keep It G " contains a sample of " Soft Shell " by <unk> . 
 " Kissin ' Pink " contains a sample of " All for You " by Kissing the Pink . 
 " Houston Old Head " contains a sample of " <unk> ( Blowin ' Money Fast ) " by Rick Ross featuring Styles P. 
 " Out of This World " contains a sample of " The Big Beat " by Billy Squier . 
 " Demons " contains a sample of " Just for Now " by Imogen Heap . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for Live . Love . ASAP adapted from Allmusic . 
 ASAP Ferg - performer 
 ASAP Nast – performer 
 ASAP Rocky – performer , producer 
 ASAP <unk> – performer 
 ASAP Ty Beats – producer 
 Beautiful Lou – producer 
 Chace Infinite – performer 
 Clams Casino – producer 
 Daniel Lynas – engineer , mixing 
 DJ Burn One – producer 
 Fat Tony – performer 
 Frans <unk> – assistant engineer 
 Lyle – producer 
 Main Attrakionz – performer 
 The <unk> – producer 
 Schoolboy Q – performer 
 <unk> – producer 
 SpaceGhostPurrp – performer , producer 
 = Hohokum = 
 Hohokum is an art video game by developer Honeyslug in collaboration with British artist Richard Hogg and Sony Santa Monica and published by Sony for PlayStation 3 , PlayStation 4 , and PlayStation Vita . The player controls a snakelike creature to explore 17 whimsical worlds with no set objectives . The developers , who began development in 2008 , compared the concept to flying a kite and were inspired by free London museums , Portmeirion , and indigenous cultures . It was released on August 12 , 2014 , and features a soundtrack by Ghostly International artists . The game received " generally favorable reviews " , according to video game review score aggregator Metacritic . Critics appreciated the game 's presentation , including its art and music , but felt that the gameplay turned to drudgery towards its end and that the objectives were too vague . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The player @-@ character is a multicolored serpent creature called the " Long Mover " who glides through whimsical game worlds with loose objectives . There is no correct way to play the game , which was designed to be enjoyed without necessarily pursuing objectives . It is non @-@ linear , and has no score , time limit , or tutorial . The developer described the game as about " relaxing in a space and just enjoying the experience and the music , instead of trying to complete it to make progress " , and an IGN preview said it is " simply about the beauty of exploring " . USgamer 's Jeremy Parish wrote that the game 's challenges were in distinguishing the interactive objects from the environment and then figuring out the function of those interactive objects . For example , a ball resembling a dandelion releases its spores when circled , but the player has to follow the floating spores to realize that other villagers use the spores as a vehicle . The game communicates with visual and <unk> cues , and uses few of the standard controller buttons : two buttons slow or accelerate the Long Mover , and the triggers make it wiggle for a boost . The Long Mover changes in color based on the direction it faces , and the DualShock 4 's light bar matches the color . 
 The game does not explicitly have a story , but has a narrative line that connects the disparate worlds . There are 17 worlds , each with unique characters , a single primary goal , and secondary activities . In " Lamp Lighting " , the player activates lights while flying past silhouettes , and each light adds a new layer of music . The player flies through a series of color @-@ changing circles to access the next world . In Sponge Land , an underwater world , the player gathers fish to swim alongside the Long Mover . The player can collect seeds in the Kite Village . Another level lets the player create shapes in the sky by flying past stars . The worlds are presented in flat colors with no outlines , and all worlds are unlocked from the beginning of the game . The credits roll once a hidden multicolored serpent is freed from each level . 
 = = Development = = 
 Hohokum is an art game developed by British game developer Honeyslug Games in collaboration with artist Richard Hogg and Sony Santa Monica beginning in 2008 Hogg and Ricky Haggett of Honeyslug knew each other through a music connection . The two discussed making a game and began to collaborate when Hogg sent images to Haggett , who was experimenting with Adobe Flash . They prototyped a top @-@ down game similar to Flow as well as a platformer with a jetpack , and a mini @-@ golf game . Their first formal collaboration was an entry for Kokoromi 's Gamma event in Montreal . The team 's first game ideas for Hohokum were about racing , which grew into the idea of a " stunt kite " . They wanted to make a game with the limitations and satisfaction of flying a kite where the conventional aims of video games were absent : no being commanded , avoiding failure , or being challenged to advance . The gameplay was designed to encourage expressive play and experimentation as " a playground , a place to wander about " . Sony Santa Monica 's lead game designer of external games Seth Killian described that world 's nature as " about a feeling and a mood , a mental space " . The first pieces of the game were abstract , and the development gradually grew figurative , with people and buildings . In pre @-@ production , Richard Hogg and Ricky Haggett went to free London museums , such as the National Maritime Museum , Natural History Museum , Imperial War Museum , which inspired in @-@ game content like ancient Egyptian tombs . The game 's " Fun Fair " level was based on <unk> in North Wales , and they were also inspired by the festival costumes of the <unk> people of southern Argentina . 
 Honeyslug and Hogg entered the game into the Eurogamer Indie Showcase and Independent Games Festival halfway through 2010 and spent two weeks polishing a rough draft . They then put the game on hold for a year starting in 2011 while they developed another game , Frobisher Says . Digital Trends described the other game as containing " the DNA of Hogg 's artistic vision for Hohokum " . Hogg described the team 's working relationship as informal and their decision @-@ making as fully collaborative , particularly in the feel of the game world . For instance , Hogg would give unplanned drawings to Haggett , who would work the art into the game , or Haggett would envision something and ask Haggett to make it " look nice " . Hogg was not as involved in the " nitty @-@ gritty of gameplay and puzzle mechanics " due to his skill set . His interest in mixed metaphors and making the familiar seem unfamiliar is one of the game 's guiding philosophies . The name of the snakelike Long Mover is a reference to a snake in a skit by British comedy troupe The Mighty Boosh . It was chosen to be purposefully more ambiguous than a specific , existing creature , and to have mythical connotations . The game 's title is based on a misspelling of the Hohokam American Southwest archaeological culture . 
 Honeyslug made a Spotify playlist between 30 and 40 tracks long of ideal " dream " music for the game , including tracks by artists signed to indie record label Ghostly International . Sony Santa Monica used their personal connections with the label to coordinate a partnership . Ghostly 's soundtrack is part licensed tracks and part original compositions . The music is split into layers and manipulated with the gameplay . Honeyslug also formed a partnership with Sony Santa Monica to be the game 's publisher and co @-@ developer . 
 The game was released for PlayStation 3 , PlayStation 4 , and PlayStation Vita on August 12 , 2014 in North America , and a day later in Europe and Japan . The Vita version uses its touchscreen , and the PlayStation 4 version uses its controller touchpad . Instead of integrating the then @-@ new features of the PlayStation 4 's DualShock 4 controller , the team sought to keep the controls simple to keep focus on the " elegance " of the Long Mover . Hohokum was a PlayStation Plus free title for subscribers during May 2015 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Destructoid 's Jordan Devore called Hohokum the " most relaxing game " of E3 2013 , and one of his favorites of the show . Polygon selected the game as an E3 2013 Editor 's Choice . Jeremy Parish of USgamer thought the game was the most intriguing PlayStation 4 title at the 2013 Tokyo Game Show and praised Sony for highlighting the " decidedly arty " game alongside the console 's blockbuster launch titles . He compared the game to a low @-@ stress puzzle in the same design vein of Flower and <unk> . Kotaku called the game both the " most confusing game " at E3 2013 and " the weirdest " on the PlayStation 4 . 
 The game received " generally favorable reviews " , according to video game review score aggregator Metacritic . Critics appreciated the game 's presentation , including its art and music , but felt that the gameplay turned to drudgery towards its end and that the objectives were too vague . Multiple reviewers also felt the game would make a good screen saver . 
 Matt Helgeson of Game Informer thought the game " lacked depth " and considered it evidence of how " games that wear their indie aesthetic on their sleeve " could , like AAA games , be " all flash and no substance " . He cited the game 's " oddball , ... colorful and charming " visuals , " tasteful " and " hip " Ghostly International soundtrack , and experimental gameplay as characteristic of the indie aesthetic , and wrote that despite its " whimsy " and " weirdness " , the game did not appear to " have a point " . He wished the game was either more structured or experimental . Polygon 's Philip Kollar similarly felt that the game was " beautiful but shallow " . 
 Matt Whittaker of Hardcore Gamer described the art style as a cross between Yo Gabba Gabba ! and Sound Shapes and wrote that it was designed for simultaneous " sensory overload and hypnotizing lack of substance " . He said that the game was " too strange and quirky " to be " gorgeous " , but otherwise beautiful . Josiah Renaudin of GameSpot similarly appreciated its creativity . Whittaker also praised the soundtrack as one of the game 's best parts , and thought it to be among the best game soundtracks of the year . He felt that the game did not make the transition " from playground to amusement park " . While he found Hohokum fun and relaxing , he thought it lacked the special element that distinguished Flower , Journey , and Proteus from " ambiguous art @-@ heavy experiences " . Game Informer 's Helgeson said that the game was more conventional than he expected , with " simple and uncreative " puzzle @-@ solving and an elephant boss battle . 
 = Constantine the Great = 
 Constantine the Great ( Latin : Flavius Valerius Aurelius Constantinus Augustus ; Greek : <unk> ὁ Μέγας ; 27 February c . 272 AD – 22 May 337 AD ) , also known as Constantine I or Saint Constantine ( in the Orthodox Church as Saint Constantine the Great , Equal @-@ to @-@ the @-@ Apostles ) , was a Roman Emperor from 306 to 337 AD . Constantine was the son of Flavius Valerius Constantius , a Roman army officer , and his consort Helena . His father became Caesar , the deputy emperor in the west in 293 AD . Constantine was sent east , where he rose through the ranks to become a military tribune under the emperors Diocletian and Galerius . In 305 , Constantius was raised to the rank of Augustus , senior western emperor , and Constantine was recalled west to campaign under his father in Britannia ( Britain ) . Acclaimed as emperor by the army at Eboracum ( modern @-@ day York ) after his father 's death in 306 AD , Constantine emerged victorious in a series of civil wars against the emperors Maxentius and Licinius to become sole ruler of both west and east by 324 AD . 
 As emperor , Constantine enacted many administrative , financial , social , and military reforms to strengthen the empire . The government was restructured and civil and military authority separated . A new gold coin , the solidus , was introduced to combat inflation . It would become the standard for Byzantine and European currencies for more than a thousand years . The first Roman emperor to claim conversion to Christianity , Constantine played an influential role in the proclamation of the Edict of Milan in 313 , which decreed tolerance for Christianity in the empire . He called the First Council of Nicaea in 325 , at which the Nicene Creed was professed by Christians . In military matters , the Roman army was reorganised to consist of mobile field units and garrison soldiers capable of countering internal threats and barbarian invasions . Constantine pursued successful campaigns against the tribes on the Roman frontiers — the Franks , the Alamanni , the Goths , and the Sarmatians — even resettling territories abandoned by his predecessors during the turmoil of the previous century . 
 The age of Constantine marked a distinct epoch in the history of the Roman Empire . He built a new imperial residence at Byzantium and renamed the city Constantinople after himself ( the laudatory epithet of " New Rome " came later , and was never an official title ) . It would later become the capital of the Empire for over one thousand years ; for which reason the later Eastern Empire would come to be known as the Byzantine Empire . His more immediate political legacy was that , in leaving the empire to his sons , he replaced Diocletian 's tetrarchy with the principle of dynastic succession . His reputation flourished during the lifetime of his children and centuries after his reign . The medieval church upheld him as a paragon of virtue while secular rulers invoked him as a prototype , a point of reference , and the symbol of imperial legitimacy and identity . Beginning with the Renaissance , there were more critical appraisals of his reign due to the rediscovery of anti @-@ Constantinian sources . Critics portrayed him as a tyrant . Trends in modern and recent scholarship attempted to balance the extremes of previous scholarship . 
 Constantine is a significant figure in the history of Christianity . The Church of the Holy Sepulchre , built on his orders at the purported site of Jesus ' tomb in Jerusalem , became the holiest place in Christendom . The Papal claim to temporal power in the High Middle Ages was based on the supposed Donation of Constantine . He is venerated as a saint by Eastern Orthodox , Byzantine Catholics , and Anglicans . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Flavius Valerius Constantinus , as he was originally named , was born in the city of Naissus , ( today Niš , Serbia ) part of the Dardania province of Moesia on 27 February , probably c . 272 AD . His father was Flavius Constantius , an Illyrian , and a native of Dardania province of Moesia ( later Dacia <unk> ) . Constantine probably spent little time with his father who was an officer in the Roman army , part of the Emperor Aurelian 's imperial bodyguard . Being described as a tolerant and politically skilled man , Constantius advanced through the ranks , earning the governorship of Dalmatia from Emperor Diocletian , another of Aurelian 's companions from Illyricum , in 284 or 285 . Constantine 's mother was Helena , possibly a <unk> woman of low social standing . It is uncertain whether she was legally married to Constantius or merely his concubine . It is unclear if Constantine could speak Thracian , his main language being Latin , during his public speeches he needed Greek translators . 
