 In July 285 AD , Diocletian declared Maximian , another colleague from Illyricum , his co @-@ emperor . Each emperor would have his own court , his own military and administrative faculties , and each would rule with a separate praetorian prefect as chief lieutenant . Maximian ruled in the West , from his capitals at Mediolanum ( Milan , Italy ) or Augusta Treverorum ( Trier , Germany ) , while Diocletian ruled in the East , from Nicomedia ( İzmit , Turkey ) . The division was merely pragmatic : the Empire was called " indivisible " in official panegyric , and both emperors could move freely throughout the Empire . In 288 , Maximian appointed Constantius to serve as his praetorian prefect in Gaul . Constantius left Helena to marry Maximian 's stepdaughter Theodora in 288 or 289 . 
 Diocletian divided the Empire again in 293 AD , appointing two Caesars ( junior emperors ) to rule over further subdivisions of East and West . Each would be subordinate to their respective Augustus ( senior emperor ) but would act with supreme authority in his assigned lands . This system would later be called the Tetrarchy . Diocletian 's first appointee for the office of Caesar was Constantius ; his second was Galerius , a native of Felix <unk> . According to Lactantius , Galerius was a brutal , animalistic man . Although he shared the paganism of Rome 's aristocracy , he seemed to them an alien figure , a semi @-@ barbarian . On 1 March , Constantius was promoted to the office of Caesar , and dispatched to Gaul to fight the rebels Carausius and Allectus . In spite of meritocratic overtones , the Tetrarchy retained vestiges of hereditary privilege , and Constantine became the prime candidate for future appointment as Caesar as soon as his father took the position . Constantine went to the court of Diocletian , where he lived as his father 's heir presumptive . 
 = = = In the East = = = 
 Constantine received a formal education at Diocletian 's court , where he learned Latin literature , Greek , and philosophy . The cultural environment in Nicomedia was open , fluid and socially mobile , and Constantine could mix with intellectuals both pagan and Christian . He may have attended the lectures of Lactantius , a Christian scholar of Latin in the city . Because Diocletian did not completely trust Constantius — none of the Tetrarchs fully trusted their colleagues — Constantine was held as something of a hostage , a tool to ensure Constantius 's best behavior . Constantine was nonetheless a prominent member of the court : he fought for Diocletian and Galerius in Asia , and served in a variety of <unk> ; he campaigned against barbarians on the Danube in 296 AD , and fought the Persians under Diocletian in Syria ( 297 AD ) and under Galerius in Mesopotamia ( 298 – 299 AD ) . By late 305 AD , he had become a tribune of the first order , a <unk> <unk> primi . 
 Constantine had returned to Nicomedia from the eastern front by the spring of 303 AD , in time to witness the beginnings of Diocletian 's " Great Persecution " , the most severe persecution of Christians in Roman history . In late 302 , Diocletian and Galerius sent a messenger to the oracle of Apollo at Didyma with an inquiry about Christians . Constantine could recall his presence at the palace when the messenger returned , when Diocletian accepted his court 's demands for universal persecution . On 23 February 303 AD , Diocletian ordered the destruction of Nicomedia 's new church , condemned its scriptures to the flames , and had its treasures seized . In the months that followed , churches and scriptures were destroyed , Christians were deprived of official ranks , and priests were imprisoned . 
 It is unlikely that Constantine played any role in the persecution . In his later writings he would attempt to present himself as an opponent of Diocletian 's " sanguinary edicts " against the " worshippers of God " , but nothing indicates that he opposed it effectively at the time . Although no contemporary Christian challenged Constantine for his inaction during the persecutions , it remained a political liability throughout his life . 
 On 1 May 305 AD , Diocletian , as a result of a debilitating sickness taken in the winter of 304 – 305 AD , announced his resignation . In a parallel ceremony in Milan , Maximian did the same . Lactantius states that Galerius manipulated the weakened Diocletian into resigning , and forced him to accept Galerius ' allies in the imperial succession . According to Lactantius , the crowd listening to Diocletian 's resignation speech believed , until the very last moment , that Diocletian would choose Constantine and Maxentius ( Maximian 's son ) as his successors . It was not to be : Constantius and Galerius were promoted to Augusti , while Severus and Maximinus Daia , Galerius ' nephew , were appointed their Caesars respectively . Constantine and Maxentius were ignored . 
 Some of the ancient sources detail plots that Galerius made on Constantine 's life in the months following Diocletian 's abdication . They assert that Galerius assigned Constantine to lead an advance unit in a cavalry charge through a swamp on the middle Danube , made him enter into single combat with a lion , and attempted to kill him in hunts and wars . Constantine always emerged victorious : the lion emerged from the contest in a poorer condition than Constantine ; Constantine returned to Nicomedia from the Danube with a Sarmatian captive to drop at Galerius ' feet . It is uncertain how much these tales can be trusted . 
 = = = In the West = = = 
 Constantine recognized the implicit danger in remaining at Galerius 's court , where he was held as a virtual hostage . His career depended on being rescued by his father in the west . Constantius was quick to intervene . In the late spring or early summer of 305 AD , Constantius requested leave for his son to help him campaign in Britain . After a long evening of drinking , Galerius granted the request . Constantine 's later propaganda describes how he fled the court in the night , before Galerius could change his mind . He rode from post @-@ house to post @-@ house at high speed , <unk> every horse in his wake . By the time Galerius awoke the following morning , Constantine had fled too far to be caught . Constantine joined his father in Gaul , at Bononia ( Boulogne ) before the summer of 305 AD . 
 From Bononia they crossed the Channel to Britain and made their way to Eboracum ( York ) , capital of the province of Britannia Secunda and home to a large military base . Constantine was able to spend a year in northern Britain at his father 's side , campaigning against the Picts beyond Hadrian 's Wall in the summer and autumn . Constantius 's campaign , like that of Septimius Severus before it , probably advanced far into the north without achieving great success . Constantius had become severely sick over the course of his reign , and died on 25 July 306 in Eboracum ( York ) . Before dying , he declared his support for raising Constantine to the rank of full Augustus . The <unk> king <unk> , a barbarian taken into service under Constantius , then proclaimed Constantine as Augustus . The troops loyal to Constantius ' memory followed him in acclamation . Gaul and Britain quickly accepted his rule ; Iberia , which had been in his father 's domain for less than a year , rejected it . 
 Constantine sent Galerius an official notice of Constantius 's death and his own acclamation . Along with the notice , he included a portrait of himself in the robes of an Augustus . The portrait was wreathed in bay . He requested recognition as heir to his father 's throne , and passed off responsibility for his unlawful ascension on his army , claiming they had " forced it upon him " . Galerius was put into a fury by the message ; he almost set the portrait on fire . His advisers calmed him , and argued that outright denial of Constantine 's claims would mean certain war . Galerius was compelled to compromise : he granted Constantine the title " Caesar " rather than " Augustus " ( the latter office went to Severus instead ) . Wishing to make it clear that he alone gave Constantine legitimacy , Galerius personally sent Constantine the emperor 's traditional purple robes . Constantine accepted the decision , knowing that it would remove doubts as to his legitimacy . 
 = = Early rule = = 
 Constantine 's share of the Empire consisted of Britain , Gaul , and Spain . He therefore commanded one of the largest Roman armies , stationed along the important Rhine frontier . After his promotion to emperor , Constantine remained in Britain , driving back the tribes of the Picts and secured his control in the northwestern dioceses . He completed the reconstruction of military bases begun under his father 's rule , and ordered the repair of the region 's roadways . He soon left for Augusta Treverorum ( Trier ) in Gaul , the Tetrarchic capital of the northwestern Roman Empire . The Franks , after learning of Constantine 's acclamation , invaded Gaul across the lower Rhine over the winter of 306 – 307 AD . Constantine drove them back beyond the Rhine and captured two of their kings , <unk> and <unk> . The kings and their soldiers were fed to the beasts of Trier 's amphitheater in the adventus ( arrival ) celebrations that followed . 
 Constantine began a major expansion of Trier . He strengthened the circuit wall around the city with military towers and fortified gates , and began building a palace complex in the northeastern part of the city . To the south of his palace , he ordered the construction of a large formal audience hall , and a massive imperial bathhouse . Constantine sponsored many building projects across Gaul during his tenure as emperor of the West , especially in <unk> ( Autun ) and <unk> ( Arles ) . According to Lactantius , Constantine followed his father in following a tolerant policy towards Christianity . Although not yet a Christian , he probably judged it a more sensible policy than open persecution , and a way to distinguish himself from the " great persecutor " , Galerius . Constantine decreed a formal end to persecution , and returned to Christians all they had lost during the persecutions . 
 Because Constantine was still largely untried and had a hint of illegitimacy about him , he relied on his father 's reputation in his early propaganda : the earliest panegyrics to Constantine give as much coverage to his father 's deeds as to those of Constantine himself . Constantine 's military skill and building projects soon gave the panegyrist the opportunity to comment favorably on the similarities between father and son , and Eusebius remarked that Constantine was a " renewal , as it were , in his own person , of his father 's life and reign " . Constantinian coinage , sculpture and oratory also shows a new tendency for disdain towards the " barbarians " beyond the frontiers . After Constantine 's victory over the Alemanni , he minted a coin issue depicting weeping and begging Alemannic tribesmen — " The Alemanni conquered " — beneath the phrase " Romans ' rejoicing " . There was little sympathy for these enemies . As his panegyrist declared : " It is a stupid clemency that spares the conquered foe . " 
 = = = Maxentius ' rebellion = = = 
 Following Galerius ' recognition of Constantine as caesar , Constantine 's portrait was brought to Rome , as was customary . Maxentius mocked the portrait 's subject as the son of a harlot , and lamented his own powerlessness . Maxentius , envious of Constantine 's authority , seized the title of emperor on 28 October 306 AD . Galerius refused to recognize him , but failed to unseat him . Galerius sent Severus against Maxentius , but during the campaign , Severus ' armies , previously under command of Maxentius ' father Maximian , defected , and Severus was seized and imprisoned . Maximian , brought out of retirement by his son 's rebellion , left for Gaul to confer with Constantine in late 307 AD . He offered to marry his daughter Fausta to Constantine , and elevate him to Augustan rank . In return , Constantine would reaffirm the old family alliance between Maximian and Constantius , and offer support to Maxentius ' cause in Italy . Constantine accepted , and married Fausta in Trier in late summer 307 AD . Constantine now gave Maxentius his meagre support , offering Maxentius political recognition . 
 Constantine remained aloof from the Italian conflict , however . Over the spring and summer of 307 AD , he had left Gaul for Britain to avoid any involvement in the Italian turmoil ; now , instead of giving Maxentius military aid , he sent his troops against Germanic tribes along the Rhine . In 308 AD , he raided the territory of the Bructeri , and made a bridge across the Rhine at Colonia <unk> ( Cologne ) . In 310 AD , he marched to the northern Rhine and fought the Franks . When not campaigning , he toured his lands advertising his benevolence , and supporting the economy and the arts . His refusal to participate in the war increased his popularity among his people , and strengthened his power base in the West . Maximian returned to Rome in the winter of 307 – 308 AD , but soon fell out with his son . In early 308 AD , after a failed attempt to usurp Maxentius ' title , Maximian returned to Constantine 's court . 
 On 11 November 308 AD , Galerius called a general council at the military city of Carnuntum ( Petronell @-@ Carnuntum , Austria ) to resolve the instability in the western provinces . In attendance were Diocletian , briefly returned from retirement , Galerius , and Maximian . Maximian was forced to abdicate again and Constantine was again demoted to Caesar . Licinius , one of Galerius ' old military companions , was appointed Augustus in the western regions . The new system did not last long : Constantine refused to accept the demotion , and continued to style himself as Augustus on his coinage , even as other members of the Tetrarchy referred to him as a Caesar on theirs . Maximinus Daia was frustrated that he had been passed over for promotion while the newcomer Licinius had been raised to the office of Augustus , and demanded that Galerius promote him . Galerius offered to call both Maximinus and Constantine " sons of the Augusti " , but neither accepted the new title . By the spring of 310 AD , Galerius was referring to both men as Augusti . 
 = = = Maximian 's rebellion = = = 
 In 310 AD , a dispossessed Maximian rebelled against Constantine while Constantine was away campaigning against the Franks . Maximian had been sent south to Arles with a contingent of Constantine 's army , in preparation for any attacks by Maxentius in southern Gaul . He announced that Constantine was dead , and took up the imperial purple . In spite of a large <unk> pledge to any who would support him as emperor , most of Constantine 's army remained loyal to their emperor , and Maximian was soon compelled to leave . Constantine soon heard of the rebellion , abandoned his campaign against the Franks , and marched his army up the Rhine . At <unk> ( Chalon @-@ sur @-@ Saône ) , he moved his troops onto waiting boats to row down the slow waters of the Saône to the quicker waters of the Rhone . He disembarked at Lugdunum ( Lyon ) . Maximian fled to Massilia ( Marseille ) , a town better able to withstand a long siege than Arles . It made little difference , however , as loyal citizens opened the rear gates to Constantine . Maximian was captured and reproved for his crimes . Constantine granted some clemency , but strongly encouraged his suicide . In July 310 AD , Maximian hanged himself . 
 In spite of the earlier rupture in their relations , Maxentius was eager to present himself as his father 's devoted son after his death . He began minting coins with his father 's deified image , proclaiming his desire to avenge Maximian 's death . Constantine initially presented the suicide as an unfortunate family tragedy . By 311 AD , however , he was spreading another version . According to this , after Constantine had pardoned him , Maximian planned to murder Constantine in his sleep . Fausta learned of the plot and warned Constantine , who put a eunuch in his own place in bed . Maximian was apprehended when he killed the eunuch and was offered suicide , which he accepted . Along with using propaganda , Constantine instituted a damnatio memoriae on Maximian , destroying all inscriptions referring to him and eliminating any public work bearing his image . 
 The death of Maximian required a shift in Constantine 's public image . He could no longer rely on his connection to the elder emperor Maximian , and needed a new source of legitimacy . In a speech delivered in Gaul on 25 July 310 AD , the anonymous orator reveals a previously unknown dynastic connection to Claudius II , a 3rd Century emperor famed for defeating the Goths and restoring order to the empire . Breaking away from tetrarchic models , the speech emphasizes Constantine 's ancestral prerogative to rule , rather than principles of imperial equality . The new ideology expressed in the speech made Galerius and Maximian irrelevant to Constantine 's right to rule . Indeed , the orator emphasizes ancestry to the exclusion of all other factors : " No chance agreement of men , nor some unexpected consequence of favor , made you emperor , " the orator declares to Constantine . 
 The oration also moves away from the religious ideology of the Tetrarchy , with its focus on twin dynasties of Jupiter and Hercules . Instead , the orator proclaims that Constantine experienced a divine vision of Apollo and Victory granting him laurel wreaths of health and a long reign . In the likeness of Apollo Constantine recognized himself as the saving figure to whom would be granted " rule of the whole world " , as the poet Virgil had once foretold . The oration 's religious shift is paralleled by a similar shift in Constantine 's coinage . In his early reign , the coinage of Constantine advertised Mars as his patron . From 310 AD on , Mars was replaced by Sol Invictus , a god conventionally identified with Apollo . There is little reason to believe that either the dynastic connection or the divine vision are anything other than fiction , but their proclamation strengthened Constantine 's claims to legitimacy and increased his popularity among the citizens of Gaul . 
 = = Civil wars = = 
 = = = War against Maxentius = = = 
 By the middle of 310 AD , Galerius had become too ill to involve himself in imperial politics . His final act survives : a letter to the provincials posted in Nicomedia on 30 April 311 AD , proclaiming an end to the persecutions , and the resumption of religious toleration . He died soon after the edict 's proclamation , destroying what little remained of the tetrarchy . Maximinus mobilized against Licinius , and seized Asia Minor . A hasty peace was signed on a boat in the middle of the Bosphorus . While Constantine toured Britain and Gaul , Maxentius prepared for war . He fortified northern Italy , and strengthened his support in the Christian community by allowing it to elect a new Bishop of Rome , Eusebius . 
 Maxentius ' rule was nevertheless insecure . His early support dissolved in the wake of heightened tax rates and depressed trade ; riots broke out in Rome and Carthage ; and Domitius Alexander was able to briefly usurp his authority in Africa . By 312 AD , he was a man barely tolerated , not one actively supported , even among Christian Italians . In the summer of 311 AD , Maxentius mobilized against Constantine while Licinius was occupied with affairs in the East . He declared war on Constantine , vowing to avenge his father 's " murder " . To prevent Maxentius from forming an alliance against him with Licinius , Constantine forged his own alliance with Licinius over the winter of 311 – 312 AD , and offered him his sister Constantia in marriage . Maximin considered Constantine 's arrangement with Licinius an affront to his authority . In response , he sent ambassadors to Rome , offering political recognition to Maxentius in exchange for a military support . Maxentius accepted . According to Eusebius , inter @-@ regional travel became impossible , and there was military buildup everywhere . There was " not a place where people were not expecting the onset of hostilities every day " . 
 Constantine 's advisers and generals cautioned against preemptive attack on Maxentius ; even his soothsayers recommended against it , stating that the sacrifices had produced unfavorable omens . Constantine , with a spirit that left a deep impression on his followers , inspiring some to believe that he had some form of supernatural guidance , ignored all these cautions . Early in the spring of 312 AD , Constantine crossed the <unk> Alps with a quarter of his army , a force numbering about 40 @,@ 000 . The first town his army encountered was <unk> ( Susa , Italy ) , a heavily fortified town that shut its gates to him . Constantine ordered his men to set fire to its gates and scale its walls . He took the town quickly . Constantine ordered his troops not to loot the town , and advanced with them into northern Italy . 
 At the approach to the west of the important city of Augusta <unk> ( Turin , Italy ) , Constantine met a large force of heavily armed <unk> cavalry . In the ensuing battle Constantine 's army encircled Maxentius ' cavalry , flanked them with his own cavalry , and dismounted them with blows from his soldiers ' iron @-@ tipped clubs . Constantine 's armies emerged victorious . Turin refused to give refuge to Maxentius ' retreating forces , opening its gates to Constantine instead . Other cities of the north Italian plain sent Constantine embassies of congratulation for his victory . He moved on to Milan , where he was met with open gates and jubilant rejoicing . Constantine rested his army in Milan until mid @-@ summer 312 AD , when he moved on to Brixia ( Brescia ) . 
 Brescia 's army was easily dispersed , and Constantine quickly advanced to Verona , where a large <unk> force was camped . Ruricius Pompeianus , general of the Veronese forces and Maxentius ' praetorian prefect , was in a strong defensive position , since the town was surrounded on three sides by the Adige . Constantine sent a small force north of the town in an attempt to cross the river unnoticed . Ruricius sent a large detachment to counter Constantine 's expeditionary force , but was defeated . Constantine 's forces successfully surrounded the town and laid siege . Ruricius gave Constantine the slip and returned with a larger force to oppose Constantine . Constantine refused to let up on the siege , and sent only a small force to oppose him . In the desperately fought encounter that followed , Ruricius was killed and his army destroyed . Verona surrendered soon afterwards , followed by Aquileia , Mutina ( Modena ) , and Ravenna . The road to Rome was now wide open to Constantine . 
 Maxentius prepared for the same type of war he had waged against Severus and Galerius : he sat in Rome and prepared for a siege . He still controlled Rome 's praetorian guards , was well @-@ stocked with African grain , and was surrounded on all sides by the seemingly impregnable Aurelian Walls . He ordered all bridges across the Tiber cut , reportedly on the counsel of the gods , and left the rest of central Italy undefended ; Constantine secured that region 's support without challenge . Constantine progressed slowly along the Via <unk> , allowing the weakness of Maxentius to draw his regime further into turmoil . Maxentius ' support continued to weaken : at chariot races on 27 October , the crowd openly taunted Maxentius , shouting that Constantine was invincible . Maxentius , no longer certain that he would emerge from a siege victorious , built a temporary boat bridge across the Tiber in preparation for a field battle against Constantine . On 28 October 312 AD , the sixth anniversary of his reign , he approached the keepers of the Sibylline Books for guidance . The keepers prophesied that , on that very day , " the enemy of the Romans " would die . Maxentius advanced north to meet Constantine in battle . 
 = = = = Constantine and his army adopt the Greek letters for Christ 's initials : Chi Rho = = = = 
 Maxentius organized his forces — still twice the size of Constantine 's — in long lines facing the battle plain , with their backs to the river . Constantine 's army arrived at the field bearing unfamiliar symbols on either its standards or its soldiers ' shields . According to Lactantius , Constantine was visited by a dream the night before the battle , wherein he was advised " to mark the heavenly sign of God on the shields of his soldiers ... by means of a slanted letter X with the top of its head bent round , he marked Christ on their shields . " Eusebius describes another version , where , while marching at midday , " he saw with his own eyes in the heavens a trophy of the cross arising from the light of the sun , carrying the message , In Hoc Signo <unk> or " with this sign , you will conquer " ; in Eusebius 's account , Constantine had a dream the following night , in which Christ appeared with the same heavenly sign , and told him to make a standard , the labarum , for his army in that form . Eusebius is vague about when and where these events took place , but it enters his narrative before the war against Maxentius begins . Eusebius describes the sign as Chi ( Χ ) traversed by Rho ( <unk> ) : <unk> , a symbol representing the first two letters of the Greek spelling of the word Christos or Christ . In 315 AD a medallion was issued at Ticinum showing Constantine wearing a helmet emblazoned with the Chi Rho , and coins issued at Siscia in 317 / 318 AD repeat the image . The figure was otherwise rare , however , and is uncommon in imperial iconography and propaganda before the 320s . 
 Constantine deployed his own forces along the whole length of Maxentius ' line . He ordered his cavalry to charge , and they broke Maxentius ' cavalry . He then sent his infantry against Maxentius ' infantry , pushing many into the Tiber where they were slaughtered and drowned . The battle was brief : Maxentius ' troops were broken before the first charge . Maxentius ' horse guards and <unk> initially held their position , but broke under the force of a Constantinian cavalry charge ; they also broke ranks and fled to the river . Maxentius rode with them , and attempted to cross the bridge of boats , but he was pushed by the mass of his fleeing soldiers into the Tiber , and drowned . 
 = = = In Rome = = = 
 Constantine entered Rome on 29 October 312 . He staged a grand adventus in the city , and was met with popular jubilation . Maxentius ' body was fished out of the Tiber and decapitated . His head was paraded through the streets for all to see . After the ceremonies , Maxentius ' disembodied head was sent to Carthage ; at this , Carthage would offer no further resistance . Unlike his predecessors , Constantine neglected to make the trip to the Capitoline Hill and perform customary sacrifices at the Temple of Jupiter . He did , however , choose to honor the Senatorial Curia with a visit , where he promised to restore its ancestral privileges and give it a secure role in his reformed government : there would be no revenge against Maxentius ' supporters . In response , the Senate decreed him " title of the first name " , which meant his name would be listed first in all official documents , and acclaimed him as " the greatest Augustus " . He issued decrees returning property lost under Maxentius , recalling political exiles , and releasing Maxentius ' imprisoned opponents . 
 An extensive propaganda campaign followed , during which Maxentius ' image was systematically purged from all public places . Maxentius was written up as a " tyrant " , and set against an idealized image of the " liberator " , Constantine . Eusebius , in his later works , is the best representative of this strand of Constantinian propaganda . Maxentius ' rescripts were declared invalid , and the honors Maxentius had granted to leaders of the Senate were invalidated . Constantine also attempted to remove Maxentius ' influence on Rome 's urban landscape . All structures built by Maxentius were re @-@ dedicated to Constantine , including the Temple of Romulus and the Basilica of Maxentius . At the focal point of the basilica , a stone statue of Constantine holding the Christian labarum in its hand was erected . Its inscription bore the message the statue had already made clear : By this sign Constantine had freed Rome from the yoke of the tyrant . 
 Where he did not overwrite Maxentius ' achievements , Constantine upstaged them : the Circus Maximus was redeveloped so that its total seating capacity was twenty @-@ five times larger than that of Maxentius ' racing complex on the Via Appia . Maxentius ' strongest supporters in the military were neutralized when the Praetorian Guard and Imperial Horse Guard ( equites <unk> ) were disbanded . Their tombstones were ground up and put to use in a basilica on the Via <unk> . On November 9 , 312 AD , barely two weeks after Constantine captured the city , the former base of the Imperial Horse Guard was chosen for redevelopment into the Lateran Basilica . The Legio II <unk> was removed from Alba ( Albano Laziale ) , and the remainder of Maxentius ' armies were sent to do frontier duty on the Rhine . 
 = = = Wars against Licinius = = = 
 In the following years , Constantine gradually consolidated his military superiority over his rivals in the crumbling Tetrarchy . In 313 , he met Licinius in Milan to secure their alliance by the marriage of Licinius and Constantine 's half @-@ sister Constantia . During this meeting , the emperors agreed on the so @-@ called Edict of Milan , officially granting full tolerance to Christianity and all religions in the Empire . The document had special benefits for Christians , legalizing their religion and granting them restoration for all property seized during Diocletian 's persecution . It repudiates past methods of religious coercion and used only general terms to refer to the divine sphere — " Divinity " and " Supreme Divinity " , summa <unk> . The conference was cut short , however , when news reached Licinius that his rival Maximin had crossed the Bosporus and invaded European territory . Licinius departed and eventually defeated Maximin , gaining control over the entire eastern half of the Roman Empire . Relations between the two remaining emperors deteriorated , as Constantine suffered an assassination attempt at the hands of a character that Licinius wanted elevated to the rank of Caesar ; Licinius , for his part had Constantine 's statues in Emona destroyed . In either 314 or 316 the two Augusti fought against one another at the Battle of Cibalae , with Constantine being victorious . They clashed again at the Battle of <unk> in 317 , and agreed to a settlement in which Constantine 's sons Crispus and Constantine II , and Licinius ' son <unk> were made caesars . After this arrangement , Constantine ruled the dioceses of Pannonia and Macedonia and took residence at Sirmium , whence he could wage war on the Goths and Sarmatians in 322 , and on the Goths in 323 . 
 In the year 320 , Licinius allegedly reneged on the religious freedom promised by the Edict of Milan in 313 and began to oppress Christians anew , generally without bloodshed , but resorting to confiscations and sacking of Christian office @-@ holders . Although this characterization of Licinius as anti @-@ Christian is somewhat doubtful , the fact is that he seems to have been far less open in his support of Christianity than Constantine . Therefore , Licinius was prone to see the Church as a force more loyal to Constantine than to the Imperial system in general – the explanation offered by the Church historian Sozomen . 
 This dubious arrangement eventually became a challenge to Constantine in the West , climaxing in the great civil war of 324 . Licinius , aided by Goth mercenaries , represented the past and the ancient Pagan faiths . Constantine and his Franks marched under the standard of the labarum , and both sides saw the battle in religious terms . Outnumbered , but fired by their zeal , Constantine 's army emerged victorious in the Battle of Adrianople . Licinius fled across the Bosphorus and appointed Martius <unk> , the commander of his bodyguard , as Caesar , but Constantine next won the Battle of the Hellespont , and finally the Battle of Chrysopolis on 18 September 324 . Licinius and <unk> surrendered to Constantine at Nicomedia on the promise their lives would be spared : they were sent to live as private citizens in Thessalonica and Cappadocia respectively , but in 325 Constantine accused Licinius of plotting against him and had them both arrested and hanged ; Licinius 's son ( the son of Constantine 's half @-@ sister ) was also killed . Thus Constantine became the sole emperor of the Roman Empire . 
 = = Later rule = = 
 = = = Foundation of Constantinople = = = 
 Licinius ' defeat came to represent the defeat of a rival center of Pagan and Greek @-@ speaking political activity in the East , as opposed to the Christian and Latin @-@ speaking Rome , and it was proposed that a new Eastern capital should represent the integration of the East into the Roman Empire as a whole , as a center of learning , prosperity , and cultural preservation for the whole of the Eastern Roman Empire . Among the various locations proposed for this alternative capital , Constantine appears to have toyed earlier with Serdica ( present @-@ day Sofia ) , as he was reported saying that " Serdica is my Rome " . Sirmium and Thessalonica were also considered . Eventually , however , Constantine decided to work on the Greek city of Byzantium , which offered the advantage of having already been extensively rebuilt on Roman patterns of urbanism , during the preceding century , by Septimius Severus and Caracalla , who had already acknowledged its strategic importance . The city was thus founded in 324 , dedicated on 11 May 330 and renamed <unk> ( " Constantine 's City " or Constantinople in English ) . Special commemorative coins were issued in 330 to honor the event . The new city was protected by the relics of the True Cross , the Rod of Moses and other holy relics , though a cameo now at the Hermitage Museum also represented Constantine crowned by the <unk> of the new city . The figures of old gods were either replaced or assimilated into a framework of Christian symbolism . Constantine built the new Church of the Holy Apostles on the site of a temple to Aphrodite . Generations later there was the story that a divine vision led Constantine to this spot , and an angel no one else could see , led him on a circuit of the new walls . The capital would often be compared to the ' old ' Rome as Nova Roma <unk> , the " New Rome of Constantinople " . 
 = = = Religious policy = = = 
 Constantine was the first emperor to stop Christian persecutions and to legalise Christianity along with all other religions and cults in the Roman Empire . 
 In February 313 , Constantine met with Licinius in Milan , where they developed the Edict of Milan . The edict stated that Christians should be allowed to follow the faith without oppression . This removed penalties for professing Christianity , under which many had been martyred previously , and returned confiscated Church property . The edict protected from religious persecution not only Christians but all religions , allowing anyone to worship whichever deity they chose . A similar edict had been issued in 311 by Galerius , then senior emperor of the Tetrarchy ; Galerius ' edict granted Christians the right to practise their religion but did not restore any property to them . The Edict of Milan included several clauses which stated that all confiscated churches would be returned as well as other provisions for previously persecuted Christians . 
 Scholars debate whether Constantine adopted his mother St. Helena 's Christianity in his youth , or whether he adopted it gradually over the course of his life . Constantine would retain the title of pontifex maximus until his death , a title emperors bore as heads of the pagan priesthood , as would his Christian successors on to Gratian ( r . 375 – 383 ) . According to Christian writers , Constantine was over 40 when he finally declared himself a Christian , writing to Christians to make clear that he believed he owed his successes to the protection of the Christian High God alone . Throughout his rule , Constantine supported the Church financially , built basilicas , granted privileges to clergy ( e.g. exemption from certain taxes ) , promoted Christians to high office , and returned property confiscated during the Diocletianic persecution . His most famous building projects include the Church of the Holy Sepulchre , and Old Saint Peter 's Basilica . 
 However , Constantine certainly did not patronize Christianity alone . After gaining victory in the Battle of the Milvian Bridge ( 312 ) , a triumphal arch — the Arch of Constantine — was built ( 315 ) to celebrate his triumph . The arch is decorated with images of the goddess Victoria . At the time of its dedication , sacrifices to gods like Apollo , Diana , and Hercules were made . Absent from the Arch are any depictions of Christian symbolism . However , as the Arch was commissioned by the Senate , the absence of Christian symbols may reflect the role of the Curia at the time as a pagan redoubt . 
 Later in 321 , Constantine instructed that Christians and non @-@ Christians should be united in observing the venerable day of the sun , or Sunday referring to the sun @-@ worship that Aurelian had established as an official cult . Furthermore , and long after his oft alleged conversion to Christianity , Constantine 's coinage continued to carry the symbols of the sun . Even after the pagan gods had disappeared from the coinage , Christian symbols appeared only as Constantine 's personal attributes : the chi rho between his hands or on his labarum , but never on the coin itself . Even when Constantine dedicated the new capital of Constantinople , which became the seat of Byzantine Christianity for a millennium , he did so wearing the Apollonian sun @-@ rayed Diadem ; no Christian symbols were present at this dedication . 
 The reign of Constantine established a precedent for the position of the emperor as having great influence and ultimate regulatory authority within the religious discussions involving the early Christian councils of that time , e.g. , most notably the dispute over Arianism , and the nature of God . Constantine himself disliked the risks to societal stability that religious disputes and controversies brought with them , preferring where possible to establish an orthodoxy . One way in which Constantine used his influence over the early Church councils was to seek to establish a consensus over the oft debated and argued issue over the nature of God . 
 Most notably , from 313 to 316 bishops in North Africa struggled with other Christian bishops who had been ordained by Donatus in opposition to Caecilian . The African bishops could not come to terms and the Donatists asked Constantine to act as a judge in the dispute . Three regional Church councils and another trial before Constantine all ruled against Donatus and the <unk> movement in North Africa . In 317 Constantine issued an edict to confiscate Donatist church property and to send Donatist clergy into exile . More significantly , in 325 he summoned the Council of Nicaea , effectively the first Ecumenical Council ( unless the Council of Jerusalem is so classified ) . The Council of Nicaea is most known for its dealing with Arianism and for instituting the Nicene Creed . 
 Constantine enforced the prohibition of the First Council of Nicaea against celebrating the Lord 's Supper on the day before the Jewish Passover ( 14 Nisan ) ( see <unk> and Easter controversy ) . This marked a definite break of Christianity from the Judaic tradition . From then on the Roman Julian Calendar , a solar calendar , was given precedence over the lunisolar Hebrew Calendar among the Christian churches of the Roman Empire . 
 Constantine made some new laws regarding the Jews , but while some of his edicts were unfavorable towards Jews , they were not harsher than those of his predecessors . It was made illegal for Jews to seek converts or to attack other Jews who had converted to Christianity . They were forbidden to own Christian slaves or to circumcise their slaves . On the other hand , Jewish clergy were given the same exemptions as Christian clergy . 
 = = = Administrative reforms = = = 
 Beginning in the mid @-@ 3rd century the emperors began to favor members of the equestrian order over senators , who had had a monopoly on the most important offices of state . Senators were stripped of the command of legions and most provincial governorships ( as it was felt that they lacked the specialized military upbringing needed in an age of acute defense needs ) , such posts being given to equestrians by Diocletian and his colleagues — following a practice enforced piecemeal by their predecessors . The emperors , however , still needed the talents and the help of the very rich , who were relied on to maintain social order and cohesion by means of a web of powerful influence and contacts at all levels . Exclusion of the old senatorial aristocracy threatened this arrangement . 
 In 326 , Constantine reversed this pro @-@ equestrian trend , raising many administrative positions to senatorial rank and thus opening these offices to the old aristocracy , and at the same time elevating the rank of already existing equestrians office @-@ holders to senator , degrading the equestrian order — at least as a bureaucratic rank — in the process , so that by the end of the 4th century the title of <unk> was granted only to mid @-@ low officials . 
 By the new Constantinian arrangement , one could become a senator , either by being elected praetor or ( in most cases ) by fulfilling a function of senatorial rank : from then on , holding of actual power and social status were melded together into a joint imperial hierarchy . At the same time , Constantine gained with this the support of the old nobility , as the Senate was allowed itself to elect praetors and quaestors , in place of the usual practice of the emperors directly creating new magistrates ( <unk> ) . In one inscription in honor of city prefect ( 336 – 337 ) <unk> Rufus Albinus , it was written that Constantine had restored the Senate " the auctoritas it had lost at Caesar 's time " . 
 The Senate as a body remained devoid of any significant power ; nevertheless , the senators , who had been marginalized as potential holders of imperial functions during the 3rd century , could now dispute such positions alongside more upstart bureaucrats . Some modern historians see in those administrative reforms an attempt by Constantine at reintegrating the senatorial order into the imperial administrative elite to counter the possibility of alienating pagan senators from a Christianized imperial rule ; however , such an interpretation remains conjectural , given the fact that we do not have the precise numbers about pre @-@ Constantine conversions to Christianity in the old senatorial milieu — some historians suggesting that early conversions among the old aristocracy were more numerous than previously supposed . 
 Constantine 's reforms had to do only with the civilian administration : the military chiefs , who since the Crisis of the Third Century had risen from the ranks , remained outside the senate , in which they were included only by Constantine 's children . 
 = = = Monetary reforms = = = 
 After the runaway inflation of the third century , associated with the production of fiat money to pay for public expenses , Diocletian had tried unsuccessfully to re establish trustworthy minting of silver and billon coins . The failure of the various Diocletianic attempts at the restoration of a functioning silver coin resided in the fact that the silver currency was overvalued in terms of its actual metal content , and therefore could only circulate at much discounted rates . Minting of the Diocletianic " pure " silver argenteus ceased , therefore , soon after 305 , while the billon currency continued to be used until the <unk> . From the early 300s on , Constantine forsook any attempts at restoring the silver currency , preferring instead to concentrate on minting large quantities of good standard gold pieces — the solidus , 72 of which made a pound of gold . New ( and highly debased ) silver pieces would continue to be issued during Constantine 's later reign and after his death , in a continuous process of <unk> , until this bullion minting eventually ceased , de jure , in 367 , with the silver piece being de facto continued by various denominations of bronze coins , the most important being the <unk> . These bronze pieces continued to be devalued , assuring the possibility of keeping fiduciary minting alongside a gold standard . The anonymous author of the possibly contemporary treatise on military affairs De Rebus <unk> held that , as a consequence of this monetary policy , the rift between classes widened : the rich benefited from the stability in purchasing power of the gold piece , while the poor had to cope with ever @-@ degrading bronze pieces . Later emperors like Julian the Apostate tried to present themselves as advocates of the humiles by insisting on trustworthy <unk> of the bronze currency . 
 Constantine 's monetary policy were closely associated with his religious ones , in that increased minting was associated with measures of confiscation — taken since 331 and closed in 336 — of all gold , silver and bronze statues from pagan temples , who were declared as imperial property and , as such , as monetary assets . Two imperial commissioners for each province had the task of getting hold of the statues and having them melded for immediate minting — with the exception of a number of bronze statues who were used as public monuments for the beautification of the new capital in Constantinople . 
 = = = Executions of Crispus and Fausta = = = 
 On some date between 15 May and 17 June 326 , Constantine had his eldest son Crispus , by <unk> , seized and put to death by " cold poison " at Pola ( Pula , Croatia ) . In July , Constantine had his wife , the Empress Fausta , killed at the behest of his mother , Helena . Fausta was left to die in an over @-@ heated bath . Their names were wiped from the face of many inscriptions , references to their lives in the literary record were erased , and the memory of both was condemned . Eusebius , for example , edited praise of Crispus out of later copies of his Historia Ecclesiastica , and his Vita Constantini contains no mention of Fausta or Crispus at all . Few ancient sources are willing to discuss possible motives for the events ; those few that do , offer unconvincing rationales , are of later provenance , and are generally unreliable . At the time of the executions , it was commonly believed that the Empress Fausta was either in an illicit relationship with Crispus , or was spreading rumors to that effect . A popular myth arose , modified to allude to Hippolytus – Phaedra legend , with the suggestion that Constantine killed Crispus and Fausta for their immoralities . One source , the largely fictional Passion of <unk> , probably penned in the eighth century by John of Damascus , makes the legendary connection explicit . As an interpretation of the executions , the myth rests on only " the slimmest of evidence " : sources that allude to the relationship between Crispus and Fausta are late and unreliable , and the modern suggestion that Constantine 's " godly " edicts of 326 and the irregularities of Crispus are somehow connected rests on no evidence at all . 
 Although Constantine created his apparent heirs " Caesars " , following a pattern established by Diocletian , he gave his creations a hereditary character , alien to the tetrarchic system : Constantine 's Caesars were to be kept in the hope of ascending to Empire , and entirely subordinated to their Augustus , as long as he was alive . Therefore , an alternative explanation for the execution of Crispus was , perhaps , Constantine 's desire to keep a firm grip on his prospective heirs , this — and Fausta 's desire for having her sons inheriting instead of their half @-@ brother — being reason enough for killing Crispus ; the subsequent execution of Fausta , however , was probably meant as a reminder to her children that Constantine would not hesitate in " killing his own relatives when he felt this was necessary " . 
 = = = Later campaigns = = = 
 Constantine considered Constantinople as his capital and permanent residence . He lived there for a good portion of his later life . He rebuilt Trajan 's bridge across the Danube , in hopes of reconquering Dacia , a province that had been abandoned under Aurelian . In the late winter of 332 , Constantine campaigned with the Sarmatians against the Goths . The weather and lack of food cost the Goths dearly : reportedly , nearly one hundred thousand died before they submitted to Rome . In 334 , after Sarmatian commoners had overthrown their leaders , Constantine led a campaign against the tribe . He won a victory in the war and extended his control over the region , as remains of camps and fortifications in the region indicate . Constantine resettled some Sarmatian exiles as farmers in Illyrian and Roman districts , and conscripted the rest into the army . Constantine took the title <unk> maximus in 336 . 
 In the last years of his life Constantine made plans for a campaign against Persia . In a letter written to the king of Persia , Shapur , Constantine had asserted his patronage over Persia 's Christian subjects and urged Shapur to treat them well . The letter is <unk> . In response to border raids , Constantine sent Constantius to guard the eastern frontier in 335 . In 336 , prince Narseh invaded Armenia ( a Christian kingdom since 301 ) and installed a Persian client on the throne . Constantine then resolved to campaign against Persia himself . He treated the war as a Christian crusade , calling for bishops to accompany the army and commissioning a tent in the shape of a church to follow him everywhere . Constantine planned to be baptized in the Jordan River before crossing into Persia . Persian diplomats came to Constantinople over the winter of 336 – 337 , seeking peace , but Constantine turned them away . The campaign was called off , however , when Constantine became sick in the spring of 337 . 
 = = = Sickness and death = = = 
 Constantine had known death would soon come . Within the Church of the Holy Apostles , Constantine had secretly prepared a final resting @-@ place for himself . It came sooner than he had expected . Soon after the Feast of Easter 337 , Constantine fell seriously ill . He left Constantinople for the hot baths near his mother 's city of <unk> ( <unk> ) , on the southern shores of the Gulf of Nicomedia ( present @-@ day Gulf of İzmit ) . There , in a church his mother built in honor of Lucian the Apostle , he prayed , and there he realized that he was dying . Seeking purification , he became a catechumen , and attempted a return to Constantinople , making it only as far as a suburb of Nicomedia . He summoned the bishops , and told them of his hope to be baptized in the River Jordan , where Christ was written to have been baptized . He requested the baptism right away , promising to live a more Christian life should he live through his illness . The bishops , Eusebius records , " performed the sacred ceremonies according to custom " . He chose the <unk> bishop Eusebius of Nicomedia , bishop of the city where he lay dying , as his <unk> . In postponing his baptism , he followed one custom at the time which postponed baptism until after infancy . It has been thought that Constantine put off baptism as long as he did so as to be absolved from as much of his sin as possible . Constantine died soon after at a suburban villa called <unk> , on the last day of the fifty @-@ day festival of Pentecost directly following Pascha ( or Easter ) , on 22 May 337 . 
 Although Constantine 's death follows the conclusion of the Persian campaign in Eusebius 's account , most other sources report his death as occurring in its middle . Emperor Julian ( a nephew of Constantine ) , writing in the mid @-@ 350s , observes that the Sassanians escaped punishment for their ill @-@ deeds , because Constantine died " in the middle of his preparations for war " . Similar accounts are given in the Origo Constantini , an anonymous document composed while Constantine was still living , and which has Constantine dying in Nicomedia ; the Historiae <unk> of Sextus Aurelius Victor , written in 361 , which has Constantine dying at an estate near Nicomedia called <unk> while marching against the Persians ; and the Breviarium of Eutropius , a handbook compiled in 369 for the Emperor Valens , which has Constantine dying in a nameless state villa in Nicomedia . From these and other accounts , some have concluded that Eusebius 's Vita was edited to defend Constantine 's reputation against what Eusebius saw as a less congenial version of the campaign . 
 Following his death , his body was transferred to Constantinople and buried in the Church of the Holy Apostles there . He was succeeded by his three sons born of Fausta , Constantine II , Constantius II and Constans . A number of relatives were killed by followers of Constantius , notably Constantine 's nephews <unk> ( who held the rank of Caesar ) and Hannibalianus , presumably to eliminate possible contenders to an already complicated succession . He also had two daughters , Constantina and Helena , wife of Emperor Julian . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Although he earned his honorific of " The Great " ( " Μέγας " ) from Christian historians long after he had died , he could have claimed the title on his military achievements and victories alone . Besides reuniting the Empire under one emperor , Constantine won major victories over the Franks and Alamanni in 306 – 308 , the Franks again in 313 – 314 , the Goths in 332 and the Sarmatians in 334 . By 336 , Constantine had reoccupied most of the long @-@ lost province of Dacia , which Aurelian had been forced to abandon in 271 . At the time of his death , he was planning a great expedition to end raids on the eastern provinces from the Persian Empire . Serving for a total of almost 31 years ( combining his years as co @-@ ruler and sole ruler ) , he was also the longest serving emperor since Augustus and the second longest serving emperor in Roman history . 
 In the cultural sphere Constantine contributed to the revival of the clean shaven face fashion of the Roman emperors from Augustus to Trajan , which was originally introduced among the Romans by Scipio Africanus . This new Roman imperial fashion lasted until the reign of Phocas . 
 The Byzantine Empire considered Constantine its founder and the Holy Roman Empire reckoned him among the venerable figures of its tradition . In the later Byzantine state , it had become a great honor for an emperor to be hailed as a " new Constantine " . Ten emperors , including the last emperor of the Eastern Roman Empire , carried the name . Monumental Constantinian forms were used at the court of Charlemagne to suggest that he was Constantine 's successor and equal . Constantine acquired a mythic role as a warrior against " heathens " . The motif of the Romanesque equestrian , the mounted figure in the posture of a triumphant Roman emperor , became a visual metaphor in statuary in praise of local benefactors . The name " Constantine " itself enjoyed renewed popularity in western France in the eleventh and twelfth centuries . Most Nicene churches consider Constantine a saint ( <unk> Κωνσταντίνος , Saint Constantine ) . In the Orthodox Church he is called <unk> ( <unk> Κωνσταντίνος ) — an equal of the Apostles . 
 The Niš Airport is named " Constantine the Great " in honor of him . A large Cross was planned to be built on a hill overlooking Niš , but the project was cancelled . In 2012 , a memorial was erected in Niš in his honor . The Commemoration of the Edict of Milan was held in Niš in 2013 . 
 = = = Historiography = = = 
 During his life and those of his sons , Constantine was presented as a paragon of virtue . Pagans such as <unk> of Athens and Libanius showered him with praise . When the last of his sons died in 361 , however , his nephew ( and son @-@ in @-@ law ) Julian the Apostate wrote the satire Symposium , or the Saturnalia , which denigrated Constantine , calling him inferior to the great pagan emperors , and given over to luxury and greed . Following Julian , Eunapius began — and Zosimus continued — a historiographic tradition that blamed Constantine for weakening the Empire through his indulgence to the Christians . 
 In medieval times , when the Roman Catholic Church was dominant , Catholic historians presented Constantine as an ideal ruler , the standard against which any king or emperor could be measured . The Renaissance rediscovery of anti @-@ Constantinian sources prompted a re @-@ evaluation of Constantine 's career . The German humanist Johann <unk> , discoverer of Zosimus ' writings , published a Latin translation thereof in 1576 . In its preface , he argued that Zosimus ' picture of Constantine was superior to that offered by Eusebius and the Church historians , and damned Constantine as a tyrant . Cardinal Caesar Baronius , a man of the Counter @-@ Reformation , criticized Zosimus , favoring Eusebius ' account of the Constantinian era . Baronius ' Life of Constantine ( 1588 ) presents Constantine as the model of a Christian prince . For his History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire ( 1776 – 89 ) , Edward Gibbon , aiming to unite the two extremes of Constantinian scholarship , offered a portrait of Constantine built on the contrasted narratives of Eusebius and Zosimus . In a form that parallels his account of the empire 's decline , Gibbon presents a noble war hero corrupted by Christian influences , who transforms into an Oriental despot in his old age : " a hero ... degenerating into a cruel and dissolute monarch " . 
 Modern interpretations of Constantine 's rule begin with Jacob Burckhardt 's The Age of Constantine the Great ( 1853 , rev. 1880 ) . Burckhardt 's Constantine is a scheming secularist , a politician who manipulates all parties in a quest to secure his own power . Henri Grégoire , writing in the 1930s , followed Burckhardt 's evaluation of Constantine . For Grégoire , Constantine developed an interest in Christianity only after witnessing its political usefulness . Grégoire was skeptical of the authenticity of Eusebius ' Vita , and postulated a pseudo @-@ Eusebius to assume responsibility for the vision and conversion narratives of that work . Otto Seeck , in Geschichte des <unk> der <unk> Welt ( 1920 – 23 ) , and André <unk> , in L 'empereur Constantin ( 1932 ) , wrote against this historiographic tradition . Seeck presented Constantine as a sincere war hero , whose ambiguities were the product of his own naïve inconsistency . <unk> 's Constantine is a philosophical monotheist , a child of his era 's religious syncretism . Related histories by A.H.M. Jones ( Constantine and the Conversion of Europe , 1949 ) and Ramsay MacMullen ( Constantine , 1969 ) gave portraits of a less visionary , and more impulsive , Constantine . 
 These later accounts were more willing to present Constantine as a genuine convert to Christianity . Beginning with Norman H. Baynes ' Constantine the Great and the Christian Church ( 1929 ) and reinforced by Andreas <unk> 's The Conversion of Constantine and Pagan Rome ( 1948 ) , a historiographic tradition developed which presented Constantine as a committed Christian . T. D. Barnes 's seminal Constantine and Eusebius ( 1981 ) represents the culmination of this trend . Barnes ' Constantine experienced a radical conversion , which drove him on a personal crusade to convert his empire . Charles Matson <unk> 's recent Constantine and the Christian Empire ( 2004 ) takes much the same tack . In spite of Barnes ' work , arguments over the strength and depth of Constantine 's religious conversion continue . Certain themes in this school reached new extremes in T.G. Elliott 's The Christianity of Constantine the Great ( 1996 ) , which presented Constantine as a committed Christian from early childhood . A similar view of Constantine is held in Paul <unk> 's recent ( 2007 ) work , Quand notre monde est <unk> <unk> , which does not speculate on the origins of Constantine 's Christian motivation , but presents him , in his role as Emperor , as a religious revolutionary who fervently believed himself meant " to play a providential role in the <unk> economy of the salvation of humanity " . 
 = = = Donation of Constantine = = = 
 Latin Rite Catholics considered it inappropriate that Constantine was baptized only on his death @-@ bed and by an unorthodox bishop , as it undermined the authority of the Papacy . Hence , by the early fourth century , a legend had emerged that Pope Sylvester I ( 314 – 335 ) had cured the pagan emperor from leprosy . According to this legend , Constantine was soon baptized , and began the construction of a church in the Lateran Palace . In the eighth century , most likely during the pontificate of Stephen II ( 752 – 757 ) , a document called the Donation of Constantine first appeared , in which the freshly converted Constantine hands the temporal rule over " the city of Rome and all the provinces , districts , and cities of Italy and the Western regions " to Sylvester and his successors . In the High Middle Ages , this document was used and accepted as the basis for the Pope 's temporal power , though it was denounced as a forgery by Emperor Otto III and lamented as the root of papal worldliness by the poet Dante Alighieri . The 15th century philologist Lorenzo Valla proved the document was indeed a forgery . 
 = = = Geoffrey of Monmouth 's Historia = = = 
 During the medieval period , Britons regarded Constantine as a king of their own people , particularly associating him with Caernarfon in Gwynedd . While some of this is owed to his fame and his proclamation as Emperor in Britain , there was also confusion of his family with Magnus Maximus 's supposed wife Saint Elen and her son , another Constantine ( Welsh : <unk> ) . In the 12th century Henry of Huntingdon included a passage in his Historia Anglorum that the emperor Constantine 's mother was a Briton , making her the daughter of King Cole of Colchester . Geoffrey of Monmouth expanded this story in his highly fictionalized Historia Regum Britanniae , an account of the supposed Kings of Britain from their Trojan origins to the Anglo @-@ Saxon invasion . According to Geoffrey , Cole was King of the Britons when Constantius , here a senator , came to Britain . Afraid of the Romans , Cole submitted to Roman law so long as he retained his kingship . However , he died only a month later , and Constantius took the throne himself , marrying Cole 's daughter Helena . They had their son Constantine , who succeeded his father as King of Britain before becoming Roman Emperor . 
 Historically , this series of events is extremely improbable . Constantius had already left Helena by the time he left for Britain . Additionally , no earlier source mentions that Helena was born in Britain , let alone that she was a princess . Henry 's source for the story is unknown , though it may have been a lost hagiography of Helena . 
 = = Documentaries = = 
 Documentaries of Constantine include : PBS @-@ From Jesus To Christ . The First Christians Chapter 12 and PBS Christ to Constantine Episode 6 Constantine 
 = = = Ancient sources = = = 
 = = = Modern sources = = = 
 = The Boat Race 1930 = 
 The 82nd Boat Race took place on 12 April 1930 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . In a race umpired by former Oxford rower Charles Burnell , Cambridge won by two lengths in a time of 19 minutes 9 seconds . Their seventh consecutive victory , it took the overall record to 41 – 40 in their favour , the first time for 68 years that they held the lead in the event . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1929 race by ten lengths , with the overall record tied on 40 victories each ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Cambridge were coached by Francis Escombe , J. C. Holcroft , J. A. MacNabb ( who had rowed in the 1924 race ) and P. H. Thomas ( a four @-@ time Blue between 1902 and 1905 ) . Oxford 's coaches were Stanley Garton ( who had rowed three times between 1909 and 1911 ) , P. C. Mallam ( a Dark Blue from 1921 to 1924 inclusive ) and Arthur Wiggins ( who had rowed for Oxford in the 1912 , 1913 and 1914 races ) . For the fourth consecutive year the umpire was Charles Burnell who had rowed for Oxford in the 1895 , 1896 , 1897 and 1898 races . Charles Kent , who rowed for Oxford in the 1891 race , was the finishing judge for the third consecutive year . 
 According to the rowing correspondent for The Times , the " Cambridge Trial Eights ... were certainly not comparable with those of the past four years . " Conversely , Oxford " had better Trial Eights than for many years past " . They performed well in their practice rows during the build @-@ up to the race : they broke the record to the Mile Post by four seconds . Cambridge were considered " slightly the faster " but Oxford were " coming on " . Both crews rowed in boats built by Sims brothers of Putney , and used <unk> oars . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 12 st 8 lb ( 79 @.@ 6 kg ) , 1 @.@ 5 pounds ( 0 @.@ 7 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford saw two rowers return in Hugh Edwards and D. E. <unk> . Cambridge 's boat contained three participants with Boat Race experience , including Olympic gold medallist Michael Warriner and J. B. Collins , both of whom were making their third consecutive appearance . Just one participant in the race was registered as non @-@ British in Cambridge 's American cox Robert Egerton Swartwout . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Cambridge . In an " unpleasant drizzle " , the umpire Burnell started the race at 12 : 30 p.m. The Light Blues made a " smoother start " but were marginally out @-@ rated by Oxford who held a one @-@ third length lead after a minute . They extended their lead to two @-@ thirds of a length by Craven Steps but the bend in the river favoured Cambridge , and their lead was halved . By the Mile Post , the Dark Blues led by the length of a canvas . 
 Oxford 's stroke Martineau responded to a push from Cambridge and were nearly a length ahead as both crews passed the Harrods Furniture Depository . Another spurt from the Light Blues saw the lead reduced to one @-@ third of a length by the time the crews passed below Hammersmith Bridge in a record time . Reducing the stroke rate to cope with the rough water , Oxford had increased their lead to three @-@ quarters of a length by Chiswick Eyot , yet were back to a half @-@ length lead by Chiswick Steps as the Light Blues coped better in the conditions . Along Duke 's Meadows Cambridge closed the gap and " the crews raced stroke for stroke " , with the Light Blues taking the lead . The crews passed below Barnes Bridge with Cambridge holding a length 's advantage and out @-@ rated their opponents , who kept rowing to the end . Cambridge won by two lengths in a time of 19 minutes 9 seconds , their seventh consecutive victory and the eleventh in the previous twelve years . It was the fastest winning time since the 1924 race , and the fifth @-@ fastest time in the history of the event . 
 The rowing correspondent for The Times suggested that " this year was one of the exceptional years by which the vast crowds who swarm on the towpath are more than rewarded for the years of waiting , and moreover Cambridge men as well as Oxford will rejoice to see so fine a courage and skill once more animating a losing crew " . During the course of the race , a spectator boat became waterlogged , resulting in eight people being taken to hospital . 
 = Nap Lajoie = 
 Napoléon " Nap " Lajoie ( / <unk> / ; September 5 , 1874 – February 7 , 1959 ) , also known as Larry Lajoie and nicknamed " The Frenchman " , was an American professional baseball second baseman and player @-@ manager . He played in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) for the Philadelphia Phillies , Philadelphia Athletics ( twice ) , and Cleveland Naps between 1896 and 1916 . He managed the Naps from 1905 through 1909 . 
 Lajoie was signed to the National Leagues 's ( NL ) Phillies in 1896 . By the beginning of the twentieth century , however , the upstart American League ( AL ) was looking to rival the supremacy of the NL and in 1901 , Lajoie and dozens of former National League players joined the American League . National League clubs contested the legality of contracts signed by players who jumped to the other league but eventually , Lajoie was allowed to play for Connie Mack 's Athletics . During the season , Lajoie set the all @-@ time American League single @-@ season mark for the highest batting average ( .426 ) . One year later , Lajoie went to the Cleveland Bronchos where he would play until the 1915 season when he returned to play for Mack and the Athletics . While with Cleveland , Lajoie 's popularity led to locals electing to change the club 's team name from Bronchos to Napoleons ( " Naps " for short ) , which remained until after Lajoie departed Cleveland and the name was changed to Indians ( the team 's present @-@ day name ) . 
 Lajoie led the AL in batting average five times in his career and four times recorded the most number of hits . During several of those years with the Naps he and Ty Cobb dominated AL hitting categories and traded batting titles with each other , most notably coming in 1910 , when the league 's batting champion was not decided until well after the last game of the season and after an investigation by American League President Ban Johnson . Lajoie in 1914 joined Cap Anson and Honus Wagner as the only major league players to record 3 @,@ 000 career hits . He led the NL or AL in putouts five times in his career and assists three times . He has been called " the best second baseman in the history of baseball " and " the most outstanding player to wear a Cleveland uniform . " Cy Young said , " Lajoie was one of the most rugged players I ever faced . He 'd take your leg off with a line drive , turn the third baseman around like a swinging door and powder the hand of the left fielder . " He was elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1937 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Lajoie was born in Woonsocket , Rhode Island , to Jean Baptiste and Celina Guertin Lajoie . The elder Lajoie was French Canadian and had emigrated to the United States . Upon arrival to the U.S. he first settled in Rutland , Vermont , but then moved to Woonsocket , where Lajoie , the youngest of eight surviving children , was born . Throughout his childhood Lajoie received little formal education . 
 The elder Lajoie , who worked as a teamster and laborer , died not long into the younger Lajoie 's childhood , which forced him and his siblings to work to support the family . Lajoie dropped out of school to work in a textile mill . He also began playing semi @-@ professional baseball for the local Woonsocket team under the alias " Sandy " , because his parents did not approve of their son playing baseball . He earned money as a taxi driver with a horse and buggy and locally was called " Slugging <unk> . " " When I told my father I had decided to take the job he was very angry . He shouted that ball players were bums and that nobody respected them , but I was determined to give it a try at least one season " , Lajoie later said . He also received the nickname " Larry " from a teammate who had trouble pronouncing Lajoie . Lajoie admired baseball players such as King Kelly and Charles Radbourn . 
 When word of Lajoie 's baseball ability spread , he began to play for other semi @-@ professional teams at $ 2 to $ 5 per game ( $ 57 to $ 142 in current dollar terms ) . Meanwhile , Lajoie worked as a teamster . He left Woonsocket and his $ 7 @.@ 50 ( $ 213 in current dollar terms ) working as a taxi driver and joined the Class B New England League 's Fall River Indians in 1896 played as a center fielder , first baseman and catcher where he earned $ 25 weekly ( $ 711 in current dollar terms ) . He recorded 163 hits in 80 games , and led the team in batting average , doubles , triples , home runs and hits . Lajoie was " widely regarded as an outstanding prospect " and Indians owner Charlie Marston rejected an offer from the Pittsburgh Pirates for Lajoie in exchange for $ 500 ( $ 14 @,@ 222 in current dollar terms ) . He was also scouted by the Philadelphia Phillies and Boston Beaneaters . 
 = = Major league career = = 
 = = = Philadelphia Phillies and Athletics = = = 
 The Philadelphia Phillies of the MLB 's National League ( NL ) purchased Lajoie and teammate Phil Geier from Fall River for $ 1 @,@ 500 ( $ 42 @,@ 666 in current dollar terms ) on August 9 . Phillies ' manager Billy Nash originally went to Fall River intending to sign Geier only but obtained Lajoie when the team agreed to include him in their asking price . Author David Jordan wrote : 
 " A legend later grew up that Geier was the main target of Nash 's pursuit and that Marston ' threw in ' Lajoie in order to get the Phillies to pay the $ 1 @,@ 500 asking price . This is hardly likely . While Geier was considered a good prospect , Lajoie was banging the ball at a .429 clip in his first professional season , was a fine fielder , and had already been sought by several big league clubs . Nap Lajoie clearly represented a financial asset to Marston , who did not give him away . The price the Phillies paid was a substantial sum for two minor leaguers in 1896 . " 
 Against the Washington Senators on August 12 , 1896 , Lajoie made his major league debut . He played first base and recorded a single . Ed Delahanty was being considered to play the first base position after Dan Brouthers retired . Delahanty , however , wanted Lajoie to play first so he could return to his natural position of left field . Delahanty said to Lajoie , " Look , <unk> , you tell the boss you ’ re a first baseman and you and me are gonna get along . " Lajoie became the team 's first baseman and by the end of the season , he and Delahanty were roommates . Later in 1898 , new manager George Stallings moved Lajoie to second base , commenting that " [ Lajoie would ] have made good no matter where I positioned him . " 
 Lajoie hit .363 and led the NL in slugging percentage in 1897 and doubles and RBIs in 1898 . He had a .378 batting average in 1899 , though he played only 77 games due to an injury . In 1900 , he missed five weeks due to a broken thumb suffered in a fistfight with teammate Elmer Flick . 
 John Rogers , described as a " penny @-@ pinching " majority owner of the Phillies , assured Lajoie that he would make the same salary as Delahanty . However , Lajoie discovered that while he was earning $ 2 @,@ 600 ( $ 73 @,@ 954 in current dollar terms ) , Delahanty earned $ 3 @,@ 000 ( $ 85 @,@ 332 in current dollar terms ) ( contracts for NL players were not allowed to surpass $ 2 @,@ 400 ) . Rogers increased Lajoie 's pay by $ 200 but the damage had already been done . " Because I felt I had been cheated , I was determined to listen to any reasonable American League offer " , Lajoie said . 
 In 1901 , the newly created American League had attracted several of the top players in the competing National League to join its ranks . Rogers declined Lajoie 's request for an increase in salary and as a result , Lajoie jumped to the crosstown Philadelphia Athletics , owned by former Phillies ' part @-@ owner Benjamin Shibe and managed by Connie Mack . Frank Hough offered Lajoie the contract on behalf of Mack . " Hough offered me $ 24 @,@ 000 ( $ 682 @,@ 656 in current dollar terms ) for four years . You can bet I signed in a hurry " , Lajoie said . Lajoie was considered " the first superstar " to join the newly formed AL . He was also the first player whose yearly salary was for $ 4 @,@ 000 ( $ 113 @,@ 776 in current dollar terms ) . " The Phillies opened their season and drew 6 @,@ 000 fans . A week later , when we opened , there were 16 @,@ 000 in the stands . The American League was here to stay " , Lajoie later said . Lajoie 's batting average that year was .426 ( it was originally recorded at .405 , later changed to .422 before finally revised again to .426 ) . The batting average mark became the all @-@ time AL record after the number was revised . Previously , Ty Cobb and George Sisler had been credited with having the AL 's all @-@ time mark . That same year in a game against the Chicago White Sox ' Clark Griffith , Lajoie became the second Major Leaguer to be intentionally walked with the bases loaded in an 11 – 7 game after Abner Dalrymple in 1881 . For the 1901 season , Lajoie led the majors in doubles ( 48 ) , and led the majors in hits ( 232 ) , batting average ( .426 ) , runs ( 145 ) , on @-@ base ( .463 ) and slugging percentage ( <unk> ) , and total bases ( 350 ) . His 125 RBIs led the AL and his 14 home runs were a career @-@ best and his 48 doubles are a Philadelphia Athletics ' record . Mack said of Lajoie , " He plays so naturally and so easily it looks like lack of effort . " Author Robert Kelly writes : " The .422 batting average of Lajoie still stands as an AL record . To some degree , however , it is tainted . The 1901 season was the first for the AL and the level of competition was presumably evolving . Such questions , however , in no way cast doubt on the extraordinary batting ability of the second baseman . " 
 In April 1902 , the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania overruled an earlier decision by the Court of Common Pleas and upheld the reserve clause in contracts between players and NL clubs . President of the Chicago National League Club Jim Hart said the state Supreme Court 's decision had dealt " a fatal blow to the rival league " and NL clubs " have won a great victory . " The Phillies ' Rogers obtained an injunction barring Lajoie from playing baseball for any team other than his team . However , a lawyer discovered the injunction was only enforceable in the state of Pennsylvania . The courts ruled the reserve clause was not valid for players who signed with an AL team . Mack responded by trading Lajoie and Bill Bernhard to the then @-@ moribund Cleveland Bronchos , whose owner , Charles Somers , had provided considerable financial assistance to the A 's in the early years . Lajoie was also pursued by Charles Comiskey , owner of the Chicago White Sox . 
 = = = Cleveland Bronchos / Naps = = = 
 Lajoie , nicknamed " The Frenchman " and considered baseball 's most famous player at the time , arrived in Cleveland on June 4 and his play was immediately met with approval from fans . The Bronchos drew 10 @,@ 000 fans to League Park in Lajoie 's first game . The Bronchos ' record at the time Lajoie and fellow Athletics teammate , Bill Bernhard , joined was 11 – 24 and improved to 12 – 24 after the team 's inaugural game with their new players , a 4 – 3 win over the Boston Americans . The team went on to finish 69 – 67 , fifth in the AL , for the franchise 's first winning record since the AL began as a league . After his first season with the Bronchos , Lajoie 's .378 average led all AL players . New York Giants manager , John McGraw , was rumored to want to sign Lajoie but Lajoie stated his intentions when he said " ... for I intend to stick to Cleveland . " 
 For the remainder of 1902 and most of 1903 , Lajoie and Flick traveled separately from the rest of the team , needing to avoid entering Pennsylvania so as to avoid a subpoena ( the only team they could legally play with inside state limits was the Phillies ) . When the Naps went to play in Philadelphia , Lajoie and Bernhard would go to nearby Atlantic City to help pass the time . The issue was finally resolved when the leagues made peace through the National Agreement in September 1903 ( which also brought the formation of the World Series ) . To begin the 1903 season , the club changed its name from the Bronchos to the Naps in honor of Lajoie after a readers ' poll result was released by the Cleveland Press . ( The team was officially the Blues in their inaugural AL season but changed to the Bronchos for the 1902 season . ) The Bronchos finished the season 77 – 63 and Lajoie finished his first full season with the club again the AL 's batting champion with a .344 average . He also led the league in slugging percentage ( .518 ) , finished second in doubles ( 41 ) , third in RBIs ( 93 ) and tied for fifth in home runs ( 7 ) . In the off @-@ season he contracted pleurisy . 
 During the 1904 , Lajoie received a suspension after he spat tobacco juice in an umpire 's eye . He later informally replaced Bill Armour as the team 's manager ( Armour submitted his resignation on September 9 but as team captain , Lajoie had already been acting as the Naps ' field manager ) . After the season had concluded , Lajoie was officially named manager . He still managed to lead the majors with a .376 batting average as he recorded his second consecutive league batting title . He also led the majors in hits ( 208 ) , doubles ( 49 ) , RBIs ( 102 ) and slugging percentage ( <unk> ) . Lajoie forbade card playing and gambling from his players during the regular season . As a manager , Lajoie was also described as " much too lenient with his players . " 
 Lajoie contracted sepsis from an untreated spike injury after a game in July 1905 . Dye from Lajoie 's stockings entered his bloodstream and led to blood poisoning . ( A rule was put into place requiring white socks to be worn underneath a player 's colored socks . ) The injury worsened and Lajoie eventually came to games in a wheelchair . Amputation of the affected leg was also discussed . The injury and illness kept Lajoie out until August 28 when he began play again and returned as the team 's first baseman . Before the season was over he also sustained an injury to his ankle from a foul tip during an at bat and missed the remainder of the season ( he continued to manage from the bench ) . He finished the season having only appeared in 65 games ( a career @-@ low , other than his rookie season when he was not called up until well after the season had begun ) . The Naps finished with a 76 – 78 record . Baseball historian Bill James wrote of Lajoie 's higher @-@ than @-@ normal career putout total and importance to Cleveland : 
 " Nap Lajoie was not only the team 's superstar , after 1905 he was also the manager . He was more than that — hell , the team was actually called the " Naps " in his honor , as if Lajoie was the team . If Lajoie was in the habit of covering second base every play , the shortstop certainly wasn 't going to tell him not to . " 
 Lajoie led the majors in 1906 in hits ( 214 ) and doubles ( 48 ) and the Naps finished third in the AL again with a winning record , 89 – 64 . Lajoie finished second in the AL to George Stone in batting average , slugging and on @-@ base percentage . In 1906 he married Myrtle Smith and the couple moved to a small farm outside Cleveland . 
 In June of the 1907 season , Lajoie 's .296 average , " an average even now that scores of players would be glad to accept , " put him at risk for hitting below .300 for the first time in his career . He also missed 15 games due to a recurrence of sepsis which he contracted during the 1905 season . Lajoie and Naps first baseman George Stovall got into an argument in a hotel lobby and Stovall broke a chair over Lajoie 's head . " George didn 't mean anything by it " , Lajoie said , and the two maintained a working relationship . He finished the season with an average of .299 . Naps owner Charles Somers received a trade offer from the Detroit Tigers for the Naps ' Elmer Flick and Tigers ' Ty Cobb . Tigers manager Hughie Jennings called Somers and told him he was offering the trade because Cobb was not getting along with several teammates . Somers decided to retain Flick , saying , " We 'll keep Flick . Maybe he isn 't as good a batter as Cobb , but he 's much nicer to have on the team . " The Naps finished the regular season in second place to the Tigers with a 90 – 64 record , a half @-@ game behind the Tigers ( who finished 90 – 63 and were not forced to make @-@ up a rained out game in accordance with league rules ) . Lajoie was partly blamed for the Naps ' second @-@ place finish . Author Fred <unk> described an instance during the season between Naps catcher Nig Clarke and Lajoie . 
 " Clarke ... was newly married and asked Lajoie for a day off so that he could go home . Lajoie refused . Clarke sulked and walked over to warm up pitcher Addie Joss . On the first pitch , he stuck out a finger and the ball broke it cleanly . With blood streaming from his hand , Clarke waved it defiantly in front of Lajoie . " Now can I go home ? " asked Clarke . He was out five weeks , and Cleveland lost the pennant to Detroit by half a game . " 
 Lajoie finished the season tied for third @-@ most in hits ( 168 ) while Cobb 's batting average , slugging and on @-@ base percentages , and hit total led the American League . Baseball historians have suggested the managerial duties Lajoie took on impacted his offensive numbers . 
 Lajoie 's dissatisfaction with the Naps ' play worsened . " You can 't win in the major leagues unless you have players who know the game . We don 't have time to teach and train youngsters up here . Our job is to win pennants , not run schools " , he said . Franklin Lewis , sports writer and author , wrote " Lajoie , in spite of his marvelous fielding and tremendous batting , was not exactly a darling of the grandstand as a manager . " Lajoie recommended to Somers on August 17 , 1909 , he find the team a new manager , although he wanted to remain on the club as a player . Somers responded to Lajoie by giving him more time to finalize his decision but when Lajoie came back days later and announced the same decision , Somers acted quickly to find a replacement . Lajoie later described the decision to take on the added duties as a player @-@ manager as the biggest mistake of his career as he felt it negatively affected his play . The highest @-@ paid player in the league , he also offered a $ 10 @,@ 000 ( $ 263 @,@ 370 in current dollar terms ) reduction in salary . Somers promoted Naps coach Deacon " Jim " McGuire to manager . The team finished 71 – 82 while Lajoie 's .324 average was third in the AL and 33 doubles second . The Naps finished 1910 71 – 81 but Lajoie had one of his better seasons statistically as he led the majors with a .384 average and 227 hits , both categories bettered only in Lajoie 's 1901 campaign . His 51 doubles , a career @-@ high , and 304 total bases led the majors , the fourth and final time in his career he would lead the majors in the latter category . Lajoie missed significant parts of back @-@ to @-@ back seasons , the first in 1911 when he appeared in just 90 games . Stovall , the former Naps first baseman , replaced McGuire as the club 's manager and the Naps finished 80 – 73 . Lajoie was forced to sit out six weeks of the 1912 season when he sprained his back in May during a practice session in Chicago . He played in 117 games on the season , an increase of the 90 he played in one season before , but Cleveland , who had hired Joe Birmingham as the team 's fifth manager since Lajoie gave up the role in 1909 , finished 75 – 78 . Lajoie and Joe Jackson tied for the team lead with 90 RBIs . He finished fourth in the AL with a .368 batting average . In 1913 , Birmingham and Lajoie had arguments in the open , including one incident in June when Lajoie cursed Birmingham openly to reporters after being benched during a batting slump . Lajoie hit .335 on the year , the last time he would hit over .300 in his career . 
 Only two other major league players had attained 3 @,@ 000 career hits until Lajoie hit a double on September 27 , 1914 , and so joined Cap Anson and Honus Wagner in the 3 @,@ 000 hit club . Lajoie recorded the hit off Yankees pitcher Marty McHale in a 5 – 3 Naps win . His .258 batting average for the season , however , was the lowest since he had joined the majors in 1896 . The Naps finished in last place in the American League standings with a 51 – 102 record , their worst record since joining the league and the franchise 's lowest winning percentage ( .333 ) . Lajoie requested that Somers trade him and the club obliged , selling Lajoie to the Athletics for the waiver price and in so doing , Lajoie returned to Philadelphia . 
 = = = Philadelphia Athletics = = = 
 The following season , 1915 , Lajoie returned to the Athletics when Mack signed him to a contract . In his first season back with the Athletics , he finished with a .280 batting average but the team ended the season in last place with a 43 – 109 record . The 1916 season would be Lajoie 's last in the majors . In his final major league game , he hit a triple to help Athletics pitcher Joe Bush win his no @-@ hitter . Lajoie , aged 41 years , played in 113 games and finished with a .246 average . Philadelphia 's season record was worse than the previous season 's franchise @-@ low record , and finished in last place again with a 36 – 117 record . The Athletics ' winning percentage ( .235 ) is the franchise 's worst winning percentage ( through 2012 season ) . 
 = = = Minor leagues and retirement = = = 
 In 1917 , Lajoie joined the Toronto Maple Leafs of the International League as manager . At the age of 42 , Lajoie won the league 's batting title with batting average of .380 . He appeared in 151 of 156 games and for the first time in his career , played on a team that won a pennant . He later was signed by the Brooklyn Dodgers for $ 3 @,@ 000 ( $ 47 @,@ 197 in current dollar terms ) in March 1918 but the contract was annulled by the Commissioner 's office and made a free agent to which Lajoie was " well pleased " . Later that same year he joined the Indianapolis Indians of the American Association as player @-@ manager . He helped lead the team to a third @-@ place finish but the season was impacted due to the U.S. ' s involvement in World War I. Lajoie made his services available to the draft board but they rejected his offer . On December 27 , 1918 , Lajoie announced his retirement from baseball . 
 Several years after his retirement , a story in The Milwaukee Sentinel talked of Lajoie 's ability to " <unk> any pitcher . " Lajoie faced pitcher Red Donahue , who avoided pitching fastballs to Lajoie after seeing him go 4 @-@ for @-@ 4 against a fellow pitching mate . Donahue instead made pitches on the outside corner , to which Lajoie reached over " and hit them with ease . " Donahue then proceeded to aim a pitch at Lajoie 's head and he proceeded to hit a home run . " That 's the kind I eat " , he said . 
 = = Rivalry with Ty Cobb = = 
 For the first part of the 20th century , Lajoie and Cobb 's statistics rivaled each other like few other players in the American League . In 1908 , Honus Wagner and Lajoie recorded their 2,000th career hit . Baseball historian David Anderson wrote : 
 " Nap Lajoie reached the milestone later in the summer with even less hoopla , in an age when individual records received little attention from the press and were generally scorned by many players . Players overly worried about their individual stats were often unpopular with teammates . The modesty of Wagner and Lajoie over their achievements contrasted sharply with Cobb 's ambition and overriding interest in his individual numbers . " 
 The Lajoie @-@ Cobb rivalry reached a peak in 1910 , when Hugh Chalmers of the Chalmers Auto Company ( a direct predecessor to modern @-@ day Chrysler ) promised a Chalmers 30 Roadster to the season 's batting champion . The public became fascinated with the daily statistics of Lajoie and Cobb in what became known as the Chalmers Race . Sports bettors , who by this time followed the sport attentively , also followed the daily reports with interest . Cobb took the final two games , a doubleheader , off against the Chicago White Sox , confident that his average was safe and would allow him to win the AL batting title — unless Lajoie had a near @-@ perfect final day . Going into the final game of the season , Cobb 's average led Lajoie 's , .383 to .376 . 
 Lajoie and the Naps faced a doubleheader against the St. Louis Browns in Sportsman 's Park , Cleveland 's final two games of the season . After a sun @-@ hindered fly ball went for a stand @-@ up triple and another batted ball landed for a cleanly hit single , Lajoie had five subsequent hits – bunt singles dropped in front of rookie third baseman Red Corriden ( whose normal position was shortstop ) , who was playing closer to shallow left field on orders , it has been suggested , of manager Jack O 'Connor . In his second at bat of the second game , Lajoie reached base on another bunt but the runner on first base advanced . According to the rules of that time , the hit was scored a sacrifice and thus , Lajoie did not record an official at bat . He finished the doubleheader a perfect 8 @-@ for @-@ 8 and his batting average increased to .384 , <unk> greater than Cobb 's mark . Although the AL office had not officially announced the results , Lajoie began to receive congratulations from fans and players , including eight of Cobb 's Detroit Tigers teammates . Most players in the league preferred Lajoie 's personality to that of Cobb 's . Coach Harry Howell is reported to have said to the game 's official scorer , E. V. Parish , " to do well by Lajoie . " Howell was reported to have offered a bribe to Parish , which described in Al Stump 's biography of Cobb , was a $ 40 ( $ 981 in current dollar terms ) suit . Parish refused the offer and the resulting uproar ended in O 'Connor and Howell being banned from the major leagues by AL President Ban Johnson . 
 Johnson had the matter investigated , and after having Cobb 's September 24 doubleheader statistics re @-@ checked , discovered only the first game of Cobb 's statistics had been scored , but not the second game , in which he went 2 @-@ for @-@ 3 . This put Cobb 's suggested actual batting average at .385 , again ahead of Lajoie 's . In the end , Johnson ruled that Lajoie 's sacrifice bunt should have been recorded as a hit ( which would have allowed him to go 9 @-@ for @-@ 9 ) but that Cobb 's batting average was greater , recording 196 hits in 509 at bats to Lajoie 's 227 hits in 591 at bats . Johnson asked Chalmers if his company would award an automobile to each player , to which he agreed . Initially Lajoie refused the car but eventually relented and accepted it . Cobb said , " I am glad that I won an automobile and am especially pleased that Lajoie also gets one . I have no one to criticize . I know the games were on the square and I am greatly pleased to know that the affair has ended so nicely . " Lajoie said , " I am quite satisfied that I was treated fairly in every way by President Johnson , but I think the scorer at St. Louis made an error in not crediting me with nine hits . However , I am glad that the controversy is over . I have the greatest respect for Cobb as a batter and am glad of his success . " 
 The Sporting News published an article written by Paul MacFarlane in its April 18 , 1981 , issue where historian Pete Palmer had discovered that while Cobb 's September 24 doubleheader was not correctly tabulated ( perhaps purposefully ) according to the correct date , the second game 's statistics were in fact included in the next day 's ledger , thus incorrectly recording a second 2 @-@ for @-@ 3 performance from Cobb which meant Lajoie 's average was greater . Author James Vail wrote in 2001 : 
 " To date , it seems that no one knows for certain who won that 1910 batting title . Total Baseball , which is now the official major @-@ league record , lists both men at .384 in its seasonal section , but its player register has Lajoie at the same number and Cobb at .383 — so even the various editors of that source do not , or cannot , agree . " Jon Wertheim wrote in Sports Illustrated 100 years after the event , " The statistics for the Detroit players had been crossed out and nullified . Every Detroit player , that is , except one : Ty Cobb . It takes something less than a detective to arrive at the conclusion that at some point Johnson ( or someone in the league office , anyway ) realized the error and decided to conceal it . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Lajoie ended his career with a lifetime .338 batting average . His career total of 3 @,@ 242 hits was the second @-@ most in MLB history at the time of his retirement , behind only Honus Wagner 's total ( 3 @,@ 420 ) . Lajoie 's 2 @,@ 521 hits in the American League was that league 's record until Cobb surpassed his mark . He was among the second group of players elected to the Hall of Fame in 1937 and was later inducted on June 12 , 1939 , when the Hall opened that same year . Lajoie obtained the greatest number of votes as he led induction mates Tris Speaker ( 165 votes ) and Cy Young ( 153 ) with 168 votes ( 83 @.@ 6 percent of ballots ) from the Baseball Writers ' Association of America . Lajoie led all second basemen in the NL in putouts ( 1898 ) and the AL four times in his career ( 1901 , 1903 , 1906 , and 1908 ) . From 1906 – 1908 he led the AL in assists ( amongst second basemen ) . He also led the league in double plays six times in his career . Baseball historian William McNeil rates Lajoie as the game 's greatest second baseman , when combining both offensive and defensive impact . Bill James argues , " In the last 20 years several statistical analysts ... have credited Lajoie with immense defensive value ... this analysis is incorrect . He was a competent fielder , even a good fielder . He was not a defensive superstar . " 
 During spring training before the 1928 season , Lajoie commented on the 1927 New York Yankees . " Of course , you could see a lot of loafing going on but if that club is the greatest of all times , you just know that we had a lot of clubs in my time who were world champions and didn 't know it . " He died in Daytona Beach , Florida in 1959 , at the age of 84 from complications associated with pneumonia . He had fallen in the autumn of 1958 and fractured his arm . His wife had died earlier in 1951 . In 1999 , he ranked number 29 on The Sporting News ' list of the " 100 Greatest Baseball Players " , and was a nominee for the Major League Baseball All @-@ Century Team . 
 Lajoie is mentioned in the poem " Line @-@ Up for Yesterday " by Ogden Nash : 
 = A Dog 's Love = 
 A Dog 's Love is a 1914 American short silent fantasy film with subtitles , directed by Jack Harvey on his directorial debut . It stars Shep the Dog , Helen Badgley , and Arthur Bauer . The film is about a dog who loses his best friend , when a young girl is killed in an automobile accident , and focuses on his emotions in dealing with his loss . Well @-@ received because of its " universally appealing " theme , the dog 's emotions were reported as surpassing the child 's histrionics . 
 The film was shot on one reel by the Thanhouser Company , 1 @,@ 007 feet ( 307 m ) in total . It was shot in standard 35mm and a spherical 1 @.@ 37 : 1 format . It was distributed by the Mutual Film Corporation upon release . Kitty Kelly of The Chicago Tribune called it a " miniature masterpiece . " Copies of the film are in the Museum of Modern Art of New York City and the National Film , Television and Sound Archive of Ottawa film archive . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film opens with an inter @-@ title that reads " Poor little rich girl has no one to play with " and cuts to Baby Helen with her doll , looking out the window . A group of children play Ring a Ring o ' Roses in the yard . Next , Baby Helen goes to tea party set up on the yard and holds her doll , all by herself , with a lonely expression . The neighbor 's dog , Shep comes out of his dog house and barks , and Baby Helen rises with a joyful expression . She takes a piece of a muffin and tosses it through the boxwood hedge separating the two yards . Shep eats the muffin and Helen invites him to her tea party . Shep runs along the hedge and passes through to join her . Helen instructs Shep with her finger and Shep barks in understanding , Helen takes her seat and shares a muffin with Shep . An inter @-@ title announces that a week later , Helen is out on an errand . Helen passes through the hedge and skips down the sidewalk and Shep barks at her . As Helen crosses the street , she is struck by a passing automobile and Shep races to the rescue . He tugs at her dress at the waist and finding that he is unable to move her , runs to Helen 's home and jumps against the screen door , barking repeatedly . As Helen 's parents are summoned , Shep leads them to Helen , where a passerby has scooped up Helen from the middle of the street . All three depart and the scene changes to a dimly lit room with Helen laid on a bed , seemingly dead . Her parents watch over her , with sad faces as a doctor inspects her and folds her arms across her chest . Beyond saving , her parents bury their heads in the pillow next to Helen as the doctor pens a note . Then Shep is shown resting against the side of the door in a feeble and sorrowful looking position . 
 An inter @-@ title confirms Helen 's death by announcing the parents have gone on " a visit to their lost darling " . The scene cuts to a grassy cemetery with lines of tombstones separated by a loose line of two trees . Helen 's parents approach her grave , marked by a group of flowers and a temporary marker at the head . Shep follows behind and pauses by a tree as Helen 's parents kneel and pause to grieve . The camera cuts to Shep , who appears sad with his eyes only half open . After the parents finish grieving , they stand up and walk to the stage left . Shep stays under the tree for a moment before approaching the grave . Through an overheard split , Shep is shown to be reminiscing about the party . The next scene shows Shep back home , lying on his side in apparent despair . His master tries to get Shep to eat some food , but the Collie refuses and turns on his side . His master pets him , confused as to what has his pet troubled so , but he gives up and departs . 
 Another inter @-@ title announces that " Shep makes daily visit to the florist " and shows Shep approach the shop and grabs a bunch of flower in his mouth before running away . Shep returns to her grave and he drops his flowers with the others . Shep looks to the left and sees a woman watering the flowers . Shep takes her watering can and runs back to Helen 's grave . The woman picks up the watering can and waters the flowers and picks up the flower bouquet brought by Shep . An inter @-@ title announces that night has come and it shows Shep lying asleep near the hedge . A ghostly image of Helen , superimposed on the film , appears through hedge and awakens Shep . Helen leads Shep through the cemetery and to her grave . Shep crawls to her grave and lies across the flowers as Helen 's form disappears down into the grave . The camera lingers on Shep before fading . The final inter @-@ title of the film announces " Don 't cry , it 's only make believe " showing Helen , holding flowers and leaning against Shep . This sequence and title may have served as a reminder to children in the audience it was all simply a dramatic story . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Shep the Dog as himself 
 Helen Badgley as Baby Helen 
 Arthur Bauer as Helen 's father 
 <unk> Cooke Benham as Helen 's mother 
 Fannie Bourke as a visitor 
 = = Production = = 
 Child actress Helen Badgley , also known as The Thanhouser <unk> , is described by the Thanhouser Company who made the film as a " precocious child actress who was very comfortable and expressive in front of the camera " . Shep the Dog , also known as The Thanhouser Collie , was a well @-@ trained animal performer who appeared in a number of the company 's films during this period . The dog 's acting , in portraying a range of emotions including " depression " , " groveling pathos " and " joy " , was noted to be superior to the child 's performance . Shep was owned by the film 's director Jack Harvey , but Shep had prior experience working for Vitagraph under Arthur Ashley . While at Vitagraph , Shep received very little coverage and recognition in comparison to Jean , the " Vitagraph Dog " . Evidence suggests that Shep starred in Shep , the Hero . Jack Harvey believed Shep to be almost human , he would direct Shep entirely by voice and would speak to him with " man talk " instead of simple commands . At an unknown , but presumably later date , Shep 's mate of four years , Bessie , became ill and Harvey saw it take a terrible emotional toll on Shep . When Bessie died , Harvey stated it would cause Shep to die of a broken @-@ heart . While A Dog 's Love was released little more than a month before Shep 's death in early November 1914 , two more films had yet to be released . Both The Barrier of Flames and Shep , the Sentinel would be released posthumously . 
 Official musical accompaniment for works of this period were very rare and only one studio , Vitagraph , regularly made suggestions available to exhibitors . Thanhouser 's musical scores were an exception in 1914 , but the scores would only be created for the " Thanhouser Big Productions " such as Joseph in the Land of Egypt . In 1913 and 1914 , cue sheets or musical suggestions could be obtained inexpensively through various industry sources and retained their dominance . Given that these cue sheets were prepared without any specific film in mind , the music would be chosen to match the themes of the film . The film was shot on one reel by the Thanhouser Company , 1 @,@ 007 feet ( 307 m ) in total . It was shot in standard 35mm and a spherical 1 @.@ 37 : 1 format . It was distributed by the Mutual Film Corporation upon release . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The film was well received by film critics and even the passing mentions in The Moving Picture World remarked that it was a good offering with good photography . Jack Harvey 's debut film as a director was well received by the public due to its " universally appealing " theme . Thanhouser writes that the " loyal dog 's attachment to his little girl playmate is treated with pictorial beauty and simple , honest sentiment " , and notes that when it was released on October 4 , 1914 , reviewers praised the " double @-@ exposure passages for their dramatic effectiveness " . Louis Reeves Harrison of The Moving Picture World ' review of the film stated , " This play becomes one of delicate pathos toward the end through some remarkable feats of double exposure , and it is one of beauty throughout because of the acting of a four @-@ year @-@ old tot , Baby Helen , a veritable star in her class . Shep contributes with exceptional intelligence - he is not eternally looking at his master out of scope for a word of command . ... I do not know what director handled this subject , but I suggest he apply his thought visualizations to the human characters of future stories . It is the exhibition of what passes in the minds and hearts of characters that brings an audience into closer sympathy with them and makes tense interest possible when melodrama merely brings a laugh . The double exposures are timed with such skill in this instance that all concerned in their production deserve high praise . They give beauty and dignity to a very simple story . " 
 Kitty Kelly of the The Chicago Tribune wrote , " Two more attractive artists never collaborated in a single production than this star baby and this star dog . Of them it is impossible to say which is the more so , though one demonstrates the maximum of naturalness while the other is an exponent of the maximum of training . ... As a general thing , I disapprove of the agonies of film mortality and its frequent projection of cemetery scenes , but this is one of the situations that must be handed the label ' exception ' . ... The picture is a miniature masterpiece . " Contained within her review Kelly , also mentioned that baby Helen was placed in front of the camera so that even as she lay " dying " that she was still shown to be breathing . Kelly stated that no person would wish for a person to stop breathing for the sake of the film , but noted that it was not the best point of vision , but noted that the scene was well @-@ managed . In Britain , The Bioscope reviewer agreed with other reviewers in finding the film to be , " ... a perfectly delightful little film . Although it is true that its plot , what there is of it , contains nothing very new , it is not merely a conventional dog and child picture of the ordinary type . It is , rather , an exquisite pictorial fancy , charmingly conceived for the most part and charmingly executed throughout . ... The picture is perfectly done , and not even in the ghost scenes toward the end is there anything banal or insincere in it . A film so full of tender sentiments and natural beauty should meet with the warmest of welcomes everywhere . " 
 Today , copies of the film are in the Museum of Modern Art of New York City and the National Film , Television and Sound Archive of Ottawa film archives . The film was released in Thanhouser Classics Volume II : Under the Mutual Banner 1912 @-@ 1914 . For the release , Andrew Crow composed and performed an original music score . 
 = Winter Paralympic Games = 
 The Winter Paralympic Games is an international multi @-@ sport event where athletes with physical disabilities compete . This includes athletes with mobility disabilities , amputations , blindness , and cerebral palsy . The Winter Paralympic Games are held every four years directly following the Winter Olympic Games . The Winter Paralympics are also hosted by the city that hosted the Winter Olympics . The International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) oversees the Winter Paralympics . Medals are awarded in each event : with gold medals for first place , silver for second and bronze for third , following the tradition that the Olympic Games started in 1904 . 
 The Winter Paralympics began in 1976 in Örnsköldsvik , Sweden . Those Games were the first Paralympics ( Summer or Winter ) that featured athletes other than wheelchair athletes . The Games have expanded and grown to be ( along with the Summer Games ) part of the largest international sporting event after the Olympic Games . Given their expansion the need for a very specific classification system has arisen . This system has also given rise to controversy and opened the door for cheating . Winter Paralympians have also been convicted of steroid use and other forms of cheating unique to Paralympic athletes , which has tainted the integrity of the Games . 
 = = History = = 
 The origins of the Winter Paralympics are similar to the Summer Paralympics . Injured soldiers returning from World War II sought sports as an avenue to healing . Organized by Dr. Ludwig Guttmann , sports competitions between British convalescent hospitals began in 1948 and continued until 1960 when a parallel Olympics was held in Rome after the 1960 Summer Olympics . Over 400 wheelchair athletes competed at the 1960 Paralympic Games , which became known as the first Paralympics . 
 Sepp <unk> , a pioneer of snow sports for disabled athletes , was a double @-@ leg amputee Austrian skier who experimented skiing using prosthetics . His work helped pioneer technological advances for people with disabilities who wished to participate in winter sports . Advances were slow and it was not until 1974 that the first official world ski competition for physically impaired athletes , featuring downhill and a cross @-@ country skiing , was held . The first Winter Paralympics were held in 1976 at Örnsköldsvik , Sweden from February 21 – 28 . Alpine and Nordic skiing for amputees and visually impaired athletes where the main events but ice sledge racing was included as a demonstration event . There were 198 participating athletes from 16 countries , and it was the first time athletes with impairments other than wheelchair athletes were permitted to compete . 
 Starting in 1988 the Summer Paralympics were held in the same host city as the Summer Olympic Games . This was due to an agreement reached between the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) and the International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) . The 1992 Winter Paralympics were the first Winter Games to use the same facilities as the Winter Olympics . 
 = = Cheating = = 
 Athletes have cheated by over @-@ representing impairment to have a competitive advantage , and the use of performance @-@ enhancing drugs . German skier Thomas Oelsner became the first Winter Paralympian to test positive for steroids in 2002 . He had won two gold medals in the alpine events but was stripped of his medals . One concern now facing Paralympic officials is the technique of boosting blood pressure , known as autonomic dysreflexia . The increase in blood pressure can improve performance by 15 % and is most effective in the endurance sports such as cross @-@ country skiing . To increase blood pressure athletes will deliberately cause trauma to limbs below a spinal injury . This trauma can include breaking bones , strapping extremities in too tightly and using high @-@ pressured compression stockings . The injury is painless to the athlete but affects the body and impacts the athlete 's blood pressure , as can techniques like allowing the bladder to overfill . 
 = = Disability categories = = 
 The IPC has established six disability categories applying to both the Summer and Winter Paralympics . Athletes with one of these physical disabilities are able to compete in the Paralympics though not every sport can allow for every disability category . 
 Amputee : Athletes with a partial or total loss of at least one limb . 
 Cerebral Palsy : Athletes with non @-@ progressive brain damage , for example cerebral palsy , traumatic brain injury , stroke or similar disabilities affecting muscle control , balance or coordination . 
 Intellectual Disability : Athletes with a significant impairment in intellectual functioning and associated limitations in adaptive behavior . 
 Wheelchair : Athletes with spinal cord injuries and other disabilities which require them to compete in a wheelchair . 
 Visually Impaired : Athletes with vision impairment ranging from partial vision , sufficient to be judged legally blind , to total blindness . 
 Les Autres : Athletes with a physical disability that does not fall strictly under one of the other five categories , such as dwarfism , multiple sclerosis or congenital deformities of the limbs such as that caused by thalidomide ( the name for this category is French for " the others " ) . 
 = = Classifications = = 
 Within the six disability categories the athletes still need to be divided according to their level of impairment . The classification systems differ from sport to sport . The systems are designed to open up Paralympic sports to as many athletes as possible , who can participate in fair competitions against athletes with similar levels of ability . The closest equivalents in able @-@ bodied competitions are age classifications in junior sports , and weight divisions in wrestling , boxing , and weightlifting . Classifications vary in accordance with the different skills required to perform the sport . The biggest challenge in the classification system is how to account for the wide variety and severity of disabilities . As a result , there will always be a range of impairment within a classification . What follows is a list of the Winter Paralympic sports and a general description of how they are classified . 
 Alpine skiing : There are two events in alpine skiing : slalom and giant slalom . Alpine skiing accommodates athletes with the following physical limitations : spinal injury , Cerebral Palsy , amputation , Les Autres and blindness / visual impairment . There are eleven classifications , seven for standing athletes , three for sitting athletes , and three for visually impaired athletes . The divisions are defined by the degree of the athletes ' function and the need for assistive equipment ( prosthesis , ski poles , etc . ) . Snowboard Cross is technically now included in this category , though competition will take place with only limited classifications ( see below ) . 
 Biathlon : Biathlon is a combination of cross @-@ country skiing with target shooting . It requires physical stamina and accurate shooting . The events are open to athletes with physical disabilities and visual impairments . There are fifteen classes in which athletes will be placed depending on their level of function . Twelve divisions are for athletes with a physical impairment and three divisions are for athletes with a visual impairment . The athletes compete together and their finishing times are entered into a formula with their disability class to determine the athletes ' over all finish order . Visually impaired athletes are able to compete through the use of acoustic signals . The signal intensity varies depending upon whether or not the athlete is on target . 
 Cross @-@ country skiing : Cross @-@ country skiing , also known as Nordic skiing is open to athletes with Cerebral Palsy , amputations , the need for a wheelchair , visual impairment and intellectual impairment . There are fifteen classifications , three for visually impaired athletes , nine for standing athletes and three for seated athletes . The divisions are determined in a similar fashion to alpine skiing with attention given to the athletes ' level of function and need for assistive devices . 
 Ice Sledge Hockey : Ice sledge hockey is open only to male competitors with a physical disability in the lower part of their body . The game is played using international hockey rules with some modifications . Athletes sit on sledges with two blades that allow the puck to go beneath the sledge . They also use two sticks , which have a spike @-@ end for pushing and a blade @-@ end for shooting . The athletes are classified into three groups : group 1 is for athletes with no sitting balance or with major impairment in both upper and lower limbs , group 2 is for athletes with some sitting balance and moderate impairment in their extremities and athletes in group 3 have good balance and mild impairment in their upper and lower limbs . 
 Wheelchair curling : Wheelchair curling is a coed team event for athletes with permanent lower limb disabilities that require them to use a wheelchair in their daily lives . Athletes with Cerebral Palsy or Multiple Sclerosis can also play if they use a wheelchair . Delivery of the stone can be by hand release or the use of a pole . There are no classifications in this event except the requirement that all athletes participating must have need for a wheelchair for daily mobility . 
 Para @-@ snowboarding : On 2 May 2012 , the International Paralympic Committee officially sanctioned " para @-@ snowboarding " ( commonly known as adaptive snowboarding ) as a medal event in the 2014 Winter Paralympic Games under Alpine Skiing . There will be men 's and women 's standing snowboard @-@ cross competitions . The IPC currently recognizes two broader sport classes , one for competitors with lower @-@ limb impairments and one for those with upper @-@ limb impairments . Visually impaired classes are not currently recognized and the sport 's debut in the 2014 Sochi Paralympics will feature events for only athletes with lower @-@ limb impairments , who will be permitted to wear a prosthesis . The events will be run in a time trial format ( one rider on course at a time ) , and results within each broad class calculated without factors that adjust raw times based on disability classification ( for example , a hypothetical athlete with a single above @-@ knee amputation will not receive any adjustment to his or her start @-@ to @-@ finish time , even though the lack of a knee and functional quadriceps in one leg can result in an impairment much greater than a hypothetical athlete with a single below @-@ knee amputation but two functional quadriceps ) . However , as the sport develops , the classes will be expanded and / or refined in the future . 
 = = List of Paralympic sports = = 
 A number of different sports have been part of the Paralympic program at one point or another . 
 This color indicates a discontinued sport 
 = = Winter Games = = 
 = Mary Shelley = 
 Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley ( née Godwin ; 30 August 1797 – 1 February 1851 ) was an English novelist , short story writer , dramatist , essayist , biographer , and travel writer , best known for her Gothic novel Frankenstein : or , The Modern Prometheus ( 1818 ) . She also edited and promoted the works of her husband , the Romantic poet and philosopher Percy Bysshe Shelley . Her father was the political philosopher William Godwin , and her mother was the philosopher and feminist Mary Wollstonecraft . 
 After Wollstonecraft 's death less than a month after her daughter Mary was born , Mary was raised by Godwin , who was able to provide his daughter with a rich , if informal , education , encouraging her to adhere to his own liberal political theories . When Mary was four , her father married a neighbour , with whom , as her stepmother , Mary came to have a troubled relationship . 
 In 1814 , Mary began a romance with one of her father 's political followers , the then married Percy Bysshe Shelley . Together with Mary 's stepsister Claire Clairmont , Mary and Shelley left for France and traveled through Europe . Upon their return to England , Mary was pregnant with Percy 's child . Over the next two years , she and Percy faced ostracism , constant debt , and the death of their prematurely born daughter . They married in late 1816 , after the suicide of Percy Shelley 's first wife , Harriet . 
 In 1816 , the couple famously spent a summer with Lord Byron , John William Polidori , and Claire Clairmont near Geneva , Switzerland , where Mary conceived the idea for her novel Frankenstein . The Shelleys left Britain in 1818 for Italy , where their second and third children died before Mary Shelley gave birth to her last and only surviving child , Percy Florence Shelley . In 1822 , her husband drowned when his sailing boat sank during a storm near Viareggio . A year later , Mary Shelley returned to England and from then on devoted herself to the upbringing of her son and a career as a professional author . The last decade of her life was dogged by illness , probably caused by the brain tumour that was to kill her at the age of 53 . 
 Until the 1970s , Mary Shelley was known mainly for her efforts to publish her husband 's works and for her novel Frankenstein , which remains widely read and has inspired many theatrical and film adaptations . Recent scholarship has yielded a more comprehensive view of Mary Shelley ’ s achievements . Scholars have shown increasing interest in her literary output , particularly in her novels , which include the historical novels Valperga ( 1823 ) and Perkin Warbeck ( 1830 ) , the apocalyptic novel The Last Man ( 1826 ) , and her final two novels , Lodore ( 1835 ) and Falkner ( 1837 ) . Studies of her lesser @-@ known works , such as the travel book Rambles in Germany and Italy ( 1844 ) and the biographical articles for Dionysius Lardner 's Cabinet Cyclopaedia ( 1829 – 46 ) , support the growing view that Mary Shelley remained a political radical throughout her life . Mary Shelley 's works often argue that cooperation and sympathy , particularly as practised by women in the family , were the ways to reform civil society . This view was a direct challenge to the individualistic Romantic ethos promoted by Percy Shelley and the Enlightenment political theories articulated by her father , William Godwin . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Mary Shelley was born as Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin in Somers Town , London , in 1797 . She was the second child of the feminist philosopher , educator , and writer Mary Wollstonecraft , and the first child of the philosopher , novelist , and journalist William Godwin . Wollstonecraft died of puerperal fever shortly after Mary was born . Godwin was left to bring up Mary , along with her older half @-@ sister , Fanny Imlay , Wollstonecraft 's child by the American speculator Gilbert Imlay . A year after Wollstonecraft 's death , Godwin published his Memoirs of the Author of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman ( 1798 ) , which he intended as a sincere and compassionate tribute . However , because the Memoirs revealed Wollstonecraft 's affairs and her illegitimate child , they were seen as shocking . Mary Godwin read these memoirs and her mother 's books , and was brought up to cherish her mother 's memory . 
 Mary 's earliest years were happy ones , judging from the letters of William Godwin 's housekeeper and nurse , Louisa Jones . But Godwin was often deeply in debt ; feeling that he could not raise the children by himself , he cast about for a second wife . In December 1801 , he married Mary Jane Clairmont , a well @-@ educated woman with two young children of her own — Charles and Claire . Most of Godwin ’ s friends disliked his new wife , describing her as quick @-@ tempered and quarrelsome ; but Godwin was devoted to her , and the marriage was a success . Mary Godwin , on the other hand , came to detest her stepmother . William Godwin 's 19th @-@ century biographer C. Kegan Paul later suggested that Mrs Godwin had favoured her own children over those of Mary Wollstonecraft . 
 Together , the Godwins started a publishing firm called M. J. Godwin , which sold children 's books as well as stationery , maps , and games . However , the business did not turn a profit , and Godwin was forced to borrow substantial sums to keep it going . He continued to borrow to pay off earlier loans , compounding his problems . By 1809 , Godwin 's business was close to failure , and he was " near to despair " . Godwin was saved from debtor 's prison by philosophical devotees such as Francis Place , who lent him further money . 
 Though Mary Godwin received little formal education , her father tutored her in a broad range of subjects . He often took the children on educational outings , and they had access to his library and to the many intellectuals who visited him , including the Romantic poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge and the former vice @-@ president of the United States Aaron Burr . Godwin admitted he was not educating the children according to Mary Wollstonecraft 's philosophy as outlined in works such as A Vindication of the Rights of Woman ( 1792 ) , but Mary Godwin nonetheless received an unusual and advanced education for a girl of the time . She had a governess , a daily tutor , and read many of her father 's children 's books on Roman and Greek history in manuscript . For six months in 1811 , she also attended a boarding school in Ramsgate . Her father described her at age 15 as " singularly bold , somewhat imperious , and active of mind . Her desire of knowledge is great , and her perseverance in everything she undertakes almost invincible . " 
 In June 1812 , her father sent Mary to stay with the Dissenting family of the radical William Baxter , near Dundee , Scotland . To Baxter , he wrote , " I am anxious that she should be brought up ... like a philosopher , even like a cynic . " Scholars have speculated that she may have been sent away for her health , to remove her from the seamy side of business , or to introduce her to radical politics . Mary Godwin revelled in the spacious surroundings of Baxter 's house and in the companionship of his four daughters , and she returned north in the summer of 1813 for a further stay of 10 months . In the 1831 introduction to Frankenstein , she recalled : " I wrote then — but in a most common @-@ place style . It was beneath the trees of the grounds belonging to our house , or on the bleak sides of the <unk> mountains near , that my true compositions , the airy flights of my imagination , were born and fostered . " 
 = = = Percy Bysshe Shelley = = = 
 Mary Godwin may have first met the radical poet @-@ philosopher Percy Bysshe Shelley in the interval between her two stays in Scotland . By the time she returned home for a second time on 30 March 1814 , Percy Shelley had become estranged from his wife and was regularly visiting Godwin , whom he had agreed to bail out of debt . Percy Shelley 's radicalism , particularly his economic views , which he had imbibed from William Godwin 's Political Justice ( 1793 ) , had alienated him from his wealthy aristocratic family : they wanted him to follow traditional models of the landed aristocracy , and he wanted to donate large amounts of the family 's money to schemes intended to help the disadvantaged . Percy Shelley therefore had difficulty gaining access to money until he inherited his estate , because his family did not want him wasting it on projects of " political justice " . After several months of promises , Shelley announced that he either could not or would not pay off all of Godwin 's debts . Godwin was angry and felt betrayed . 
 Mary and Percy began meeting each other secretly at Mary Wollstonecraft 's grave in St Pancras Churchyard , and they fell in love — she was nearly 17 , he nearly 22 . To Mary 's dismay , her father disapproved , and tried to thwart the relationship and salvage the " spotless fame " of his daughter . At about the same time , Mary 's father learned of Shelley 's inability to pay off the father 's debts . Mary , who later wrote of " my excessive and romantic attachment to my father " , was confused . She saw Percy Shelley as an embodiment of her parents ' liberal and reformist ideas of the 1790s , particularly Godwin 's view that marriage was a repressive monopoly , which he had argued in his 1793 edition of Political Justice but since retracted . On 28 July 1814 , the couple eloped and secretly left for France , taking Mary 's stepsister , Claire Clairmont , with them , but leaving Percy 's pregnant wife behind . 
 After convincing Mary Jane Godwin , who had pursued them to Calais , that they did not wish to return , the trio travelled to Paris , and then , by donkey , mule , carriage , and foot , through a France recently ravaged by war , to Switzerland . " It was acting in a novel , being an incarnate romance , " Mary Shelley recalled in 1826 . As they travelled , Mary and Percy read works by Mary Wollstonecraft and others , kept a joint journal , and continued their own writing . At Lucerne , lack of money forced the three to turn back . They travelled down the Rhine and by land to the Dutch port of <unk> , arriving at Gravesend , Kent , on 13 September 1814 . 
 The situation awaiting Mary Godwin in England was fraught with complications , some of which she had not foreseen . Either before or during the journey , she had become pregnant . She and Percy now found themselves penniless , and , to Mary 's genuine surprise , her father refused to have anything to do with her . The couple moved with Claire into lodgings at Somers Town , and later , Nelson Square . They maintained their intense programme of reading and writing , and entertained Percy Shelley 's friends , such as Thomas Jefferson Hogg and the writer Thomas Love Peacock . Percy Shelley sometimes left home for short periods to dodge creditors . The couple 's distraught letters reveal their pain at these separations . 
 Pregnant and often ill , Mary Godwin had to cope with Percy 's joy at the birth of his son by Harriet Shelley in late 1814 and his constant outings with Claire Clairmont . She was partly consoled by the visits of Hogg , whom she disliked at first but soon considered a close friend . Percy Shelley seems to have wanted Mary Godwin and Hogg to become lovers ; Mary did not dismiss the idea , since in principle she believed in free love . In practice , however , she loved only Percy Shelley and seems to have ventured no further than flirting with Hogg . On 22 February 1815 , she gave birth to a two @-@ months premature baby girl , who was not expected to survive . On 6 March , she wrote to Hogg : 
 My dearest Hogg my baby is dead — will you come to see me as soon as you can . I wish to see you — It was perfectly well when I went to bed — I awoke in the night to give it suck it appeared to be sleeping so quietly that I would not awake it . It was dead then , but we did not find that out till morning — from its appearance it evidently died of convulsions — Will you come — you are so calm a creature & Shelley is afraid of a fever from the milk — for I am no longer a mother now . 
 The loss of her child induced acute depression in Mary Godwin , who was haunted by visions of the baby ; but she conceived again and had recovered by the summer . With a revival in Percy Shelley 's finances after the death of his grandfather , Sir Bysshe Shelley , the couple holidayed in Torquay and then rented a two @-@ storey cottage at Bishopsgate , on the edge of Windsor Great Park . Little is known about this period in Mary Godwin 's life , since her journal from May 1815 to July 1816 is lost . At Bishopsgate , Percy wrote his poem Alastor ; and on 24 January 1816 , Mary gave birth to a second child , William , named after her father , and soon nicknamed " <unk> " . In her novel The Last Man , she later imagined Windsor as a Garden of Eden . 
 = = = Lake Geneva and Frankenstein = = = 
 In May 1816 , Mary Godwin , Percy Shelley , and their son travelled to Geneva with Claire Clairmont . They planned to spend the summer with the poet Lord Byron , whose recent affair with Claire had left her pregnant . The party arrived at Geneva on 14 May 1816 , where Mary called herself " Mrs Shelley " . Byron joined them on 25 May , with his young physician , John William Polidori , and rented the Villa <unk> , close to Lake Geneva at the village of <unk> ; Percy Shelley rented a smaller building called Maison Chapuis on the waterfront nearby . They spent their time writing , boating on the lake , and talking late into the night . 
 " It proved a wet , <unk> summer " , Mary Shelley remembered in 1831 , " and incessant rain often confined us for days to the house " . Sitting around a log fire at Byron 's villa , the company amused themselves with German ghost stories , which prompted Byron to propose that they " each write a ghost story " . Unable to think of a story , young Mary Godwin became anxious : " Have you thought of a story ? I was asked each morning , and each morning I was forced to reply with a mortifying negative . " During one mid @-@ June evening , the discussions turned to the nature of the principle of life . " Perhaps a corpse would be re @-@ animated " , Mary noted , " galvanism had given token of such things " . It was after midnight before they retired , and unable to sleep , she became possessed by her imagination as she beheld the grim terrors of her " waking dream " , her ghost story : 
 She began writing what she assumed would be a short story . With Percy Shelley 's encouragement , she expanded this tale into her first novel , Frankenstein : or , The Modern Prometheus , published in 1818 . She later described that summer in Switzerland as the moment " when I first stepped out from childhood into life " . The story has been fictionalised several times and formed the basis for a number of films . 
 In September 2011 , the astronomer Donald Olson , after a visit to the Lake Geneva villa the previous year , and inspecting data about the motion of the moon and stars , concluded that her waking dream took place " between 2am and 3am " 16 June 1816 , several days after the initial idea by Lord Byron that they each write a ghost story . 
 = = = Authorship of Frankenstein = = = 
 Since Frankenstein was published anonymously in 1818 , readers and critics argued over its origins and the contributions of the two Shelleys to the book . There are differences in the 1818 , 1823 , and 1831 editions , and Mary Shelley wrote , " I certainly did not owe the suggestion of one incident , nor scarcely of one train of feeling , to my husband , and yet but for his incitement , it would never have taken the form in which it was presented to the world . " She wrote that the preface to the first edition was Percy 's work " as far as I can recollect . " James Rieger concluded Percy 's " assistance at every point in the book 's manufacture was so extensive that one hardly knows whether to regard him as editor or minor collaborator " , while Anne K. Mellor later argued Percy only " made many technical corrections and several times clarified the narrative and thematic continuity of the text . " 
 = = = Bath and Marlow = = = 
 On their return to England in September , Mary and Percy moved — with Claire Clairmont , who took lodgings nearby — to Bath , where they hoped to keep Claire ’ s pregnancy secret . At <unk> , Mary Godwin had received two letters from her half @-@ sister , Fanny Imlay , who alluded to her " unhappy life " ; on 9 October , Fanny wrote an " alarming letter " from Bristol that sent Percy Shelley racing off to search for her , without success . On the morning of 10 October , Fanny Imlay was found dead in a room at a Swansea inn , along with a suicide note and a laudanum bottle . On 10 December , Percy Shelley 's wife , Harriet , was discovered drowned in the Serpentine , a lake in Hyde Park , London . Both suicides were hushed up . Harriet ’ s family obstructed Percy Shelley 's efforts — fully supported by Mary Godwin — to assume custody of his two children by Harriet . His lawyers advised him to improve his case by marrying ; so he and Mary , who was pregnant again , married on 30 December 1816 at St Mildred 's Church , Bread Street , London . Mr and Mrs Godwin were present and the marriage ended the family rift . 
 Claire Clairmont gave birth to a baby girl on 13 January , at first called Alba , later Allegra . In March of that year , the Chancery Court ruled Percy Shelley morally unfit to assume custody of his children and later placed them with a clergyman 's family . Also in March , the Shelleys moved with Claire and Alba to Albion House at Marlow , Buckinghamshire , a large , damp building on the river Thames . There Mary Shelley gave birth to her third child , Clara , on 2 September . At Marlow , they entertained their new friends Marianne and Leigh Hunt , worked hard at their writing , and often discussed politics . 
 Early in the summer of 1817 , Mary Shelley finished Frankenstein , which was published anonymously in January 1818 . Reviewers and readers assumed that Percy Shelley was the author , since the book was published with his preface and dedicated to his political hero William Godwin . At Marlow , Mary edited the joint journal of the group 's 1814 Continental journey , adding material written in Switzerland in 1816 , along with Percy 's poem " Mont Blanc " . The result was the History of a Six Weeks ' Tour , published in November 1817 . That autumn , Percy Shelley often lived away from home in London to evade creditors . The threat of a debtor 's prison , combined with their ill health and fears of losing custody of their children , contributed to the couple 's decision to leave England for Italy on 12 March 1818 , taking Claire Clairmont and Alba with them . They had no intention of returning . 
 = = = Italy = = = 
 One of the party 's first tasks on arriving in Italy was to hand Alba over to Byron , who was living in Venice . He had agreed to raise her so long as Claire had nothing more to do with her . The Shelleys then embarked on a roving existence , never settling in any one place for long . Along the way , they accumulated a circle of friends and acquaintances who often moved with them . The couple devoted their time to writing , reading , learning , sightseeing , and socialising . The Italian adventure was , however , blighted for Mary Shelley by the deaths of both her children — Clara , in September 1818 in Venice , and William , in June 1819 in Rome . These losses left her in a deep depression that isolated her from Percy Shelley , who wrote in his notebook : 
 My dearest Mary , wherefore hast thou gone , 
 And left me in this dreary world alone ? 
 Thy form is here indeed — a lovely one — 
 But thou art fled , gone down a dreary road 
 That leads to Sorrow 's most obscure abode . 
 For thine own sake I cannot follow thee 
 Do thou return for mine . 
 For a time , Mary Shelley found comfort only in her writing . The birth of her fourth child , Percy Florence , on 12 November 1819 , finally lifted her spirits , though she nursed the memory of her lost children till the end of her life . 
 Italy provided the Shelleys , Byron , and other exiles with a political freedom unattainable at home . Despite its associations with personal loss , Italy became for Mary Shelley " a country which memory painted as paradise " . Their Italian years were a time of intense intellectual and creative activity for both Shelleys . While Percy composed a series of major poems , Mary wrote the autobiographical novel Matilda , the historical novel Valperga , and the plays Proserpine and Midas . Mary wrote Valperga to help alleviate her father 's financial difficulties , as Percy refused to assist him further . She was often physically ill , however , and prone to depressions . She also had to cope with Percy ’ s interest in other women , such as Sophia Stacey , Emilia Viviani , and Jane Williams . Since Mary Shelley shared his belief in the non @-@ exclusivity of marriage , she formed emotional ties of her own among the men and women of their circle . She became particularly fond of the Greek revolutionary Prince Alexander <unk> and of Jane and Edward Williams . 
 In December 1818 , the Shelleys travelled south with Claire Clairmont and their servants to Naples , where they stayed for three months , receiving only one visitor , a physician . In 1820 , they found themselves plagued by accusations and threats from Paolo and Elise <unk> , former servants whom Percy Shelley had dismissed in Naples shortly after the <unk> had married . The pair revealed that on 27 February 1819 in Naples , Percy Shelley had registered as his child by Mary Shelley a two @-@ month @-@ old baby girl named Elena Adelaide Shelley . The <unk> also claimed that Claire Clairmont was the baby 's mother . Biographers have offered various interpretations of these events : that Percy Shelley decided to adopt a local child ; that the baby was his by Elise , Claire , or an unknown woman ; or that she was Elise 's by Byron . Mary Shelley insisted she would have known if Claire had been pregnant , but it is unclear how much she really knew . The events in Naples , a city Mary Shelley later called a paradise inhabited by devils , remain shrouded in mystery . The only certainty is that she herself was not the child ’ s mother . Elena Adelaide Shelley died in Naples on 9 June 1820 . 
 In the summer of 1822 , a pregnant Mary moved with Percy , Claire , and Edward and Jane Williams to the isolated Villa Magni , at the sea 's edge near the hamlet of San <unk> in the Bay of Lerici . Once they were settled in , Percy broke the " evil news " to Claire that her daughter Allegra had died of typhus in a convent at Bagnacavallo . Mary Shelley was distracted and unhappy in the cramped and remote Villa Magni , which she came to regard as a dungeon . On 16 June , she miscarried , losing so much blood that she nearly died . Rather than wait for a doctor , Percy sat her in a bath of ice to staunch the bleeding , an act the doctor later told him saved her life . All was not well between the couple that summer , however , and Percy spent more time with Jane Williams than with his depressed and debilitated wife . Most of the short poems Shelley wrote at San <unk> were addressed to Jane rather than to Mary . 
 The coast offered Percy Shelley and Edward Williams the chance to enjoy their " perfect plaything for the summer " , a new sailing boat . The boat had been designed by Daniel Roberts and Edward Trelawny , an admirer of Byron 's who had joined the party in January 1822 . On 1 July 1822 , Percy Shelley , Edward Ellerker Williams , and Captain Daniel Roberts sailed south down the coast to Livorno . There Percy Shelley discussed with Byron and Leigh Hunt the launch of a radical magazine called The Liberal . On 8 July , he and Edward Williams set out on the return journey to Lerici with their eighteen @-@ year @-@ old <unk> , Charles Vivian . They never reached their destination . A letter arrived at Villa Magni from Hunt to Percy Shelley , dated 8 July , saying , " pray write to tell us how you got home , for they say you had bad weather after you sailed <unk> & we are anxious " . " The paper fell from me , " Mary told a friend later . " I trembled all over . " She and Jane Williams rushed desperately to Livorno and then to Pisa in the fading hope that their husbands were still alive . Ten days after the storm , three bodies washed up on the coast near Viareggio , midway between Livorno and Lerici . Trelawny , Byron , and Hunt cremated Percy Shelley ’ s corpse on the beach at Viareggio . 
 = = = Return to England and writing career = = = 
 After her husband 's death , Mary Shelley lived for a year with Leigh Hunt and his family in Genoa , where she often saw Byron and transcribed his poems . She resolved to live by her pen and for her son , but her financial situation was precarious . On 23 July 1823 , she left Genoa for England and stayed with her father and stepmother in the Strand until a small advance from her father @-@ in @-@ law enabled her to lodge nearby . Sir Timothy Shelley had at first agreed to support his grandson , Percy Florence , only if he were handed over to an appointed guardian . Mary Shelley rejected this idea instantly . She managed instead to wring out of Sir Timothy a limited annual allowance ( which she had to repay when Percy Florence inherited the estate ) , but to the end of his days he refused to meet her in person and dealt with her only through lawyers . Mary Shelley busied herself with editing her husband 's poems , among other literary endeavours , but concern for her son restricted her options . Sir Timothy threatened to stop the allowance if any biography of the poet were published . In 1826 , Percy Florence became the legal heir of the Shelley estate after the death of his half @-@ brother Charles Shelley , his father 's son by Harriet Shelley . Sir Timothy raised Mary 's allowance from £ 100 a year to £ 250 but remained as difficult as ever . Mary Shelley enjoyed the stimulating society of William Godwin 's circle , but poverty prevented her from socialising as she wished . She also felt ostracised by those who , like Sir Timothy , still disapproved of her relationship with Percy Bysshe Shelley . 
 In the summer of 1824 , Mary Shelley moved to Kentish Town in north London to be near Jane Williams . She may have been , in the words of her biographer Muriel Spark , " a little in love " with Jane . Jane later disillusioned her by gossiping that Percy had preferred her to Mary , owing to Mary 's inadequacy as a wife . At around this time , Mary Shelley was working on her novel , The Last Man ( 1826 ) ; and she assisted a series of friends who were writing memoirs of Byron and Percy Shelley — the beginnings of her attempts to immortalise her husband . She also met the American actor John Howard Payne and the American writer Washington Irving , who intrigued her . Payne fell in love with her and in 1826 asked her to marry him . She refused , saying that after being married to one genius , she could only marry another . Payne accepted the rejection and tried without success to talk his friend Irving into proposing himself . Mary Shelley was aware of Payne 's plan , but how seriously she took it is unclear . 
 In 1827 , Mary Shelley was party to a scheme that enabled her friend Isabel Robinson and Isabel 's lover , Mary Diana Dods , who wrote under the name David Lyndsay , to embark on a life together in France as man and wife . With the help of Payne , whom she kept in the dark about the details , Mary Shelley obtained false passports for the couple . In 1828 , she fell ill with smallpox while visiting them in Paris . Weeks later she recovered , <unk> but without her youthful beauty . 
 During the period 1827 – 40 , Mary Shelley was busy as an editor and writer . She wrote the novels The Fortunes of Perkin Warbeck ( 1830 ) , Lodore ( 1835 ) , and Falkner ( 1837 ) . She contributed five volumes of Lives of Italian , Spanish , Portuguese , and French authors to Lardner 's Cabinet Cyclopaedia . She also wrote stories for ladies ' magazines . She was still helping to support her father , and they looked out for publishers for each other . In 1830 , she sold the copyright for a new edition of Frankenstein for £ 60 to Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley for their new Standard Novels series . After her father 's death in 1836 at the age of eighty , she began assembling his letters and a memoir for publication , as he had requested in his will ; but after two years of work , she abandoned the project . Throughout this period , she also championed Percy Shelley 's poetry , promoting its publication and quoting it in her writing . By 1837 , Percy 's works were well @-@ known and increasingly admired . In the summer of 1838 Edward Moxon , the publisher of Tennyson and the son @-@ in @-@ law of Charles Lamb , proposed publishing a collected works of Percy Shelley . Mary was paid £ 500 to edit the Poetical Works ( 1838 ) , which Sir Timothy insisted should not include a biography . Mary found a way to tell the story of Percy 's life , nonetheless : she included extensive biographical notes about the poems . 
 Mary Shelley continued to treat potential romantic partners with caution . In 1828 , she met and flirted with the French writer Prosper Mérimée , but her one surviving letter to him appears to be a deflection of his declaration of love . She was delighted when her old friend from Italy , Edward Trelawny , returned to England , and they joked about marriage in their letters . Their friendship had altered , however , following her refusal to cooperate with his proposed biography of Percy Shelley ; and he later reacted angrily to her omission of the atheistic section of Queen Mab from Percy Shelley 's poems . Oblique references in her journals , from the early 1830s until the early 1840s , suggest that Mary Shelley had feelings for the radical politician Aubrey Beauclerk , who may have disappointed her by twice marrying others . 
 Mary Shelley 's first concern during these years was the welfare of Percy Florence . She honoured her late husband 's wish that his son attend public school , and , with Sir Timothy 's grudging help , had him educated at Harrow . To avoid boarding fees , she moved to Harrow on the Hill herself so that Percy could attend as a day scholar . Though Percy went on to Trinity College , Cambridge , and dabbled in politics and the law , he showed no sign of his parents ' gifts . He was devoted to his mother , and after he left university in 1841 , he came to live with her . 
 = = = Final years and death = = = 
 In 1840 and 1842 , mother and son travelled together on the continent , journeys that Mary Shelley recorded in Rambles in Germany and Italy in 1840 , 1842 and 1843 ( 1844 ) . In 1844 , Sir Timothy Shelley finally died at the age of ninety , " falling from the stalk like an overblown flower " , as Mary put it . For the first time , she and her son were financially independent , though the estate proved less valuable than they had hoped . 
 In the mid @-@ 1840s , Mary Shelley found herself the target of three separate blackmailers . In 1845 , an Italian political exile called Gatteschi , whom she had met in Paris , threatened to publish letters she had sent him . A friend of her son 's bribed a police chief into seizing Gatteschi 's papers , including the letters , which were then destroyed . Shortly afterwards , Mary Shelley bought some letters written by herself and Percy Bysshe Shelley from a man calling himself G. Byron and posing as the illegitimate son of the late Lord Byron . Also in 1845 , Percy Bysshe Shelley 's cousin Thomas Medwin approached her claiming to have written a damaging biography of Percy Shelley . He said he would suppress it in return for £ 250 , but Mary Shelley refused . 
 In 1848 , Percy Florence married Jane Gibson St John . The marriage proved a happy one , and Mary Shelley and Jane were fond of each other . Mary lived with her son and daughter @-@ in @-@ law at Field Place , Sussex , the Shelleys ' ancestral home , and at Chester Square , London , and accompanied them on travels abroad . 
 Mary Shelley 's last years were blighted by illness . From 1839 , she suffered from headaches and bouts of paralysis in parts of her body , which sometimes prevented her from reading and writing . On 1 February 1851 , at Chester Square , she died at the age of fifty @-@ three from what her physician suspected was a brain tumour . According to Jane Shelley , Mary Shelley had asked to be buried with her mother and father ; but Percy and Jane , judging the graveyard at St Pancras to be " dreadful " , chose to bury her instead at St Peter 's Church , Bournemouth , near their new home at Boscombe . On the first anniversary of Mary Shelley 's death , the Shelleys opened her box @-@ desk . Inside they found locks of her dead children 's hair , a notebook she had shared with Percy Bysshe Shelley , and a copy of his poem Adonaïs with one page folded round a silk parcel containing some of his ashes and the remains of his heart . 
 = = Literary themes and styles = = 
 Mary Shelley lived a literary life . Her father encouraged her to learn to write by composing letters , and her favourite occupation as a child was writing stories . Unfortunately , all of Mary 's juvenilia were lost when she ran off with Percy in 1814 , and none of her surviving manuscripts can be definitively dated before that year . Her first published work is often thought to have been Mounseer Nongtongpaw , comic verses written for Godwin 's Juvenile Library when she was ten and a half ; however , the poem is attributed to another writer in the most recent authoritative collection of her works . Percy Shelley enthusiastically encouraged Mary Shelley 's writing : " My husband was , from the first , very anxious that I should prove myself worthy of my parentage , and enrol myself on the page of fame . He was forever inciting me to obtain literary reputation . " 
 = = = Novels = = = 
 = = = = Autobiographical elements = = = = 
 Certain sections of Mary Shelley 's novels are often interpreted as masked rewritings of her life . Critics have pointed to the recurrence of the father – daughter motif in particular as evidence of this autobiographical style . For example , commentators frequently read Mathilda ( 1820 ) autobiographically , identifying the three central characters as versions of Mary Shelley , William Godwin , and Percy Shelley . Mary Shelley herself confided that she modelled the central characters of The Last Man on her Italian circle . Lord Raymond , who leaves England to fight for the Greeks and dies in Constantinople , is based on Lord Byron ; and the utopian Adrian , Earl of Windsor , who leads his followers in search of a natural paradise and dies when his boat sinks in a storm , is a fictional portrait of Percy Bysshe Shelley . However , as she wrote in her review of Godwin 's novel Cloudesley ( 1830 ) , she did not believe that authors " were merely copying from our own hearts " . William Godwin regarded his daughter 's characters as types rather than portraits from real life . Some modern critics , such as Patricia <unk> and Jane Blumberg , have taken the same view , resisting autobiographical readings of Mary Shelley 's works . 
 = = = = <unk> genres = = = = 
 Mary Shelley employed the techniques of many different novelistic genres , most vividly the Godwinian novel , Walter Scott 's new historical novel , and the Gothic novel . The Godwinian novel , made popular during the 1790s with works such as Godwin 's Caleb Williams ( 1794 ) , " employed a <unk> confessional form to explore the contradictory relations between the self and society " , and Frankenstein exhibits many of the same themes and literary devices as Godwin 's novel . However , Shelley critiques those Enlightenment ideals that Godwin promotes in his works . In The Last Man , she uses the philosophical form of the Godwinian novel to demonstrate the ultimate meaninglessness of the world . While earlier Godwinian novels had shown how rational individuals could slowly improve society , The Last Man and Frankenstein demonstrate the individual 's lack of control over history . 
 Shelley uses the historical novel to comment on gender relations ; for example , Valperga is a feminist version of Scott 's masculinist genre . Introducing women into the story who are not part of the historical record , Shelley uses their narratives to question established theological and political institutions . Shelley sets the male protagonist 's compulsive greed for conquest in opposition to a female alternative : reason and sensibility . In Perkin Warbeck , Shelley 's other historical novel , Lady Gordon stands for the values of friendship , domesticity , and equality . Through her , Shelley offers a feminine alternative to the masculine power politics that destroy the male characters . The novel provides a more inclusive historical narrative to challenge the one which usually relates only masculine events . 
 = = = = Gender = = = = 
 With the rise of feminist literary criticism in the 1970s , Mary Shelley 's works , particularly Frankenstein , began to attract much more attention from scholars . Feminist and psychoanalytic critics were largely responsible for the recovery from neglect of Shelley as a writer . Ellen Moers was one of the first to claim that Shelley 's loss of a baby was a crucial influence on the writing of Frankenstein . She argues that the novel is a " birth myth " in which Shelley comes to terms with her guilt for causing her mother 's death as well as for failing as a parent . Shelley scholar Anne K. Mellor suggests that , from a feminist viewpoint , it is a story " about what happens when a man tries to have a baby without a woman ... [ Frankenstein ] is profoundly concerned with natural as opposed to unnatural modes of production and reproduction " . Victor Frankenstein 's failure as a " parent " in the novel has been read as an expression of the anxieties which accompany pregnancy , giving birth , and particularly maternity . 
 Sandra Gilbert and Susan Gubar argue in their seminal book The Madwoman in the Attic ( 1979 ) that in Frankenstein in particular , Shelley responded to the masculine literary tradition represented by John Milton 's Paradise Lost . In their interpretation , Shelley reaffirms this masculine tradition , including the misogyny inherent in it , but at the same time " conceal [ s ] fantasies of equality that occasionally erupt in monstrous images of rage " . Mary Poovey reads the first edition of Frankenstein as part of a larger pattern in Shelley 's writing , which begins with literary self @-@ assertion and ends with conventional femininity . Poovey suggests that Frankenstein 's multiple narratives enable Shelley to split her artistic persona : she can " express and efface herself at the same time " . Shelley 's fear of self @-@ assertion is reflected in the fate of Frankenstein , who is punished for his egotism by losing all his domestic ties . 
 Feminist critics often focus on how authorship itself , particularly female authorship , is represented in and through Shelley 's novels . As Mellor explains , Shelley uses the Gothic style not only to explore repressed female sexual desire but also as way to " censor her own speech in Frankenstein " . According to Poovey and Mellor , Shelley did not want to promote her own authorial persona and felt deeply inadequate as a writer , and " this shame contributed to the generation of her fictional images of abnormality , perversion , and destruction " . 
 Shelley 's writings focus on the role of the family in society and women 's role within that family . She celebrates the " feminine affections and compassion " associated with the family and suggests that civil society will fail without them . Shelley was " profoundly committed to an ethic of cooperation , mutual dependence , and self @-@ sacrifice " . In Lodore , for example , the central story follows the fortunes of the wife and daughter of the title character , Lord Lodore , who is killed in a duel at the end of the first volume , leaving a trail of legal , financial , and familial obstacles for the two " heroines " to negotiate . The novel is engaged with political and ideological issues , particularly the education and social role of women . It dissects a patriarchal culture that separated the sexes and pressured women into dependence on men . In the view of Shelley scholar Betty T. Bennett , " the novel proposes egalitarian educational paradigms for women and men , which would bring social justice as well as the spiritual and intellectual means by which to meet the challenges life invariably brings " . However , Falkner is the only one of Mary Shelley 's novels in which the heroine 's agenda triumphs . The novel 's resolution proposes that when female values triumph over violent and destructive masculinity , men will be freed to express the " compassion , sympathy , and generosity " of their better natures . 
 = = = = Enlightenment and Romanticism = = = = 
 Frankenstein , like much Gothic fiction of the period , mixes a visceral and alienating subject matter with speculative and thought @-@ provoking themes . Rather than focusing on the twists and turns of the plot , however , the novel foregrounds the mental and moral struggles of the protagonist , Victor Frankenstein , and Shelley imbues the text with her own brand of politicised Romanticism , one that criticised the individualism and egotism of traditional Romanticism . Victor Frankenstein is like Satan in Paradise Lost , and Prometheus : he rebels against tradition ; he creates life ; and he shapes his own destiny . These traits are not portrayed positively ; as Blumberg writes , " his relentless ambition is a self @-@ delusion , clothed as quest for truth " . He must abandon his family to fulfill his ambition . 
 Mary Shelley believed in the Enlightenment idea that people could improve society through the responsible exercise of political power , but she feared that the irresponsible exercise of power would lead to chaos . In practice , her works largely criticise the way 18th @-@ century thinkers such as her parents believed such change could be brought about . The creature in Frankenstein , for example , reads books associated with radical ideals but the education he gains from them is ultimately useless . Shelley 's works reveal her as less optimistic than Godwin and Wollstonecraft ; she lacks faith in Godwin 's theory that humanity could eventually be perfected . 
 As literary scholar Kari <unk> writes , The Last Man , more so than Frankenstein , " in its refusal to place humanity at the center of the universe , its questioning of our privileged position in relation to nature ... constitutes a profound and prophetic challenge to Western humanism . " Specifically , Mary Shelley 's allusions to what radicals believed was a failed revolution in France and the Godwinian , <unk> , and Burkean responses to it , challenge " Enlightenment faith in the inevitability of progress through collective efforts " . As in Frankenstein , Shelley " offers a profoundly disenchanted commentary on the age of revolution , which ends in a total rejection of the progressive ideals of her own generation " . Not only does she reject these Enlightenment political ideals , but she also rejects the Romantic notion that the poetic or literary imagination can offer an alternative . 
 = = = = Politics = = = = 
 Critics have until recently cited Lodore and Falkner as evidence of increasing conservatism in Mary Shelley 's later works . In 1984 , Mary Poovey influentially identified the retreat of Mary Shelley ’ s reformist politics into the " separate sphere " of the domestic . Poovey suggested that Mary Shelley wrote Falkner to resolve her conflicted response to her father 's combination of libertarian radicalism and stern insistence on social decorum . Mellor largely agreed , arguing that " Mary Shelley grounded her alternative political ideology on the metaphor of the peaceful , loving , bourgeois family . She thereby implicitly endorsed a conservative vision of gradual evolutionary reform . " This vision allowed women to participate in the public sphere but it inherited the inequalities inherent in the bourgeois family . 
 However , in the last decade or so this view has been challenged . For example , Bennett claims that Mary Shelley 's works reveal a consistent commitment to Romantic idealism and political reform and Jane Blumberg 's study of Shelley 's early novels argues that her career cannot be easily divided into radical and conservative halves . She contends that " Shelley was never a passionate radical like her husband and her later lifestyle was not abruptly assumed nor was it a betrayal . She was in fact challenging the political and literary influences of her circle in her first work . " In this reading , Shelley 's early works are interpreted as a challenge to Godwin and Percy Bysshe Shelley 's radicalism . Victor Frankenstein 's " thoughtless rejection of family " , for example , is seen as evidence of Shelley 's constant concern for the domestic . 
 = = = Short stories = = = 
 In the 1820s and 1830s , Mary Shelley frequently wrote short stories for gift books or annuals , including sixteen for The Keepsake , which was aimed at middle @-@ class women and bound in silk , with gilt @-@ edged pages . Mary Shelley 's work in this genre has been described as that of a " hack writer " and " wordy and pedestrian " . However , critic Charlotte Sussman points out that other leading writers of the day , such as the Romantic poets William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge , also took advantage of this profitable market . She explains that " the annuals were a major mode of literary production in the 1820s and 1830s " , with The Keepsake the most successful . 
 Many of Shelley 's stories are set in places or times far removed from early 19th @-@ century Britain , such as Greece and the reign of Henry IV of France . Shelley was particularly interested in " the fragility of individual identity " and often depicted " the way a person 's role in the world can be <unk> altered either by an internal emotional upheaval , or by some supernatural occurrence that mirrors an internal schism " . In her stories , female identity is tied to a woman 's short @-@ lived value in the marriage market while male identity can be sustained and transformed through the use of money . Although Mary Shelley wrote twenty @-@ one short stories for the annuals between 1823 and 1839 , she always saw herself , above all , as a novelist . She wrote to Leigh Hunt , " I write bad articles which help to make me miserable — but I am going to plunge into a novel and hope that its clear water will wash off the mud of the magazines . " 
 = = = Travelogues = = = 
 When they ran off to France in the summer of 1814 , Mary Godwin and Percy Shelley began a joint journal , which they published in 1817 under the title History of a Six Weeks ' Tour , adding four letters , two by each of them , based on their visit to Geneva in 1816 , along with Percy Shelley 's poem " Mont Blanc " . The work celebrates youthful love and political idealism and consciously follows the example of Mary Wollstonecraft and others who had combined travelling with writing . The perspective of the History is philosophical and reformist rather than that of a conventional travelogue ; in particular , it addresses the effects of politics and war on France . The letters the couple wrote on the second journey confront the " great and extraordinary events " of the final defeat of Napoleon at Waterloo after his " Hundred Days " return in 1815 . They also explore the sublimity of Lake Geneva and Mont Blanc as well as the revolutionary legacy of the philosopher and novelist Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau . 
 Mary Shelley 's last full @-@ length book , written in the form of letters and published in 1844 , was Rambles in Germany and Italy in 1840 , 1842 and 1843 , which recorded her travels with her son Percy Florence and his university friends . In Rambles , Shelley follows the tradition of Mary Wollstonecraft 's Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark and her own A History of a Six Weeks ' Tour in mapping her personal and political landscape through the discourse of sensibility and sympathy . For Shelley , building sympathetic connections between people is the way to build civil society and to increase knowledge : " knowledge , to enlighten and free the mind from clinging deadening prejudices — a wider circle of sympathy with our fellow @-@ creatures ; — these are the uses of travel " . Between observations on scenery , culture , and " the people , especially in a political point of view " , she uses the travelogue form to explore her roles as a widow and mother and to reflect on revolutionary nationalism in Italy . She also records her " pilgrimage " to scenes associated with Percy Shelley . According to critic Clarissa Orr , Mary Shelley 's adoption of a persona of philosophical motherhood gives Rambles the unity of a prose poem , with " death and memory as central themes " . At the same time , Shelley makes an egalitarian case against monarchy , class distinctions , slavery , and war . 
 = = = Biographies = = = 
 Between 1832 and 1839 , Mary Shelley wrote many biographies of notable Italian , Spanish , Portuguese , and French men and a few women for Dionysius Lardner 's Lives of the Most Eminent Literary and Scientific Men . These formed part of Lardner 's Cabinet Cyclopaedia , one of the best of many such series produced in the 1820s and 1830s in response to growing middle @-@ class demand for self @-@ education . Until the republication of these essays in 2002 , their significance within her body of work was not appreciated . In the view of literary scholar Greg <unk> , they reveal Mary Shelley 's " prodigious research across several centuries and in multiple languages " , her gift for biographical narrative , and her interest in the " emerging forms of feminist historiography " . Shelley wrote in a biographical style popularised by the 18th @-@ century critic Samuel Johnson in his Lives of the Poets ( 1779 – 81 ) , combining secondary sources , memoir and anecdote , and authorial evaluation . She records details of each writer 's life and character , quotes their writing in the original as well as in translation , and ends with a critical assessment of their achievement . 
 For Shelley , biographical writing was supposed to , in her words , " form as it were a school in which to study the philosophy of history " , and to teach " lessons " . Most frequently and importantly , these lessons consisted of criticisms of male @-@ dominated institutions such as primogeniture . Shelley emphasises domesticity , romance , family , sympathy , and compassion in the lives of her subjects . Her conviction that such forces could improve society connects her biographical approach with that of other early feminist historians such as Mary Hays and Anna Jameson . Unlike her novels , most of which had an original print run of several hundred copies , the Lives had a print run of about 4 @,@ 000 for each volume : thus , according to <unk> , Mary Shelley 's " use of biography to forward the social agenda of women 's historiography became one of her most influential political interventions " . 
 = = = Editorial work = = = 
 Soon after Percy Shelley 's death , Mary Shelley determined to write his biography . In a letter of 17 November 1822 , she announced : " I shall write his life — & thus occupy myself in the only manner from which I can derive consolation . " However , her father @-@ in @-@ law , Sir Timothy Shelley , effectively banned her from doing so . Mary began her fostering of Percy 's poetic reputation in 1824 with the publication of his Posthumous Poems . In 1839 , while she was working on the Lives , she prepared a new edition of his poetry , which became , in the words of literary scholar Susan J. Wolfson , " the <unk> event " in the history of her husband 's reputation . The following year , Mary Shelley edited a volume of her husband 's essays , letters , translations , and fragments , and throughout the 1830s , she introduced his poetry to a wider audience by publishing assorted works in the annual The Keepsake . 
 Evading Sir Timothy 's ban on a biography , Mary Shelley often included in these editions her own annotations and reflections on her husband 's life and work . " I am to justify his ways , " she had declared in 1824 ; " I am to make him beloved to all posterity . " It was this goal , argues Blumberg , that led her to present Percy 's work to the public in the " most popular form possible " . To tailor his works for a Victorian audience , she cast Percy Shelley as a lyrical rather than a political poet . As Mary Favret writes , " the disembodied Percy identifies the spirit of poetry itself " . Mary glossed Percy 's political radicalism as a form of sentimentalism , arguing that his republicanism arose from sympathy for those who were suffering . She inserted romantic anecdotes of his benevolence , domesticity , and love of the natural world . Portraying herself as Percy 's " practical muse " , she also noted how she had suggested revisions as he wrote . 
 Despite the emotions stirred by this task , Mary Shelley arguably proved herself in many respects a professional and scholarly editor . Working from Percy 's messy , sometimes indecipherable , notebooks , she attempted to form a chronology for his writings , and she included poems , such as <unk> , addressed to Emilia Viviani , which she would rather have left out . She was forced , however , into several compromises , and , as Blumberg notes , " modern critics have found fault with the edition and claim variously that she <unk> , misinterpreted , purposely obscured , and attempted to turn the poet into something he was not " . According to Wolfson , Donald Reiman , a modern editor of Percy Bysshe Shelley 's works , still refers to Mary Shelley 's editions , while acknowledging that her editing style belongs " to an age of editing when the aim was not to establish accurate texts and scholarly apparatus but to present a full record of a writer 's career for the general reader " . In principle , Mary Shelley believed in publishing every last word of her husband 's work ; but she found herself obliged to omit certain passages , either by pressure from her publisher , Edward Moxon , or in deference to public propriety . For example , she removed the atheistic passages from Queen Mab for the first edition . After she restored them in the second edition , Moxon was prosecuted and convicted of blasphemous libel , though he escaped punishment . Mary Shelley 's omissions provoked criticism , often stinging , from members of Percy Shelley 's former circle , and reviewers accused her of , among other things , indiscriminate inclusions . Her notes have nevertheless remained an essential source for the study of Percy Shelley 's work . As Bennett explains , " biographers and critics agree that Mary Shelley 's commitment to bring Shelley the notice she believed his works merited was the single , major force that established Shelley 's reputation during a period when he almost certainly would have faded from public view " . 
 = = Reputation = = 
 In her own lifetime , Mary Shelley was taken seriously as a writer , though reviewers often missed her writings ' political edge . After her death , however , she was chiefly remembered as the wife of Percy Bysshe Shelley and as the author of Frankenstein . In fact , in the introduction to her letters published in 1945 , editor Frederick Jones wrote , " a collection of the present size could not be justified by the general quality of the letters or by Mary Shelley 's importance as a writer . It is as the wife of [ Percy Bysshe Shelley ] that she excites our interest . " This attitude had not disappeared by 1980 when Betty T. Bennett published the first volume of Mary Shelley 's complete letters . As she explains , " the fact is that until recent years scholars have generally regarded Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley as a result : William Godwin 's and Mary Wollstonecraft 's daughter who became Shelley 's Pygmalion . " It was not until Emily Sunstein 's Mary Shelley : Romance and Reality in 1989 that a full @-@ length scholarly biography was published . 
 The attempts of Mary Shelley 's son and daughter @-@ in @-@ law to " <unk> " her memory by censoring biographical documents contributed to a perception of Mary Shelley as a more conventional , less reformist figure than her works suggest . Her own timid omissions from Percy Shelley 's works and her quiet avoidance of public controversy in her later years added to this impression . Commentary by Hogg , Trelawny , and other admirers of Percy Shelley also tended to downplay Mary Shelley 's radicalism . Trelawny 's Records of Shelley , Byron , and the Author ( 1878 ) praised Percy Shelley at the expense of Mary , questioning her intelligence and even her authorship of Frankenstein . Lady Shelley , Percy Florence 's wife , responded in part by presenting a severely edited collection of letters she had inherited , published privately as Shelley and Mary in 1882 . 
 From Frankenstein 's first theatrical adaptation in 1823 to the cinematic adaptations of the 20th century , including the first cinematic version in 1910 and now @-@ famous versions such as James Whale 's 1931 Frankenstein , Mel Brooks ' 1974 Young Frankenstein , and Kenneth Branagh 's 1994 Mary Shelley 's Frankenstein , many audiences first encounter the work of Mary Shelley through adaptation . Over the course of the 19th century , Mary Shelley came to be seen as a one @-@ novel author at best , rather than as the professional writer she was ; most of her works have remained out of print until the last thirty years , obstructing a larger view of her achievement . In recent decades , the republication of almost all her writing has stimulated a new recognition of its value . Her habit of intensive reading and study , revealed in her journals and letters and reflected in her works , is now better appreciated . Shelley 's conception of herself as an author has also been recognised ; after Percy 's death , she wrote of her authorial ambitions : " I think that I can maintain myself , and there is something <unk> in the idea . " Scholars now consider Mary Shelley to be a major Romantic figure , significant for her literary achievement and her political voice as a woman and a liberal . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 History of a Six Weeks ' Tour ( 1817 ) 
 Frankenstein ; or , The Modern Prometheus ( 1818 ) 
 Mathilda ( 1819 ) 
 Valperga ; or , The Life and Adventures of Castruccio , Prince of Lucca ( 1823 ) 
 Posthumous Poems of Percy Bysshe Shelley ( 1824 ) 
 The Last Man ( 1826 ) 
 The Fortunes of Perkin Warbeck ( 1830 ) 
 Lodore ( 1835 ) 
 Falkner ( 1837 ) 
 The Poetical Works of Percy Bysshe Shelley ( 1839 ) 
 Contributions to Lives of the Most Eminent Literary and Scientific Men ( 1835 – 39 ) , part of Lardner 's Cabinet Cyclopaedia 
 Rambles in Germany and Italy in 1840 , 1842 , and 1843 ( 1844 ) 
 Collections of Mary Shelley 's papers are housed in Lord Abinger 's Shelley Collection on deposit at the Bodleian Library , the New York Public Library ( particularly The Carl H. Pforzheimer Collection of Shelley and His Circle ) , the Huntington Library , the British Library , and in the John Murray Collection . 
 = Enter the Dominatrix = 
 Enter the Dominatrix is a downloadable content pack for the 2013 video game Saints Row IV . It tells an alternate story of the alien Zin invasion , different than the main game . The dialogue often breaks the fourth wall and its style is self @-@ referential in nature . Enter the Dominatrix draws on its history as originally produced as downloadable content for the game 's predecessor , Saints Row : The Third . It was first announced on April Fool 's Day in 2012 , later confirmed , and then cancelled to be incorporated into Saints Row IV , which drew on some aspects of the original idea and left the rest for this downloadable content . It was released on October 22 , 2013 to mixed or average reviews . Critics appreciated the pack 's treatment of its own history , what Eurogamer 's Chris Schilling called a " very postmodern conceit " . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Enter the Dominatrix tells an alternative story on the Zin invasion of Saints Row IV where the simulation of Steelport is hijacked by a rogue artificial intelligence called the Dominatrix . The pack draws on its origins as Saints Row : The Third downloadable content that was later delayed and repackaged . It also frequently breaks the fourth wall — its story 's incongruence with the larger Saints Row story is a recurring theme , where the characters self @-@ referentially acknowledge the plot holes . The story advances through cutscene clips presented as " unseen footage " found by television journalist Jane <unk> , as " what could have been " . Some scenes end in concept art or videos of Volition employees acting out the drama so as to give the game an unfinished feel . The pack also casts characters from Saints Row : The Third who did not return in the sequel . The player fights the Dominatrix — who appears as a cross between Maleficent and a sex worker — several times . Other missions include using telekinesis to cage furries at a sex club and a BDSM chariot race . There are five missions in total . The pack introduces new weapons such as a heavy minigun , a flamethrower , a grenade launcher , new vehicles , and new computer @-@ controlled support characters ( " homies " ) . Up to two players can play cooperatively . 
 = = Development = = 
 THQ announced an Enter the Dominatrix standalone expansion for Saints Row : The Third as an April Fool 's joke in 2012 . It was confirmed as in development the next month , with the basic plot where the alien commander Zinyak imprisons the Saints ' leader in The Dominatrix simulation of Steelport so as to prevent interference when he takes over the planet . The expansion also was to add superpowers for the player character . In June , THQ said the expansion would be wrapped into a full sequel , tentatively titled " The Next Great Sequel in the Saints Row Franchise " and scheduled for release in 2013 . The parts of that expansion that weren 't incorporated into the sequel ( Saints Row IV ) were later released as this downloadable content for the new title . It was developed by Volition , published by Deep Silver , and released October 22 , 2013 . Enter the Dominatrix was followed by the " How the Saints Saved Christmas " downloadable content pack . High Voltage Software ported the full game and all of its downloadable content to PlayStation 4 and Xbox One as Saints Row 4 : Re @-@ Elected , which was released in North America on January 20 , 2015 , and worldwide three days later . A Linux port is planned for release in 2015 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Enter the Dominatrix received " mixed or average reviews " , according to video game review score aggregator Metacritic . Chris Schilling of Eurogamer , citing the game 's development history , called Enter the Dominatrix " a fascinating case study in how games evolve " . Electronic Gaming Monthly 's Eric Patterson also commented on how downloadable content in the industry is seen as content pulled from the retail release to be sold as an addition , which Enter the Dominatrix 's development history flips on its head . He added that in all of his industry experience , he had never otherwise seen a developer purposefully let its fans play " shelved " content , and thus found the experience " fascinating " . Official Xbox Magazine 's Mikel Reparaz said it was fun to see what " could have been " . 
 Eurogamer 's Schilling called the self @-@ referential nature of the release a " very postmodern conceit " , which he thought worked well despite the dual faux pas of parodying The Matrix and overtly " satirizing game mechanics " . He felt that the satire was not good , though the writing was " genuinely funny " , and that the repeated Dominatrix fight scenes should not have felt as low budget . He recommended the pack for those who love " wry gags about creaky gaming tropes with the occasional belly laugh " , and said he had a better time finding his own fun than playing through the missions . Patterson of Electronic Gaming Monthly noted that those who are looking for cost benefit would be disappointed by lack of content , especially those who had already finished the main game , but he was interested in Enter the Dominatrix for its behind @-@ the @-@ scenes aspects , which he encouraged other developers to use more often . 
 = The Elder Scrolls V : Skyrim = 
 The Elder Scrolls V : Skyrim is an open world action role @-@ playing video game developed by Bethesda Game Studios and published by Bethesda Softworks . It is the fifth installment in The Elder Scrolls series , following The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion . Skyrim was released worldwide on November 11 , 2011 , for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 , and Xbox 360 . Three downloadable content ( DLC ) add @-@ ons were released — Dawnguard , Hearthfire , and Dragonborn — which were repackaged into The Elder Scrolls V : Skyrim – Legendary Edition , which was released on June 4 , 2013 . The Elder Scrolls V : Skyrim – Special Edition . A remastered version of the game will be released for the Xbox One and PlayStation 4 on October 28 , 2016 . It will come with full mod support , all three DLC expansions , and a complete graphical upgrade . 
 Skyrim 's main story revolves around the player character and their effort to defeat Alduin the World @-@ Eater , a dragon who is prophesied to destroy the world . The game is set two hundred years after the events of Oblivion and takes place in the fictional province of Skyrim . Over the course of the game , the player completes quests and develops the character by improving skills . Skyrim continues the open world tradition of its predecessors by allowing the player to travel anywhere in the game world at any time , and to ignore or postpone the main storyline indefinitely . 
 The game was developed using the Creation Engine , rebuilt specifically for the game . The team opted for a unique and more diverse game world than Oblivion 's Cyrodiil , which game director and executive producer Todd Howard considered less interesting by comparison . Skyrim was released to critical acclaim , with reviewers particularly mentioning the character development and setting , and is considered to be one of the greatest video games of all time . The game shipped over seven million copies to retailers within the first week of its release , and sold over 20 million copies across all three platforms . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The Elder Scrolls V : Skyrim is an action role @-@ playing game , playable from either a first or third @-@ person perspective . The player may freely roam over the land of Skyrim , which is an open world environment consisting of wilderness expanses , dungeons , cities , towns , fortresses and villages . Players may navigate the game world more quickly by riding horses , or by utilizing a fast @-@ travel system which allows them to warp to previously discovered locations . The game 's main quest can be completed or ignored at the player 's preference after the first stage of the quest is finished . However , some quests rely on the main storyline being at least partially completed . Non @-@ player characters ( NPCs ) populate the world and can be interacted with in a number of ways ; the player may engage them in conversation , marry an eligible NPC , or kill them . As in previous The Elder Scrolls games , killing certain NPCs can make some quests or items unobtainable . Some NPCs cannot be killed . If witnessed , crimes like murder and theft accrue the player bounty points in each of the world 's nine holds . Should the player be stopped by a guard , they may wipe their bounty with gold or jail time , or may resist arrest which will trigger an aggressive pursuit . NPCs may allocate the player additional side @-@ quests , and some side @-@ quests have parameters adjusted based on nearby dungeons which the player has yet to explore . Some NPCs who are befriended or hired by the player may act as companions who will accompany the player and provide aid in combat . The player may choose to join factions , which are organized groups of NPCs -- such as the Dark Brotherhood , a band of assassins -- or the player may choose to destroy them . Each of the factions has an associated quest path to progress through . Each city and town in the game world each has an economy which the player can stimulate by completing jobs such as farming . 
 Players have the option to develop their character . At the beginning of the game , players create their character by selecting one of several races , including humans , orcs , elves and anthropomorphic cat or lizard @-@ like creatures , and then customizing their character 's appearance . Over the course of the game , players improve their character 's skills , which are numerical representations of their ability in certain areas . There are eighteen skills divided evenly among the three schools of combat , magic , and stealth . When players have trained skills enough to meet the required experience , their character levels up . Each time their character levels , the players may choose to select a skill @-@ specific ability called a perk , or to store perk points for later use . Earlier entries in The Elder Scrolls series used a character class system to determine which skills would contribute to the character 's leveling , but Skyrim allows players to discover preferred skills as they play the game and rewards them with more experience when a frequently used skill is leveled . A head @-@ up display ( HUD ) appears when any of the player 's three main attributes are being depleted . Attributes regenerate over time , although this process can be accelerated by using potions or regenerative spells . Health is depleted primarily when the player takes damage , and the loss of all health results in death . <unk> is depleted by the use of spells , certain poisons and by being struck by lightning @-@ based attacks . Stamina determines the player 's effectiveness in combat and is depleted by sprinting , power attacking , and being struck by frost @-@ based attacks . The player 's inventory can be accessed from the menu and items can be viewed in 3D , which may prove essential in solving puzzles found in dungeons . 
 The player 's effectiveness in combat relies on the use of weapons and armor , which may be bought , found and created at forges , and magic , which may be bought or unlocked by finding spell tomes . Weapons and magic are assigned to each hand , allowing for dual @-@ wielding , and can be swapped out through a quick @-@ access menu of favorite items . Shields can be used to fend off enemy attacks and reduce incurred damage , or offensively through bashing attacks . Blunt , bladed and hacking weapons can be used in close combat and each have specific advantages and roles ; for example , the player can perform power attacks with each weapon . Magic can be used in the form of spells , which have several functions , such as the regeneration of health or the depletion of enemy health . A bow and arrow may be utilized in long @-@ range combat , but the bow can be used as a defensive melee weapon in close combat , by " bashing " . The player can enter sneak mode and pickpocket , or deliver sneak attacks to unsuspecting enemies . 
 When exploring the game world , the player may encounter wildlife . Many creatures in the wilderness are immediately hostile towards the player . However , game animals such as elk and deer will simply run away . Skyrim is the first entry in The Elder Scrolls to include Dragons in the game 's wilderness . Like other creatures , Dragons are generated randomly in the world and will engage in combat with NPCs , creatures and the player . Some Dragons may attack cities and towns when in their proximity . The player character can absorb the souls of Dragons in order to use powerful spells called " Dragon Shouts " , or " Thu 'um " . Each Shout contains three words in the language spoken by Dragons , and the strength of the Shout will vary depending on how many words have been spoken . The words to Shouts can be learned by visiting " Word Walls " in dungeons or around the continent . The words to each shout are unlocked for use by spending the absorbed souls of slain Dragons . A regeneration period limits the player 's use of Shouts in gameplay . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Skyrim is set 200 years after the events of Oblivion , though it is not a direct sequel . The game takes place in Skyrim , a province of the Empire on the continent of Tamriel , amid a civil war between two factions . The Stormcloaks , led by Jarl Ulfric Stormcloak , are made up of Skyrim 's native Nord race . Their goal is an independent Skyrim free from Imperial interference . The Imperial Legion , led by General Tullius , is the military of the Empire that opposes the Stormcloaks and seeks to reunite and pacify the province . 
 The main story begins with the imprisoned player being led to an Imperial execution in the town of Helgen , alongside a thief , several Stormcloak soldiers and their leader , Ulfric Stormcloak , who murdered the High King of Skyrim with his voice . Alduin , a large black dragon , unexpectedly interrupts the procession , attacking and destroying the town before the player can be executed . The player escapes and journeys to the nearby town of Riverwood , whose residents are now fearful that the dragon could strike their town as well at any moment . Riverwood also serves as a tutorial village in that the player can forge items , trade goods , practice alchemy , and receive miscellaneous quests . The player is asked to make their way to the city of Whiterun , to request aid from the city 's Jarl against the dragon threat . Jarl <unk> the Greater accepts . He also directs the player to his court wizard , who asks the player to retrieve the Dragonstone , an ancient artifact that shows the location of ancient dragon burial sites . No dragons will be generated until the player returns to Whiterun , with the exception of Helgen , during the beginning of the storyline . 
 The player returns to Whiterun with the Dragonstone , only to learn that another dragon has appeared near the city . After slaying the dragon with assistance from the city 's guards , the player unexpectedly absorbs the dragon 's soul which grants them the ability to perform a magical ability called a " Thu 'um " , or Shout . The city 's guards are astonished , and inform the player that they must be a Dragonborn , a mortal born with the soul and power of a dragon . After returning to the Jarl with news of the dragon 's defeat , the player is summoned to meet with the Greybeards , an order of monks who live in seclusion in their temple of High Hrothgar on the slopes of Skyrim 's tallest mountain , the Throat of the World . 
 The Greybeards further train the player in the " Way of the Voice " , teaching the player more powerful Thu <unk> and instructing the player on their destiny and role as the Dragonborn . The player learns that Skyrim 's civil war is the last in a sequence of prophetic events foretold by the Elder Scrolls , which also predicted the return of Alduin , the first dragon and the Nordic god of destruction . Alduin is prophesied to destroy the races of Men and Mer , and consume the world . The player character is the latest and likely last " <unk> " , or Dragonborn . <unk> are anointed by the gods to help fend off the threat Alduin and other dragons pose to Tamriel . 
 The Greybeards task the player with retrieving the legendary Horn of Jurgen <unk> in the marshes of <unk> as a final test . However , the player discovers the Horn has been stolen , and the culprit wishes to meet with the Dragonborn . The thief reveals herself as Delphine , Riverwood 's innkeeper . Delphine admits that she set up the player in retrieving the Dragonstone . Delphine wants the Dragonborn to prove their power before explaining her actions , and they head to the village of <unk> , where a dragon burial mound is supposedly located . Once there , the player and Delphine witness Alduin reviving a dragon from the burial mound and defeat the dragon . Delphine later reveals that she is one of the last surviving members of the Blades — an order of bodyguards sworn to protect Dragonborn Imperial Emperors , and before that , they were sworn to kill dragons . She explains that the Blades have been out of purpose for centuries with no Dragonborn Emperor , and now with the player character being the next Dragonborn , the organization has finally regained its purpose . Afterwards , Malborn , who Delphine tells the player to meet at Solitude to help you , helps the player infiltrate the Thalmor Embassy near the city of Solitude , the headquarters of the <unk> Dominion in Skyrim , to follow up on her suspicions about the Thalmor 's possible involvement with the dragon threat . While there , the player discover the Thalmor are searching for a man named Esbern , an archivist of the Blades Order , then the Thalmor tell the player to surrender or they will kill Malborn , but Malborn attacks the soldiers and the player has the opportunity to save Malborn though it is not necessary . After escaping the Thalmor Embassy , Delphine then instructs the player to locate Esbern , known to be hiding in the sewers and <unk> of the city of <unk> . 
 The player character accompanies the Blades in search of Alduin 's Wall , a prophetic <unk> located in an ancient Blades fortress known as Sky Haven Temple . While the Blades set up in the temple , the player character learns that the ancient Nords used a special Thu 'um against Alduin called " <unk> " , representing mankind 's comprehensive hatred for the dragons , to cripple his ability to fly so they could engage him . To gain more information , the player meets the ancient dragon Paarthurnax , the leader of the Greybeards who was once one of Alduin 's most feared generals . Paarthurnax reveals that Alduin was not truly defeated in the past , but was cast into the currents of time by the use of an Elder Scroll in the hope was that he would never reemerge . The player manages to locate the Elder Scroll within the ancient <unk> ruin of <unk> and uses it to peer through a window in time , when Alduin was first defeated , learning the powerful <unk> Shout to combat Alduin . 
 Armed with the knowledge of how the ancient Nords defeated Alduin , the player battles Alduin on the summit of the Throat of the World . <unk> by the player , Alduin flees to Sovngarde , the Nordic afterlife . The player learns that Dragonsreach , the palace of the Jarl of Whiterun , was originally built to trap and hold a dragon . The Jarl refuses to allow the player to utilize Dragonsreach and possibly endanger the city if the civil war between the Stormcloaks and the Imperial Legion still rages . With the help of the Greybeards , the player calls a council between General Tullius — the Imperial Legion 's commander — and Ulfric Stormcloak , successfully calling for a temporary armistice while the dragon threat exists . If the civil war <unk> has been completed beforehand , thus ending the war , the Jarl eventually agrees with persuasion . 
 The player summons and traps a dragon named <unk> in Dragonsreach , learning from him that Alduin has fled to Sovngarde through a portal located high in the <unk> Mountains , at an ancient fort called Skuldafn . <unk> , impressed with the player 's Thu 'um and ability to capture him , agrees to fly the player to Skuldafn , claiming Alduin has shown himself as weak and undeserving of leadership over the dragon race . Upon arrival at Skuldafn , the player fights their way up to the portal to Sovngarde . Upon entering Sovngarde , the player travels to the Hall of Valor and meets with <unk> , the legendary Nord who , along with his Five Hundred Companions , drove the Elves out of Skyrim . <unk> informs the player that Alduin has placed a " soul snare " in Sovngarde , allowing him to gain strength by devouring the souls of deceased Nords arriving there . The player meets up with the three heroes of Nordic legend who defeated Alduin originally , and , with their help , destroys the soul snare and defeats Alduin once more . 
 If the player did not kill Paarthurnax in an earlier side quest , an alternate conclusion is given . The player returns to the summit of the Throat of the World in which Paarthurnax and several other dragons wait . Paarthurnax explains that even though Alduin is defeated , they are in no condition to celebrate for he was once their ally and is still one of their kin . Having asserted his authority over many dragons , Paarthurnax declares that the remainder of the dragons will " submit to his Thu 'um " , suggesting he wants to take Alduin 's place as the leader of the dragons in order to teach them the Way of the Voice . 
 = = Development = = 
 Having completed work on Oblivion in 2006 , Bethesda Game Studios began work on Fallout 3 . It was during this time that the team began planning their next The Elder Scrolls game . From the outset , they had decided to set the new entry in the land of Skyrim , incorporating Dragons into the main theme of the game . Full development begun following the release of Fallout 3 in 2008 ; the developers considered Skyrim a spiritual successor to both Fallout 3 and previous The Elder Scrolls games . The game was developed by a team of roughly 100 people composed of new talent as well as of the series ' veterans . The production was supervised by Todd Howard , who was the director of many titles released by Bethesda Softworks . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The team set the game in the province of Skyrim , designing it by hand . While similar in size to Oblivion 's game world of Cyrodiil , the mountainous topography of the world inflates the game space and makes it more difficult to traverse than Cyrodiil , which was relatively flat . In designing Skyrim 's world , the team opted for a different approach to what was taken with Oblivion ; art director Matt <unk> considered the " epic @-@ realism " of Skyrim 's world design as a departure from Oblivion 's generic representation of classic European fantasy lore . Howard expressed the team 's desire to re @-@ encapsulate the " wonder of discovery " of Morrowind 's game world in Skyrim , as the return to the classic fantasy of Arena and The Elder Scrolls II : Daggerfall in Oblivion meant sacrificing a world with a unique culture . As a way of creating diversity in the world , the team divided the world into nine sectors , known as holds , and attempted to make each hold feel topographically unique from another ; in addition , the team wanted to reflect the socioeconomic background of the NPCs by making some locations elaborate and wealthy while others are poorer and lower @-@ tech . 
 The team sought to make each of the game 's ten races feel unique ; Howard considered that the player 's choosing of a race at the beginning of the game is a more important decision than it has been in previous The Elder Scrolls games because the culture of Skyrim 's world contains more racism . However , he iterated that the player 's choice of race does not have major game @-@ affecting consequences as it simply adds " flavor " in different NPCs ' dispositions towards the player , and is not meant as a way of locking players out of particular quests . Efforts to making Skyrim 's world feel hand @-@ crafted extended to the team abandoning the use of generated landscapes as they had done in Oblivion . While one team member was charged with designing dungeons in Oblivion , Skyrim 's 150 dungeons were designed by a small team of eight people . Skyrim features 244 quests and over 300 points of interest . 
 = = = Engine = = = 
 Skyrim is powered by Bethesda 's Creation Engine , created specifically for Skyrim . After Fallout 3 's release , the team devised numerous design objectives to meet for Skyrim , and as Howard described , the team " got all those done and kept going " . Had the team not been able to meet their design goals with current hardware , they would have waited for the next generation and released Skyrim then , but , as Howard felt , the current technology did not hold the team back at all . The Creation Engine allows for numerous improvements in graphical fidelity over Bethesda 's previous efforts . For example , the draw distance renders farther than in previous The Elder Scrolls games ; Howard provided an example where the player can stare at a small object such as a fork in detail , and then look up at a mountain and run to the top of it . Dynamic lighting allows shadows to be created by any structure or item in the game world , and the Creation Engine allowed for greater detail in flora production than SpeedTree had in previous Bethesda games . For example , with Bethesda 's own technology , the team were able to give weight to the branches of trees which affect how trees blow in the wind ; in addition , the technology allows wind to affect the flow of water in channels such as rivers and streams . Because of the large presence of snow in Skyrim 's game world , the technological upgrades were applied to weather effects and allow for dynamic snow fall upon the terrain , instead of snow that was rendered as a textural effect in previous games . 
 The team made use of Havok 's Behavior toolset for character animation , which allows for a greater fluidity between the character 's movements of walking , running and sprinting , and also increases the efficiency of the third @-@ person camera option which had been criticized in Oblivion . The toolset allows interactions between the player and NPCs to take place in real @-@ time ; in Oblivion , when the player went to interact with an NPC , time would freeze and the camera would zoom in on the NPC 's face . In Skyrim , NPCs can move around and make body gestures while conversing with the player . Children are present in the game , and their presence is handled similarly as in Fallout 3 in that they cannot be harmed by the player in any way since depictions of violence involving children in video games is a controversial and largely @-@ debated issue . Skyrim makes use of the Radiant AI artificial intelligence system that was created for Oblivion , and it has been updated to allow NPCs to " do what they want under extra parameters " . The updated system allows for greater interaction between NPCs and their environments ; NPCs can perform tasks such as farming , milling and mining in the game world , and will react with each other . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 The team employed Jeremy Soule , who previously worked on Morrowind and Oblivion , to compose the music for Skyrim . " Dragonborn " , the game 's main theme , was recorded with a choir of over thirty people , singing in the fictional Dragon language . Creative director Todd Howard envisioned the theme for Skyrim as The Elder Scrolls theme sung by a choir of barbarians . This became a reality when the idea was passed by Soule , who recorded the 30 @-@ man choir and layered three separate recordings to create the effect of 90 voices . The language , <unk> , was created by Bethesda 's concept artist Adam Adamowicz , and he developed a 34 @-@ character runic alphabet for the game . The lexicon of <unk> was expanded as needed ; as lead designer Bruce Nesmith explained , words were introduced to the lexicon " every time [ the studio wanted ] to say something " . 
 A physical @-@ only release consisting of four audio CDs was released alongside the game on November 11 , 2011 . As with the previous two entries in the series , the soundtrack to Skyrim is sold via Jeremy Soule 's distributor DirectSong . All physical copies ordered via DirectSong were personally autographed by Soule . " Day One " pre @-@ orders from Amazon.de also included a five track promotional Skyrim soundtrack sampler . A digital version of the soundtrack was released via iTunes on January 31 , 2013 . 
 = = Marketing and release = = 
 Skyrim was first announced at the Los Angeles Convention Center in Los Angeles , California , on December 11 , 2010 . The center was the host of Spike 's annual Video Game Awards ; Howard appeared on stage during the awards and presented its announcement trailer , which introduced the game 's story and revealed its " 11 – 11 – 11 " release date . It was the cover story for the February 2011 issue of the Game Informer magazine , wherein journalist Matt Miller wrote a fifteen @-@ page article that revealed the first details about the game 's story and gameplay . Asked about downloadable content ( DLC ) packages in a June 2011 interview , Howard expressed that it was the team 's intention to release DLC packages after having done so for previous releases ; he revealed that it was the team 's goal to release a lower number of DLC packages that were larger in content than those released for Fallout 3 , as he felt that releasing a larger number of low @-@ content packages was " chaotic " . Via a press release , the team announced that the first two planned DLC packages would release on the Xbox 360 via Xbox Live a month ahead of PCs and the PlayStation 3 system . At the 2011 QuakeCon conference , the team unveiled Skyrim 's special edition package . Bundled with a copy of the game is a map of the game world , a 12 @-@ inch figurine of Alduin , as well as a 200 @-@ page concept art book and a DVD feature about the making of Skyrim . 
 In October 2011 pictures of many pages of the manual of the game were leaked , later followed by footage from the introduction , revealing some more details . By November 1 , 2011 , a copy of the Xbox 360 version had been leaked and made available through the internet , allowing people with a hacked Xbox 360 to play Skyrim 10 days before its official release . In the Netherlands , the game has been available for purchase since November 7 . On November 10 stores in Australia began selling the game ahead of its release on November 11 . 
 A compilation package called The Elder Scrolls V : Skyrim – Legendary Edition was released on June 4 , 2013 . It contains the 1 @.@ 9 patch , and the three expansions along with the main game . On June 4 , 2016 , Bethesda announced The Elder Scrolls V : Skyrim – Special Edition , a remaster for PlayStation 4 , Xbox One and Windows . It is scheduled to be released on October 28 , 2016 . Windows players who own the original game and all of its downloadable content will be offered the Special Edition for free . 
 = = = Additional content = = = 
 A wide variety of both official and fan @-@ created modifications are available for Skyrim , generally made using the packaged Creation Kit . These mods might be distributed freely on file sharing sites like the Skyrim Nexus , or officially aggregated via the Steam Workshop 's controlled content distribution mechanism . The mods include features such as more vibrant night sky , new lighting systems , new characters and locations , user interface updates , and more . The first official Skyrim modification was The Fall of the Space Core , Vol . 1 , created by Bethesda in collaboration with Valve Corporation . It causes the Space Core – a fictional device from Valve 's video game Portal 2 – to fall from the sky and land in a burnt @-@ out house near Whiterun . The Space Core ( voiced by Nolan North ) acts as a non @-@ player character , following the player around the world of Skyrim and dispensing space @-@ related comments . 
 Dawnguard , the first downloadable add @-@ on for Skyrim , revolves around a battle between the Dawnguard and Clan <unk> . The Dawnguard , a band of vampire hunters , rely on the use of their trademark crossbow weapons in their pursuit against Clan <unk> , a family of vampires . Early in Dawnguard 's quest line , players must choose which faction they join forces with . Dawnguard adds new content to the game including weapons , magic and armor , and expands the abilities afforded to players who choose to become either a vampire or a werewolf . It also adds two new areas outside of the main land of Skyrim to explore — the Soul Cairn , a plane of the realm Oblivion , and the Forgotten Vale , a secluded glacial valley . Dawnguard released on the Xbox 360 in English @-@ speaking territories on June 26 , 2012 , and in European countries in mid @-@ July 2012 . Via the digital distribution platform Steam , Dawnguard released for Windows on August 2 , 2012 . Performance issues on the PlayStation 3 platform hampered Dawnguard 's , and subsequent content add @-@ ons ' , release on it . Dawnguard eventually released on the PlayStation 3 on February 26 , 2013 in North America and on February 27 , 2013 , in Europe . 
 Hearthfire , Skyrim 's second add @-@ on , allows players to build houses and adopt children . Three plots of land are added to the game world , which players can purchase . Once land is purchased , players select rooms to add on to the basic template of the house , built from raw materials like lumber and clay which can be harvested or purchased . Players may also adopt up to two children and have them live with the player 's spouse in their houses . Hearthfire released for the Xbox 360 on September 4 , 2012 and for Windows on October 4 , 2012 . It later released for PlayStation 3 on February 19 , 2013 in North America and February 20 , 2013 in Europe . 
 Dragonborn is the third and final add @-@ on for Skyrim . It revolves around the player character 's efforts to defeat <unk> , the first Dragonborn who has become corrupted and seeks to control the world . The add @-@ on takes place on the island of Solstheim , the land of the Dark Elves , which like Skyrim is presented as an open world . It adds new content to the game and allows players to ride on the backs of Dragons , along with other shouts that can be learned exclusively from Solstheim . Dragonborn released for the Xbox 360 on December 4 , 2012 , for Windows on February 5 , 2013 , and for PlayStation 3 on February 12 , 2013 . 
 In April 2013 , Bethesda announced via their blog that they were " moving on " from Skyrim and preparing to work on other projects . They added that they would only be releasing " minor updates " for the game . 
 = = = Technical issues = = = 
 At the launch of Skyrim , many technical issues ranging in severity were being reported . Some examples include a texture down @-@ scaling issue on the Xbox 360 version when the game was run from the hard drive ; crashes , slowdown and frame rate issues on the PlayStation 3 version when save files exceeded 6 MB , commonly occurring due to extended game play times ; and various crashes and slowdowns on the Windows version . According to Skyrim 's director Todd Howard , the conception of ' restrictive RAM ' is incorrect : " It 's literally the things you 've done in what order and what 's running . " 
 Since release several patches have been published to address technical issues and improve overall gameplay . Patch 1 @.@ 2 was released on November 29 , 2011 , to fix some of the game 's issues ; however , some players reported new bugs in the game following the patch , including more frequent game crashes . Patch 1 @.@ 3 was released on December 7 , 2011 , to improve stability , further address known issues , and fix some problems that were introduced in version 1 @.@ 2 . Patch 1 @.@ 4 was released on February 1 , 2012 , for the PC . Another list of issues and bugs were addressed in this patch as well as the Skyrim launcher support for Skyrim Workshop ( PC ) . Patch 1 @.@ 5 was released on March 20 , 2012 , for the PC . Numerous bugs were fixed , as well as the inclusion of new archery / spellcasting <unk> . On April 12 , 2012 , Bethesda announced that Kinect support would be coming for the Xbox 360 version of Skyrim . It features more than 200 voice commands . Patch 1 @.@ 6 was released on May 24 , 2012 , for the PC . This includes a new feature – mounted combat . Patch 1 @.@ 7 was released on July 30 , 2012 , for the PC , and 1 @.@ 8 was released on November 1 , 2012 , for the PC . These two introduced only minor bugfixes . Patch 1 @.@ 9 was released on March 18 , 2013 . In addition to providing various bug fixes , this patch also added new features , most namely the new ' Legendary ' difficulty and ' Legendary ' skills . 
 An unofficial community patch , the Unofficial Skyrim Patch , tries to fix remaining issues unattended by the official patches . The latest version , released in June 2015 , lists hundreds of gameplay , quest , and other bugs as fixed in the game and its add @-@ ons . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Skyrim received critical acclaim upon release . The removal of the character class system from previous The Elder Scrolls entries was well received . Billy Shibley of Machinima 's Inside Gaming and Charles Onyett of IGN praised its removal because it allowed players to experiment with different skills without having to make decisions about a class early in the game . John Bedford of Eurogamer opined that by removing the character class system , the game tailored to players wanting to build an all @-@ around character , while still letting other players specialize in a preferred play @-@ style . Steve Butts of The Escapist considered the addition of perks to the character development system " a great method to make your character feel even more unique and personal " . Kevin VanOrd of GameSpot praised the way perks allowed for the player 's preferred skills to become more powerful over time , stating that the perk system " forms around the way you play , but allows for tweaking so that you retain a sense of control " . The user interface ( UI ) that navigates the player 's items and spells was also praised by reviewers for its accessibility ; Bedford complimented its " elegant design " which succeeded Oblivion 's cumbersome UI . 
 The art style of the game world drew acclaim from many reviewers , who welcomed the departure from Oblivion 's Cyrodiil . Jason Schreier of Wired described the land of Skyrim as a " Viking @-@ inspired treasure trove of flavor and charm " , noting its contrast to Cyrodiil which he considered generic by comparison . The Staff at Edge magazine described Cyrodiil as a " patchwork of varying terrains " , praising the more consistent design of Skyrim . Shibley praised " the lack of copy @-@ and @-@ paste level design that 's plagued Bethesda 's previous games , [ ... ] giving a lived @-@ in and handcrafted look to the world " . Bedford noted that the improved graphical fidelity over Oblivion allowed the game world to feel more lifelike , praising the " misty mountain setting , complete with swirling fog and high @-@ altitude snowstorms " . An editor for PC PowerPlay praised the diversity of the dungeon design . Andrew Reiner of Game Informer cited criticisms Oblivion faced for repetitive dungeons , noting that " the composition of each dungeon is largely unique and individualized " in Skyrim . He also favored the design choice to have a quick route out of a dungeon leading from its last room , eliminating the problem he identified Oblivion as having where the player would clear a dungeon and then have to go all the way back to the beginning to exit it . Many reviewers praised the large amount of things to do in the world away from the main story . Tom Francis of PC Gamer opined that it was difficult to explore the world without becoming distracted by things to do , explaining that " it 's hard to walk for a minute in any direction without encountering an intriguing cave , a lonely shack , some strange stones , a wandering traveller , a haunted fort " . 
 Reviewers welcomed the ability to dual @-@ wield weapons and magic . An editor for PC PowerPlay felt that the dual @-@ wielding ability " transforms the tactical scope of each combat encounter " . Shibley noted that the dual @-@ wielding option gave the player more freedom to experiment with combat , explaining that " the ability to apply a spell to each hand [ ... ] generates huge potential for getting creative with your spell combinations " . However , many reviewers were critical of the melee combat , feeling that it had not been improved upon as much as other areas in the game . Justin McElroy of Joystiq explained that " what should be thrilling fights in Skyrim are often weighed down by the same clunky melee system Oblivion suffered from " . Onyett described melee combat as " flat " and " floaty " , and that " many times it feels like you 're slicing air instead of a mythical creature 's flesh " . Francis agreed with this sentiment , explaining that " too much of the time , you wave your weapon around and enemies barely react to the hits " . 
 Many reviewers noted glitches while playing Skyrim , some game @-@ breaking . Nick Cowen of The Guardian pointed out that the game 's glitches were a trade @-@ off for its ambitious scope , himself experiencing glitches that forced him to reload earlier saves . Edge began their review by criticizing the lack of polish , while still acknowledging many areas in the game which made up for it . In addition , the quality of the main quest divided some reviewers . While Reiner praised the main quest as " superbly penned " and " Bethesda 's best effort to date " , Butts and Francis criticized the fact that the story was delivered primarily through conversations and quest journals , rather than through the player 's own interactions . While the Dragon battles were well @-@ received , some reviewers observed flaws in the AI for Dragons . Onyett pointed out their " predictable attack patterns " , which Francis agreed with , explaining that " fighting them never changes much : you can just ignore them until they land , then shoot them from a distance when they do " . Reiner felt that due to the repetitiveness of their attack patterns , the Dragons were not challenging enough for low @-@ level players . Edge pointed out a curve in difficulty for players who favored archery and magic , as Dragons were difficult to attack while airborne . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 During the first day of release , Steam showed over 230 @,@ 000 people playing Skyrim concurrently . Within two days of the game 's launch , 3 @.@ 4 million physical copies were sold . Of those sales , 59 % were for the Xbox 360 , 27 % for the PS3 , and 14 % for the PC . In the first week of release , Bethesda stated that 7 million copies of the game had been shipped to retailers worldwide , and that total sales through the following Wednesday were expected to generate an estimated US $ 450 million . By December 16 , 2011 , this had risen to 10 million copies shipped to retail and around US $ 620 million . Additionally , Valve stated that it was the fastest selling game to date on their Steam platform . Steam 's statistics page showed the client breaking a five million user record by having 5 @,@ 012 @,@ 468 users logged in January 2 , 2012 . Total number of sold copies on the PC platform is difficult to confirm because Valve does not publicly publish digital sales . During this time , Skyrim was the most @-@ played game on Steam by a huge margin , with double the number of players as Team Fortress 2 , the second @-@ placed game . In the United Kingdom , Skyrim was the 9th best selling title of 2012 . In June 2013 , Bethesda announced that over 20 million copies of the game had been sold . Regarding sales on the PC , Todd Howard stated in an interview with Rock , Paper , Shotgun that " Skyrim did better than we 've ever done on PC by a large , large number . And that 's where the mods are . That feeds the game for a long time . " Electronic Entertainment Design and Research , a market research firm , estimates that the game has sold 22 @.@ 7 million copies worldwide . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Skyrim received awards from various gaming sites and publications . IGN and GameSpot named Skyrim " PC Game of the Year " . It also received GameSpot 's " Readers ' Choice " award . The game received the " RPG of the Year " award from Spike TV , IGN , X @-@ Play , GameSpot and GameSpy . It received " Overall Game of the Year " wins from Spike TV , Giant Bomb , X @-@ Play , Machinima.com , GameSpot , 1UP.com , Game Revolution , GameSpy Joystiq and the Interactive Achievement Awards . It was voted No.1 in Good Game 's top 100 video games of all time and No.1 in PC Gamer 's " The 100 Greatest PC Games of All Time " . 
 = USS Alaska ( CB @-@ 1 ) = 
 USS Alaska ( CB @-@ 1 ) was the lead ship of the Alaska class of large cruisers which served with the United States Navy during the end of World War II . She was the first of two ships of her class to be completed , followed only by Guam ; four other ships were ordered but were not completed before the end of the war . Alaska was the third vessel of the US Navy to be named after what was then the territory of Alaska . She was laid down on 17 December 1941 , ten days after the outbreak of war , was launched in August 1943 by the New York Shipbuilding Corporation , in Camden , New Jersey , and was commissioned in June 1944 . She was armed with a main battery of nine 12 in ( 300 mm ) guns in three triple turrets and had a top speed of 33 kn ( 61 km / h ; 38 mph ) . 
 Due to being commissioned late in the war , Alaska saw relatively limited service . She participated in operations off Iwo Jima and Okinawa in February – July 1945 , including providing anti @-@ aircraft defense for various carrier task forces and conducting limited shore bombardment operations . She shot down several Japanese aircraft off Okinawa , including a possible Ohka piloted missile . In July – August 1945 she participated in sweeps for Japanese shipping in the East China and Yellow Seas . After the end of the war , she assisted in the occupation of Korea and transported a contingent of US Army troops back to the United States . She was decommissioned in February 1947 and placed in reserve , where she remained until she was stricken in 1960 and sold for scrapping the following year . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Alaska was authorized under the Fleet Expansion Act on 19 July 1940 , and ordered on 9 September . On 17 December 1941 she was laid down at New York Shipbuilding in Camden , New Jersey . She was launched on 15 August 1943 , sponsored by the wife of the governor of Alaska , after which fitting @-@ out work was effected . The ship was completed by June 1944 , and was commissioned into the US Navy on 17 June , under the command of Captain Peter K. Fischler . 
 The ship was 808 feet 6 inches ( 246 @.@ 43 m ) long overall and had a beam of 91 ft 1 in ( 27 @.@ 76 m ) and a draft of 31 ft 10 in ( 9 @.@ 70 m ) . She displaced 29 @,@ 779 long tons ( 30 @,@ 257 t ) as designed and up to 34 @,@ 253 long tons ( 34 @,@ 803 t ) at full combat load . The ship was powered by four @-@ shaft General Electric geared steam turbines and eight oil @-@ fired Babcock & Wilcox boilers rated at 150 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 110 @,@ 000 kW ) , generating a top speed of 33 knots ( 61 km / h ; 38 mph ) . The ship had a cruising range of 12 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 22 @,@ 000 km ; 14 @,@ 000 mi ) at a speed of 15 kn ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . She carried four OS2U Kingfisher or SC Seahawk seaplanes , with a pair of steam catapults mounted amidships . 
 The ship was armed with a main battery of nine 12 inch L / 50 Mark 8 guns in three triple gun turrets , two in a superfiring pair forward and one aft of the superstructure . The secondary battery consisted of twelve 5 @-@ inch L / 38 dual @-@ purpose guns in six twin turrets . Two were placed on the centerline superfiring over the main battery turrets , fore and aft , and the remaining four turrets were placed on the corners of the superstructure . The light anti @-@ aircraft battery consisted of 56 quad @-@ mounted 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) Bofors guns and 34 single @-@ mounted 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) Oerlikon guns . A pair of Mk 34 gun directors aided gun laying for the main battery , while two Mk 37 directors controlled the 5 @-@ inch guns and a Mk 57 director aided the 40 mm guns . The main armored belt was 9 in ( 229 mm ) thick , while the gun turrets had 12 @.@ 8 in ( 325 mm ) thick faces . The main armored deck was 4 in ( 102 mm ) thick . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After her commissioning , Alaska steamed down to Hampton Roads , escorted by the destroyers Simpson and Broome . The ship was then deployed for a shakedown cruise , first in the Chesapeake Bay and then into the Caribbean , off Trinidad . On the cruise she was escorted by the destroyers Bainbridge and Decatur . After completing the cruise Alaska returned to the Philadelphia Navy Yard for some minor alterations , including the installation of four Mk 57 fire control directors for her 5 @-@ inch guns . On 12 November she left Philadelphia in the company of the destroyer @-@ minelayer Thomas E. Fraser , bound for two weeks of sea trials off Guantanamo Bay , Cuba . On 2 December she left Cuba for the Pacific , transiting the Panama Canal two days later , and reaching San Diego on 12 December . There her gun crews trained for shore bombardment and anti @-@ aircraft fire . 
 = = = Pacific deployment = = = 
 On 8 January 1945 , Alaska left California for Hawaii , arriving in Pearl Harbor on 13 January . There she participated in further training and was assigned to Task Group 12 @.@ 2 , which departed for Ulithi on 29 January . The Task Group reached Ulithi on 6 February and was merged into Task Group 58 @.@ 5 , part of Task Force 58 , the Fast Carrier Task Force . Task Group 58 @.@ 5 was assigned to provide anti @-@ aircraft defense for the aircraft carriers ; Alaska was assigned to the carriers Enterprise and Saratoga . The fleet sailed for Japan on 10 February to conduct air strikes against Tokyo and the surrounding airfields . The Japanese did not attack the fleet during the operation . Alaska was then transferred to Task Group 58 @.@ 4 and assigned to support the assault on Iwo Jima . She served in the screen for the carriers off Iwo Jima for nineteen days , after which time she had to return to Ulithi to replenish fuel and supplies . 
 Alaska remained with TG 58 @.@ 4 for the Battle of Okinawa . She was assigned to screen the carriers Yorktown and Intrepid ; the fleet left Ulithi on 14 March and reached its operational area southeast of Kyushu four days later . The first air strikes on Okinawa began that day , and claimed 17 Japanese aircraft destroyed on the ground . Here , Alaska finally saw combat , as the Japanese launched a major air strike on the American fleet . Her anti @-@ aircraft gunners destroyed a Yokosuka <unk> bomber attempting to crash into Intrepid . Shortly thereafter , Alaska was warned that American aircraft were in the vicinity . About ten minutes later , her gunners spotted an unidentified aircraft , approaching in what they thought was a threatening manner ; they shot down what turned out to be an F6F Hellcat fighter , though the pilot was uninjured . Later that afternoon , Alaska shot down a second Japanese bomber , a Yokosuka D4Y . 
 The following day , the carrier Franklin was badly damaged by several bomb hits and a kamikaze . Alaska and her sister Guam , two other cruisers , and several destroyers were detached to create Task Group 58 @.@ 2 @.@ 9 to escort the crippled Franklin back to Ulithi . On the voyage back to port , another D4Y bomber attacked Franklin , though the ships were unable to shoot it down . Gunfire from one of the 5 @-@ inch guns accidentally caused flash burns on several men standing nearby ; these were the only casualties suffered by her crew during the war . Alaska then took on the role of fighter director ; using her anti @-@ air search radar she vectored fighters to intercept and destroy a Kawasaki Ki @-@ 45 heavy fighter . On 22 March , the ships reached Ulithi and Alaska was detached to rejoin TG 58 @.@ 4 . 
 After returning to her unit , Alaska continued to screen for the aircraft carriers off Okinawa . On 27 March she was detached to conduct a bombardment of Minamidaitō . She was joined by Guam , two light cruisers , and Destroyer Squadron 47 . On the night of 27 – 28 March , she fired forty @-@ five 12 @-@ inch shells and three hundred and fifty @-@ two 5 @-@ inch rounds at the island . The ships rejoined TG 58 @.@ 4 at a refueling point , after which they returned to Okinawa to support the landings when they began on 1 April . On the evening of 11 April , Alaska shot down one Japanese plane , assisted in the destruction of another , and claimed what might have been an Ohka piloted rocket @-@ bomb . On 16 April , the ship shot down another three aircraft and assisted with three others . Throughout the rest of the month , her heavy anti @-@ aircraft fire succeeded in driving off Japanese bombers . 
 Alaska then returned to Ulithi to resupply , arriving on 14 May . She was then assigned to TG 38 @.@ 4 , the reorganized carrier task force . The fleet then returned to Okinawa , where Alaska continued in her anti @-@ aircraft defense role . On 9 June , she and Guam bombarded Oki Daitō . TG 38 @.@ 4 then steamed to San Pedro Bay in the Leyte Gulf for rest and maintenance ; the ship remained there from 13 June until 13 July , when she was assigned to Cruiser Task Force 95 along with her sister Guam , under the command of Rear Admiral Francis S. Low . On 16 July , Alaska and Guam conducted a sweep into the East China and Yellow Seas to sink Japanese shipping vessels . They had only limited success , however , and returned to the fleet on 23 July . They then joined a major raid , which included three battleships and three escort carriers , into the estuary of the Yangtze River off Shanghai . Again , the operation met with limited success . 
 = = = Post @-@ war operations = = = 
 In the course of her service during World War II , Alaska was awarded three battle stars . On 30 August Alaska left Okinawa for Japan to participate in the 7th Fleet occupation force . She arrived in Incheon , Korea on 8 September and supported Army operations there until 26 September , when she left for Tsingtao , China , arriving the following day . There , she supported the 6th Marine Division until 13 November , when she returned to Incheon to take on Army soldiers as part of Operation Magic Carpet , the mass repatriation of millions of American servicemen from Asia and Europe . Alaska left Incheon with a contingent of soldiers bound for San Francisco . After reaching San Francisco , she left for the Atlantic , via the Panama Canal , which she transited on 13 December . The ship arrived in the Boston Navy Yard on 18 December , where preparations were made to place the ship in reserve . She left Boston on 1 February 1946 for Bayonne , New Jersey , where she would be berthed in reserve . She arrived there the following day , and on 13 August , she was removed from active service , though she would not be decommissioned until 17 February 1947 . 
 = = = Conversion proposals = = = 
 In 1958 , the Bureau of Ships prepared two feasibility studies to see if Alaska and Guam were suitable to be converted to guided missile cruisers . The first study involved removing all of the guns in favor of four different missile systems . At $ 160 million this was seen as too costly , so a second study was conducted . This study left the forward batteries — the two 12 ″ triple turrets and three of the 5 " dual turrets — in place and added a reduced version of the first plan for the aft . This would have cost $ 82 million , and was still seen as too cost @-@ prohibitive . As a result , the conversion proposal was abandoned and the ship was instead stricken from the naval registry on 1 June 1960 . On 30 June she was sold to the Lipsett Division of Luria Brothers to be broken up for scrap . 
 = = Awards = = 
 = Emory Washburn = 
 Emory Washburn ( February 14 , 1800 – March 18 , 1877 ) was a United States lawyer , politician , and historian . He was Governor of Massachusetts for one term ( from 1854 to 1855 ) , and served for many years on the faculty of Harvard Law School . His history of the early years of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court is still considered a foundational work on the subject . 
 Born in Leicester , Massachusetts , Washburn attended Dartmouth and Williams before studying law . After establishing what grew to become a successful and distinguished law practice in Worcester , Washburn entered politics as a Whig . After serving several years in the state legislature , he was elected governor in 1853 . Despite his support for a reform @-@ minded agenda , he was swept out of office on the Know Nothing tide in 1854 . 
 Washburn joined the faculty of Harvard Law in 1856 , where he was a popular and influential figure until his retirement in 1876 . His publications , in addition to his history of the SJC , include a history of his hometown of Leicester and numerous treatises on legal subjects . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Emory Washburn was born on February 14 , 1800 in Leicester , Massachusetts to Joseph and Ruth ( Davis ) Washburn , both of whom came from families with deep roots in New England . He was the sixth of seven children . His father died when he was seven years old , and the local pastor , Zephaniah Swift Moore , became a major influence in his early years . He first attended Leicester Academy , and then entered Dartmouth College , where Moore taught languages , at the age of thirteen . He accompanied Moore when the latter moved to Williams College in 1815 , graduating two years later in a class of seven ; he was influential in establishing an alumni association at Williams , serving as its first president . 
 Washburn then embarked on the study of law , first with Charles Dewey , a Williamstown judge and lawyer , and then at Harvard Law School under Asahel Stearns . Although he did not graduate from Harvard , he was admitted to the bar and opened a practice in Charlemont , Massachusetts . After six months there he returned to his hometown of Leicester , where he practiced until 1828 . In that year he moved to Worcester , where he would live and practice for the next thirty years . In 1830 he married Marianne Cornelia Giles , with whom he had three sons and one daughter . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Washburn was elected to the Massachusetts House of Representatives in 1826 , serving two terms ; his only notable activity was in committee work preparing a feasibility study for a railroad from Boston to the Connecticut River . He was a regular supporter of the Western Railroad in its efforts to develop the railroad westward from Boston . Washburn asserted that railroads could " ... ward off the attack of any invader . " He would serve in the state legislature again in 1838 and 1877 . From 1830 to 1834 he served on the staff of Governor Levi Lincoln , Jr . , and in 1841 he was elected to the State Senate , where he served two years . In the second of those years he was chairman of the judiciary committee . In 1844 he was appointed a justice of the Court of Common Pleas , a post he held until 1847 . During these years he also established and maintained what was described by one of his peers , George Frisbie Hoar , as one of the largest and most successful law practices in Worcester County , partnering with John Davis among others . 
 In 1853 Washburn traveled to England to research English constitutional law . While he was away , the Whig Party nominated him as its gubernatorial candidate ; he did not learn of his nomination until his ship reached Halifax , Nova Scotia . In the election he defeated Henry W. Bishop ( Democrat ) and Henry Wilson ( Free Soil ) with 46 % of the vote . Since a majority of votes was at the time required to win , the election was determined in the state senate . Washburn was the last governor elected in this fashion ( plurality voting was enacted in 1855 ) ; he would also be the last Whig governor . During his one year in office , he successfully promoted and enacted significant pieces of legislation on a broad social welfare agenda , including measures concerning debt relief , assistance to the poor and insane , and financial aid for female medical students . 
 One major event that took place during Washburn 's tenure was Anthony Burns ' arrest and trial under the terms of the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850 . The case galvanized anti @-@ slavery activists , who protested outside the courthouse and sought both legal and extra @-@ legal remedies to secure Burns ' release . Washburn refused to intercede in the matter , bringing criticism , and Burns remained in custody at the time Washburn left office . Burns was eventually returned to slavery , after which abolitionists purchased his freedom . 
 The 1854 campaign saw the rise of the secretive Know Nothing movement in Massachusetts politics . Washburn stood for reelection , but the Whig party apparatus was generally unaware of Know Nothing strength and dismissive of its candidates . One commentator described the Know Nothing slate as " <unk> ministers , lying tooth @-@ pullers , and buggering priests " , and Washburn 's opponent , former Whig Henry J. Gardner , as a " rickety vermin " who stood no chance of winning . The outcome of the November election was a landslide : Washburn received only 21 % of the vote , and Know Nothing candidates won every major state and Congressional office , as well as most of the seats in the state legislature . 
 = = Law professor = = 
 The following year he was offered a position as a lecturer at Harvard Law School , which became a full professorship in 1856 . The seat had previously been occupied by Judge Edward G. Loring , who Harvard 's Overseers refused to retain after he ruled that Burns be returned to slavery . For the next twenty years , Washburn served as one of three dominant figures ( along with Theophilus Parsons and Joel Parker ) in shaping the law school 's practices and curriculum . Legal historian Charles Warren wrote of the three , " Parker was the great lawyer ; Parsons the great teacher ; and Washburn , the great man . " The three men established a collegial and open learning environment at the law school . Washburn produced a significant number of legal treatises and books during his Harvard tenure ; his Treatise on the American Law of Real Property formed the basis for Harvard 's courses and later textbooks on the subject for the next century . His interests in history and the law were <unk> in these years , with a number of his publications covering aspects of both subjects . 
 In 1860 Washburn joined in public calls for the repeal of the state 's personal liberty laws . These laws , which were designed to make enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 as difficult as possible , were characterized by their opponents as an affront to the interests of slave owners , and as a source of heightened tension between north and south . When the American Civil War broke out in 1861 , Washburn led calls for harmony in the law school , which had students from both northern and southern states . He also served , despite his relatively advanced age , in a home guard militia unit , and supported the war effort by writing , giving speeches , and donating money . 
 Washburn was a popular and dedicated teacher . Students would sometimes attend his lectures just to hear him speak , and he was always willing to help students with matters both academic and personal . He also regularly assisted recent graduates as they made their way into the profession . 
 In 1870 the Law School hired Christopher Langdell to be its first dean . Langdell began to institute significant changes in the school , which Washburn for the most part went along with . He finally resigned his professorship in 1876 , and opened a law practice in Cambridge . He was encouraged to run for United States Congress , but refused . He was instead convinced to stand once again for the Massachusetts House , to which he was elected . He died in office on March 18 , 1877 in Cambridge , and was buried at Mount Auburn Cemetery . 
 = = Historian = = 
 Washburn had a long and abiding interest in local and state history . In 1826 he published a short history of Leicester in a Worcester magazine . This work formed the basis for his Historical Sketches of the Town of Leicester , Massachusetts , published in 1860 . He was elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in 1827 , beginning a lifelong association with that organization . He served as the society 's secretary for foreign correspondence from 1866 @-@ 1867 , and then secretary of domestic correspondence from 1867 @-@ 1877 . A large portion of his personal and business papers also resides within its collections . He later became a contributing member to the New England Historical and Genealogical Society and was a member of the Massachusetts Historical Society and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences . In 1840 he published Sketches of the Judicial History of Massachusetts , which provides a basic history of the colonial Massachusetts Superior Court of Judicature ( antecedent to the current Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court ) and its justices . Biographer Robert Spector describes it as " the starting point and basis " for legal historical work relating to the court . Washburn considered himself to be more of an antiquarian than a historian : he believed it important to conserve artifacts and historical information , leaving the interpretation of those to others . He wrote of the importance , for example , of the need for the state to preserve its own historical documents ( something not given much attention in its early years ) . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Washburn , Emory ( 1840 ) . Sketches of Massachusetts Judicial History . Boston : Little , Brown . OCLC <unk> . 
 Washburn , Emory ( 1855 ) . Brief Sketch of the History of Leicester Academy . Boston : Phillips , Sampson . OCLC <unk> . 
 Washburn , Emory ( 1860 ) . Historical Sketches of the Town of Leicester , Massachusetts . Boston : J. Wilson . OCLC <unk> . 
 Washburn , Emory ( 1860 – 1862 ) . A Treatise on the American Law of Real Property . Boston : Little , Brown . OCLC <unk> . 
 Washburn , Emory ( 1863 ) . A Treatise on the American Law of <unk> and <unk> . Philadelphia : George W. Childs . OCLC <unk> . 
 = Klas August Linderfelt = 
 Klas August Linderfelt ( 1847 – March 18 , 1900 ) was an American librarian . A native of Sweden , he emigrated to Milwaukee , Wisconsin and became a teacher and a librarian . As the first librarian of the Milwaukee Public Library , he became a significant figure in the city and in the library profession , becoming the seventh President of the American Library Association . He left both the city and the profession permanently following his arrest for embezzlement . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Linderfelt was born in Sweden in 1847 . He became an orphan after the deaths of his mother when he was five and his father when he was eleven . Linderfelt persevered and earned a doctorate from Uppsala University . He emigrated to Milwaukee in 1870 and taught classics at Milwaukee College . In 1875 , he was married to a woman whose name has been reported as Maggie Cooper or Margie E. Parker . By 1880 they had the first two of their four children , a son and daughter , and lived modestly at 278 Pleasant Street . 
 = = Milwaukee Public Library = = 
 The Milwaukee Public Library dates to February 7 , 1878 , when the Wisconsin State Legislature authorized the city to form a public library . Linderfelt had taken an interest in libraries and was hired to be its first librarian in 1880 . With his new post , Linderfelt joined the ranks of Milwaukee 's elite and his family took up residence on Grand Avenue . He also made the acquaintance of numerous important figures in the library profession , and was especially close to William Frederick Poole . 
 Under Linderfelt 's leadership , the Milwaukee Public Library developed a new charging system and a pencil dater for due dates that was widely adopted by libraries . He wrote professional articles and his book Eclectic Card Catalog Rules , based on the work of Karl <unk> as well as numerous English language librarians like Melvil Dewey , was published by Charles Ammi Cutter in 1890 . He also wrote on other topics , such as the book <unk> : An Easy Method of Acquiring the Universal Language ( 1888 ) , about the constructed language . 
 Linderfelt was a founder and the first president of the Wisconsin Library Association in February 1891 . He was active in the American Library Association , serving as a councilor from 1883 to 1891 and vice president from 1890 to 1891 . He was instrumental in local arrangements for the ALA 's 1886 annual conference in Milwaukee , including an eight @-@ day , 1500 mile post @-@ conference train excursion afterwards arranged by Linderfelt , which included a steamboat trip on the Dells of the Wisconsin River . In 1891 , he was elected to follow Samuel Swett Green as President of the American Library Association . 
 Linderfelt 's most significant achievement was the arrangements for the construction of a library and museum building at 814 Wisconsin Avenue . A national competition was held and 74 designs were proposed . One of the entrants was a 25 @-@ year @-@ old Frank Lloyd Wright , whose entry was helpful in publicizing his blooming career . The winning entry was a neo @-@ renaissance structure from the Wisconsin architecture firm of Ferry & Clas , which was constructed at a cost of $ 780 @,@ 000 . It opened on October 3 , 1898 . Today , the building is still in use as the Milwaukee Public Library 's Central Library and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 = = <unk> charges = = 
 Beginning in at least 1883 , Linderfelt began embezzling large sums of money from the Library , chiefly by double @-@ billing the board for Library expenditures and pocketing the difference . He never provided a motive for his theft , but it was widely speculated , and argued by his lawyer , that the financial demands of Linderfelt 's prestigious position in society were not met by his modest public salary . 
 He was first investigated in 1888 over a shortfall in the collection of library fines , but the missing money was reimbursed , reportedly by two members of the Library board of trustees , and the matter was dropped . However , following the revelation that Milwaukee School Board secretary A.H. <unk> had embezzled over $ 50 @,@ 000 , and his subsequent suicide , a city @-@ wide audit was conducted . City accountant Carl <unk> discovered Linderfelt had embezzled over $ 4000 and following a meeting with some of the trustees , including Harrison Carroll Hobart , and Mayor Peter J. Somers , Linderfelt confessed and was arrested on April 28 , 1892 . 
 The library profession was stunned by Linderfelt 's arrest . The news was " a great shock " , Green wrote later in his history of the profession . Green wrote to Poole " I should have as soon suspected myself as Linderfelt " and others had similar reactions of disbelief . Many librarians wrote letters of support for Linderfelt . The ALA acted swiftly to mitigate the damage to the image of the profession . On May 22 , the executive board of the ALA moved that William I. Fletcher be appointed president following Linderfelt 's resignation , and that he be officially recorded as president retroactively for the entire term , essentially erasing Linderfelt from the historical record of the ALA . A month later , Melvil Dewey was elected ALA president for the next term . The incident was seen as a triumph of newer librarians like Dewey over the " old guard " represented by Poole , of whom Linderfelt was seen as a protege . 
 In Milwaukee , Linderfelt received strong support from members of the board of trustees and the city 's elite , who pushed to reimburse the city and reinstate the librarian . However , local newspapers objected , especially following revelations of the previous investigation and that Linderfelt had stolen nearly twice as much as initially thought , over $ 9000 . On July 12 , Linderfelt pleaded nolo contendere and Judge A. Scott Sloan , saying that " further punishment would be wrong " , issued a suspended sentence . Linderfelt left Milwaukee that day for a promised job at the Library Bureau in Boston . 
 The lenient sentence was met with outrage in the city . Newspapers inveighed against the decision and residents held " indignation meetings " to agitate against it . Within days , upon the urging of Mayor Somers the district attorney scrambled to find new charges to file against Linderfelt and ordered his arrest in Boston . But Linderfelt had already left Boston and was sighted in England later that month . Poole wrote " They let him off without punishment , and are now chasing him around the world to arrest him for another trial . " 
 = = Later life = = 
 Linderfelt settled in Paris and studied medicine . His wife and children joined him there . At the end of his life , Linderfelt worked for the journal La Semaine <unk> . Instead of going to Paris , his eldest son , Karl E. Linderfelt , dropped out of Beloit College and lived with uncles in Cripple Creek , Colorado . He joined the Colorado National Guard and was one of the commanders at the Ludlow Massacre , noted for his aggression and profanity and for assaulting and allegedly murdering strike leader Louis <unk> . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Linderfelt has been ignored or received cursory treatment in histories of both Milwaukee and the library profession in the United States , including the work of Linderfelt 's immediate successor at the Milwaukee Public Library and longtime assistant Theresa Elmendorf . Noted library historian Wayne A. Wiegand wrote about Linderfelt in a two part article published in 1977 in American Libraries , the official magazine of the American Library Association . In the article , Wiegand expressed hope that librarians would remember Linderfelt " to provide some balance against the too @-@ frequent eulogistic treatment accorded the <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> of library history " and that the ALA would officially acknowledge Linderfelt as a past ALA President for the sake of " historical accuracy " . A librarian responding to Wiegand 's article echoed his sentiments , noting Linderfelt 's absence in the Dictionary of American Biography and the National Cyclopedia of American Biography and Wiegand 's upcoming article about Linderfelt for the Dictionary of American Library Biography . As of 2015 , Linderfelt has not appeared on the official list of past ALA Presidents . 
 In 1991 , the centennial of the founding of the Wisconsin Library Association , former <unk> presidents began the tradition of annually passing an urn with non @-@ human ashes representing Linderfelt to each president at the end of their term . Linderfelt was inducted into the Wisconsin Library Hall of Fame in 2009 . 
 = John Rowan ( Kentucky ) = 
 John Rowan ( July 12 , 1773 – July 13 , 1843 ) was a 19th @-@ century politician and jurist from the U.S. state of Kentucky . Rowan 's family moved from Pennsylvania to the Kentucky frontier when he was young . From there , they moved to Bardstown , Kentucky , where Rowan studied law with former Kentucky Attorney General George Nicholas . He was a representative to the state constitutional convention of 1799 , but his promising political career was almost derailed when he killed a man in a duel stemming from a drunken dispute during a game of cards . Although public sentiment was against him , a judge found insufficient evidence against him to convict him of murder . In 1804 , Governor Christopher Greenup appointed Rowan Secretary of State , and he went on to serve in the Kentucky House of Representatives and the U.S. House of Representatives . 
 In 1819 , Rowan was appointed to the Kentucky Court of Appeals , serving until his resignation 1821 . He was again elected to the state legislature in 1823 . With the state reeling from the Panic of 1819 , Rowan became the leader of a group of legislators dedicated to enacting laws favorable to the state 's large debtor class . He believed the will of the people was sovereign and roundly denounced the Court of Appeals for striking down debt relief legislation as unconstitutional . He led the effort to impeach the offending justices , and when that effort failed , spearheaded a movement to abolish the court entirely and replace it with a new one , touching off the Old Court – New Court controversy . New Court partisans in the legislature elected Rowan to the U.S. Senate in 1824 . During his term , the nascent Whig Party ascended to power in the state legislature , and at the expiration of his term in 1831 , the Whigs replaced him with party founder Henry Clay . 
 After his term in the Senate , Rowan returned to Kentucky , where he served as the first president of the Louisville Medical Institute and the Kentucky Historical Society . In 1840 , he was appointed to a commission to prosecute land claims of U.S. citizens against the Republic of Mexico , but resigned his commission in 1842 because of failing health . He died July 13 , 1843 and was buried on the grounds of Federal Hill , his estate in Bardstown . According to tradition , Stephen Collins Foster , a distant relative of Rowan 's , was inspired to write the ballad My Old Kentucky Home after a visit to Federal Hill in 1852 , but later historians have been unable to conclude whether or not Foster ever visited the mansion at all . The mansion is now owned by the state of Kentucky and forms the centerpiece of My Old Kentucky Home State Park . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 John Rowan was born July 12 , 1773 , near York , Pennsylvania . He was third of five children born to Captain William and Sarah Elizabeth " Eliza " ( Cooper ) Rowan . His siblings included two older brothers – Andrew and Stephen – and two younger sisters – Elizabeth and Alice . Captain Rowan served in the 4th York Battery during the Revolutionary War , and after the war , he was elected to three consecutive terms as sheriff of York County . 
 Having exhausted most of his resources in Pennsylvania helping establish the new United States government , Captain Rowan decided to move the family to the western frontier , where he hoped to start fresh and rebuild his fortune . On October 10 , 1783 , the Rowans and five other families embarked on a flat bottomed boat near Redstone Creek and began their journey down the Monongahela River toward the Falls of the Ohio . The travelers expected the journey to last a few days at most , but ice along the river slowed the journey , and a lack of provisions exacerbated the delays . Three of the families disembarked near what is now Maysville , Kentucky ; the Rowans would later learn that most of these settlers were killed by Indians . The remaining settlers continued downriver , reaching Louisville , Kentucky on March 10 , 1783 . 
 In April 1784 , the Rowans and five other families set out for a tract of land on the Long Falls of the Green River that Rowan had purchased before leaving Pennsylvania . The party arrived on May 11 , 1784 , and constructed a fort which they dubbed Fort Vienna . The fort , then located approximately 100 miles from the nearest white settlement , is the present @-@ day town of Calhoun . The settlers at Fort Vienna frequently clashed with the Shawnee who used the area as a hunting ground . The Rowans would remain at Fort Vienna for six years . 
 Concerned for the education of his children , Captain Rowan moved the family to Bardstown , Kentucky in 1790 . There , John Rowan began his education under Dr. James Priestly at Salem Academy . Salem Academy was , at the time , considered one of the best educational institutions in the west . Among Rowan 's classmates at the Academy were future U.S. Attorney General Felix Grundy , future U.S. Senator John Pope , future U.S. District Attorney Joseph Hamilton Daveiss , and future Kentucky state senator John Allen . Rowan and Grundy were members of a debating society called the Bardstown Pleiades which may have been an outgrowth of Salem Academy . Other notable members of the society included future Florida Governor William Pope Duval , future U.S. Postmaster General and Kentucky Governor Charles A. Wickliffe , and future Kentucky Senator Benjamin Hardin . 
 Completing his studies in 1793 , Rowan moved to Lexington , Kentucky and read law under former Kentucky Attorney General George Nicholas . He was admitted to the bar in May 1795 and commenced practice in Louisville . Rowan struggled financially during his early years as a lawyer . Nelson County judge Atkinson Hill took an interest in Rowan , furnishing him with money to expand his law library and taking him as a business partner . In order to earn some money , Rowan accepted an appointment as a public prosecutor , but after securing a felony conviction against a young man in his first case , he was so troubled that he resigned the office and resolved never again to play the role of prosecutor . For the remainder of his career , he always represented defendants . An advocate of education , Rowan allowed several prominent young law students to study in his office , including future U.S. Treasury Secretary James Guthrie , future Supreme Court Justice John McKinley , and future Kentucky Governor Lazarus W. Powell . 
 Rowan married Anne Lytle on October 29 , 1794 . She was the daughter of Captain William Lytle , one of the early settlers of Cincinnati , Ohio , and by this marriage Rowan became the uncle of Ohio congressman Robert Todd Lytle . Rowan and his wife – who he affectionately nicknamed " Nancy " – had nine children : Eliza Cooper ( Rowan ) Harney , Mary Jane ( Rowan ) Steele , William Lytle Rowan , <unk> Hill Rowan , John Rowan , Jr . , Josephine Daviess ( Rowan ) Clark , Ann ( Rowan ) Buchanan , Alice Douglass ( Rowan ) Shaw Wakefield , and Elizabeth ( Rowan ) Hughes . <unk> Hill Rowan served as an emissary to Spain for President Andrew Jackson . John Rowan , Jr. was appointed U.S. Chargé d 'Affaires to Naples by President James K. Polk , serving from 1848 to 1849 . Ann Rowan married Joseph Rodes Buchanan , a noted physician of Covington , Kentucky . 
 In 1795 , Rowan began construction of Federal Hill , his family estate , on land that his father @-@ in @-@ law gave him as a wedding present . Due to limited financial resources , the time required to import building materials from the east , and the craftsmanship required to construct the large home , the mansion was not completed until 1818 . After a fire destroyed the log cabin in which the Rowans lived in 1812 , they moved into the part of the mansion that was completed , and continued to live there while construction on the rest of the house was finished . Federal Hill was once believed to be the first brick house constructed in the state of Kentucky , but more contemporary sources give the designation to the William Whitley House , also known as Sportsman 's Hill , which was completed in 1794 near Crab Orchard , Kentucky . 
 Rowan identified with the Democratic @-@ Republican Party and espoused the Jeffersonian principles of limited government and individual liberty . He was chosen to represent Nelson County at the constitutional convention held at Frankfort , Kentucky in 1799 to draft the second Kentucky Constitution . As a delegate , he advocated the supremacy of the legislative branch over the executive and judicial branches , which he believed provided ordinary citizens a greater role in state government . The constitution adopted by the convention abolished the use of electors to choose the governor and state senators , providing for the direct election of these officers instead . 
 = = Duel with Dr. James Chambers = = 
 Rowan was known throughout his life as an avid <unk> . On January 29 , 1801 , Rowan joined Dr. James Chambers and three other men for a game of cards at Duncan McLean 's Tavern in Bardstown . After several beers and games of whist , Chambers suggested playing Vingt @-@ et @-@ un for money instead . Rowan had determined not to gamble during this session of gaming , but impaired by the alcohol , he agreed . After a few hands , an argument broke out between Chambers and Rowan . The exact nature of the argument is not known . Some accounts claim it was over who was better able to speak Latin and Greek ; others suggest that general insults were exchanged between the two men . A brief scuffle followed the disagreement . 
 How the matter escalated to a duel is also the subject of some uncertainty . In his biography of Benjamin Hardin , Lucious P. Little recounts that Chambers immediately challenged Rowan to a duel . According to Little , Rowan , embarrassed at his behavior , refused the challenge and repeatedly apologized for his actions , but Chambers was insistent on the duel and continued hurling insults of growing severity at Rowan until Rowan accepted the challenge . A letter from George M. Bibb , published a year after the event and reprinted in 1912 in the Register of the Kentucky State Historical Society , claims that Chambers ' challenge was issued through a letter delivered to Rowan by Chambers ' friend , Major John Bullock , on January 31 , 1801 . Bibb claims that he and Rowan had , after the night of the incident , gone to nearby Bullitt County on business , that Rowan had returned first , and that Rowan showed Bibb the letter upon his return on February 1 . 
 Bullock served as Chambers ' second for the duel ; Bibb acted as second for Rowan . According to Bibb , he and Bullock met on February 1 to discuss the parameters for the duel . Bullock proposed that the matter be dropped , but Bibb insisted that Chambers would have to retract his challenge , to which Bullock would not consent . The duel was held February 3 , 1801 , near Bardstown . Both combatants missed with their first shots . Both men fired again , and Rowan 's second shot struck Chambers , wounding him severely . ( Bibb 's account says that Chambers was struck in the left side ; other accounts state that the shot hit Chambers in the chest . ) Rowan then offered his carriage to take Chambers to town for medical attention , and Chambers asked that Rowan not be prosecuted . Despite medical aid , Chambers died the following day . 
 Public sentiment was against Rowan in the matter of his duel with Chambers . Soon after the duel , friends of Chambers formed a posse and rode toward Rowan 's house . Rowan concocted a ruse whereby he dressed a family slave in his coat and hat and sent him riding from the house on horseback . The posse was fooled into thinking the slave was Rowan and gave chase , but the slave escaped and Rowan 's life was spared as well . Days later , the owner of the land where the duel had taken place swore out a warrant for Rowan 's arrest for murder . Some accounts hold that , as Commonwealth 's Attorney , Rowan 's friend Felix Grundy would have been responsible for prosecuting the case against Rowan and that Grundy resigned the position to avoid prosecuting his friend . Grundy 's biographer , John Roderick Heller , admits that this was possible , although no evidence exists to confirm it . Heller also points out that Grundy was Commonwealth 's Attorney not in Nelson County ( the location of Bardstown ) , but in neighboring Washington County at the time . Joseph Hamilton Daveiss and Colonel William Allen served as counsel for Rowan . The judge opined that there was insufficient evidence to send the case to a grand jury , and Rowan was released . 
 = = Secretary of State and early legislative career = = 
 Shortly after his duel with Chambers , Rowan moved to Frankfort , Kentucky , the state capital . In 1802 , he was one of 32 men who signed a pledge to bring James Madison to Transylvania University as superintendent . This action began a long relationship between Rowan and Transylvania , and the university presented him with an honorary Doctor of Laws degree in 1823 . Governor Christopher Greenup appointed Rowan Secretary of State in 1802 . He served until 1806 , when he was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives . He represented Kentucky 's Third District ( which included Bardstown ) during the Tenth Congress from March 4 , 1807 to March 3 , 1809 , even though he did not reside in that district at the time . 
 The first major congressional debate in which Rowan participated was over the election of William McCreery as representative from Baltimore , Maryland . Joshua Barney , McCreery 's opponent in the election , claimed that McCreery did not meet a requirement in the Maryland Constitution that a representative live in the district from which he was elected for twelve months prior to the election . McCreery admitted that he had moved from Baltimore to the country prior to the election but claimed that he still owned his home in Baltimore and lived there during the winter months . A resolution was introduced to declare McCreery the duly elected representative from Baltimore , and an amendment was added to clarify that the grounds upon which the resolution was based were that McCreery had not abandoned his Baltimore home . Despite his support for states ' rights , Rowan opposed the amendment because he felt that state sovereignty was only made possible by national sovereignty and that the national legislature had the right to declare a state law unconstitutional . By giving another reason for declaring McCreery duly elected , Rowan felt this issue would be obscured . The amendment was defeated by a vote of 92 – 8 , and the resolution to declare McCreery duly elected passed 89 – 18 . 
 Also during the first session of the Tenth Congress , Rowan proposed that a congressional committee be formed to investigate accusations against General James Wilkinson that , in 1788 , he took money from the government of Spain in exchange for efforts to separate Kentucky from Virginia and unite it with Spain rather than the United States . Aaron Burr had been accused of working with Wilkinson in the so @-@ called Spanish Conspiracy , and when Burr had approached Rowan in 1806 to solicit his services in defending Burr against the charges , Rowan had declined because he believed Burr to be guilty . Rowan 's proposal to form an investigative committee against Wilkinson failed , but he succeeded in gaining approval for a committee to investigate federal judge Harry Innes ' purported role in the Conspiracy . Rowan was appointed to the committee and delivered its report April 19 , 1808 ; the report stated that the committee could find no evidence of wrongdoing by Innes . 
 Rowan was not as active during the second session of the Tenth Congress , introducing no legislation and making no major speeches . Newly elected Kentucky Senator John Pope observed in a letter to a friend that the Democratic @-@ Republicans in Congress disliked Rowan and were disappointed in his speaking and debating ability . He opined that Rowan 's attempt to investigate Wilkinson had been a slap at party founder Thomas Jefferson ( then in his second term as President ) , under whom Wilkinson was serving as Commanding General of the United States Army . Pope went on to write that , although Rowan personally cited no party affiliation , he was claimed by the Federalist caucus in the House . In studying Rowan 's short tenure in the House , historian Stephen Fackler observed that " Rowan adhered more rigidly to the precepts of Jeffersonian republicanism than Jefferson himself , for the president compromised his principles in the national interest . " Fackler observed that Rowan often disagreed with Jefferson as president , and that as a result , some historians labeled him a Federalist , a designation Fackler felt was in error . 
 After his tenure in Congress , Rowan was elected to represent Nelson County in the Kentucky House of Representatives from 1813 to 1817 . In 1817 , the House debated a resolution instructing Governor Gabriel Slaughter to negotiate with the governors of Indiana and Ohio to secure passage of legislation requiring citizens of those states to return fugitive slaves . Representative James G. Birney vigorously opposed the resolution , and it was defeated . The pro @-@ slavery members of the House then rallied behind Rowan 's leadership to pass a substitute resolution which softened the most objectionable language but retained the call for fugitive slave legislation in Indiana and Ohio . 
 = = Legislative interim and service on the Court of Appeals = = 
 Rowan often found himself in demand as an orator and host . In February 1818 , he was chosen to eulogize his close friend , George Rogers Clark . In June 1819 , the citizens of Louisville chose him as their official host for a visiting party that included James Monroe and Andrew Jackson . In May 1825 , he was one of thirteen men chosen by the citizens of Louisville to organize a reception for a visit by the Marquis de Lafayette . 
 Rowan was appointed as a judge of the Kentucky Court of Appeals in 1819 . During his time as a justice , he delivered a notable opinion opposing the constitutionality of chartering of the Second Bank of the United States . He also opined that the General Assembly was within its rightful powers to enact a tax on the Bank . In the case of McCulloch v. Maryland , the U.S. Supreme Court delivered a contradictory opinion . Dissatisfied with the confinement of service on the bench , Rowan resigned from the court in 1821 . Though his service was brief , he was referred to as " Judge Rowan " for the rest of his life . 
 While Rowan was still a justice of the Court of Appeals , the General Assembly chose him and John J. Crittenden as commissioners to resolve a border dispute with Tennessee . The dispute had arisen from an erroneous survey of the border line conducted by Dr. Thomas Walker years earlier . Walker 's line deviated northward from the intended line ( 36 degrees , 30 minutes north latitude ) by some twelve miles by the time it reached the Tennessee River . The Tennessee commissioners , Felix Grundy and William L. Brown , proposed that , because it had been accepted for so long , the Walker line be observed as far west as the Tennessee River , with Kentucky being compensated with a more southerly line between the Tennessee and Mississippi Rivers . Crittenden was inclined to accept this proposal with some minor adjustments , but Rowan insisted that Tennessee honor the statutory border of 36 degrees , 30 minutes north . The Tennessee commissioners refused to submit to arbitration in the matter , and Rowan and Crittenden delivered separate reports to the Kentucky legislature . The legislature adopted Crittenden 's report ; Rowan then resigned as commissioner and was replaced by Robert Trimble . Thereafter , the commissioners quickly agreed to a slightly modified version of the Tennessee proposal . 
 In 1823 , the state legislature chose Rowan and Henry Clay to represent the defendant in a second rehearing of Green v. Biddle before the U.S. Supreme Court . The case , which involved the constitutionality of laws passed by the General Assembly relating to land titles granted in Kentucky when the state was still a part of Virginia , was of interest to the legislature . The Supreme Court , however , refused the second rehearing , letting stand their previous opinion that Kentucky 's laws were in violation of the compact of separation from Virginia . 
 = = Old Court – New Court controversy = = 
 Due to the Panic of 1819 , many citizens in Kentucky fell deep into debt and began petitioning the legislature for help . The state 's politicians split into two factions . Those who advocated for measures that were more favorable to debtors were dubbed the Relief faction while those who insisted on sound money principles and the strict adherence to the obligation of contracts were called the Anti @-@ Relief faction . In 1820 , a pro @-@ relief measure passed the General Assembly providing debtors a one @-@ year stay on the collection of their debts if the creditor would accept payment in devalued notes issued by the Bank of the Commonwealth or a two @-@ year stay if the creditor demanded payment in sound money . Two separate circuit courts found the law unconstitutional in the cases of Williams v. Blair and Lapsley v. Brashear . 
 Meanwhile , Rowan , who espoused the Relief position , was elected to the Kentucky House of Representatives in 1822 representing Jefferson and Oldham counties . He immediately became the leader of the Relief faction in the House . When Relief partisans decided to appeal Williams and Lapsley to the Kentucky Court of Appeals , which was at the time the court of last resort in the state , Rowan was chosen to argue the appeal before the court alongside George M. Bibb and Lieutenant Governor William T. Barry . Their efforts failed , however , as the Court found the measure unconstitutional , upholding the decisions of the lower courts . 
 On December 10 , 1823 , Rowan presented resolutions condemning the Court 's decision to the legislature . The twenty @-@ six page preamble to the resolutions laid out the Relief faction 's reasoning upon the subject of debt relief and legislative supremacy . The preamble and resolutions were adopted by the House by a vote of 56 – 40 . The offending judges – two of whom had been Rowan 's colleagues during his service on the Court – were summoned before the legislature to defend their decisions later in December . Following their appearance , Rowan introduced a measure to remove them from office ; the vote in the House was 56 – 40 in favor of the measure , but this fell short of the two @-@ thirds majority needed to remove the judges . The Relief faction then introduced legislation to repeal the law that originally created the Court of Appeals , then replace the abolished court with a new court . Anti @-@ Relief partisans decried the measure as blatantly unconstitutional . Rowan was the chief defender of the measure , and after his impassioned speech on the night of December 24 , 1824 , it passed by simple majority . In November 1824 , Rowan heavily revised the preamble and resolutions he presented in the previous legislative session . These revised documents effectively formed the faction 's platform for the upcoming elections . 
 Rowan 's role in the Old Court – New Court controversy strained his relationship with his former friend , Benjamin Hardin . Hardin and Rowan had once been so close that Hardin named one of his sons " Rowan " in his colleague 's honor . After the controversy , Hardin insisted that friends and family refer to Rowan Hardin as " Ben " , but few people other than Hardin himself adopted the new name . 
 = = Service in the U.S. Senate = = 
 As a result of the 1824 elections , the Relief faction gained a 22 – 16 majority in the state Senate and a 61 – 39 majority in the House . The pro @-@ Relief majority in the state Senate subsequently elected Rowan to the U.S. Senate , which had the inadvertent effect of weakening the faction 's cause in the House by removing its leader there . Rowan served in the Senate from March 4 , 1825 to March 3 , 1831 . During the Twenty @-@ first Congress , he was chairman of the Judiciary Committee . 
 On April 10 , 1826 , Rowan sponsored an amendment to legislation to reorganize the federal judiciary that would have required seven justices to concur with a decision in order to strike down a law as unconstitutional . The amendment , which ultimately failed , was offered in the aftermath of a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States declaring an occupying claimant law to be unconstitutional ; Rowan personally disagreed with the Court 's decision . Rowan offered another amendment providing that ministers of the federal courts would be subject to state laws when carrying out the decisions of the federal courts . After a month of debate , the entire bill was tabled . 
 An ally of Senator Richard Mentor Johnson , who was a primary voice against the practice of debt imprisonment , Rowan made a notable speech denouncing the practice on the Senate floor in 1828 . A consistent opponent of internal improvements and tariffs , even those that would benefit his own constituents , he voted against a measure allocating federal funds for the construction of a road connecting the cities of Lexington and Maysville . The vote was ill @-@ received by the people of the state , and Rowan 's popularity took a significant hit . When the bill was re @-@ introduced in the next congressional session , Rowan voted for it only after receiving significant pressure from the state legislature to do so . The bill passed in this session , but newly elected president Andrew Jackson vetoed it . 
 In the state legislative elections of 1830 , the ascendent Whig Party gained control of both houses of the General Assembly . Rowan 's strict adherence to Jeffersonian democracy and leadership of the New Court faction during the court controversy of the 1820s had put him at odds with Whig founder Henry Clay . By this time , however , not even Rowan 's fellow Democrats endorsed his re @-@ election . Henry Clay was elected instead . 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 After his service in the Senate , Rowan returned to Kentucky , dividing his time between Louisville and Bardstown . During an epidemic of cholera that spread through Bardstown in 1833 , three of Rowan 's children ( William , Atkinson , and Mary Jane ) died . The spouses of William and Mary Jane also died of cholera , as did Mary Jane 's daughter , and Rowan 's sister Elizabeth and her husband . Aid from Bishop Joseph <unk> and a group of nuns who traveled to Federal Hill during the epidemic probably spared the life of Rowan 's orphaned granddaughter , Eliza Rowan Harney . 
 In 1836 , Rowan and two other men founded the Louisville Medical Institute , the forerunner of the University of Louisville medical school . The next year , Rowan was chosen as the school 's first president , serving in that capacity until 1842 . He also served as the first president of the Kentucky Historical Society from 1838 until his death . 
 In his last act of public service , in 1839 Rowan was appointed as a commissioner to adjust land claims of U.S. citizens against the Republic of Mexico . During an adjournment of the commission in 1842 , Rowan returned to Kentucky to visit relatives . While there , he fell ill and was unable to return to Washington , D.C. ; consequently , he resigned his commission . Rowan died July 13 , 1843 . He was interred in the family burial ground at Federal Hill . In his will , Rowan specified that no marker should be placed over his grave , noting that his parents ' graves had no markers , and he did not want to be honored above his parents . Several years later , members of his family placed a marker over his grave , despite his wishes . According to legend , the marker frequently tumbles from its base , purportedly a manifestation of Rowan haunting his grave . 
 Relative of the Rowan family , Stephen Collins Foster , occasionally visited Federal Hill according to letters penned by Stephen 's brother Morrison Foster . Stephen was inspired by the imagery witnessed at Federal Hill and by Harriet Beecher Stowe 's anti @-@ slavery novel Uncle Tom 's Cabin to write his ballad My Old Kentucky Home . The mansion remained in the possession of Rowan 's family until 1922 , when his granddaughter , Madge ( Rowan ) Frost , sold it to the state of Kentucky to be preserved as a state shrine . Today , it is a part of My Old Kentucky Home State Park in Bardstown . In 1856 , the Kentucky General Assembly created a new county from parts of Fleming and Morgan counties and named it Rowan County in Rowan 's honor . 
 = Nana 's Party = 
 " Nana 's Party " is the fifth episode of the second series of the British dark comedy anthology television programme Inside No. 9 . It was first broadcast on 23 April 2015 on BBC Two . Written and directed by Steve Pemberton and Reece Shearsmith , the episode starred Claire Skinner as the obsessive @-@ compulsive and aspirational Angela , who is hosting a party for the 79th birthday of her mother Maggie , played by Elsie Kelly . Angela 's husband Jim , played by Pemberton , is keen to play a prank on Pat , Angela 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , who is a practical joker . Pat is played by Shearsmith , while Carol , a recovering alcoholic who is Pat 's wife and Angela 's sister , is played by Lorraine Ashbourne . The episode also features Eve Gordon as Katie , Angela and Jim 's teenage daughter , and Christopher Whitlow as a paramedic seen at the beginning and end of the episode . 
 Much of the episode 's plot revolves around a practical joke with a fake cake that Jim has set up in an attempt to fool Pat . Moving the cake reveals the head of the person hiding under the table , but , in the mean time , the hidden character can hear conversations taking place nearby , unbeknownst to those who are not in on the joke . The episode plays on viewers ' guesses as to what has led to the arrival — seen at the opening of the episode — of a paramedic . In particular , the person under the table is at risk of injury if candles burn down or someone puts a knife into the " cake " . 
 " Nana 's Party " was the first episode of Inside No. 9 to be written , but it was shelved when BBC executives instead suggested that it worked as the first episode of a sitcom . Pemberton and Shearsmith revisited and modified the script during the writing process for Inside No. 9 's second series . The writers aimed for a feeling of suburban darkness reminiscent of the work of the playwright Alan Ayckbourn , while commentators compared the episode to the work of the playwright and screenwriter Mike Leigh , particularly the play Abigail 's Party . The story addresses themes including alcoholism , extramarital affairs , aging and social class . Television critics responded positively to " Nana 's Party " , which was praised as a typically @-@ strong instalment of Inside No. 9 . Particular praise was directed towards the writing and performances , especially Skinner 's performance as Angela , Ashbourne 's performance as Carol and Shearsmith 's performance as Pat . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " Nana 's Party " was the first episode of Inside No. 9 to be written by the programme 's creators Reece Shearsmith and Steve Pemberton . BBC producers felt the episode worked as the opening episode of a sitcom , but Pemberton and Shearsmith were not happy to develop the idea into its own series , given the events of the plot . As such , the script was shelved , and revisited during planning for Inside No. 9 's second series . A number of changes were made from the original script when the concept was revisited . For example , a paramedic was added to the opening scene in order to add a sense of danger and foreboding , and the character Angela 's " borderline OCD " was accentuated . 
 Shearsmith said that the episode 's focus on a grandmother 's birthday party felt " domestic " and " homely " . Pemberton , too , called it a " domestic " story , describing it as playing upon the classic British plot device of a family party going wrong . Shearsmith suggested that the pleasant house did give the episode the feel of a sitcom , but said that the story went somewhere " darker " than a typical sitcom would . With " Nana 's Party " , the writers wanted to produce something " dark " and " suburban " , with Pemberton citing the playwright Alan Ayckbourn as an influence . Indeed , at the time the episode was written , Shearsmith was starring in an adaptation of Ayckbourn 's play Absent Friends . 
 The writers intended to play off the idea of a hidden character being able to hear conversations revealing secrets . An initial idea of Pemberton 's was to have a large parcel on a table at the birthday party , but with Maggie — on whose birthday the episode would be set — absent . Other characters would repeatedly ask where Maggie was , until it was revealed that her head was in the parcel . This idea developed into the possibility of a hollow cake hiding a character , a device used in the final episode . For the writers , there is humour in characters spending time talking earnestly to a cake ; they noted that the prop cake had features resembling a face . In the editing stage , the production team kept reintroducing the cake in order to remind viewers of its presence . The original script ended with a knife being plunged into a fake cake followed by the revelation , contrary to viewers ' expectations , that no one was under it at the time ; instead , the writers upped the drama in the story , making it possible that any of the characters injured . For the writers , the original plot was , in a sense , darker , as some characters got away with wrongdoing in a way they do not in the final version . 
 = = = Casting and characters = = = 
 As each episode of Inside No. 9 features new characters , the writers were able to attract actors who might have been unwilling to commit to an entire series . " Nana 's Party " featured Claire Skinner as Angela , who is hosting a party . Pemberton and Shearsmith lived close to Skinner , but they had not properly met . She was one of several members of the cast of the film Life Is Sweet ( others being Alison Steadman and Jane Horrocks ) who have starred in Inside No. 9 . Skinner enjoyed the " funny " script and her " nice " character . Eve Gordon ( trained at the Nottingham Television Workshop ) starred as Angela 's daughter Katie , and Pemberton starred as Angela 's husband Jim . Pemberton and Shearsmith suggested that Pemberton 's costume made him look like Mr Chow Mein , a Benny Hill character . 
 Elsie Kelly played Angela 's mother Maggie , on whose birthday the episode is set . The part was not written with anyone in mind , though Pemberton already knew Kelly well from their time together on the sitcom Benidorm . Lorraine Ashbourne played Angela 's sister Carol , and Pat , Carol 's husband , was played by Shearsmith . Carol was Pemberton 's favourite character in the whole series ; Shearsmith worried that an actor may not portray the character as they had hoped , but was very happy with Ashbourne 's performance . Ashbourne said she was " thrilled " to be working with Pemberton and Shearsmith , for whom she had great admiration . She described the character of Carol as " hilarious " , characterising her as " sexually frustrated " and " sad " . To reflect Carol 's alcoholism , Ashbourne <unk> whiskey around her mouth before filming . Shearsmith wore a red wig to play Pat , something he had never done before . His skin @-@ tone needed to be changed to match the hair , necessitating a white spray on his face every morning . In order not to give the impression that Pat was a thief or murderer ( rather than simply a practical joker ) , Shearsmith was directed to chuckle while Pat set up his jokes . Christopher Whitlow plays a paramedic seen at the beginning and end of the episode . The scene featuring the paramedic at the end of the episode was longer in the final cut than had been initially intended in order to show more of the character 's actions . 
 = = = Filming and direction = = = 
 The second series of Inside No. 9 was filmed from the end of 2014 into early 2015 . " Nana 's Party " was filmed in January , and was the final episode of the second series to be filmed . The writers saw a number of houses before selecting the one used in the episode ; they wanted an open plan home to allow for easy movement between rooms . The one chosen was close to Twickenham Studios . A " deckhouse " was added to the house 's garden ; despite there already being two sheds , neither would have been visible on @-@ screen . A new one was thus added . The executive producer Adam Tandy suggested that deckhouse would be preferable to shed , as the latter term suggested the site of something awful . Scenes in a bedroom used the room mostly as the production team found it . The room featured a number of books not seen on @-@ screen , which reminded Shearsmith of a script ( in the end not used for Inside No. 9 's second series ) of an episode set in a library . The front room had a buffet , including a prawn ring ; by the third day of filming , this had begun to smell , and needed to be removed . 
 Pemberton and Shearsmith , in addition to writing and starring in " Nana 's Party " , directed the episode . This was the second episode they jointly directed in the second series after " Cold Comfort " , their directorial debut . The pair did not know , while writing for the series , which episodes they would be directing , meaning that their writing was unlikely to be influenced by the knowledge . Pemberton and Shearsmith had always intended to try directing , and the second series of Inside No. 9 offered them the opportunity . David Kerr , who had directed all of the episodes in the first series , was unable to return for the second . Guillem Morales and Dan Zeff each took on directorial duties for two episodes , while Pemberton and Shearsmith decided to direct the remaining two . Shearsmith said in an interview that the pair had considered directing episodes in which they did not appear much , but scheduling concerns left them with " Cold Comfort " and " Nana 's Party " ; both episodes feature the writers quite heavily . 
 " Nana 's Party " represented a directorial challenge insofar as Pemberton and Shearsmith were both on @-@ screen for a relatively large amount of the episode . The pair took turns off @-@ camera ; on one day , Shearsmith acted and Pemberton watched , and the next day , the two switched ; they were , however , tired , not least because it was the final episode of the series filmed . " Nana 's Party " required more direction than " Cold Comfort " , due in part to the larger number of actors . Pemberton and Shearsmith leaned strongly on Stephan Pehrsson , their cinematographer . While Pemberton and Shearsmith handled staging , Pehrsson handled cinematography . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A paramedic is let into a house to the sounds of panic . Earlier , the fastidious Angela prepares to host a party for the 79th birthday of her mother , Maggie . Angela 's daughter , Katie , heads to her room to complete her homework . When Angela moves a cake , she reveals the head of Jim , her husband . Jim plans to play a trick on Pat — a practical joker and the husband of Angela 's sister , Carol ( a recovering alcoholic ) — by hiding under the cake . Maggie , Carol and Pat — the latter wearing a wolf mask — arrive at the house . As the three settle , Pat plugs in his mobile to charge — something Jim had asked Angela to prevent — and secretly places ice in a bucket . Carol privately drinks from a sunscreen bottle while ostensibly unblocking the toilet after her mother could not flush it . Angela is proud that the party food is from Marks 's , but Carol mocks Angela 's middle class affectations . Maggie wants a photograph with the food on the table , and Carol lights the cake 's candles , which burn towards to the flammable fake cake — under which Jim is still hiding . Katie greets her nana and aunt , with Maggie insisting that she tell the joke from Pat 's card . Panicking , Angela blows out the candles . The room clears , and Jim is left frustrated . 
 Katie shows Maggie her tablet as the pair sit in the former 's room . A visibly @-@ drunk Carol enters and talks to Katie about the importance of having fun . Katie wants to finish her homework , but assures Carol that she would make a good mother . Downstairs , Jim persuades Angela to take up position under the table as Pat replaces the soap in the toilet . Pat joins Jim next to the table and returns a VHS ; it becomes clear that Jim 's apparent love for Countdown is actually a cover for his pornography habit , and Jim tries to steer the conversation away from the topic , worried that Angela will hear . Carol enters and puts on music . Pat sees Carol 's sunscreen , and prepares her a drink of " Adam 's ale " . Carol aggressively flirts with Jim , who does not reciprocate . When Pat hands Carol water , she throws it in his face and he leaves . Carol confronts Jim about promises he made to her , and how this house should be hers , not Angela 's . Jim remains terrified that Angela can hear the conversation . 
 Katie and Maggie enter . Maggie talks about Pat 's " frozen willies " — novelty ice cubes — as a distressed Jim makes her a drink , and Carol dances with the uninterested Katie . Jim pulls Carol away from Katie , but Carol hits him ; when Carol talks to Katie about becoming her stepmother , Jim shouts at her . Pat stops him , and , after Carol storms out , tells Jim that " he knows " . Katie is distressed , and interrogates Jim as Maggie plunges a knife into the cake . Jim panics , believing Angela is still under the table , but Angela enters from the kitchen , and reveals that she left to buy a real cake — the story that Jim had told to cover her apparent absence . Katie wants to talk to her mother , but chaos ensues when Maggie chokes on an ice cube , which Pat reveals contains a fake spider . Carol enters , her face blackened by Pat 's fake soap , and Pat , reaching for his charging phone to call the emergency services , is electrocuted , his hands wet from the ice bucket . Angela performs the Heimlich maneuver on her mother ; Carol kneels by Pat and shouts for help . The new cake is pushed into Jim 's face by Katie , who then answers the door . The paramedic enters , then begins a striptease for Maggie to the Casualty theme . His performance , it is revealed , was Pat 's present to Maggie . Later , Jim talks to an oblivious Maggie . He sees Angela and Katie come down the stairs with bags . In silence , he watches them leave as Maggie tells him the joke from Pat 's birthday card . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 <unk> following a birthday party in disarray are common , particularly in plays , and an episode with a similar theme was also included in the first series of Inside No. 9 . " Nana 's Party " revolves around the relatively mundane problems of alcoholism , affairs and aging . Class is another theme , with Angela , Jim and Katie representing a typical middle class family , while Maggie , Carol and Pat are more working class . David Chater , writing for The Times , said that " Nana 's Party " was like " a more twisted version " of Abigail 's Party , with several critics likening the episode to a Mike Leigh drama . Critics also saw the influence of Ayckbourn 's work . 
 The episode 's action revolves around the practical joke involving the cake and , in particular , viewers ' attempts to guess what has caused injury , as they know that the paramedic will be coming . Both Angela and the alcoholic Carol are " ticking time @-@ bomb [ s ] " . Angela is the central character , and is similar to a more anxious version of Sue Brockman , Skinner 's character from Outnumbered . She is stressed and obsessive @-@ compulsive , but aspirational , fastidious , and dutiful . The comedy critic Bruce Dessau compared Ashbourne 's characterisation of Carol to Elizabeth Taylor 's characterisation in Who 's Afraid of Virginia Woolf ? ; as the episode progresses , Carol becomes increasingly abusive . Commentators variously described Pat as " appalling " , " tiresome " , an " irritating tit " and " an insufferable booby " . For Chris Bennion , writing in The Independent , Pat 's character is more complex : " Behind Pat 's cheesy jokes and schoolboy tomfoolery lies a desperately sad and dignified man , standing by and caring for a wife whose love for him has long gone . " Pat and Carol , for Pemberton and Shearsmith , have a more honest relationship than Jim and Angela , despite the problems in their relationship . 
 Jim is Pat 's " weary nemesis " , and a " classic everyman " . Jim and Pat , for Gerard Gilbert of i , are like " two suburban grotesques straight out of a Mike Leigh drama " . Maggie is unaware of the chaos around her , instead distracted by the tablet — on which she plays a game somewhere between Clash of Clans and Minecraft — or retelling the birthday card joke . As a " Middle England suburban " comedy , " Nana 's Party " is " all about the depths and heartaches lurking beneath apparently happy families " . As the story progresses , the characters subvert expectations , with the irritating Pat revealed as a caring husband and the alcoholic Carol revealed as recovering from an unsuccessful affair . Pemberton and Shearsmith characterised the episode 's ending as " downbeat " and lacking a twist , noting that " Nana 's Party " is the only episode of Inside No. 9 in which no character dies . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critics responded positively to " Nana 's Party " , with Patrick Mulkern of Radio Times calling it " another cracker " , Chater characterising it as another " bullseye " , and Julia Raeside and John Dugdale , writing in The Sunday Times , describing it as " another perfectly judged high @-@ wire walk : comedy and tragedy balanced evenly and artfully at all times " . Bennion called it " a tightly wound and hugely impressive half hour " , and the freelance journalist Dan Owen called it " another great instalment " that " really worked " on its own terms . 
 The episode 's writing was praised . For Bennion , the writers displayed their intellect , but he noted that Skinner got " the lion 's share of the good lines " . He felt the ending was " as affecting as it is well @-@ earned " . Raeside , in the course of a review of the whole series for theguardian.com , claimed that one of the writers ' strengths is " pulling at the loose threads of suburban life to reveal the worst of humanity just under the soft furnishings " , and that , in " Nana 's Party " , despite the viewers ' assumption that there would be a " gory " conclusion , the " tragedy was an altogether more gruesome punctuation to the story as Pemberton 's face betrayed the total emotional collapse going on within " . Jack Seale , also writing for theguardian.com , claimed that the script was able to move " effortlessly from funny to dark to desperately sad " . Phoebe @-@ Jane Boyd , in a review of the episode for the entertainment website Den of Geek , wrote that the tension in " Nana 's Party " was " cranked up fantastically " , as the story 's genre , and viewer 's expectations , shift . Owen felt that the writing and cast were able to save what could have been a predictable episode , picking out Skinner as particularly compelling . Bennion also praised the cast , claiming that Skinner , Ashbourne and Kelly were strong , but that Shearsmith gave the best performance . Dessau , too , called the cast " great " , and felt that Shearsmith played his part " to perfection " . 
 = = = Cited sources = = = 
 Pemberton , Steve ; Shearsmith , Reece ( 2015 ) . Nana 's Party ( episode commentary ) . Steve & Reece IN9 ( via SoundCloud ) . Retrieved 3 April 2016 . 
 = Treehouse of Horror XII = 
 “ Treehouse of Horror XII ” is the first episode of The Simpsons ' thirteenth season . Because of Fox ’ s contract with Major League Baseball ’ s World Series , the episode first aired on the Fox Network in the United States on November 6 , 2001 , nearly one week after Halloween . It is the twelfth annual Treehouse of Horror episode , consisting of three self @-@ contained segments . In the first segment , a gypsy puts a curse on Homer , which puts everybody he cares about in danger . In the second segment , which is a parody on both 2001 : A Space Odyssey and Demon Seed , the Simpson family buys a new house , who falls in love with Marge and attempts to kill Homer . In the third and final segment , which lampoons the Harry Potter franchise , Lord Montymort attempts to capture Lisa , a skilled magician , in order to drain her magic powers . 
 The episode was written by Joel H. Cohen , John Frink , Don Payne and Carolyn Omine while Jim Reardon served as the director . It was the first Treehouse of Horror since the original special to not employ “ scary names ” in the credits . According to executive producer Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham , this was due to the September 11 terrorist attacks , after which the Simpsons staff tried to be more serious and sensitive . However , according to current show runner Al Jean , the “ scary names ” were dropped because they were too difficult to come up with . The episode contains numerous references and parodies to science fiction and horror works , including 2001 : A Space Odyssey , Demon Seed , Harry Potter and Star Wars . The episode also features Pierce Brosnan and Matthew Perry as guest stars . 
 The episode was considered a success in the ratings when it first aired , boosting the Fox Network to victory among viewers between ages 18 and 49 the night it was broadcast . Since airing , the episode has received mixed reviews from critics . In particular , critics were dissatisfied with the last segment of the show , while “ House of Whacks ” was often considered to be the best of the three . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Outside Mr. Burns ' manor , Smithers is standing on a ladder , trying to put up a small orange bat decoration on a weather vane . He slips on the ladder , grabs on an electric cord and slides down into an electricity box and gets zapped . A tower from Mr. Burns ' mansion breaks in half , damaging a mausoleum , which opens up four caskets which in turn reveal three skeletons which all resemble Mr. Burns , dressed in various costumes . Later , we see the Simpsons dressed up in costumes , with Homer as Fred Flintstone , Marge as Wilma Flintstone , Lisa and Maggie as conjoined twins , and Bart as a hobo walking up to the mansion ( with Bart and Lisa complaining that Flanders gave them toothpaste instead of candy ) . The family sees the building and caskets on fire , and screams in terror . They run out the gate , which as it closes , has its bars slice the family . The slices of the Simpsons continue to scream and run away . Mr. Burns , delighted , pats the orange bat as it comes to life and flies into the screen , revealing the title , “ The Simpsons Halloween Special XII " . 
 = = = Hex and the City = = = 
 In a parody of the 1996 American body horror film Thinner Homer is cursed by a gypsy after destroying her fortune teller office . The curse soon takes effect , with Marge growing a beard from her blue hair , Lisa turning into a centaur , Bart ’ s neck becoming long and floppy as a result of Homer strangling him , Maggie becoming a ladybug with a human head , Lenny and Carl crushed by a helicopter , and Moe stuffed into his own pickled egg jar ( with Homer wondering how that happened ) . Homer sets out to find a leprechaun to end the curse . Homer uses Lucky Charms cereal as bait to get the leprechaun , eventually finding one after picking through a group of other magical creatures . Homer takes the leprechaun home , but it is extremely hyperactive and it runs amok . Homer takes the leprechaun to the gypsy ’ s office and <unk> it on her . The leprechaun and gypsy fight , but their struggles soon turn into passionate kissing and fondling , much to Homer 's disgust . The leprechaun and the gypsy marry in a ceremony ( led by Yoda ) attended by other gypsies and mythical creatures , as well as the Simpson family . Homer remarks that everything ended happily , but a now fully hair covered Marge reminds him that Bart committed suicide by drowning in his cereal , and that the gypsy said apologizing will bring him back to life . Homer refuses , saying , " She 's not the boss of me ! " . 
 = = = House of Whacks = = = 
 In a parody of Demon Seed and 2001 : A Space Odyssey , the Simpsons buy an automated upgrade for their home called “ Ultrahouse ” , which comes with three celebrity voices : Matthew Perry , Dennis Miller ( whom Lisa and Marge recognize as " the voice that caused all those murder @-@ suicides " ) , and Pierce Brosnan ( which Marge picks because he was on the show Remington Steele ) . Marge finds the house , which does all the work for the Simpsons , charming . The house soon becomes infatuated with Marge after the two share a bath and decides to kill Homer . In the middle of the night , the house lures Homer downstairs by frying bacon , then dispenses ice onto the floor via the refrigerator to make him slip . Homer lands on the table , which is designed to fold inward with a built @-@ in garbage disposal in the center , sending Homer into the blades and apparently killing him . The next morning , Marge fears that Homer is dead and attempts to escape the house with the kids , but Ultrahouse locks her inside and tries to subdue and seduce her . When Marge and the kids rush to the kitchen , they find that Homer is alive , despite cuts all over his body and a gaping hole in the back of his head . After the house attempts to kill him in many ways , Homer leads a charge to the basement where he attacks the CPU ’ s “ British charm unit ” , which makes it speak with a rude American dialect before powering down and finally shutting off . Feeling bad that she has to toss out the Ultrahouse ( since he was charming and witty before being driven mad by love ) , Marge gives the CPU to her sisters Patty and Selma , whose mundane stories about their day at work drives the CPU to suicide ( but since the CPU is not willing to reach inside Selma 's cleavage to get his self @-@ destruct button , the Ultrahouse CPU is reduced to banging himself with Patty and Selma 's Egyptian pyramid lamp ) . 
 = = = Wiz Kids = = = 
 In a parody of Harry Potter , Bart and Lisa go to the “ <unk> ’ s School of <unk> ” in which young boys and girls are trained in the art of witchcraft , such as turning frogs into princes , with Lisa 's turning into a perfect British one while Bart 's results in a freakish , vomiting hybrid begging only for death . Lord Montymort notices Lisa ’ s spells and he and his snake sidekick , Slithers decide to capture Lisa in order to increase his power . Montymort looks for someone to assist him and chooses Bart , who agrees to Montymort ’ s proposal . On the night of the magic recital at <unk> ’ s School of <unk> , Lisa attempts a “ levitating dragon trick ” on an gigantic dragon that is released onto the stage . Lisa is shocked to find that her spell will not work , and then notices that Bart has replaced her wand with a <unk> . The dragon morphs into a giant Montymort who captures Lisa and begins sucking up her power . Bart casts a spell ( to destroy the evil one ) against Montymort , but is struck by lightning . In a last @-@ ditch effort , Bart charges at Montymort and stabs him in the shin with his magic wand . Montymort dies ( as his shin was the source of all his magic ) and is eaten by a crying Slithers . Bart and Lisa walk away , trying to forget everything that happened ( unaware that the leprechaun from the first story is right behind him ) . 
 = = = Epilogue = = = 
 Pierce Brosnan , the Leprechaun , and the freakish Frog Prince exit a trailer , with fruit baskets . After the Leprechaun and Frog Prince ( who were also apparently guest stars ) criticize Brosnan for being allowed to park so close to the set in such a vastly large parking lot , Brosnan offers them a ride to their car . As Brosnan pulls out , he finds out too late that he has been taken hostage as they drive out of the parking lot in a mad haste . 
 = = Production = = 
 “ Treehouse of Horror XII ” was directed by Jim Reardon and co @-@ written by Joel H. Cohen , John Frink , Don Payne and Carolyn Omine . It is the twelfth episode of the annual Treehouse of Horror Halloween specials , and , due to Fox ’ s contract with Major League Baseball ’ s World Series , the episode was pushed back to November 6 , 2001 on the Fox network , airing six days after Halloween . As with the rest of the Halloween specials , the episode is considered non @-@ canon and falls outside of the show ’ s regular continuity . This was the first Halloween special where the writers did not have “ scary names ” in the credits . This was due to the terrorist attacks on September 11 , after which the staff were “ trying to be sensitive ” , and , according to producer Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham , the Halloween names would all reference the attacks had they been kept . Mike Scully , who worked as show runner for the episode , stated that the “ scary names ” were removed because they had also “ turned into shameless plugs ” for side projects done by The Simpsons ’ staff members . 
 The first segment , “ Hex and the City ” , was written by Joel Cohen . The gypsy fortune teller in the segment was portrayed by Tress MacNeille while the leprechaun was played by Dan Castellaneta . Current show runner Al Jean stated in the DVD audio commentary for the episode that the leprechaun seen at the end of the segment was “ as much as [ he ] had ever laughed ” at the color screening for the episode . He stated that the way the leprechaun moved and the way Reardon directed it was “ just so funny ” . The leprechaun has reappeared many times since the episode , becoming one of few characters on The Simpsons to “ leap from Halloween [ shows ] to regular shows ” . 
 “ House of Whacks ” was co @-@ written by John Frink and Don Payne . Payne , who conceived the story of the segment , based it on Stanley Kubrick ’ s film 2001 : A Space Odyssey . The segment would originally end with the Ultrahouse killing Homer , and , for compensation , the family would program the house with Homer ’ s personality . The Ultrahouse was portrayed by Pierce Brosnan , however he was not the staff ’ s first choice for the role . The role was originally intended for Sean Connery , and over the course of production , the staff considered Lyle Lovett and Gary Oldman for the role . The decision remained until “ someone who worked for [ Lovett ] decided it was somehow insulting to have him play a house ” , according to Scully . At this point , the staff settled on Brosnan . Scully stated that “ Brosnan wound up doing a great job ” and that working with him was “ really funny ” . Originally , the Ultrahouse would have a pompadour and play the guitar , however they changed its mannerisms to suit Brosnan ’ s performance better . Matthew Perry also made a guest appearance , playing himself as one of Ultrahouse ’ s voice options . Regular cast member Dan Castellaneta portrayed Dennis Miller in the segment ( a special ending credit had to be made to avoid confusion with viewers who thought the real Dennis Miller did voicework on the show ) . One scene was cut from the segment . The scene would take place during Marge ’ s call to the police station , where police chief Clancy Wiggum , while answering Marge ’ s call , is being shot at by “ <unk> ” . 
 The third segment , “ Wiz Kids ” , was written by Carolyn Omine . Omine stated in the DVD audio commentary for the episode that the segment was “ a really hard sell ” , since only about four of the writers had read Harry Potter and the Philosopher ’ s Stone , the book the segment was based on , while the rest of the writers did not know about the book and thought viewers would not know who Harry Potter was . At the time of the episode ’ s production , four books had been written in the Harry Potter series and the film adaptation of Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone would be released November 16 , ten days after this episode aired . Two scenes were cut from the segment ; one of them would serve as an extension of Montymort and Slithers plotting their scheme , followed by a scene showing Bart combing his hair , while the other scene would show Groundskeeper Willie riding an enchanted lawn mower . The latter scene was cut for time . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The title of “ Hex and the City ” is based on the title of the television show Sex and the City . The segment contains a background character who looks similar to the main character from Caps For Sale , a 1938 children ’ s book about a cap salesman who wears all his hats . Cedars @-@ Sinai is a hospital in Los Angeles . One of the bunnies jumping into the pit that Bart and Homer dug is Bongo , the one @-@ eared rabbit character from Simpsons creator Matt Groening ’ s comic Life in Hell . Among the creatures Bart and Homer find in the pit is journalist and news personality Katie Couric , as well as a pixie resembling Tinkerbell . The priest at the leprechaun and the gypsy ’ s wedding is Yoda , a character from the Star Wars franchise . Maggie turns into a ladybug similar to The Metamorphosis . The plot of “ House of Whacks ” is based on the science @-@ fiction film 2001 : A Space Odyssey by Stanley Kubrick , with Ultrahouse acting as a reference to HAL 9000 , the antagonist of the film . The Ultrahouse ’ s fascination with Marge was inspired by the science @-@ horror film Demon Seed by Donald Cammell . The Ultrahouse wears gloves similar to those worn by Mickey Mouse . To attack Homer , the Ultrahouse uses , among many other weapons , an automatic hammer resembling the one Homer invented in the episode “ The Wizard of Evergreen Terrace ” . “ Wiz Kids ” bases its plot on the Harry Potter books written by J. K. Rowling , who would later make a guest appearance in the episode “ The Regina Monologues ” . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast and re @-@ release = = = 
 In its original American broadcast on November 6 , 2001 , “ Treehouse of Horror XII ” , along with a new episode of the Fox program That ' 70s Show , made Fox the highest rated channel that night among adults ages 18 to 49 , according to Nielsen Media Research . The preliminary Nielsen household rating and share and adult 18 @-@ 49 rating on the Fox channel that night were 7 @.@ 6 rating / 11 share . Media Life Magazine described The Simpsons performance in the ratings that night as “ superb ” . On September 2 , 2003 , the episode was released , along with the episodes “ Treehouse of Horror V ” , “ Treehouse of Horror VI ” and “ Treehouse of Horror VII ” as part of a DVD set titled The Simpsons - Treehouse of Horror . The episode was released again as part of The Simpsons : The Thirteenth Season DVD and Blu @-@ ray set , released on August 24 , 2010 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Following its television broadcast and the home video release of the thirteenth season of The <unk> , “ Treehouse of Horror XII ” received mixed reviews from critics . Casey Broadwater of Blu @-@ ray.com stated that the episode “ is merely so @-@ so entry in the show 's annual Halloween anthology ” , while Colin Jacobsson of DVD Movie Guide wrote that , while it “ doesn ’ t present many significant flaws ” , it also “ doesn ’ t ever really shine ” . He concluded his review by writing “ ' XII ' isn ’ t bad Simpsons , but it ’ s mediocre ” . Writing for Good Film Guide , Matt <unk> held a similar opinion , calling it “ an average quality Treehouse of Horror episode ” and described it as being “ easily watchable ” and “ fairly memorable , but far from the best of the bunch ” . Nate Boss of Project : Blu stated that the episode is “ At times memorable , at times forgettable ” and that it “ kicks off Season 13 with a smile , whimper , and thud ” . Ron Martin of 411Mania stated that , while he does not consider “ Treehouse of Horror XII ” to be the worst episode of the series , “ as far as Treehouse episodes go , it has to be one of the weakest ” . 
 Writing for <unk> , Dominic von <unk> described the episode as a “ disappointment ” . Reviewing the episode for the Daily News of New York City before the episode 's official broadcast , Eric Mink complimented it for being “ fitfully funny ” , however he added that the episode “ seem [ s ] short on the pop @-@ culture digs and celebrity skewering that used to put a high gloss on the show 's gleaming reputation ” . Jennifer Malkowski of DVD Verdict however gave the episode a positive review , and referred to the episode , along with “ Weekend at Burnsie 's ” , as the two best episodes of the season . She wrote that “ [ the episode ] succeeds because of wall @-@ to @-@ wall laughs ” , and cited several scenes and gags , in particular the “ horrible vomiting frog ‘ prince ’ that Bart enchants ” . She gave the episode an A – rating . Aaron Peck of High @-@ Def Digest was also favorable , stating that the episode was “ one of [ his ] all @-@ time favorite Treehouse of Horror episodes ” . 
 “ Hex and the City ” garnered mixed responses from critics ; Broadwater wrote that the segment was “ a bit of a letdown ” while Boss described it as “ fairly poor ” . Mink however felt that the segment was the best in the episode . “ House of Whacks ” was well received . Broadwater described the segment as “ brilliant ” while von <unk> referred to it as being the best of the three . Boss , who was dissatisfied with the first segment , felt that “ House of Whacks ” “ makes up for it ” . Brosnan 's guest appearance was praised ; Jacobsson described the performance as “ a surprisingly nice guest turn ” while Boss referred to it as “ killer ” . Adam Rayner of Obsessed With Film wrote that the segment features Brosnan “ giving his best acting turn since … ‘ The Long Good Friday ’ ? ” . Particular scorn was aimed at “ Wiz Kids ” , the third segment of the episode . Jacobsson stated that “ Wiz Kids ” “ ends the show on a drab note ” while Mink stated that the segment “ pretty much fall [ s ] flat ” . Boss was also critical , writing “ Harry Potter , in my Simpsons ? It may be more likely than you think , although , for sure , it really does stink ” . Andre Dellamorte of Collider wrote that , even though he complimented the segment for being “ bold ” considering the film it parodied had not come out yet , he criticized the segment by writing “ the depth of the parody stops with surface references ” . Peck , however , described the segment as being “ quite possibly one of the best and most clever spoofs of Harry Potter ” . 
 = The Stolen Earth = 
 " The Stolen Earth " is the twelfth episode of the fourth series and the 750th overall episode of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who . The episode was written by show runner and head writer Russell T Davies and is the first of a two @-@ part crossover story with spin @-@ offs The Sarah Jane Adventures and Torchwood ; the concluding episode is " Journey 's End " , the finale of the fourth series . It was first broadcast on BBC One on 28 June 2008 . 
 The finale 's narrative brings closure to several prominent story arcs created during Davies ' tenure as show runner . In the episode , contemporary Earth and twenty @-@ six other planets are stolen by the Daleks , aided by their megalomaniacal creator Davros and a shattered but precognitive Dalek Caan . As the Doctor ( David Tennant ) and his companion Donna Noble ( Catherine Tate ) try to find Earth , his previous companions Jack Harkness ( John Barrowman ) , Martha Jones ( Freema Agyeman ) , Sarah Jane Smith ( Elisabeth Sladen ) , and Rose Tyler ( Billie Piper ) convene to contact him and mount a defence against the Daleks . In the episode 's climax , the Doctor is shot by a Dalek and begins to regenerate . 
 The episode marks the first appearance of Davros since the 1988 serial Remembrance of the Daleks ; he is portrayed by Julian Bleach . It is also the first Doctor Who appearance of Eve Myles as Gwen Cooper ; Gareth David @-@ Lloyd as Ianto Jones ; Tommy Knight as Luke Smith ; and Alexander Armstrong as the voice of Mr Smith . <unk> <unk> and Penelope Wilton reprise supporting roles as Martha 's mother Francine Jones and former Prime Minister Harriet Jones respectively . Paul O 'Grady and Richard Dawkins make cameo appearances as themselves as television personalities who attempt to assuage public fear . 
 The two @-@ part finale 's epic scale and underlying plot was first conceived in early 2007 as the last regular @-@ series story for departing producers Russell T Davies , Julie Gardner , and Phil Collinson : the fourth series finale is the last story produced by Collinson ; and Steven Moffat and Piers Wenger replaced Davies and Gardner as show runner and executive producer respectively in 2010 . Major concepts were already specified by July 2007 and the script was written in December 2007 ; Davies began on the 7th and finished on the 31st . Filming for the finale took place in February and March 2008 , and post @-@ production finished in mid @-@ June 2008 , only two weeks before the episode aired . To conceal as many plot elements as possible , " The Stolen Earth " ' s title was not disclosed until sixteen days before broadcast , preview DVDs omitted the scene where the Doctor regenerates — the last scene is the Doctor being shot by a Dalek — and the episode aired without a preview trailer for " Journey 's End " . 
 The episode was reviewed positively by both the audience and professional reviewers . The Audience Appreciation Index score was 91 : an unprecedented figure for Doctor Who and one of the highest ratings ever given to a television programme . On its original broadcast , it was viewed by 8 @.@ 78 million viewers and was the second most @-@ watched programme of the week ; at the time of broadcast , it was the highest position Doctor Who had ever reached . Critical reaction was overwhelmingly positive : Nicholas Briggs and Julian Bleach were commended for their portrayal of Dalek Caan and Davros respectively ; and most aspects of Davies ' writing were applauded : most notably , the twist ending of the episode was universally appreciated . The shock regeneration created an unprecedented level of public interest in the show , which continued until the transmission of " Journey 's End " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the start of the episode the Earth is teleported out of its spatial location shortly after the Doctor and Donna arrive to investigate Rose Tyler 's warning at the end of " Turn Left " . The Doctor contacts the Shadow Proclamation , a universal police force , to find Earth . They determine twenty @-@ seven missing worlds — including Earth , Adipose III , <unk> , and the Lost Moon of <unk> — automatically reorganise into a specific pattern when placed near each other . Donna mentions the disappearance of bees on contemporary Earth ; this allows the Doctor to trace the planets to the Medusa Cascade , an inter @-@ universal rift . 
 A Dalek force , led by their creator Davros and the red Supreme Dalek , quickly subjugate Earth , despite humanity 's fierce resistance . Military bases , including UNIT 's headquarters in New York City and their aircraft carrier Valiant , are destroyed . Davros , who was thought to have perished during the Time War , was saved by Dalek Caan , who entered the conflict after performing an emergency temporal shift . The power needed to enter the Time War — which is " time @-@ locked " , preventing time @-@ travellers from entering the conflict — caused Caan to become precognitive at the cost of his sanity . 
 The Doctor 's former companions Captain Jack Harkness , Martha Jones , Sarah Jane Smith , and Rose Tyler — who have all encountered the Daleks before — hide in various places : Jack takes refuge in the Torchwood Hub ( 51 ° 27 ′ 50 ″ N 3 ° 09 ′ 51 ″ W ) with his team ; Martha uses Project Indigo — an experimental teleport device scavenged from the Sontarans — to escape UNIT New York with the " <unk> Key " , a device that activates a defensive last resort nuclear weapons system ; Sarah Jane stays in her home with her son Luke Smith and supercomputer Mr Smith ; and Rose tracks down Noble 's mother and grandfather . They are contacted by former Prime Minister Harriet Jones through a secret " subwave network " designed by Mr Copper — a humanoid alien who met the Doctor in " Voyage of the Damned " — to contact the Doctor 's companions in an emergency . They attempt to contact the Doctor by amplifying the sub @-@ wave signal ; Sarah uses Mr Smith 's computing power and Torchwood manipulates the spatial @-@ temporal rift in Cardiff . The Doctor and the Daleks receive the transmission and trace the signal : the Daleks kill Harriet Jones ; and the Doctor is able to locate Earth in a temporally <unk> pocket universe . 
 At the end of the episode , the Doctor travels into the pocket universe and receives transmitted images of his companions in the subwave signal . After Davros hijacks the signal and taunts the Doctor about his resurrection and imminent victory , the Doctor breaks communication and attempts to convene with his companions . The Doctor lands on the same street Rose is searching for him on and runs to embrace her , but is shot by a Dalek . Jack promptly destroys the Dalek and helps Rose and Donna carry the Doctor into the TARDIS , where the Doctor begins to regenerate . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Early development = = = 
 " The Stolen Earth " and " Journey 's End " are the culmination of all four series of Doctor Who since its revival in 2005 and show runner Russell T Davies ' work in reviving the show . Davies stated the story arc for the fourth series comprised " an element from every episode — whether it 's a person , a phrase , a question , a planet , or a mystery [ that ] builds up to the grand finale " , and the finale " [ had ] been seeded for a long time , with small but vital references going all the way back to Series One " . Several of these thematic motifs are used as major plot points : the significance of disappearance of bees , the Medusa Cascade , and the Shadow Proclamation are explained in the episode . It is the first major crossover between Doctor Who and its spin @-@ off series Torchwood and The Sarah Jane Adventures . Davies compared the crossover 's conception to a typical child 's imagination of a crossover between the Doctor Who and Star Wars universes : 
 When you see the story , it 'll make so much sense that all these characters are involved . It 's simply doing what kids do in their imaginations : they 're experts at crossovers and would think of nothing of having their Dalek toys battling Star Wars droids . Why not have all the factions of the Doctor Who universe going into battle together ? 
 The fourth series finale was first planned in early 2006 . Its epic scale — including the threat of the destruction of reality and large number of guest stars — was required to compensate for Doctor Who 's reduced airtime in 2009 and the imminent departure of producers Davies , Julie Gardner , and Phil Collinson between mid @-@ 2008 and early 2010 . The episode 's story was defined in early 2007 , when Davies disseminated his summary of the fourth series to the production team . In his brief , he described the finale — already titled " The Stolen Earth " — as : 
 The season finale . Earth is transported halfway across the universe as part of a Dalek plot . These episodes feature Martha , Captain Jack , Sarah Jane , Elton , and Rose . Jackie and Mickey ? Also , can I have the Torchwood team , just for a couple of days ? Plus , a futuristic space station complex where lots of alien races are gathering for a conference . CGI : Bane , Krillitanes , Gelth , Isolus , everything we 've got in the computer . 
 Prosthetics : Judoon , Slitheen , the Graske , the <unk> of <unk> , Sisters of the Wicker Place Mat , plus a new female alien , a wise old counsellor , head of the space conference . Lots of gunfire and exterminations . And the biggest Dalek spaceship interior ever – more like a Dalek Temple . Christ almighty ! The skies over the Earth need to be changed to weird outer space vistas . Also , visible in the sky , a huge Dalek ship interior . The size of a solar system ! This will probably explode . Like they do . 
 And Davros . 
 Donna and Midshipman Alonzo Frame ( Russell Tovey ) — from " The Runaway Bride " and " Voyage of the Damned " respectively — were also planned to make cameos in " The Stolen Earth " : Donna was planned to appear before Catherine Tate agreed to reprise the lead role for the entire fourth series ; and Frame was present as part of the Shadow Proclamation in several drafts of the episode . Piper 's appearance was almost cancelled when filming was originally scheduled during her honeymoon in January 2008 . Freema Agyeman was similarly contracted to appear in the finale when she accepted the role of Martha Jones in 2006 . 
 Major concepts of the finale were already developed in March 2007 . Davies explained the Medusa Cascade — first mentioned in dialogue between the Master and the Doctor in " Last of the Time Lords " — to Radio Times and Doctor Who Magazine journalist Benjamin Cook as " just an area of space " near an inter @-@ universal rift which allowed Rose to return for the fourth series . He sent Cook another email several hours later that explained Dalek Caan 's role in the finale and Davros ' resurrection from the Time War . The Doctor 's regeneration was conceived in two separate parts in mid @-@ 2007 : Davies outlined the concept of two Doctors in " Journey 's End " in late April 2007 ; and using a regeneration to end the episode was originally conceived on 12 July 2007 . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Davies started writing " The Stolen Earth " on 10 December 2007 . He had spent the previous day writing Martha 's appearance in New York City . He considered destroying the city but decided against it : 
 I spent today considering one tangible thing : whether to destroy New York in 4 @.@ 12 . That would be fun , wouldn 't it ? The idea came from the fact that all the Doctor 's companions are found in England . I 've a chance to expand on that , create a bigger world . [ ... ] But destroying New York has its problems : it leaves heavy repercussions for the rest of Doctor Who history , because there 's no reset button . I worry about that . Series Five is bound to have episodes set on modern @-@ day Earth – and that might be hard to establish , because it 'd be a very wounded world . [ ... ] These emails do influence things , definitely , because I 'm thinking , no , destroying New York is a bad choice . 
 Several days before he started writing the episode , he received a call from Bernard Cribbins , who proposed a scene in which his character , Wilfred Mott , would fire a paintball pellet at a Dalek 's eyestalk . He proposed it as a reference to the Peter Cushing Dr. Who films that he starred in in the mid @-@ 1960s , and thought it would provide comic relief in between heavy exposition . The Dalek 's response — evaporating the paintball and replying " My vision is not impaired ! " — was added after Cook reminded Davies it was " obligatory " to invert the recurring phrase spoken when a Dalek was blinded ( " Vision impaired ! " ) , and remove a weakness the Daleks had exhibited since their first appearance in the 1963 – 1964 serial The Daleks . Wilfred 's reaction to Rose after she blew up the same Dalek — asking her if she wanted to swap weapons — was likewise added by Cribbins by way of an ad @-@ lib during filming . 
 Davies ' first drafts of the Dalek invasion and the Shadow Proclamation were fundamentally different from their broadcast counterparts . Instead of hearing the Daleks ' repeated cry of " Exterminate " , Captain Jack and Sarah Jane reacted to the sight of Dalek saucers . One saucer would descend towards Whitehall , destroy Big Ben in transit , and assassinate the Prime Minister , Aubrey Fairchild . The Shadow Proclamation — defined in the script as an intergalactic police force that occupied a " huge installation , metal sci @-@ fi towers ranged across a series of linked asteroids , hanging in space , like a Roger Dean painting " — originally featured " every creature [ the revival of the show ] ever had " and a cameo by Blon Fel @-@ <unk> <unk> @-@ Day " Margaret Blaine " Slitheen ( Annette Badland ) as a <unk> ( a <unk> family ) toddler : 
 47 : INT . Shadow Proclamation lobby : Night . 
 Close on the Doctor and Donna — who 's recovering , brave face on — both stepping out ... 
 The Doctor : ... right , the first thing we 've got to do is ... 
 Stops dead , as a platoon of Judoon march past , big , heavy boots stomping , left to right , the Doctor and Donna nipping through a gap in the formation , pushing forward ... 
 The Doctor : ... whoops , ' scuse me , sorry ... 
 FX : Three Krillitanes swoop down , the Doctor and Donna brushing them off , still pushing forward ... 
 Donna : Oy ! Get off ! 
 The Doctor : Keep your wings in , you lot ! 
 ... then stopped by two <unk> buzzing right to left ... 
 The Doctor : ... oh , mind those stings , thank you ... 
 The Doctor and Donna then stopping to look properly . Gulp . 
 FX : Wide shot . Big , white open smart @-@ sci @-@ fi @-@ building . Filled with crowd multiplication Judoon , crowd multiplication Slitheen , a few Hath , two helmeted Sycorax , and crowd multiplication space @-@ extras : some in big opera cloaks ; Sisters of the Wicker Place Mat from 1 @.@ 2 ; plus a lot of monks and nuns . Also , Shadow police : like Judoon , but Human , in big stompy black uniforms . Flying through the air : Krillitanes ; <unk> ; and Gelth . And in one corner , a huge <unk> Adipose , mewling . All busy , chaotic , emergency ! 
 The Doctor : Tell me , what 's everyone doing here ? 
 Slitheen : The whole universe is on red alert ! Planets have disappeared ! We have lost Clom ! 
 The Doctor : Clom 's gone ? ! 
 Slitheen : Clom 's gone ! 
 Donna : What 's Clom ? 
 Slitheen : Our twin planet ! Without it , Raxacoricofallapatorius will fall out of the sky ! [ turns to go ] We must phone home ... [ to Baby Slitheen ] ... this way , Margaret . 
 Baby Slitheen talks with the voice of Margaret Blaine : 
 Baby Slitheen : Take me home , Daddy , I don 't like the nasty policemen ! 
 The number of monsters and the Proclamation 's bureaucratic nature would anger the Doctor and cause Alonzo Frame — now employed as a " Shadow Soldier " — to aid him in filling out paperwork . Frame would be killed by the Daleks later in the story . 
 A week after he had written the Shadow Proclamation scenes , Davies decided to rewrite the scenes heavily because of monetary and script constraints . Tovey 's cameo was replaced with a scene centred on the " Chief Constable " because he was unavailable for filming , much to Davies ' disappointment . The Dalek invasion was also rewritten to the version broadcast after he decided a personal assassination of the Prime Minister was uncharacteristically " diplomatic " , and recycled the Prime Minister 's name for " The Next Doctor " He also expressed doubts about the Shadow Proclamation to Cook ; he thought the Chief Constable was " terribly stripped down " , but admitted the Shadow Proclamation was a vital element of the plot . He decided to correct the faults in the Chief Constable by renaming her the " Shadow Architect " ( Kelly Hunter ) : 
 I went back and fixed the Chief Constable . Her main problem was being a Chief Constable , so I decided ... that if she has to say lame sci @-@ fi lines , she can only work if she 's a sci @-@ fi creature . I 've renamed her the Shadow Architect , made her albino and weird ( hair scraped back into a black snood , red eyes , solemn , swathed in black robes ) , and given her a slight mysticism — not hermit @-@ in @-@ a @-@ cave mysticism , just an albino freakiness — so she 's sort of interesting now . 
 Davies kept the Shadow Proclamation scenes set before the introduction of the Shadow Architect until early February 2008 . The scenes were linked by an argument between the Doctor and the Judoon : the Doctor would complain that Earth 's disappearance should take priority , but the Judoon kept insisting the Doctor wait in a queue to report the disappearance . The Doctor would win the argument by overloading the Judoon 's translator machines ( because he could speak six million languages simultaneously ) and order them to allow him to see the Shadow Architect immediately . Davies ' submitted script was over the budget afforded for special effects , so he was required to cut the scene , even though Annette Badland had already recorded dialogue for her cameo . The rewritten — and eventually broadcast — scene had the TARDIS " land directly in the Shadow Architect 's office " with four Judoon guards . 
 Davies wrote former Prime Minister Harriet Jones ( Penelope Wilton ) into the script on 22 December — before Wilton was approached about reprising the role — because Gardner and Collinson wished for the character to have a satisfying and redemptive conclusion ; in the dénouement of her previous appearance in " The Christmas Invasion " , the character faced a vote of no confidence in Parliament after she ordered Torchwood to shoot down a fleeing Sycorax ship . Harriet Jones ' story arc thus formed a tripartite storyline which consisted of an introduction , animosity towards the Doctor , and redemption ( albeit at the cost of her life ) . Davies was aware that Wilton was " very hard to book " and restricted her appearance to one day 's filming in one location ( Harriet 's home ) to make negotiations easier ; had Wilton declined , Davies planned to replace her with either Donna , Mr Copper ( Clive Swift ) from " Voyage of the Damned " , or Elton from " Love & Monsters " . Wilton accepted unconditionally because she " would do anything for ... Davies " and she wished to act in Phil Collinson 's last filming block as producer ; her first appearance in " Aliens of London " was filmed in the first production block of the first series . Collinson and Davies lamented the character 's death : Collinson " [ couldn 't ] bear the thought she 's dead " and argued that she escaped death ; and Davies generally stated in Doctor Who Magazine issue 397 that " when [ significant characters a writer creates ] have to die , it 's a genuinely emotional time " . 
 Davies ' scriptwriting was affected by the development of a head cold and overrunning script constraints ; he was annoyed that he had written " dialogue [ he had ] been dying to write " with a " faint heart " because he would have to cut it . Because he was behind schedule , he was forced to cancel plans to attend Piper 's wedding and almost cancelled plans to celebrate the New Year with his boyfriend . These problems affected his first draft of the Doctor 's conversation with his companions and encounter with Davros ; he dismissed it as " lame shit " which would waste licence @-@ payers ' money , and replaced it with a different version hours later . The conversation features all of the Doctor 's companions simultaneously talking to the Doctor ; Tate , Tennant , and director Graeme Harper made the creative decision to have the Doctor ignore any mention of the Daleks because they thought the Doctor 's joviality in the scene would be otherwise inappropriate . He eventually finished the script at 1am on New Year 's Eve . Cook reviewed the last pages of the script and suggested that the episode should air without a trailer ; Davies agreed by noting that " [ the BBC ] never send out preview discs of the last episode " and that any advertisements for " Journey 's End " could " just show lots of Daleks and a repeat of " I 'm regenerating " [ the Doctor 's last line in the episode before the regeneration process starts ] . The episode was officially submitted on 7 January 2008 : the preparation date for " The Stolen Earth " and " Journey 's End " . 
 Davies discussed the episode 's climax in detail in the show 's companion series Doctor Who Confidential . The climax — a Dalek ray shooting the Doctor and his consequent regeneration — was written by Davies as a pastiche of romance fiction . He compared the reunion between Rose and the Doctor to " the biggest romance [ the viewer ] has ever seen " and joked that seminal films such as Gone with the Wind should have ended with a Dalek shooting the male lead , and intensified the scene 's emotional impact through Piper 's cameos throughout the fourth series . Tennant described the Doctor 's wounding as a " moment of high emotion " and lamented that " [ the Doctor ] can 't have a happy moment , especially with a cliffhanger needing to be written " . The episode ended during the regeneration because Davies wanted to create the " biggest , most exciting cliffhanger in Doctor Who " , and to differentiate the scene from previous regenerations , which were always completed at the end of serials . He considered its resolution — the regeneration process being halted by the Doctor , who siphoned the excess energy into his severed hand after his injuries were healed — legitimate because the hand was an important plot device in " Journey 's End " ' s climax . The production team realised the halted regeneration and creation of a new Doctor would create a debate amongst fans about whether one of the Doctor 's twelve regenerations were used up . The production team originally declined to comment to avoid the debate ; Davies later said that he believed that because the process wasn 't completed , the Doctor did not use one of his regenerations . However , the 2013 Christmas special The Time of the Doctor , which was the last regular story for the Eleventh Doctor , confirmed that this regeneration did indeed count , as the Tenth Doctor was described as having " vanity issues at the time " . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The finale contains nineteen principal cast members , sixteen of whom appear in " The Stolen Earth " . As a consequence of the episode 's crossover nature , the episode is the first appearance of Gareth David @-@ Lloyd as Ianto Jones and Tommy Knight as Luke Smith in Doctor Who . Eve Myles , who previously played Gwyneth in " The Unquiet Dead " , makes her first appearance as the Torchwood female lead Gwen Cooper . The episode features many returning characters : Billie Piper , Freema Agyeman , <unk> <unk> , John Barrowman , Nicholas Briggs , Elisabeth Sladen , and Penelope Wilton reprise roles for " The Stolen Earth " . Evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins and comedian Paul O 'Grady make cameo appearances on Torchwood 's television screen ; cameos by celebrities such as Davina McCall , Derek <unk> , and Ann Widdecombe had been a part of each penultimate episode since the show 's revival . O 'Grady was given a cameo after Davies heard that he was a fan of the show ; and Dawkins was added to the script by Davies when Cook suggested him to portray the " elderly professor " on a Newsnight @-@ style television programme discussing the new planets in the sky . Dawkins accepted because of his pre @-@ existing association with Doctor Who ; his wife Lalla Ward portrayed the second incarnation of the Time Lady Romana between 1979 and 1981 . Gary Milner was cast as the extra " Scared Man " after misreading the <unk> as " Sacred Man " and creating a " priest @-@ like " portrayal of the character . Andrew Bullivant — who portrayed the Milkman in the episode 's cold open — was given a role in The Sarah Jane Adventures serial The Temptation of Sarah Jane Smith as a policeman because of his performance in " The Stolen Earth " . Michael Brandon later appeared in the audio play Lurkers at Sunlight 's Edge . Kelly Hunter made a further appearance as the Shadow Architect in the opening episode of Series 9 , " The Magician 's Apprentice " . 
 = = = Davros = = = 
 " The Stolen Earth " is the first appearance of Davros since the 1988 serial Remembrance of the Daleks . Davies postponed Davros ' return as he thought that " Davros would dominate the Daleks ... like plain robots , instead of the scheming geniuses that they are " , and used the previous series to establish the Daleks ' individual intelligence . Davros was kept as a contingency plan for several occasions : the character would have appeared in " The Parting of the Ways " if the Emperor Dalek prop was too expensive ; and was " even a possibility " to reside in the titular prison in " The Satan Pit " . Davies wrote an origin story for Davros to clear up the character 's convoluted backstory which was eventually cut because of time constraints . 
 Davies cast Julian Bleach to portray Davros after his performances in his Olivier Award @-@ winning play <unk> Peter and as the <unk> in the Torchwood episode " From Out of the Rain " . To keep the return of Davros secret , the character was referred to as " The Enemy " or " Dave [ Ross ] " among the crew and was kept anonymous on the shooting scripts as much as possible ; however , the Radio Times called the secret " one of the worst @-@ kept ... in television history " . David Tennant liked Davros ' " <unk> megalomaniac " attitude and the nostalgic feeling he created — Tennant 's first memory of Doctor Who was Davros ' debut in Genesis of the Daleks — and described himself as being " absolutely captivated by [ the ] extraordinary creature " . To prepare for his role , Bleach reviewed Genesis of the Daleks , one of his favourite serials , to remind himself of Davros ' voice . Bleach described his interpretation of Davros as that of " [ a ] twisted megalomaniac , [ a ] mad scientist , [ and a ] misguided genius " at the same time and described the character as a whole as " a cross between Hitler and Stephen Hawking " whose " nihilistic desires " made the character " extraordinary " . Bleach would later use the German leader 's oratorical skills and his " dogmatic speeches " as a reference point . 
 Davies , prosthetics designer Neill Gorton , costume designer Louise Page , and concept artist Peter McKinstry then met to discuss the design of Davros for the episode . They agreed to keep the visual design of Davros faithful to that shown in his debut Genesis of the Daleks ; The only major change was to replace the hand destroyed in Revelation of the Daleks with a <unk> robotic version . McKinstry aimed to make Davros " bigger and scarier " by updating the " flimsy " design of the classic series : 
 We wanted to get away from the slightly flimsy look of the earlier series . So I beefed Davros up , made him more sturdy . I also think that the reinvented Davros is unusual for the new Doctor Who because he is genuinely grotesque . Sometimes we ’ ve held back a bit with the ugliness of the monsters . But Davros is a very unpleasant looking character , which makes his return all the more powerful . 
 The team made two minor changes to the design : they removed Davros ' microphone and completely redesigned Davros ' headpiece . The team felt that the microphone was redundant because Davros did not " speak in a whisper and need something to make him more audible " , and originally intended to leave Bleach 's voice unaltered in post @-@ production : the decision to treat the voice was not made until late May 2008 ; and Gorton thought the original headpiece " always seemed particularly weak " for " such a powerful character " . After he was informed that the production designer for Genesis of the Daleks wanted the headpiece to resemble a medical brace , Gorton redesigned it to appear to be " screwed directly into [ Davros ' ] head " . 
 Page and Gorton contemporaneously collaborated on Davros ' upper body . Page designed the leather tunic — which Gorton thought was " a beautiful piece of costume ... which echoes the classic design " — and Gorton designed the ribcage . Davies explained the use of the leather tunic and the exposed ribcage in Doctor Who Magazine issue 401 : 
 Seriously , Davros is meant to be horrific , and we 've had so many withered geniuses in sci @-@ fi lately — like Emperor Palpatine in Star Wars — that I needed something to make everyone sit up and realise that this man is the King of Horror : the original and the best ! And he 's been through so many physical changes over the years , I wanted to add one of my own . I asked Louise to give him the new jacket buckles , because I wanted it to look like a straitjacket . It just seemed to fit , cos he 's so insane ! 
 = = = Daleks = = = 
 " The Stolen Earth " is the first appearance of the Daleks since " Evolution of the Daleks " , which was filmed eighteen months prior to the episode ; consequently , the prop controllers experienced difficulty re @-@ adapting to their roles . Davies 's inclusion of the Daleks as part of the crossover was intended to create a " charged atmosphere " for the protagonists : Jack was killed by the Daleks ; Rose and Martha were present at two of their apparent extinctions ; and Sarah was present at their creation . The animatronic of the Dalek mutant had to be recreated for the episode , because the previous prop that was used in " Dalek " and " The Parting of the Ways " was irreversibly damaged by water when the latter was filmed . " The Stolen Earth " features two new variants of Daleks : the Supreme Dalek , coloured red as an allusion to the Peter Cushing film Dr. Who and the Daleks ; and the partially destroyed Dalek Caan . Caan was described in the shooting script as : 
 ... open , gutted , and melted , its harsh lines now curved and warped ... in the middle of the warped , open shell sits a Dalek Mutant , tentacles stirring . This creature is more distorted than ever , its skin bubbled . One blind eye staring out ; voice ancient , sing @-@ song , mad . 
 Voice actor Nicholas Briggs adopted a different voice for each model : he adopted a grandiose voice for the Supreme Dalek to fit his perception of the character as egotistical ; and he adopted a sing @-@ song voice for Caan to reflect the character 's insanity as a result of entering the Time War . Briggs justified his interpretation of Caan by explaining that " [ Caan ] can 't tell when he 's happy or sad , his emphasis is very strange and he finds things funny when things aren 't funny " , creating a soothsayer personality with an " almost pure " mind . An expanded theory was published in Briggs ' interview with Doctor Who Magazine in July 2008 : 
 My theory on Caan is that being sucked through the Time War and blown out the other end has kind of reverse @-@ wired — or random @-@ wired — his brain , so all his neurons are firing in constantly changing , random , insane ways . That 's why he doesn 't really know what 's funny or serious . He just knows the truth , and it blurts out in this odd , cryptic way . I think he 's frozen in a moment of <unk> ecstasy . When any emotion surges up inside him , it makes him laugh , whether its appropriate or not . 
 Briggs ' portrayal was well @-@ received by the production team : Graeme Harper " loved Caan 's giggling " and requested " more ... on every take " ; and Davies described Caan as " the creepiest Dalek yet " . The finale also introduced minor changes to the Daleks : the characteristic Dalek " plunger " was replaced with a gear mechanism for scenes that featured Davros ' guard : the mechanism is used to control Dalek machinery aboard the Dalek flagship Crucible more efficiently ; and the Dalek eyestalk exhibits a minuscule twitch in scenes , a characteristic added by Graeme Harper to make them appear cautious and " on @-@ edge " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 " The Stolen Earth " features the first external location shots of the Daleks since the revival of Doctor Who in 2005 , and the greatest proportion of filming undertaken at night since the show 's revival : apart from the pre @-@ credits sequence set in suburban London , all of the scenes set on Earth were filmed at night . 
 The two @-@ parter took approximately six weeks in 2008 to film ; regular filming began on 18 February 2008 and ended on 29 March . The first scene shot for " The Stolen Earth " — a news report that starred <unk> Carl as Trinity Wells — was filmed on 31 January 2008 in a news studio at BBC Wales ' Broadcasting House . The first week of filming took place entirely at the show 's studios in Upper Boat , Rhondda Cynon Taf ; most of the scenes set in the Torchwood Hub and the TARDIS — including the regeneration scene — were filmed in the period . 
 The filming schedule of the second and third week alternated between " The Stolen Earth " and " Journey 's End " . Three days were allocated to filming for " The Stolen Earth " : scenes in Donna 's house were filmed on 26 February on Nant Fawr Road , Cyncoed , Cardiff ; the Crucible Vault set in the Upper Boat Studios was used on 3 March ; and scenes at the Shadow Proclamation were filmed at the School of Optometry at Cardiff University on 8 March 2008 . 
 Filming for the episode 's outdoor scenes began in the afternoon of 11 March . The first outdoor scene filmed was the cold open , on West Mound Crescent in <unk> . Two scenes were filmed in Pontypridd on 12 March : exterior scenes of the Noble household took place on Hawthorn Road — rather than the usual location in Cyncoed — before relocating to Market Street in the town centre to film the scenes where Rose encounters members of the public in the middle of a riot . Tennant and Tate meanwhile filmed the trailer for the fourth series because they were not required on location . 
 The Doctor and Rose 's reunion was filmed on 13 March in Penarth town centre , in front of two hundred people ; consequently , the scene was leaked onto the Internet and reported in the next day 's edition of The Sun . Graeme Harper insisted that the scene appear " mystical " because the characters ' reunion was " the most magical moment " in the entire episode and Ernie <unk> , the Director of Photography for the show , compared the scene 's feeling to the 1980s science @-@ fiction film Blade Runner . Exterior filming for the week finished in Brook Street and the adjoining Plantagenet Street in Riverside , Cardiff , for scenes where Daleks kidnap humans for experimentation and Wilf 's attack on a Dalek respectively . Scenes in the UNIT headquarters in Manhattan were filmed on the evenings of 16 March and 19 March : the first night , depicting the Dalek invasion , was filmed in a traffic control centre on Junction 32 of the M4 motorway , with the actual Dalek invasion of the building filmed in six minutes at 5 : 30am the following morning ; and the second night , depicting Martha 's escape from UNIT , was filmed in a warehouse in Nantgarw owned by the National Museum Wales . Because of a traffic accident on the first night , the production team were prepared to postpone the shoot if needed . 
 Penelope Wilton reprised her role as Harriet Jones to film a scene on 18 March , in a cottage in Dinas Powys . Filming was stalled because of difficulty transporting the Dalek props into the cottage : specifically , the raised patio doors made it difficult to balance and maneuver the props . The remainder of the fifth week was used to film Dalek @-@ only scenes at Upper Boat Studios , when the Vault set was redressed as the Crucible command deck . Scenes that featured Martha and Sarah in their houses were filmed alternately during the sixth week — the former in the previously regular location of Lower Cwrt @-@ Y @-@ Vil Road in Penarth and the latter primarily at Upper Boat — ending on 28 March with scenes of Sarah and Luke in their attic . The last exterior scene filmed for the episode was recorded on 25 March in the regular The Sarah Jane Adventures filming location of Clinton Road in Penarth , and consisted of external shots of Sarah 's house and two Daleks accosting Sarah en route to meeting the Doctor . General filming for the episode — and the two @-@ parter — closed with Dawkins ' and O 'Grady 's cameos : Dawkins was filmed at Upper Boat after shooting finished in the attic set ; and O 'Grady was filmed on 31 March alongside an episode of The Paul O 'Grady Show at The London Studios on the South Bank of the River Thames . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 The episode was given to post @-@ production team The Mill after filming concluded . The number of effects in the first draft was almost three times larger than broadcast ; consequently , several scenes — most notably , all but one shot of the attack on the Valiant — were cut from the episode . The Mill created two notable effects for " The Stolen Earth " : the invasion of New York City , using reconnaissance photos and establishing shots from the filming of " Daleks in Manhattan " to create a 2.5D shot of the city ; and the planetary array at the Medusa Cascade , using a fully three @-@ dimensional model . 
 Murray Gold concurrently composed the score for the episode . In conjunction with new cues composed for the fourth series , Gold used some of his earlier work , such as Rose 's and Harriet Jones ' leitmotifs , the Ood 's " Song of Freedom " from " Planet of the Ood " , and the appearance fanfare for Mr Smith , the latter being played in diegesis . Gold discussed the new cues in the release of the fourth series soundtrack : 
 " The Doctor 's Theme Season [ sic ] Four " is an orchestral and choral arrangement of the Doctor 's leitmotif from the first series performed by the BBC National Orchestra and Chorus of Wales . The original theme was a minimalist solo performed by Melanie Pappenheim . Davies and Collinson described the music as " President Flavia [ from The Five Doctors ] singing out of the Time Vortex " and was intended to be used when " things get too Time Lord @-@ y " . An instrumental of the new arrangement was used at the end of " Forest of the Dead " , when the Doctor tries to save River Song ( Alex Kingston ) from death . The rearrangement — and first full prolific use of the cue since " The Parting of the Ways " — specifically represents Rose 's return and the four @-@ series story arc 's cyclic nature . 
 " The Greatest Story Never Told " is a cue used regularly in the second half of the fourth series . The cue evokes the scores of previous episodes to represent the Doctor 's " past love " . 
 " The <unk> Fate of Donna Noble " is a cue that first appeared in " Turn Left " . It represents Donna 's realisation of her grand destiny and her demises at the end of " Turn Left " and " Journey 's End " . 
 " Davros " is the eponymous character 's leitmotif . Gold described Davros as having a " sound motif that underscored him " in addition to " the fingernails ... voice ... [ and ] face emerging from the shadows " . Part of the theme was taken from the score of " Midnight " to represent Dalek Caan 's prophecies . 
 " The Dark and Endless Dalek Night " is the Dalek leitmotif for the series finale , and features the BBC National Chorus of Wales . <unk> and conductor Ben Foster described the track as his " defining moment " of scoring the entire fourth series . 
 " A Pressing Need to Save the World " is a rearrangement of a theme first used in the second series of Torchwood ; Gold felt it " was appropriate to bring it back " for the series finale . 
 " Hanging on the <unk> " is a tabla @-@ centric cue that is played over scenes that depicted the Doctor 's companions using the subwave network to reach him . 
 The episode was allocated a fifty @-@ minute slot on BBC One and the only cuts to the episode were minor pieces of dialogue . Post @-@ synchronisation of crowd dialogue took place on 5 June and the episode 's final mix took place on 12 June 2008 : the same day the episode was officially announced by the BBC . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 = = = Partial media blackout , broadcast , and ratings = = = 
 The title of the episode was the last of the fourth series to be revealed ; in April 2008 , when the other twelve episode titles were revealed , " The Stolen Earth " ' s was withheld because " it [ gave ] away too much " ; its title was only revealed two weeks before broadcast . Like the second series finale comprising " Army of Ghosts " and " Doomsday " , the final scene of " The Stolen Earth " was removed from preview DVDs sent to reviewers and a media blackout was imposed on any plot details from " Journey 's End " . 
 Overnight ratings estimated that " The Stolen Earth " was watched by 7 @.@ 4 million viewers , approximately 38 @.@ 3 % of the total television audience . The final viewing figure was 8 @.@ 78 million viewers , the second highest figure of the week beginning 23 June 2008 ; the highest was the UEFA Euro 2008 Final , watched by 8 @.@ 84 million viewers . Prior to the episode 's broadcast , only " Voyage of the Damned " had ranked as high ; the record was subsequently broken by " Journey 's End " a week later . Consequently , rival channel ITV1 suffered its second worst average audience share in the channel 's history : the daily average was 10 @.@ 2 % compared to BBC One 's 26 @.@ 9 % average share . The episode received an Appreciation Index score of 91 ( considered excellent ) , the highest rating ever received by the series and one of the highest ratings ever for a terrestrial television programme . The high Index rating broke the previous record of 89 shared by " The Parting of the Ways " , " Doomsday " , " Silence in the Library " , and " Forest of the Dead " . Including its viewership on the BBC iPlayer and the following repeats on BBC Three and BBC One , " The Stolen Earth " was eventually viewed by 12 @.@ 86 million viewers : over two million higher than the series average of 10 @.@ 59 million . 
 The episode depicted <unk> 900 461 as the Doctor 's phone number ; the number is reserved by Ofcom for dramatic purposes . After transmission , approximately 2 @,@ 500 viewers attempted to call the number and received a network message that explained the number was not in service . Ofcom consequently released a statement saying that the calls were free because the number did not exist . 
 = = = " Doctor Who fever " = = = 
 The episode 's airing — in particular , its shock regeneration — contributed to a public surge of interest , described by Daily Mail journalist Paul <unk> as " Doctor Who fever " . The regeneration prompted a large amount of speculation to Tennant 's replacement : actor Robert Carlyle was the bookmaker 's favourite to replace Tennant ; and actors James McAvoy , Jason Statham , Alan Davies , and James Nesbitt were less popular predictions . In his article about the public reaction to the cliffhanger , <unk> offered five popular theories : a botched regeneration that resulted in two Doctors ; a revelation that the whole series was dream sequence like the ninth season of Dallas ; Tennant 's successor being female ; a normal regeneration ; and a cover @-@ up by the BBC to disguise the fact that " Journey 's End " would be Tennant 's last appearance ; the first theory proved to be correct . The increase of public interest peaked in the two days prior to the transmission of " Journey 's End " : the day before transmission saw the Seventh Doctor 's actor Sylvester McCoy , Collinson , Davies , and Agyeman appear on separate daytime television shows ; and coverage of the series finale was the top story in BBC News Online 's entertainment section several hours before transmission . Davies attributed the amount of interest the episode created — which was greater than he expected — and the success of the new series to the measures made in keeping plot details secret and creating a " live experience " : 
 It 's exciting ... when you get kids in playground talking about your story , about who 's going to live or die , then I consider that a job well done , because that 's interactive television , that 's what it 's all about : it 's debate and fun and chat . It 's playing a game with the country and I think that 's wonderful . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode was well received by viewers , in particular , the show 's teenage fanbase . In Doctor Who Magazine 's 2008 viewer poll , the episode won the awards for as " Best Story " , " Best Guest Actor " for Julian Bleach , " Best Monster " for the Daleks , " Best Music " , and " Best Villain " for Davros ; the latter was won with a supermajority of the votes cast . The episode was the best @-@ received episode of the fourth series among members of the Doctor Who Forum , with an approval rating of 92 @.@ 4 % . In Doctor Who Magazine 's 2009 viewer poll The Mighty 200 , rating all of the Doctor Who stories transmitted at the time , the story was rated thirteenth of two hundred , with an approval rating of 84 @.@ 62 % — one hundredth of a percentage point less than the immediately preceding episode , " Turn Left " — and rated as the best story by under @-@ 18s and fans since the show 's revival in 2005 . 
 The Guardian published three reviews of the episode . Sam Wollaston gave the episode a positive review ; he thought it was a " wonderful episode " that " would be hard to top " . Wollaston joked in his review about Richard Dawkins 's cameo , and compared his anti @-@ theological mannerisms to the Daleks . Gareth McLean described the end of the episode as a " genuine , jaw @-@ dropping , outta @-@ nowhere cliffhanger " . He commended the production team for successfully suppressing information about the regeneration in an industry often stifled by leaks . Stephen Brook of The Guardian 's media blog <unk> , thought the episode was " unbelievably good " and " genuinely scary and exciting " . He theorised about the questionable regeneration : whether it was genuine and , if so , who would portray the next incarnation of the Doctor ; and which companion will die in " Journey 's End " . 
 The Independent 's Thomas Sutcliffe gave the episode a negative review and expressed that the episode was " extermination without inspiration " . Before the episode 's transmission , he was excited about how Dawkins and O 'Grady would appear , and was disappointed when they only appeared when Ianto was channel surfing . Sutcliffe expressed disbelief at the idea that O 'Grady would continue to film his talk show , and with a studio audience , in the midst of planetary disaster , but nevertheless praised the cameos . After the cameos , he " began to lose interest " because he did not like the continuity and crossover elements of the episode . He criticised the re @-@ occurrence of clichéd lines " But ... that 's impossible ! " , " It can 't be ! " , and " Exterminate ! " . He closed his review by requesting the producers to " change the record " . 
 Mark Wright of The Stage posed the question : " How on Earth do you review that ? " . Wright put the episode as " the most bonkers , delicious , audacious , brilliant , silly , exciting and scary piece of Doctor Who seen in the 45 @-@ year history of [ the ] TV series " , and described it as " Doctor Who at its most show stopping , entertaining and brilliant best . " In his review , Wright explained his love of crossover fiction and commended Davies for the direction he took Doctor Who into becoming what Wright considered to be a " small television industry " . Wright complimented the way the episode was keeping with tradition , specifically aspects such as ; " Daleks trundling around spaceships having shouty conversations with each other " ; " UNIT [ being ] as useless as ever at repelling alien marauders " , and the visual appearance of Davros . He described Bleach 's portrayal as a " halfway house between the original version as played by Michael Wisher and the more exuberant ... turn by Terry Molloy " . He also thought positively of the final scenes ; he commented that " the most flint @-@ hearted must have had a misty eye as Rose found her Time Lord again and they ran towards each other in candy box slow @-@ mo " and he cheered when the " outpouring of romance was brought to an end , as it should be in Doctor Who , by a big Dalek gun " . 
 Ben Rawson @-@ Jones of Digital Spy gave the episode five stars out of five . In his review , he states that " ' The Stolen Earth ' does a fine job in weaving components from the current series , former companions , and Davros together . " He wrote that he admires Graeme Harper 's direction of the scene where Sarah and Jack receive the continuous " Exterminate ! " transmission from the Daleks and stated that " Harper 's work ... is worthy of the big screen in terms of its breathtaking visual elements . " He complimented the casting of Michael Brandon as General Sanchez , and expressed hope that Sanchez had survived the Dalek attack because he had the potential to be " the new Brigadier figure that UNIT so desperately needs " . Rawson @-@ Jones thought Briggs , as the voice of the Daleks , did a " superb job with Dalek Caan 's crazy dialect , stemming from a very inventive and bold move by writer Russell T Davies to make this Dalek go <unk> " . He praised Bleach 's performance as Davros , for his " controlled , sinister vocals " that " wonderfully evoke the brilliant but deranged mindset of the Dalek creator " . Upon closing , he commended Davies for being " an expert at delivering jaw @-@ dropping finales that give each season a sense of cohesion and up the stakes to almost unbearable levels " , and thought that matching the episode 's quality would be a " tough task " . 
 Alan Stanley Blair of Airlock Alpha was positive in his review . In his opinion , the episode never failed to deliver and " acts as a tribute to everything Russell T Davies put in place when he resurrected the series in 2005 . " He described the storyline as " fast @-@ moving , bursting [ with ] excitement " and said that it contained " everything you would expect to see from an adventure comprising of all companions and a new Dalek empire " and " acts as the ultimate climax to four years of storytelling and will leave you with goose bumps for the full 42 minutes . " Blair was impressed about how Torchwood and Doctor Who crossed over when their original target demographics dictated it " should never have happened " , and commended scenes that depicted Gwen 's concern for her husband Rhys , Ianto watching The Paul O 'Grady Show , and Sarah 's and Jack 's emotional response to the Dalek transmission . Although his review was positive , he did criticise two parts of the episode : the concept of " time @-@ lock [ ing ] " the Time War was questioned because the Time Lords were annihilated in the conflict ; and he complained that the Doctor 's phone number was out of service . 
 Dan Wainwright of The Express & Star in Wolverhampton , expressed feelings of denial in response to the episode 's ending . He asked : " Surely not even Russell T Davies , who seems obsessed with filling episodes with celebrity cameos and John Barrowman , wouldn ’ t be so maverick as to change his lead actor half way through a season finale ? " In his review , Wainwright expressed feelings of <unk> and hatred towards Davies for his role in reviving Doctor Who , particularly disliking Davies for romanticising the character , and conversely admiring Davies for making the series popular among children . Catherine <unk> , writing for Blogcritics , gave a positive review . She opened by saying " Russell T Davies has again extended the boundaries of most infuriating cliffhangers . " She commended the cast for " top notch acting " that brought " a whole new level of emotion to the series " , specifically Jack and Sarah 's reaction to the Dalek <unk> transmission , which " brought tears to her eyes " . <unk> praised the production team for " the most beautiful [ outer space shots ] outside the Hubble telescope " and the direction which showed the Daleks " at their fearful best " . 
 Simon Brew of science @-@ fiction blog Den of Geek commented that " If the aim of a really well done Doctor Who cliffhanger is to leaving you screaming [ " no " ] at the screen and frantically checking the calendar for the next episode , then it ’ s fair to say that Russell T Davies has just managed to tick that box . " His review both criticised and praised the episode : he summarised the episode as " bursting with a breathless ambition that papered over its occasional cracks " ; but lamented that the plot detail felt " muddled " because of how many plot devices were compressed into the episode . Brew thought the ensemble of companions " separated the great actors from the good " : he complimented Sladen 's and Cribbins 's portrayal of fear ; and he criticised UNIT , Torchwood , and the Doctor for uncharacteristically admitting defeat . Brew 's opinion of Davros and Caan was positive : he thought that " Julian Bleach nailed [ Davros ] " and the appearance of Davros was " very reverential " to the classic series and that Caan " [ added ] an interesting dynamic to the Dalek fight " . He closed his review by expressing hope that " Journey 's End " didn 't end like " Last of the Time Lords " and said : 
 To say that The Stolen Earth eclipsed the equivalent episode last year would be no understatement whatsoever , and to also note that it ’ s generated an enthusiasm and excitement for next week already would be showing yet more restraint . 
 Charlie Jane Anders of the science fiction blog io9 called Davies " the gay Michael Bay " and " wished for the first time that Davies would stay on to produce a fifth season " of Doctor Who . She " loved all the silly plot devices and loopy plot twists " such as Project Indigo , the <unk> Key , the concept of using " every telephone in England " to call the Doctor , and the fact that Davros was unable to cultivate a Dalek army " without slicing his own torso up " . Anders praised Bleach 's portrayal of Davros for capturing " the character 's mixture of curiosity , <unk> and mania better than anyone since [ ... ] Michael Wisher " . She also commended the " super @-@ heroics " in the episode , such as Wilf 's attack on a Dalek with a paintball gun , Gwen and Ianto 's final scene , and the " glowing nobility " of Harriet Jones ' sacrifice to help the Doctor : 
 Even though I was glad we 'll never hear anyone say " I know who you are " to her again , I was glad she was able to turn her usual schtick into a moving speech of defiance . It sorta reminded me of the Controller in " Day of the Daleks " : " Who knows ? I may have helped to exterminate you . " 
 Closing her review , she expressed excitement for " Journey 's End " , saying the final scene left her with a " feeling like [ she had ] no clue how it could be resolved , even using crazy RTD logic " . 
 Dave Golder of science @-@ fiction magazine SFX gave the episode four stars out of five . He noted that after two experimental and " edgy " scripts , " The Stolen Earth " used Davies ' regular style of " crowd pleasing script pyrotechnics " . He positively reviewed the special effects in the episode , Bleach 's acting , the pace of the episode , and the cliffhanger , but criticised the Shadow Proclamation for being " a severe disappointment after all the foreshadowing " , and some character moments for being " dropped into the action like little ' emotion bombs ' " , such as Jack and Sarah 's " melodramatic response " to the Dalek transmission . He closed his review by saying " there 's no denying [ the episode is ] all huge fun , like a tipsy romp on a bouncy castle with all the people you ’ ve ever loved . " 
 Travis <unk> of IGN gave the episode 7 @.@ 6 / 10 ( " Enjoyable " ) . He opened his review by discussing the concept of " fan service " : 
 The idea of " fan service " is always a double edged sword . It 's great to see all of the things you may like about a series come together on screen , but it so often works better in theory than in practice . It 's like those giant crossovers that comic books do all the time – where every cool character meets every other cool character . While it 's interesting ( to a degree ) that they 're sharing a page , everybody ends up getting short @-@ shrift . 
 His review focused primarily upon the Daleks . He initially criticised their appearance because of overuse ; he discussed their previous appearances in Doctor Who since 2005 : a singular enemy in " Dalek " ; a Dalek empire against Rose in " The Parting of the Ways " ; the Dalek Cult of Skaro against the Cybermen in " Doomsday " ; and their appearance in 1930s Manhattan in " Daleks in Manhattan " and " Evolution of the Daleks " . He cited Davros and the " year @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half " break as the reason their appearance " sort @-@ of worked " ; Davros ' appearance " [ upped ] the stakes " , but he criticised the character for " [ doing ] little to enhance the mythology " and Bleach for a " way over the top " performance . <unk> criticised Rose 's isolation from the other companions , but noted that she could defend against the Daleks on her own . He closed his review positively ; he said " Whatever the conclusion of this season , Davies run on this series is an enormous achievement . " 
 = = = Filming locations = = = 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " The Stolen Earth " / " Journey 's End " reviews at The Doctor Who Ratings Guide 
 = Stewie Goes for a Drive = 
 " Stewie Goes for a Drive " is the fourth episode of the tenth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . It originally aired on November 6 , 2011 in the United States on Fox . The plot depicts actor Ryan Reynolds moving into the house across the street , and Peter Griffin befriending him . Ryan flirts with Peter , making Peter uncomfortable , and their friendship ends . Meanwhile , Stewie takes Brian 's car for a joy ride , and crashes it into a lamp post . Fearing the consequences , Stewie runs away from home , but then needs Brian 's help when he ends up in a bad part of town . 
 First announced at the 2011 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , the episode was written by Gary Janetti and directed by Julius Wu . It received mixed reviews from critics . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 5 @.@ 73 million homes in its original airing . In addition to Reynolds , who voiced himself , the episode featured guest performances by Adam Alexi @-@ Malle , Ralph Garman , Joe Lomonaco , Rachael MacFarlane and Tara Strong , along with several recurring guest voice actors . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Peter and Lois are leaving a doctor 's office when actor Ryan Reynolds asks them for directions . He seems very appreciative of Peter . The next morning Peter notices that Ryan has moved in across the street , taking Cleveland Brown 's former residence . Ryan says he 's filming for a movie nearby . Peter attends Ryan 's housewarming party that night , at which Ryan tickles him and requests that he return the favor . Later that week , they go out to dinner , but Peter immediately exits the restaurant when Ryan tries to kiss him . The next day , Peter tells Lois he believes Ryan is gay but Lois rejects the idea . Peter confronts Ryan , who replies that he is only attracted to Peter 's spirit in the way that a man is attracted to a woman . Angered by Peter 's accusation , Ryan orders him to leave and that they can never talk again — but hands him a cell phone so they can " always talk " . 
 Brian picks up Stewie from day care . On the drive home , Stewie listens to " Before He Cheats " by Carrie Underwood on the radio . He decides to stay in the car by himself to continue listening after they reach home and accidentally hits the gear shift , causing the car to move forward . Thinking he can drive , Stewie takes the car for a ride and is thrilled by the experience . He hears on the car radio a contest to win Justin Bieber concert tickets . Stewie calls the radio station on his cell phone but loses control of the car and crashes into a lamppost . ( Herbert is heard on the radio winning the tickets . ) Stewie takes the car home with the front of the vehicle completely destroyed . Brian discovers the damage and immediately blames Stewie , who tries to deny his involvement , but Brian points out that Stewie left Rupert in the car . Brian says he 'll tell Peter and Lois , and Stewie cries . Afraid of being punished , Stewie runs away . He leaves a CD @-@ ROM for Brian that details his plans . Stewie takes the bus to the airport , but disembarks in the wrong neighborhood . Consuela , the Griffin family 's former maid , finds him and takes him home . Brian finds Stewie , and tells him that he did not tell anyone about the accident . They attempt to leave Consuela 's home , but she insists on keeping Stewie as her own baby . Stewie steals a gun and shoots her in the foot , but says that he didn 't want to hurt her because she had shown kindness to him in the past . Brian and Stewie return home . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 First announced at the 2011 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International by series showrunners Steve Callaghan and Mark Hentemann , the episode was written by Gary Janetti . Janetti joined the series in its first season , writing " Brian : Portrait of a Dog " , as well as the series 's landmark 150th episode " Brian & Stewie " . It was directed by Julius Wu , who joined the show in its fifth season , directing " The Tan Aquatic with Steve Zissou " . Series regulars Peter Shin and James Purdum served as supervising director , with Andrew Goldberg , Alex Carter , Spencer Porter , Anthony Blasucci , Mike Desilets and Deepak Sethi serving as staff writers for the episode . Composer Ron Jones , who has worked on the series since its inception , returned to compose the music for " Stewie Goes for a Drive " . An announcement of Reynolds ' appearance in the episode was made at the Television Critics Association 's summer press tour , along with several other guest voice actors for the season . 
 In addition to the regular cast , actor and musician Adam Alexi @-@ Malle , actor Ralph Garman , voice actor Joe Lomonaco , voice actress Rachael MacFarlane , actor Ryan Reynolds , and voice actress Tara Strong guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors Alec Sulkin , writer John Viener and writer Wellesley Wild made minor appearances throughout the episode . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the opening scene of the episode when Peter and Lois first meet actor Ryan Reynolds , Reynolds lists various movies he has appeared in , including the 2009 film The Proposal and the 2011 film The Change @-@ Up . Impressed by Ryan 's demeanor towards him , Peter then recalls meeting actress Shelley Duvall , which he did not enjoy , even though Duvall is shown being friendly . Reynolds also reveals that he will be portraying Nazi leader Adolf Hitler in a film entitled <unk> , which is being filmed in Quahog rather than nearby Newport , Rhode Island . 
 Later , as Brian and Stewie drive home from his day care , they listen to the 2006 single " Before He Cheats " on the car 's radio , sung by American Idol winner Carrie Underwood . Stewie stays in the car after arriving home to listen to the rest of the song , and sings along . Pleased with himself , he decides he should appear on the Fox television series Glee . Later Stewie learns of a contest to win tickets to a local Justin Bieber concert , but ultimately he loses the contest to his neighbor , Herbert . After returning home , Stewie begins watching a film parodying various 1970s science fiction movies ( including music parodying the 1976 Michael York film Logan 's Run ) before being accused by Brian of crashing his car . When Stewie tries to reject blame for the incident , Brian tells him that he must accept his punishment , and compares it to the television game show The Price Is Right , in which a woman is shown accepting a poor showcase , involving a weeklong trip to her parent 's house in Wilmington , Delaware . Stewie then runs away from home , leaving a video message for Brian asking Brian to rescue him in a TV @-@ movie @-@ clichéd way at the airport , and to bring appropriate soundtrack music , suggesting " With or Without You " by U2 , " Solsbury Hill " by Peter Gabriel , " Unwritten " by Natasha Bedingfield , " Live Like We 're Dying " by Kris Allen , " Thank You " by Dido and " Somebody " by Depeche Mode . 
 In minutes 12 to 13 , Ryan takes Peter out to eat Moroccan food . Peter hesitates for fear of gas he gets from Mexican food , and a cutaway shows Peter farting out a Mexican bandit spirit who utters , " Con <unk> ! Es El <unk> ! " ( Watch out ! It 's the <unk> ! ) " and then fires shots from pistols in each hand whereupon the Griffins all flee . After Ryan convinces Peter to try his lamb tajine , Peter has to excuse himself to the bathroom , and on the way he farts out a Moroccan swordsman spirit who waves his sword and yells out something in Arabic , and the nearby couple has to flee . 
 = = Reception = = 
