 " Stewie Goes for a Drive " was broadcast on November 6 , 2011 , as a part of an animated television night on Fox , and was preceded by The Simpsons and Allen Gregory , and followed by Family Guy creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane 's second show , American Dad ! . It was watched by 5 @.@ 73 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings , despite airing simultaneously with Desperate Housewives on ABC , The Good Wife on CBS and Sunday Night Football on NBC . The episode also acquired a 3 @.@ 0 / 7 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , beating Allen Gregory and American Dad , in addition to significantly edging out both shows in total viewership . The episode 's ratings decreased somewhat from the previous week 's episode , " Screams of Silence : The Story of Brenda Q " . 
 Reviews of the episode were mostly mixed , calling the storyline a " much less extreme reversal " of the season two episode " The Story on Page One " , in which Peter attempts to seduce actor Luke Perry . Kevin McFarland of The A.V. Club wrote of the episode , " It was disappointing to see Family Guy bury a guest star like Kaitlin Olson in the background for much of her episode as Quagmire 's sister last week , but it was even worse to see the show waste Ryan Reynolds . " He continued , " He may not fit an empirical definition of a movie star , but I think he ’ s worth more as a guest than a tired trope like playing himself as a sexual predator towards Peter . " McFarland also criticized the episode 's two storylines , noting , " Both plots paint themselves into a corner with no time to get out . In the third act , Stewie is trapped at Consuela 's house and Peter hadn 't succumbed to Reynolds ' repetitive and slowly escalating advances or done anything about them , so the show snaps its fingers and ends each one prematurely . " He graded the episode as a C- . In a much more positive review , Terron R. Moore of Ology criticized the episode for not featuring Griffin family siblings Chris and Meg , but praised the series for adopting a Stewie @-@ centric storyline . Moore noted of the storyline involving Reynolds , " All pretty funny stuff , but Ryan Reynolds ' entire guest slot is based on the fact that you like Ryan Reynolds and his occasionally homoerotic humor , which I can definitely appreciate . " He concluded his review by writing , " Not the best Family Guy , but a definite improvement on the week before , using some of the elements it knows best . " Andy <unk> of <unk> also gave mixed reaction to the episode , writing , " Something happens whenever a celebrity shows up on " Family Guy " and plays themselves . I can 't quite put my finger on it , but everything just feels a bit off . This episode , which featured Ryan Reynolds as Ryan Reynolds , only confirmed that feeling . " He also compared it to The Simpsons , noting , " Maybe it 's the way the celebrity is treated as a character : in shows like The Simpsons , celebrities who play themselves appear as a relatively normal version of themselves [ ... ] But on Family Guy , celebrities tend to appear as some bizarro version of themselves . " 
 = Little Annie Fanny = 
 Little Annie Fanny is a comics series by Harvey Kurtzman and Will Elder . It appeared in 107 two- to seven @-@ page episodes in Playboy magazine from October 1962 to September 1988 . Little Annie Fanny is a humorous satire of contemporary American society and its sexual mores . Annie Fanny , the title character , is a statuesque , buxom young blonde woman who innocently finds herself nude in every episode . The series is notable for its painted , luminous color artwork and for being the first full @-@ scale , multi @-@ page comics feature in a major American publication . 
 Kurtzman , a cartoonist , created the series at the culmination of his career . He had launched Mad magazine , worked briefly for Playboy publisher Hugh Hefner and on a series of solo and collaborative projects , then returned to working for Hefner with Little Annie Fanny . Each episode of the comic strip was designed and written by Kurtzman and rendered in oil , tempera , and watercolor by Elder . Hefner edited each episode , often requiring detailed changes to ensure that the series remained true to the magazine 's editorial style . Critical reaction was mixed , with most praising the elaborate , fully painted comic , but some dismissing it as falling short of Kurtzman 's full potential . The complete series was first collected into two volumes in 2000 and 2001 by Dark Horse Comics . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Harvey Kurtzman founded the satirical Mad magazine in 1952 ; an early fan was onetime cartoonist Hugh Hefner , who founded the men 's magazine Playboy in 1953 . Hefner offered Kurtzman an opportunity to conceive a new humor magazine for his enterprise , which the cartoonist accepted when he left Mad in 1956 in an ownership dispute . Kurtzman took most of the Mad artists with him , including frequent collaborator Will Elder , to create the adult @-@ oriented humor magazine Trump . Although it sold well , Hefner ran into financial problems in 1957 and halted Trump after two issues . He provided office space for the artists , from which they self @-@ published the satirical magazine Humbug in 1957 – 58 . It failed to gain a significant following , and a dejected Kurtzman began pitching feature proposals to Playboy , all of which were rejected . However , he received a note from Hefner : " I bow to no one in my appreciation for H. Kurtzman . " Hefner 's praise encouraged Kurtzman to meet with publisher Ian Ballantine and create Harvey Kurtzman 's Jungle Book ( 1959 ) . This introduced the innocent and idealistic Goodman Beaver , a male character who continued to appear — with artwork by Elder — in Kurtzman 's Help ! ( 1960 ) . 
 Kurtzman continued to correspond with Hefner and Playboy executive editor Ray Russell , who was interested in Kurtzman 's idea of a comic strip suitable for the magazine 's audience and suggested " satire ... as an excuse or rationale for a slick magazine to be publishing a comic strip . " Although single @-@ panel cartoons were an established part of the magazine , a comic strip was unprecedented and had to be justified . Kurtzman submitted some Goodman Beaver strips and was surprised to receive a favorable response from Hefner , who liked the " fresh and eager " character . He especially enjoyed " Goodman Goes Playboy " , which featured a boisterous romp in Hefner 's mansion . Hefner nevertheless insisted that the material was not right for his magazine , but requested an explanation of the character with a suggestion : " Maybe there is a way of launching a similar series ... that can somehow be related to Playboy " . Kurtzman replied that Goodman Beaver " could be foolish and at the same time wise , " and that he " innocently partakes of the bad while espousing the good . " He further stated that Beaver 's innocent , restive , and charming nature allotted him especial creative freedom . A week later , Kurtzman wrote to Hefner , " What would you think of a girl character ... whom I could apply to my kind of situations ? " Six weeks later Hefner replied , " I think your notion of doing a Goodman Beaver strip of two , three , or four pages , but using a sexy girl ... is a bull 's eye . We can run it every issue . " 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Kurtzman recruited his long @-@ time collaborator Will Elder to work on the strip 's illustrations . He suggested to Elder an " <unk> " , painted style , then thought the strip would be better suited by an India inked , outlined comic book style with flat color behind it . Hefner , whose opinion prevailed , preferred the more difficult , fully painted , <unk> look . Kurtzman 's suggestions for the feature 's name included The Perils of Zelda , The Perils of Irma , and Little Mary <unk> ; he settled on Little Annie Fanny , its title and logo a parody of Harold Gray 's Little Orphan Annie . The cartoonist began submitting story ideas for the multi @-@ page comic strip to Hefner for approval . Over the twenty @-@ six years he wrote the character , he was allowed ( with Playboy 's substantial budget ) to travel for research , photography , and sketching . He followed this with a preliminary script for Hefner , who revised it . Kurtzman then worked out the story 's composition , pacing , and action in thumbnail drawings and pencil roughs of each page of the comic , followed by larger , more @-@ detailed layouts on translucent vellum specifying lighting , color , and speech balloon placement . These also required Hefner 's approval — a typical two- to seven @-@ page episode would take as many as nine pages of layout . Kurtzman then discussed the layout with Elder , who drove from his home in New Jersey to Kurtzman 's in New York . Kurtzman acted out every detail of the strip ; according to Elder , " He would change his voice and take on the characteristics of each role ... We 'd crack each other up and fall down laughing . " This gave Elder what he needed to create the penciling , including " eye pops " ( background gags worked into blank areas of Kurtzman 's layout ; Hefner rejected many , so Elder created as many as possible ) and the final rendering . Elder painted in oil , tempera , and watercolor , never using ink . Beginning with a white illustration board , Elder explained he would " pile on " his oil paint , light colors over dark , then apply tempera , then layer several watercolor washes to give Annie luminous tones . " The colors were like gems to me , " he said . " I worked very hard to give them iridescence . " The work was labor @-@ intensive and deadlines were often difficult to meet , so other artists , including Russ Heath , Arnold Roth , Jack Davis , Al Jaffee , Frank Frazetta , and Paul Coker , were occasionally enlisted to help finish the art . Jaffee , a childhood friend of Elder , said about the experience : " Little Annie Fannie was the most unique , lavishly produced cartoon cum illustration feature ever . Each panel was a miniature masterpiece that Willie glazed and re @-@ glazed in brilliant watercolor until he reached the level of 3 @-@ D @-@ like translucence that he wanted . I know from first @-@ hand experience what went into this project . " <unk> inked the dialog balloons before Kurtzman cleaned and submitted the finished work . Little Annie Fanny , Playboy 's first comic strip , was the first multi @-@ page comics feature in a major American magazine . 
 = = Characters = = 
 Annie Fanny is the feature 's lead character . Like other young women in Playboy pictorials , Annie is beautiful , buxom , and often unclothed . She is sexually innocent , oblivious to the worldliness around her . Like her forebear Goodman Beaver , Annie was conceived as a modern Candide , above the story 's corruptions and temptations . Unlike Goodman , however , Annie is never shocked or offended ; she remains blithe . The authors of Icons of the American Comic Book say Annie " glides through a changing world with an untiring optimism " with a " good @-@ natured lack of desire " . She is insulated from the carnal nature of those around her , who explain the new rules of society to her each episode . Ruthie , Annie 's mother hen roommate , appears in the first episode and remains in the strip throughout its run . Wanda <unk> , Annie Fanny 's wild and shapely best friend , first appears in an episode @-@ 10 beauty contest as Miss Greenwich Village and is often seen at Annie 's side throughout the remainder of the series . Ralphie <unk> , Annie 's nerdy @-@ but @-@ hip do @-@ gooder boyfriend , has the look of Goodman Beaver ( with playwright Arthur Miller 's eyeglasses and pipe ) and the temperament of a straight @-@ laced , chastising prude . Solly Brass , Annie 's huckster agent , is based on actor Phil Silvers . 
 A number of other characters in Little Annie Fanny are derived from Gray 's Little Orphan Annie . <unk> <unk> , Annie 's surrogate father and a powerful , manipulative capitalist , is based on Daddy Warbucks . His mysterious assistant , the Wasp , derives from Warbucks ' assistant the Asp , and <unk> , his bodyguard , comes from the character Punjab . Other supporting characters include ad man Benton <unk> ( whose name is taken from the advertising agencies Batten , Barton , <unk> & Osborn and Benton & Bowles ) , <unk> 's rival Huck Buxton ( modeled on gap @-@ toothed British actor Terry @-@ Thomas ) , Duncan Fyfe <unk> ( an art plagiarist ) , and Freddie <unk> ( who resembles comic actor Fred Gwynne from Car 54 , Where Are You ? ) . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Little Annie Fanny takes the reader through the changing attitudes of American culture , satirizing contemporary trends and fads . In each of the 107 episodes , Annie experiences the latest popular movie , fashion statement , national politics , or society headline . During the strip 's first decade , when it ran up to eleven times per year , Annie meets caricatures of the Beatles ( who lust for Annie ) , Sean Connery ( playing " James Bomb " ) , reclusive Catcher in the Rye author J. D. Salinger ( as " Salinger <unk> " ) , NFL champions Green Bay Packers ( as the " Greenback Busters " ) , and Elvis Presley , Bob Dylan , and Sonny & Cher on the " <unk> Show " ( Hullabaloo show ) . During these early years , the strip pokes fun at miniskirts , LSD , free love , and bra burning . Background caricatures include Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev , prissy @-@ but @-@ powerful J. Edgar Hoover , unisex fashion designer Rudi Gernreich , and the " Put a Tiger in Your Tank " ad campaign of Humble Oil . During the 1970s , when the strip ran three to five times per year , Annie sees violent films such as A Clockwork Orange and The French Connection and meets sex novelist Philip Roth , consumer advocate Ralph Nader , chess champion Bobby Fischer , and shock rocker Alice Cooper . She experiences disco , streaking , C.B. radio , nudist colonies , and women 's liberation . Background " eye pops " include Hollywood heavy Charles Bronson , Laugh @-@ In 's Arte Johnson , the Avis TV commercial 's O. J. Simpson , and Star Wars ' C @-@ 3PO . In the 1980s , when Little Annie Fanny appeared once or twice a year , Annie deals with personal computers , goes to Urban Cowboy 's Gilley 's Club , cruises on The Love Boat , and encounters Indiana Jones , Ayatollah Khomeini , Jim and Tammy Faye Bakker , and Woody Allen . Elder 's background gags include the Coneheads , Howard Cosell , Miss Piggy , E.T. , and Billy Beer . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Comics historian Don <unk> said that Little Annie Fanny " reached a high point seldom achieved by cartoon art " . Writing for his Don <unk> 's <unk> website : " Harvey Kurtzman ... strove for most of his life to advance the boundaries of comics , not just in terms of storytelling but also in production values " , concluding that Little Annie Fanny achieved at least the latter . About its venue he said , " Playboy magazine , whatever you may say about its content , always did a first @-@ rate job of printing color pictures . " According to comics commentators Randy Duncan and Matthew J. Smith , the series " reads today as an amusing look at the evolving mores of the sexual revolution " . Comics editor Monte Beauchamp said that Little Annie Fanny was " the most elaborate comic strip ever created " and cartoonist @-@ critic R. C. Harvey called it " a masterpiece ... the most lavish color comic strip of all time " . 
 Not all were as impressed . Noting that Kurtzman was financially strapped before making his living for twenty @-@ six years from Playboy , historian Paul Buhle wrote : " The strip had many brilliant early moments , but went downhill as the writer and artist bent to editor Hugh Hefner 's demands for as much titillation as possible . " Cartoonist Art Spiegelman said that Little Annie Fanny devolved from the more interesting Goodman Beaver . Underground cartoonist Robert Crumb , whose career Kurtzman helped launch , scorned Playboy and Annie . Monty Python 's Terry Gilliam , the former assistant editor of Help ! , said that Little Annie Fanny was not as sharp as Kurtzman 's earlier work : " technically brilliant but ... slightly compromised . " Art agent and publisher Denis Kitchen , who handles Kurtzman and Eisner 's estates , said that " most Kurtzman devotees would not consider Little Annie Fanny genius work ... [ and ] some would argue the opposite : that it was genius diluted or degraded " . Kitchen placed the onus on Kurtzman 's employer Hefner , who " was often a punctilious taskmaster with a heavy red pen who often had very different ideas about what was funny or satiric " and insisted that each strip " had to include Annie disrobing " . Beauchamp agreed : " Unfortunately , Hefner was notorious for his heavy editorial hand . " Duncan and Smith also agreed , and wrote that " humor sometimes mixes awkwardly with the loaded topics of the era , and some have found Annie 's lack of character development and the requisite sexual hijinks an impediment to taking her seriously . " However , they repeated their respect : " The eternally innocent Annie performed admirably as a nonjudgmental witness to the changing tides of the sexual revolution . " 
 = = Other media = = 
 The December 1978 issue of Playboy mentioned a " worldwide search for the actress " who would " portray Little Annie Fanny in a live @-@ action movie " . In 2000 , Playboy TV approached Mainframe Entertainment to create a CGI animated television series based on Little Annie Fanny , but no series was ever produced . 
 Twenty @-@ six early episodes of the comic were reprinted in book form by Playboy Press in 1966 and 1972 . After Kurtzman 's death in 1993 , Playboy revived the comic in 1998 with art by Ray Lago and Bill Schorr , publishing two episodes . Dark Horse Comics collected all episodes of the series and published them in two volumes ( 2000 and 2001 ) , with annotations by Denis Kitchen and others . 
 = = = = Books = = = = 
 = = = = Journals , newspapers , websites = = = = 
 = John Cameron ( Alberta politician ) = 
 John Cameron [ <unk> ] ( May 28 , 1846 – October 6 , 1919 ) was a merchant and politician in Alberta , Canada and a municipal councillor in Edmonton . He is regarded as one of the city 's pioneer citizens . 
 Born in Canada West ( later Ontario ) , Cameron worked as a merchant in his birth province and Manitoba before coming to Edmonton in 1881 . In Edmonton he continued as a merchant , owning and operating a store for 15 years . In Edmonton he quickly established himself as a prominent citizen , serving on the inaugural Edmonton Board of Trade as president , which he would remain for five years . Cameron also was involved in the development of the Edmonton Public School Board , serving on the board in the 1890s . He was also involved in the town 's politics , winning election to Edmonton 's first town council in 1892 and serving an additional term when elected in 1895 . After this retirement from politics , he worked in the coal and real estate business until his death in 1919 , at the age of 73 . Upon his death , he was lauded as one of the pioneer citizens of Edmonton ; a street , neighbourhood and ravine were named for him . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 John Cameron was born at East Hawkesbury , Canada West in 1846 , the son of Colin and Anna ( née McLaurin ) Cameron . His brother was Sir Douglas Cameron , who also went into politics , serving in the Ontario Legislature and as Lieutenant Governor of Manitoba . John attended school in Hawkesbury and Renfrew and in 1871 became a merchant at Vankleek Hill , with a partner in the firm Cameron & Mode General Merchants . In 1876 , he went west and relocated to Winnipeg , Manitoba to establish Cameron & Company general merchants , where he remained until 1881 . 
 = = Career in Edmonton = = 
 Cameron moved from Winnipeg to Edmonton in 1881 by ox @-@ cart , travelling through Carlton and Battleford , bringing with him 96 @,@ 000 pounds ( 44 @,@ 000 kg ) of freight on a journey that took three months . Once in Edmonton , he used this freight as the initial inventory of a store , the A. McDonald Company , where he entered into a partnership . In 1891 , he would purchase the store from its original owner , A. McDonald . He moved into a new building in 1893 , designed by architect William S. Edmiston and constructed by contractor Kenneth McLeod . The building , located on Jasper Avenue , included a cellar , main floor for merchandise and storage , and an upper storey , heated in its entirety by a furnace . He would operate until 1896 . After the sale of the store , he entered into the real estate and coal business . In 1914 , Cameron was serving as managing director and treasurer of <unk> <unk> Ltd. and as chairman of the provisional directors of the Canada Northwest Loan and Mortgage Company . 
 He was elected the first president of the Edmonton Board of Trade upon its founding in 1889 . He served until 1894 . He also played a vital role in the development of the school system in Edmonton , involving himself in education @-@ related affairs as early as 1881 , and serving on the public school board from 1886 – 87 and 1889 until 1897 . In 1881 , he was part of a group that provided funds for the first school teacher in the city . In 1886 , with the school board , Cameron was responsible for introducing a fee for the parents of students attending schools in the Edmonton Public School District who did not live within the district , as district residents were taxed for the school 's services . He would serve as secretary @-@ treasurer from 1882 to 1884 and later as chairman of the school board from 1890 to 1892 and 1894 . 
 = = = Civic politics = = = 
 Cameron was one of six candidates elected as aldermen to Edmonton 's first town council in 1892 ; he received the fifth most votes of the fourteen candidates . He was defeated in his 1893 re @-@ election bid , in which he finished seventh of nine candidates . He briefly returned to the council after being elected again in 1895 , but did not seek re @-@ election the following year and remained out of politics thereafter . During his first term on the council , he was involved in an altercation in which the dominion government had made a decision to Dominion Land Office from Edmonton to Strathcona , at the time a separate town , south of the North Saskatchewan River . When news of the decision and crews to execute it arrived in Edmonton , angry citizens descended on the office and tore to pieces the wagon that the officer was packing with records for transportation . Led by mayor Matthew McCauley , Cameron was part of a group of prominent citizens that headed the resistance , eventually leading to the dominion reversing its decision . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 At Vankleek Hill in 1872 , he married Jane <unk> . She would die some time afterwards , and John Cameron , aged 29 , would remarry Elizabeth Ann McCann on November 8 , 1875 . They had two sons , John Hilliard and Howard , and four daughters , Mabel , Florence , Alice and Jessie . He was a member of the Edmonton Old Timers ' Association as well as the Edmonton Agricultural Society . He was an avid outdoorsman who enjoyed canoeing and hiking in the Edmonton North Saskatchewan River Valley . Along with his wife Elizabeth , he was an early member of the Presbyterian church in Edmonton , attending First Presbyterian Church , where he was an elder . Though he served as an independent on the Edmonton Town Council , he was a Liberal . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 He died of heart failure in the morning of October 6 , 1919 after a brief illness at his Edmonton home . He was survived by his wife and children . After his funeral at his home on Cameron Avenue , he was buried at the Edmonton Cemetery . At the time of his death , the Edmonton Bulletin praised Cameron for his efforts in establishing the foundations of the city Edmonton , and remarked that " the city owes much to him because of his strenuous efforts with others in maintaining this as the permanent site for the city " . Elizabeth Cameron died in Edmonton in 1933 at the age of 79 . 
 Cameron Street , the neighbourhood of Cameron Heights , and the Cameron Ravine ( in the vicinity of Cameron Heights ) in Edmonton are named in honour . 
 = Peter Isaacson = 
 Peter Stuart Isaacson , AM , DFC , AFC , DFM ( born 31 July 1920 ) is an Australian publisher and decorated military pilot . He was owner of Peter Isaacson Publications , the publisher of various trade publications and suburban newspapers including the Southern Cross and the Sunday Observer in Melbourne . He served in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) as a pilot with RAF Bomber Command during World War II and was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross , the Air Force Cross and the Distinguished Flying Medal . 
 Isaacson grew up in Melbourne and started working for a newspaper when he was sixteen . He joined the RAAF in 1940 . Following his stint in Bomber Command , he became well known in Australia for his tours in the Avro Lancaster Q @-@ for @-@ Queenie to promote the sale of war loans and , in particular , for flying his plane under the Sydney Harbour Bridge in 1943 . He transferred to the RAAF Reserve after the war , retiring as a wing commander in 1969 . Since 1956 he has served as a Trustee , Chairman , and finally Life Governor of the Victorian Shrine of Remembrance . In 1991 he was appointed a Member of the Order of Australia for his publishing and community work . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Isaacson was born in London on 31 July 1920 to an Australian father and an Austrian mother ; his parents moved to Australia with him when he was six years old . Growing up in Melbourne , he was educated at Brighton Grammar School and started work at sixteen as a messenger boy on The Age , where his mother Caroline edited women 's features . All of Isaacson 's immediate family would eventually serve in World War II : his father , Arnold , a World War I veteran , joined the Volunteer Defence Corps , his mother became Public Relations Officer in the Australian Women 's Army Service ( AWAS ) , and his sister Joan became a photographer with the AWAS . 
 = = World War II = = 
 On 8 December 1940 , the nineteen @-@ year @-@ old Isaacson enlisted in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . After completing his training in Australia and Canada , he was posted to the United Kingdom and joined No. 460 Squadron RAAF at RAAF <unk> , Yorkshire , as a sergeant pilot . Operating Vickers Wellington medium bombers , No. 460 Squadron had been raised under the Article XV provisions of the Empire Air Training Scheme and was one of a number of nominally Australian formations taking part in RAF Bomber Command 's strategic air campaign against Germany . The squadron commenced operations in March 1942 and participated in 1 @,@ 000 @-@ bomber raids against Cologne , Essen and Bremen in May and June . It converted to Avro Lancaster heavy bombers in October . Isaacson was awarded the Distinguished Flying Medal on 6 November 1942 for " many successful night attacks on the enemy " with No. 460 Squadron . The following month his Lancaster was damaged by a Junkers Ju 88 night fighter after a raid on Munich . 
 Commissioned as a pilot officer , Isaacson was subsequently posted to No. 156 Squadron RAF of the Pathfinder Force , based at RAF Warboys , Huntingdonshire . He was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross on 30 March 1943 for his actions during a raid on Berlin . His citation , promulgated in the London Gazette , read : 
 One night in March 1943 , this officer was detailed for an attack on Berlin . Following the attack and while still over the target area , his aircraft was hit by anti @-@ aircraft fire and severely damaged . The mid @-@ upper turret frame was twisted , the perspex and 2 engine cowlings blown off , the aileron controls damaged and the aircraft forced down to 4 @,@ 000 feet . On the return journey the aircraft was driven off the route and held in a cone of searchlights for 15 minutes ; during this time a further loss of height down to 900 feet occurred . In the face of this perilous situation Pilot Officer <unk> , showing coolness , resolution and skilful airmanship , succeeded in flying his aircraft back to base . This officer is an outstanding captain of aircraft who has a fine record of many successful operational sorties . 
 Isaacson completed forty @-@ five sorties with Bomber Command , when the likelihood of surviving an operational tour of thirty missions was never more than 50 % and , at times , much less . Promoted to acting flight lieutenant , he was chosen in May 1943 to captain Lancaster Q @-@ for @-@ Queenie on a landmark flight from England to Australia across the Pacific Ocean , and then from Melbourne to New Zealand and back , non @-@ stop in both directions . He was awarded the Air Force Cross on 27 August 1943 for this mission , the citation noting that it was " the first occasion on which an aircraft has flown to Australia by this route and the direct flights between Melbourne and New Zealand are the first of their kind " . The Lancaster was brought to Australia so that it could serve as a template for local production of the type , but this never took place and it was instead used for exhibition flights to encourage purchase of war bonds . On 22 October 1943 Isaacson flew Q @-@ for @-@ Queenie under the Sydney Harbour Bridge , flouting a 1931 regulation that prohibited such activity ; the Lancaster remains the largest aircraft to have been flown under the bridge . Isaacson gave his crew no warning of what he was about to do and when asked later why he did it , replied " Because it was there " . It was , however , reported at the time that he undertook the stunt to support the war loan effort for which he and his crew were actively fundraising . 
 Notwithstanding the publicity the escapade generated for war loans , Isaacson recalled that when he landed at Mascot afterwards : 
 I was threatened with a court martial . Two authorities wanted to court martial me : Eastern Area in which the crime was committed and Southern Command to which I was attached at the time . I was told later there was a great fight among the bureaucrats of each of these commands as to which would court martial me . Apparently they could not agree on which should be the prosecutor and the idea either lapsed – or maybe is still being pursued by the successors to each of these commands ! 
 In December 1943 , following his promotional tour with his crew in Q @-@ for @-@ Queenie , he settled down to instructional work at an operational training unit before undertaking a further tour in the Lancaster commencing in March 1944 . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 Isaacson stood as the Liberal candidate for Prahran in the November 1945 Victorian state election , but was defeated by Labor 's Bill Quirk . His wartime commission was terminated on 21 February 1946 and he transferred to the RAAF Reserve . He was state commandant of the Victorian Squadron of the Air Training Corps from 1950 , and commandant of No. 21 ( City of Melbourne ) Squadron from 1961 , before retiring in 1969 with the rank of wing commander . He also served as an honorary aide @-@ de @-@ camp to Queen Elizabeth II from 1963 to 1965 . 
 After working as aviation correspondent for The Argus in Melbourne , Isaacson set up his first newspaper , the Advertiser , in 1947 ; he established Peter Isaacson Publications the same year . The Advertiser took over other community newspapers and became the Southern Cross , which Isaacson edited and published along with Sunday Observer and various business and industry magazines . In 1986 Peter Isaacson Publications took over the Asher Joel Media Group . Southern Cross was bought by APN News & Media in 1993 and Isaacson became APN 's director , serving until 1998 . He chaired TW Media from 1997 to 2005 . 
 Isaacson married Anne McIntyre in Melbourne on 21 December 1950 . The couple , who had known each other since their teens , had delayed their wedding during Anne 's five @-@ year struggle with polio and Isaacson carried his future bride to the registry office on the day . The marriage produced two sons . On 10 June 1991 Isaacson was appointed a Member of the Order of Australia " for services to the print media and the community " . He published As I Remember Them : Men and Women Who Shaped a Life , a collection of eulogies he had delivered for friends and colleagues , in 2012 . In May of that year he was among a group of thirty @-@ two veterans selected to attend the dedication of the RAF Bomber Command Memorial in London as part of the official Australian delegation . Isaacson is a Life Governor of the Victorian Shrine of Remembrance , having previously served as a Trustee from 1956 to 2000 , and Chairman from 1983 to 2000 . He and his wife live in the Melbourne suburb of Toorak . 
 = Porcupine ray = 
 The porcupine ray ( Urogymnus asperrimus ) is a rare species of stingray in the family Dasyatidae and the only member of its genus . This bottom @-@ dweller is found throughout the tropical Indo @-@ Pacific , as well as off West Africa . It favors sand , coral rubble , and seagrass habitats in inshore waters to a depth of 30 m ( 100 ft ) . A large and heavy @-@ bodied species reaching 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 5 m ( 3 @.@ 9 – 4 @.@ 9 ft ) in width , the porcupine ray has a nearly circular , plain @-@ colored pectoral fin disc and a thin tail without any fin folds . Uniquely within its family , it lacks a venomous stinging spine . However , an adult ray can still defend itself ably with the many large , sharp thorns found over its disc and tail . 
 The diet of the porcupine ray consists mainly of benthic invertebrates and bony fishes , which it digs up from the sea floor . It is aplacental viviparous , in which the developing embryos are nourished by histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) produced by the mother . The porcupine ray has long been valued for its rough and durable skin , which was made into a shagreen leather once used for various utilitarian and ornamental purposes , such as to cover sword hilts and shields . It is caught incidentally by coastal fisheries . Because it must be handled carefully due to its thorns , its commercial significance is limited . Unregulated fishing has led to this species declining in many parts of its range , and thus has been listed as Vulnerable by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 German naturalists Marcus Elieser Bloch and Johann Gottlob Schneider described the porcupine ray in their 1801 work Systema <unk> , based on a partial dried skin obtained from Mumbai , India . They placed it in the genus Raja and named it <unk> , meaning " roughest " in Latin . In the same work , they also described a West African form , Raja africana . Later authors have regarded the two as synonymous . However , since the two names were published simultaneously , there is uncertainty about which name has priority . Some works give the ray 's specific epithet as asperrimus , and others as africanus . 
 In 1837 , Johannes Peter Müller and Friedrich Gustav Jakob Henle placed the porcupine ray in a new genus , Gymnura . As the name Gymnura was already in use , referring to the butterfly rays , later that year Müller and Henle replaced it with Urogymnus . Both names are derived from the Ancient Greek oura ( " tail " ) and gymnos ( " naked " or " unarmed " ) , referring to the lack of a tail sting . Other common names for this species include black spotted ray , rough @-@ skinned ray , <unk> stingaree , Solander 's ray , and thorny ray . There may be more than one species of porcupine ray , as is currently recognized . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The porcupine ray is widely distributed , but uncommon compared to other stingrays that share its range . It is found all along the continental periphery of the Indian Ocean , from South Africa to the Arabian Peninsula to Southeast Asia to Ningaloo Reef off western Australia , including Madagascar , the Seychelles , and Sri Lanka ; it has colonized the eastern Mediterranean Sea through the Suez Canal . In the Pacific Ocean , its range continues through Indonesia and New Guinea , north to the Philippines , east to the Gilbert Islands and Fiji , and south to Heron Island off eastern Australia . This species is also found in the eastern Atlantic Ocean off Senegal , Guinea , and Côte d 'Ivoire . Bottom @-@ dwelling in nature , the porcupine ray is found close to shore at depths of 1 – 30 m ( 3 – 100 ft ) . It inhabits sandy flats , coral rubble , and seagrass beds , often near reefs , and also enters brackish water . 
 = = Description = = 
 The pectoral fin disc of the porcupine ray is evenly oval , almost as wide as long , and very thick at the center , giving it a domed appearance . The tip of the snout is rounded and barely protruding . The small eyes are closely followed by much larger spiracles . Between the narrow nostrils is a skirt @-@ shaped curtain of skin ; the posterior margin of the curtain is strongly fringed and overhangs the mouth . The mouth bears 3 – 5 papillae on the floor and prominent furrows at the corners . The area around the mouth , including the curtain , are heavily covered by more papillae . There are around 48 tooth rows in either jaw . The teeth are small and flattened . Five pairs of gill slits are located on the underside of the disc . 
 The pelvic fins are small and narrow . The thin , rapidly tapering tail is about equal to the disc in length and has an almost cylindrical cross @-@ section , without fin folds . The tail also has no venomous stinging spine , unlike other members of the family . A dense patch of flattened , heart @-@ shaped dermal denticles covers the center of the disc and extends onto the tail . Larger individuals additionally have numerous tall , sharp thorns over the entire upper surface of the disc . The porcupine ray is plain light to dark gray or brown above , darkening to blackish towards the tail tip , and white below . This large species grows to at least 1 @.@ 2 m ( 3 @.@ 9 ft ) across and 2 @.@ 2 m ( 7 @.@ 2 ft ) long , and may reach 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) across . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The porcupine ray can sometimes be observed lying still on the bottom in the open or inside caves . It is known to form groups at Ningaloo Reef . Its diet consists primarily of sipunculids , polychaete worms , crustaceans , and bony fishes . When feeding it plows deeply into the bottom , expelling excess sediment from its spiracles in a plume visible from a long distance away . Parasites documented from this ray include the tapeworm Rhinebothrium <unk> , the nematode Echinocephalus overstreeti , and the <unk> monogeneans Dendromonocotyle <unk> and Neoentobdella <unk> . The porcupine ray is aplacental viviparous , with the developing embryos sustained to term by histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) secreted by the mother . Mangrove forests serve as important habitat for juvenile rays . Males and females mature sexually at about 90 and 100 cm ( 35 and 39 in ) across respectively . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Despite not having a sting , the porcupine ray is capable of injuring humans with its many sharp thorns . It is reportedly bold and tolerant of being approached closely underwater . The tough , thorny skin of this ray , made into a form of leather called shagreen , had many historical uses . In particular , it was used to cover the hilts of various melee weapons , as its extremely rough texture prevented slippage during battle . For example , the Japanese deemed it the only species whose skin was acceptable for covering sword grips . The Malayans used it to cover shields . The skin was also used ornamentally , such as by the Chinese , who dyed it and ground down the thorns to yield a mottled pattern . The native inhabitants of Funafuti Atoll used dried portions of the ray 's tail as a rasp @-@ like tool . 
 Presently , the porcupine ray is caught incidentally in trawls , tangle nets , and beach seines . Its skin continues to be highly valued , while the meat and cartilage may also be utilized . In the <unk> Islands and some other places in the Red Sea , its liver is eaten as a seasonal dish . However , the economic importance of this ray is limited by how difficult it is to handle . The multi @-@ species coastal fisheries that catch the porcupine ray are largely unregulated , which seems to have resulted in its dramatic decline or local extinction in the Bay of Bengal , the Gulf of Thailand , and likely elsewhere in its range . Potential additional threats to this species include habitat degradation from coastal development , and depletion of its food supply from overfishing . As a result , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed it as Vulnerable . 
 = First Person Shooter ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " First Person Shooter " is the thirteenth episode of the seventh season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network in the United States on February 27 , 2000 . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " First Person Shooter " earned a Nielsen household rating of 9 @.@ 3 , being watched by 15 @.@ 31 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received mostly negative reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , The Lone Gunmen summon Mulder and Scully to the headquarters of a video game design company after a new virtual reality game , which the Gunmen helped design , is taken over by a bizarre female computer character whose power is much more than virtual . 
 " First Person Shooter " was written by noted authors William Gibson and Tom Maddox , and directed by series creator Chris Carter . In addition , the episode serves as the spiritual successor to Gibson and Maddox 's earlier episode " Kill Switch . " Gibson was motivated to write the episode after the success of " Kill Switch . " The episode featured several elaborate special effects sequences that nearly put the episode over budget . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode opens with three men , fitted with futuristic combat gear and automatic weapons , entering the virtual reality game First Person Shooter . In a control room , Ivan and Phoebe , the game 's programmers , are monitoring the players ' vital signs . Only one of the players makes it to the second level of the violent game , where he encounters a female character in a fetishistic leather outfit . She introduces herself as Maitreya , stating , " This is my game " . She then kills the player with a flintlock pistol . 
 Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) visit the headquarters of First Person Shooters 's developers in Inland Empire , California , where they meet the Lone Gunmen , who work as consultants for the game . They look at the body of the player , which clearly displays a gunshot wound . Ivan claims there is no way a real gun could have been brought into the highly @-@ secured building . The agents are shown a video from the game , featuring the female character who killed the player . Mulder takes the printout of the character and shows it to a detective , as he believes she is the killer . 
 Daryl Musashi , a famous computer hacker , arrives at the building and enters the game to kill Maitreya . However , the character cuts off Musashi 's head and hands with a large medieval sword . Mulder receives a call from the Sheriff 's Department that a woman similar to the one in the printout has been picked up . The woman , a stripper named Jade Blue Afterglow , tells the agents that she was paid by a medical imaging facility in Culver City , California to scan her body . 
 Mulder and Scully find out that the Lone Gunmen have become trapped inside First Person Shooter , with somebody trying to kill them . Mulder enters the game , where he sees Maitreya and follows her . In the real world , Phoebe tearfully admits to Scully that the female warrior was created by her as a sort of personal estrogenic outlet in a testosterone @-@ fuelled environment . Maitreya was to be contained within Phoebe 's personal separate project , but the character found her way into the First Person Shooter program . 
 Scully decides to join Mulder in the game , and the two fight Maitreya together . Maitreya begins to duplicate herself , making the task of killing her more difficult . Finally , Maitreya sits atop a virtual tank and aims it at the agents . Phoebe admits there is one way to stop the game , but doing so will erase the entire program . Despite protests from Ivan , Phoebe gives Byers the kill command , effectively destroying Maitreya along with the game while saving Mulder and Scully . During Mulder 's narration , we see that in the control room one of the monitors is still active . There , Ivan sees Maitreya 's avatar , but with Scully 's face . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background and writing = = = 
 The episode is notable for being written by William Gibson , together with fellow science fiction novelist and long @-@ time friend Tom Maddox . " First Person Shooter " was the second episode written by the authors , after the success of the fifth season episode " Kill Switch " , which first aired on February 15 , 1998 and subsequently made frequent appearances in reruns , encouraging Gibson to continue working in television . According to executive producer Frank Spotnitz , the writing process for " First Person Shooter " was slow . Initially , Gibson and Maddox presented the first two acts of their idea , which was tweaked by series creator Chris Carter and Spotnitz in order to make it feel more like an X @-@ File . After the rewriting process , the writers then returned with the subsequent acts . Gibson and Maddox were fans of The Lone Gunmen and purposely wrote them into the episode . 
 = = = Filming and casting = = = 
 The concepts behind the episode were difficult to transfer from script to film . Spotnitz later explained that , " William Gibson and Tom Maddox always get us into trouble . They always come up with these great ideas that are always hard to execute . " In addition , budgetary challenges faced the production of " First Person Shooter . " Due to all the special effects needed for the episode , the episode nearly drastically went over budget . In order to not over @-@ spend , the production crew was lent various virtual game layouts from video game companies . Not wishing to simply " copy existing designs , " production designer Corey Kaplan and his design team created " some pretty pictures " to differentiate the crews ' design from the video game companies ' . Much of the opening action was filmed at a <unk> food distribution company in Los Angeles . At the time , the company 's owner was the uncle of X @-@ Files producer Paul Rabwin . In addition , a warehouse in downtown Los Angeles filled in for the backdrop of the opening scene . 
 Carter later noted that the hardest part of " First Person Shooter " was casting a suitable actress for the part of Maitreya . Casting director Rick Millikan looked into every possible avenue — including strippers , porn stars , and erotic thriller / direct @-@ to @-@ video actresses — before settling upon Krista Allen for the role . Initially , there was a " wholesome quality " that bothered Carter , but as the episode was being filmed , both Carter and Millikan recognized that Allen was right for the part . In addition to the part of Maitreya , several stuntmen were needed for the episode , including doubles for Mulder and Maitreya for their martial art fight scene . Experienced gymnast Dana Heath was hired for several scenes that required Maitreya to execute a series of handstands . Fourteen stuntmen were needed to ride Kawasaki 600s and fire gas @-@ powered machine @-@ guns . 
 = = = Action and effects = = = 
 The tank scene was created completely using CGI . The only actual footage from the scene was the background . A computer @-@ generated tank , along with women , were designed on a computer . Then , special effects shots of smoke and explosions were layered on top of the vehicle to give it a more life @-@ like appearance . Bruce Harwood , who portrayed Byers , noted that the action sequences in the episode were a challenge . He explained , " It 's pretty difficult on a set when the stuntmen come up to you and go , ' Don 't worry , you 'll be safe , Nothing to worry about . Okay . Everyone put their safety glasses on . ' " 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " First Person Shooter " first aired in the United States on February 27 , 2000 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 3 , with a 13 share , meaning that roughly 9 @.@ 3 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 13 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 15 @.@ 31 million viewers . The episode aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland on Sky1 on June 11 , 2000 and received 0 @.@ 67 million viewers , making it the third most watched episode that week . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " Tonight , Mulder and Scully must track down a video game killer whose killing spree is real . " 
 Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " D – " and largely panned it , calling it " legendarily bad " . He likened the overall experience of watching “ First Person Shooter ” to " feeling as if the show is slowly but surely letting the air out of its own tires . " He was , however , moderately pleased with the performances of Duchovny and Anderson , writing that they both were " really trying " . Kenneth Silber from Space.com criticized the lack of emotion in the episode , writing , " ' First Person Shooter ' achieves considerable mayhem but remarkably little drama . There seems little reason to care what happens to any of the characters , whether virtual or real , regulars or guests . Even as a man 's hands are cut into bloody stumps , one never gets the sense that anything important is going on . " 
 Rich Rosell from Digitally Obsessed awarded the episode 2 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars and wrote that " this Chris Carter @-@ directed ep [ sic ] oddly enough doesn 't center on the series mythology arc , but instead opts for a stab at the tired ol ' virtual reality genre . [ ... ] The only saving grace here is the appearance of hip conspiracy buffs The Lone Gunmen , who always brighten up any episode they appeared in . " Cyriaque Lamar from i09 called Maitreya one of " The 10 Most Ridiculous X @-@ Files Monsters " . Lamar derided the plot , calling it " Scully And Mulder Do Doom " , and expressed disappointment that the episode was written by William Gibson . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode one star out of five . Regardless of the negative press , " First Person Shooter " became one of Gillian Anderson 's favorite episodes , despite " its reliance on big guns and raging testosterone . " Anderson explained that she enjoyed the opportunity " to show Scully wearing heavy metal and firing oversized weapons . " 
 Although " First Person Shooter " was not as well @-@ received as the first episode written by William Gibson and Tom Maddox , " Kill Switch " , the episode later won Emmy Awards for Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Drama Series and Outstanding Visual Effects for a Series , and received a nomination for Outstanding Sound Editing for a Series . 
 = Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard = 
 Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard is a poem by Thomas Gray , completed in 1750 and first published in 1751 . The poem ’ s origins are unknown , but it was partly inspired by Gray ’ s thoughts following the death of the poet Richard West in 1742 . Originally titled Stanzas Wrote in a Country Church @-@ Yard , the poem was completed when Gray was living near St Giles ' parish church at Stoke Poges . It was sent to his friend Horace Walpole , who popularised the poem among London literary circles . Gray was eventually forced to publish the work on 15 February 1751 , to pre @-@ empt a magazine publisher from printing an unlicensed copy of the poem . 
 The poem is an elegy in name but not in form ; it employs a style similar to that of contemporary odes , but it embodies a meditation on death , and remembrance after death . The poem argues that the remembrance can be good and bad , and the narrator finds comfort in pondering the lives of the obscure rustics buried in the churchyard . The two versions of the poem , Stanzas and Elegy , approach death differently ; the first contains a stoic response to death , but the final version contains an epitaph which serves to repress the narrator 's fear of dying . With its discussion of , and focus on , the obscure and the known , the poem has possible political ramifications , but it does not make any definite claims on politics to be more universal in its approach to life and death . 
 Claimed as " probably still today the best @-@ known and best @-@ loved poem in English " , the Elegy quickly became popular . It was printed many times and in a variety of formats , translated into many languages , and praised by critics even after Gray 's other poetry had fallen out of favour . Later critics tended to comment on its language and universal aspects , but some felt the ending was unconvincing , failing to resolve the questions the poem raised ; or that the poem did not do enough to present a political statement that would serve to help the obscure rustic poor who form its central image . 
 = = Background = = 
 Gray 's life was surrounded by loss and death , and many people that he knew died painfully and alone . In 1749 , several events occurred that caused Gray stress . On 7 November , Mary Antrobus , Gray 's aunt , died ; her death devastated his family . The loss was compounded a few days later by news that his friend since childhood Horace Walpole had been almost killed by two highwaymen . Although Walpole survived and later joked about the event , the incident disrupted Gray 's ability to pursue his scholarship . The events dampened the mood that Christmas , and Antrobus 's death was ever fresh in the minds of the Gray family . As a side effect , the events caused Gray to spend much of his time contemplating his own mortality . As he began to contemplate various aspects of mortality , he combined his desire to determine a view of order and progress present in the Classical world with aspects of his own life . With spring nearing , Gray questioned if his own life would enter into a sort of rebirth cycle or , should he die , if there would be anyone to remember him . Gray 's meditations during spring 1750 turned to how individuals ' reputations would survive . Eventually , Gray remembered some lines of poetry that he composed in 1742 following the death of West , a poet he knew . Using that previous material , he began to compose a poem that would serve as an answer to the various questions he was pondering . 
 On 3 June 1750 , Gray moved to Stoke Poges , and on 12 June he completed Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard . Immediately , he included the poem in a letter he sent to Walpole , that said : 
 As I live in a place where even the ordinary tattle of the town arrives not till it is stale , and which produces no events of its own , you will not desire any excuse from me for writing so seldom , especially as of all people living I know you are the least a friend to letters spun out of one 's own brains , with all the toil and constraint that accompanies sentimental productions . I have been here at Stoke a few days ( where I shall continue good part of the summer ) ; and having put an end to a thing , whose beginnings you have seen long ago . I immediately send it you . You will , I hope , look upon it in light of a thing with an end to it ; a merit that most of my writing have wanted , and are like to want , but which this epistle I am determined shall not want . 
 The letter reveals that Gray felt that the poem was unimportant , and that he did not expect it to become as popular or influential as it did . Gray dismisses its positives as merely being that he was able to complete the poem , which was probably influenced by his experience of the churchyard at Stoke Poges , where he attended the Sunday service and was able to visit the grave of Antrobus . 
 The version that was later published and reprinted was a 32 @-@ stanza version with the " Epitaph " conclusion . Before the final version was published , it was circulated in London society by Walpole , who ensured that it would be a popular topic of discussion throughout 1750 . By February 1751 , Gray received word that William Owen , the publisher of the Magazine of Magazines , would print the poem on 16 February ; the copyright laws of the time did not require Gray 's approval for publication . With Walpole 's help , he was able to convince Robert Dodsley to print the poem on 15 February as a quarto pamphlet . 
 Walpole added a preface to the poem reading : " The following <unk> came into my hands by Accident , if the general Approbation with which this little Piece has been spread , may be call 'd by so slight a Term as Accident . It is the Approbation which makes it unnecessary for me to make any Apology but to the Author : As he cannot but feel some Satisfaction in having pleas 'd so many Readers already , I flatter myself he will forgive my communicating that Pleasure to many more . " 
 The pamphlet contained woodblock illustrations and was printed without attribution to Gray , at his request . Immediately after , Owen 's magazine with Gray 's poem was printed but contained multiple errors and other problems . In a 20 February letter to Walpole , Gray thanked him for intervening and helping to get a quality version of the poem published before Owen . It was so popular that it was reprinted twelve times and reproduced in many different periodicals until 1765 , including in Gray 's Six Poems ( 1753 ) , in his Odes ( 1757 ) , and in Volume IV of Dodsley 's 1755 compilation of poetry . The revised version of 1768 was that later printed . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The poem most likely originated in the poetry that Gray composed in 1742 . William Mason , in Memoirs , discussed his friend Gray and the origins of Elegy : " I am inclined to believe that the Elegy in a Country Church @-@ yard was begun , if not concluded , at this time [ August 1742 ] also : Though I am aware that as it stands at present , the conclusion is of a later date ; how that was originally I shall show in my notes on the poem . " Mason 's argument was a guess , but he argued that one of Gray 's poems from the Eton Manuscript , a copy of Gray 's handwritten poems owned by Eton College , was a 22 @-@ stanza rough draft of the Elegy called " Stanza 's Wrote in a Country Church @-@ Yard " . The manuscript copy contained many ideas which were reworked and revised as he attempted to work out the ideas that would later form the Elegy . A later copy was entered into Gray 's commonplace book and a third version , included in an 18 December 1750 letter , was sent to Thomas Wharton . The draft sent to Walpole was subsequently lost . 
 There are two possible ways the poem was composed . The first , Mason 's concept , argues that the Eton copy was the original for the Elegy poem and was complete in itself . Later critics claimed that the original was more complete than the later version ; Roger Lonsdale argued that the early version had a balance that set up the debate , and was clearer than the later version . Lonsdale also argued that the early poem fits classical models , including Virgil 's Georgics and Horace 's <unk> . The early version of the poem was finished , according to Mason , in August 1742 , but there is little evidence to give such a definite date . Mason argued that the poem was in response to West 's death , but there is little to indicate that Mason would have such information . 
 Instead , Walpole wrote to Mason to say : " The Churchyard was , I am persuaded , posterior to West 's death at least three or four years , as you will see by my note . At least I am sure that I had the twelve or more first lines from himself above three years after that period , and it was long before he finished it . " 
 The two did not resolve their disagreement , but Walpole did concede the matter , possibly to keep the letters between them polite . But Gray 's outline of the events provides the second possible way the poem was composed : the first lines of the poem were written some time in 1746 and he probably wrote more of the poem during the time than Walpole claimed . The letters show the likelihood of Walpole 's date for the composition , as a 12 June 1750 letter from Gray to Walpole stated that Walpole was provided lines from the poem years before and the two were not on speaking terms until after 1745 . The only other letter to discuss the poem was one sent to Wharton on 11 September 1746 , which alludes to the poem being worked on . 
 = = Genre = = 
 The poem is not a conventional part of the Classical genre of <unk> elegy , because it does not mourn an individual . The use of " elegy " is related to the poem relying on the concept of <unk> rerum , or disquiet regarding the human condition . The poem lacks many standard features of the elegy : an invocation , mourners , flowers , and shepherds . The theme does not emphasise loss as do other elegies , and its natural setting is not a primary component of its theme . Through the " Epitaph " at the end , it can be included in the tradition as a memorial poem , and it contains thematic elements of the elegiac genre , especially mourning . But as compared to a poem recording personal loss such as Milton 's " <unk> " , it lacks many of the ornamental aspects found in that poem . Gray 's is natural , whereas Milton 's is more artificially designed . 
 In evoking the English countryside , the poem belongs to the picturesque tradition found in John Dyer 's <unk> Hill ( 1726 ) , and the long line of topographical imitations it inspired . However , it diverges from this tradition in focusing on the death of a poet . Much of the poem deals with questions that were linked to Gray 's own life ; during the poem 's composition , he was confronted with the death of others and questioned his own mortality . Although universal in its statements on life and death , the poem was grounded in Gray 's feelings about his own life , and served as an epitaph for himself . As such , it falls within an old poetic tradition of poets contemplating their legacy . The poem , as an elegy , also serves to lament the death of others , including West , though at a remove . This is not to say that Gray 's poem was like others of the graveyard school of poetry ; instead , Gray tried to avoid a description that would evoke the horror common to other poems in the elegiac tradition . This is compounded further by the narrator trying to avoid an emotional response to death , by relying on rhetorical questions and discussing what his surroundings lack . Nevertheless , the sense of kinship with Robert Blair 's " The Grave " was so generally recognised that Gray 's Elegy was added to several editions of Blair 's poem between 1761 @-@ 1808 , after which other works began to be included as well . 
 The performance is connected with the several odes that Gray also wrote and those of Joseph Warton and William Collins . The poem , as it developed from its original form , advanced from the Horatian manner and became more Miltonic . The poem actively relied on " English " techniques and language . The stanza form , quatrains with an ABAB rhyme scheme , was common to English poetry and used throughout the 16th century . Any foreign diction that Gray relied on was merged with English words and phrases to give them an " English " feel . Many of the foreign words Gray adapted were previously used by Shakespeare or Milton , securing an " English " tone , and he emphasised monosyllabic words throughout his elegy to add a rustic English tone . 
 = = Poem = = 
 The poem begins in a churchyard with a narrator who is describing his surroundings in vivid detail . The narrator emphasises both aural and visual sensations as he examines the area in relation to himself : 
 The curfew tolls the knell of parting day , 
 The lowing herd wind slowly o 'er the lea 
 The ploughman homeward plods his weary way , 
 And leaves the world to darkness and to me . 
 Now fades the <unk> 'ring landscape on the sight , 
 And all the air a solemn stillness holds , 
 Save where the beetle wheels his droning flight , 
 And drowsy <unk> lull the distant folds ; 
 Save that from yonder ivy @-@ mantled tow 'r 
 The moping owl does to the moon complain 
 Of such , as wand 'ring near her secret bow 'r , 
 <unk> her ancient solitary reign . ( lines 1 – 12 ) 
 As the poem continues , the narrator begins to focus less on the countryside and more on his immediate surroundings . His descriptions move from sensations to his own thoughts as he begins to emphasise what is not present in the scene ; he contrasts an obscure country life with a life that is remembered . This contemplation provokes the narrator 's thoughts on the natural process of wastage and unfulfilled potential . 
 Full many a gem of purest ray serene , 
 The dark <unk> 'd caves of ocean bear : 
 Full many a flow 'r is born to blush unseen , 
 And waste its sweetness on the desert air . 
 Some village @-@ Hampden , that with dauntless breast 
 The little tyrant of his fields withstood ; 
 Some mute inglorious Milton here may rest , 
 Some Cromwell guiltless of his country 's blood . 
 The applause of listening <unk> to command , 
 The threats of pain and ruin to despise , 
 To scatter plenty o 'er a smiling land , 
 And read their <unk> 'ry in a nation 's eyes , 
 Their lot forbade : nor <unk> 'd alone 
 Their growing virtues , but their crimes <unk> 'd ; 
 <unk> to wade through slaughter to a throne , 
 And shut the gates of mercy on mankind , 
 The struggling pangs of conscious truth to hide , 
 To quench the blushes of ingenuous shame , 
 Or heap the shrine of Luxury and Pride 
 With incense kindled at the Muse 's flame . ( lines 53 – 72 ) 
 The narrator focuses on the inequities that come from death , obscuring individuals , while he begins to resign himself to his own inevitable fate . As the poem ends , the narrator begins to deal with death in a direct manner as he discusses how humans desire to be remembered . As the narrator does so , the poem shifts and the first narrator is replaced by a second who describes the death of the first : 
 For thee , who mindful of th ' <unk> 'd Dead 
 Dost in these lines their artless tale relate ; 
 If chance , by lonely contemplation led , 
 Some kindred spirit shall inquire thy fate , 
 <unk> some hoary @-@ headed swain may say , 
 Oft have we seen him at the peep of dawn 
 Brushing with hasty steps the dews away 
 To meet the sun upon the upland lawn . ( lines 93 – 100 ) 
 The poem concludes with a description of the poet 's grave , over which the narrator is meditating , together with a description of the end of the poet 's life : 
 There at the foot of yonder nodding beech 
 That <unk> its old fantastic roots so high , 
 His listless length at <unk> would he stretch , 
 And pore upon the brook that babbles by . 
 Hard by yon wood , now smiling as in scorn , 
 Mutt 'ring his wayward fancies he would rove , 
 Now drooping , woeful wan , like one forlorn , 
 Or <unk> 'd with care , or cross 'd in hopeless love . 
 One morn I miss 'd him on the custom 'd hill , 
 Along the heath and near his <unk> <unk> tree ; 
 Another came ; nor yet beside the rill , 
 Nor up the lawn , nor at the wood was he ; 
 The next with dirges due in sad array 
 Slow thro ' the church @-@ way path we saw him borne . 
 Approach and read ( for thou canst read ) the lay , 
 <unk> 'd on the stone beneath yon aged thorn . " ( lines 101 – 116 ) 
 An epitaph is included after the conclusion of the poem . The epitaph reveals that the poet whose grave is the focus of the poem was unknown and obscure . Circumstance kept the poet from becoming something greater , and he was separated from others because he was unable to join in the common affairs of their life : 
 Here rests his head upon the lap of Earth 
 A youth to Fortune and to Fame unknown . 
 Fair Science frown 'd not on his humble birth , 
 And Melancholy mark 'd him for her own . 
 Large was his bounty , and his soul sincere , 
 <unk> 'n did a recompense as largely send : 
 He gave to Mis 'ry all he had , a tear , 
 He gain 'd from <unk> 'n ( ' twas all he wish 'd ) a friend . 
 No farther seek his merits to disclose , 
 Or draw his frailties from their dread abode , 
 ( There they alike in trembling hope repose ) 
 The bosom of his Father and his God . ( lines 117 – 128 ) 
 The original conclusion from the earlier version of the poem confronts the reader with the inevitable prospect of death and advises resignation , which differs from the indirect , third @-@ person description in the final version : 
 The thoughtless World to majesty may bow 
 Exalt the brave , & idolize Success 
 But more to Innocence their Safety owe 
 Than Power & Genius e 'er conspired to bless 
 And thou , who mindful of the <unk> 'd Dead 
 Dost in these Notes thy artless Tale relate 
 By Night & lonely contemplation led 
 To linger in the gloomy Walks of Fate 
 Hark how the sacred Calm , that broods around 
 Bids ev 'ry fierce <unk> Passion ease 
 In still small Accents whisp 'ring from the Ground 
 A grateful Earnest of eternal Peace 
 No more with Reason & thyself at strife ; 
 Give anxious Cares & endless Wishes room 
 But thro ' the cool sequester 'd Vale of Life 
 <unk> the silent <unk> of thy Doom . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The poem connects with many earlier British poems that contemplate death and seek to make it more familiar and tame , including Jonathan Swift 's satirical Verses on the Death of Dr. Swift . But when compared to other works by the so @-@ called Graveyard poets , such as Blair 's The Grave ( 1743 ) , Gray 's poem has less emphasis on common images found there . His description of the moon , birds and trees dispels the horror found in them and he largely avoids mentioning the word " grave " , instead using euphemisms . 
 There is a difference in tone between the two versions of the elegy ; the early one ends with an emphasis on the narrator joining with the obscure common man , while the later version ends with an emphasis on how it is natural for humans to want to be known . The later ending also explores the narrator 's own death , whereas the earlier version serves as a Christian consolation regarding death . 
 The first version of the elegy is among the few early poems composed by Gray in English , including " Sonnet on the Death of Richard West , " his " Eton Ode " , and his " Ode to Adversity " . All four contain Gray 's meditations on mortality that were inspired by West 's death . The later version of the poem kept the stoic resignation regarding death , as the narrator still accepts death . The poem concludes with an epitaph , which reinforces Gray 's indirect and reticent manner of writing . Although the ending reveals the narrator 's repression of feelings surrounding his inevitable fate , it is optimistic . The epitaph describes faith in a " trembling hope " that he cannot know while alive . 
 In describing the narrator 's analysis of his surroundings , Gray employed John Locke 's philosophy of the sensations , which argued that the senses were the origin of ideas . Information described in the beginning of the poem is reused by the narrator as he contemplates life near the end . The description of death and obscurity adopts Locke 's political philosophy as it emphasises the inevitability and finality of death . The end of the poem is connected to Locke 's An Essay Concerning Human Understanding in that the beginning of the poem deals with the senses and the ending describes how we are limited in our ability to understand the world . The poem takes the ideas and transforms them into a discussion of blissful ignorance by adopting Locke 's resolution to be content with our limited understanding . Unlike Locke , the narrator of the poem knows that he is unable to fathom the universe , but still questions the matter . 
 On the difference between the obscure and the renowned in the poem , scholar David Cecil argued , " Death , he perceives , dwarfs human differences . There is not much to choose between the great and the humble , once they are in the grave . It may be that there never was ; it may be that in the obscure graveyard lie those who but for circumstance would have been as famous as Milton and Hampden . " However , death is not completely democratic because " if circumstances prevented them from achieving great fame , circumstances also saved them from committing great crimes . Yet there is a special pathos in these obscure tombs ; the crude inscriptions on the clumsy monuments are so poignant a reminder of the vain longing of all men , however humble , to be loved and to be remembered . " 
 The poem ends with the narrator turning towards his own fate , accepting his life and accomplishments . The poem , like many of Gray 's , incorporates a narrator who is contemplating his position in a transient world that is mysterious and tragic . Although the comparison between obscurity and renown is commonly seen as universal and not within a specific context with a specific political message , there are political ramifications for Gray 's choices . Both John Milton and John Hampden spent time near the setting of Stoke Poges , which was also affected by the English Civil War . The poem 's composition could also have been prompted by the entrance of Prince William , Duke of Cumberland into London or by a trial of Jacobite nobility in 1746 . 
 Many scholars , including Lonsdale , believe that the poem 's message is too universal to require a specific event or place for inspiration , but Gray 's letters suggest that there were historical influences in its composition . In particular , it is possible that Gray was interested in debates over the treatment of the poor , and that he supported the political structure of his day , which was to support the poor who worked but look down on those that refused to . However , Gray 's message is incomplete , because he ignored the poor 's past rebellions and struggles . The poem ignores politics to focus on various comparisons between a rural and urban life in a psychological manner . The argument between living a rural life or urban life lets Gray discuss questions that answer how he should live his own life , but the conclusion of the poem does not resolve the debate as the narrator is able to recreate himself in a manner that reconciles both types of life while arguing that poetry is capable of preserving those who have died . It is probable that Gray wanted to promote the hard work of the poor but to do nothing to change their social position . Instead of making claims of economic injustice , Gray accommodates differing political views . This is furthered by the ambiguity in many of the poem 's lines , including the statement " Some Cromwell guiltless of his country 's blood " that could be read either as Oliver Cromwell being guiltless for violence during the English Civil War or merely as villagers being compared to the guilty Cromwell . The poem 's primary message is to promote the idea of " Englishness " , and the pastoral English countryside . The earlier version lacks many of the later version 's English aspects , especially as Gray replaced many classical figures with English ones : Cato the Younger by Hampden , Tully by Milton , and Julius Caesar by Cromwell . 
 = = Influence = = 
 = = = Poetic parallels = = = 
 In choosing an " English " over a Classical setting , Gray provided a model for later poets wishing to describe England and the English countryside during the second half of the 18th century . Once Gray had set the example , any occasion would do to give a sense of the effects of time in a landscape , as for instance in the passage of the seasons as described in John Scott ’ s Four Elegies , descriptive and moral ( 1757 ) . Other imitations , though avoiding overt verbal parallels , chose similar backgrounds to signal their parentage . One favourite theme was a meditation among ruins , such as John Langhorne 's “ Written among the ruins of Pontefract Castle ” ( 1756 ) , Edward Moore ’ s “ An elegy , written among the ruins of a nobleman 's seat in Cornwall ” ( 1756 ) and John Cunningham ’ s “ An elegy on a pile of ruins " ( 1761 ) . Gray ’ s friend William Mason chose an actual churchyard in South Wales for his “ Elegy VI ” ( 1787 ) , adding a reference to the poet in the text . He also provided a final note explaining that the poem was written “ to make it appear a day scene , and as such to contrast it with the twilight scene of my excellent Friend ’ s Elegy ” . 
 A kinship between Gray ’ s Elegy and Oliver Goldsmith ’ s “ The Deserted Village ” has been recognised , although the latter was more openly political in its treatment of the rural poor and used heroic couplets , where the <unk> poets kept to cross @-@ rhymed quatrains . At first it was collected in various editions along with Gray ’ s poem and other topographical works , but from 1873 a number of editions appeared which contained just the Elegy and “ The Deserted Village ” , though sometimes with the inclusion of Goldsmith ’ s “ The Traveller ” or some other single work as well . At that period an anonymous review in the The Academy ( 12 December 1896 ) claimed that " Gray 's ' Elegy ' and Goldsmith 's ' The Deserted Village ' shine forth as the two human poems in a century of artifice . " 
 The Elegy 's continued influence in the 19th century provoked a response from the Romantic poets , who often attempted to define their own beliefs in reaction to Gray 's . Percy Bysshe Shelley , for example , who as a schoolboy was given the exercise of translating part of the Elegy into Latin , eventually wrote his own meditation among the graves in 1815 . His " A Summer Evening Churchyard , Lechlade , Gloucestershire " is metrically more inventive and written in a six @-@ line stanza that terminates Gray ’ s cross @-@ rhymed quatrain with a couplet . In theme and tendency Shelley 's poem closely resembles the setting of the Elegy but concludes that there is something appealing in death that frees it of terror . 
 In the Victorian period , Alfred , Lord Tennyson adopted many features of the Elegy in his own extended meditation on death , In Memoriam . He established a ceremonial , almost religious , tone by reusing the idea of the " knell " that " tolls " to mark the coming night . This is followed with the poet narrator looking through letters of his deceased friend , echoing Gray 's narrator reading the tombstones to connect to the dead . Robert Browning relied on a similar setting to the Elegy in his pastoral poem " Love Among the Ruins " , which describes the desire for glory and how everything ends in death . Unlike Gray , Browning adds a female figure and argues that nothing but love matters . Thomas Hardy , who had memorised Gray 's poem , took the title of his fourth novel , Far from the Madding Crowd , from a line in it . In addition , many in his Wessex Poems and Other Verses ( 1898 ) contain a graveyard theme and take a similar stance to Gray , and its frontispiece depicts a graveyard . 
 It is also possible that parts of T. S. Eliot 's Four Quartets are derived from the Elegy , although Eliot believed that Gray 's diction , along with 18th @-@ century poetic diction in general , was restrictive and limited . But the Four Quartets cover many of the same views , and Eliot 's village is similar to Gray 's hamlet . There are many echoes of Gray 's language throughout the Four Quartets ; both poems rely on the yew tree as an image and use the word " twittering " , which was uncommon at the time . Each of Eliot 's four poems has parallels to Gray 's poem , but " Little Gidding " is deeply indebted to the Elegy 's meditation on a " neglected spot " . Of the similarities between the poems , it is Eliot 's reuse of Gray 's image of " stillness " that forms the strongest parallel , an image that is essential to the poem 's arguments on mortality and society . 
 = = = Adaptations and parodies = = = 
 On the basis of some 2000 examples , one commentator has argued that “ Gray ’ s Elegy has probably inspired more adaptations than any other poem in the language ” . It has also been suggested that parody acts as a kind of translation into the same tongue as the original , something that the printing history of some examples seems to confirm . One of the earliest , John Duncombe ’ s “ An evening contemplation in a college ” ( 1753 ) , frequently reprinted to the end of the 18th century , was included alongside translations of the Elegy into Latin and Italian in the 1768 and 1775 Dublin editions and 1768 Cork edition of Gray ’ s works . In the case of the American The Political Passing Bell : An Elegy . Written in a Country Meeting House , April 1789 ; <unk> from Gray for the Entertainment of Those Who Laugh at All Parties by George Richards ( <unk> ) and published from Boston MA , the parody was printed opposite Gray 's original page by page , making the translation to the political context more obvious . 
 A shift in context was the obvious starting point in many of these works and , where sufficiently original , contributed to the author ’ s own literary fortunes . This was the case with Edward Jerningham ’ s The Nunnery : an elegy in imitation of the Elegy in a Churchyard , published in 1762 . <unk> by its success , Jerningham followed it up in successive years with other poems on the theme of nuns , in which the connection with Gray ’ s work , though less close , was maintained in theme , form and emotional tone : “ The Magdalens : an elegy ” ( 1763 ) ; “ The Nun : an elegy ” ( 1764 ) ; and “ An Elegy Written Among the Ruins of an Abbey ” ( 1765 ) , which is derivative of the earlier poems on ruins by Moore and Cunningham . At the opposite extreme , Gray ’ s poem provided a format for a surprising number that purport to be personal descriptions of life in gaol , starting with “ An elegy in imitation of Gray , written in the King 's Bench Prison by a minor “ ( London 1790 ) , which is close in title to William Thomas Moncrieff ’ s later " Prison Thoughts : An elegy , written in the King 's Bench Prison " , dating from 1816 and printed in 1821 . In 1809 , <unk> wrote “ An evening 's contemplation in a French prison , being a humble imitation of Gray 's Elegy ” while he was a prisoner at Arras during the Napoleonic wars ( London 1809 ) . It was followed next year by the bitter “ Elegy in Newgate ” , published in The Satirist in the character of the recently imprisoned William Cobbett . 
 An obvious distinction can be made between imitations meant to stand as independent works within the elegiac genre , not all of which followed Gray ’ s wording closely , and those with a humorous or satirical purpose . The latter filled the columns in newspapers and comic magazines for the next century and a half . In 1884 some eighty of them were quoted in full or in part in Walter Hamilton ’ s Parodies of the works of English and American authors ( London 1884 ) , more than those of any other work and further evidence of the poem ’ s abiding influence . One example uncollected there was the ingenious double parody of J. C. Squire , “ If Gray had had to write his Elegy in the Cemetery of Spoon River instead of in that of Stoke Poges ” . This was an example of how later parodies shifted their critical aim , in this case “ explicitly calling attention to the formal and thematic ties which connected the 18th century work with its 20th century derivation ” in Edgar Lee Masters ’ work . Ambrose Bierce used parody of the poem for the same critical purpose in his definition of “ Elegy ” in The Devil ’ s Dictionary , ending with the dismissive lines 
 The wise man homeward plods ; I only stay 
 To fiddle @-@ <unk> in a minor key . 
 = = = Translations = = = 
 While parody sometimes served as a special kind of translation , some translations returned the compliment by providing a parodic version of the Elegy in their endeavour to accord to the current poetic style in the host language . An extreme example was provided by the <unk> French imitation by the Latin scholar John Roberts in 1875 . In place of the plain English of Gray ’ s “ And all that beauty , all that wealth e ’ er gave ” , he substituted the Parnassian Tous les dons de Plutus , tous les dons de <unk> ( All the gifts of Plutus and of <unk> ) and kept this up throughout the poem in a performance that its English reviewer noted as bearing only the thinnest relation to the original . 
 The latest database of translations of the Elegy , amongst which the above version figures , records over 260 in some forty languages . As well as the principal European languages and some of the minor such as Welsh , Breton and Icelandic , they include several in Asian languages as well . Through the medium of these , Romanticism was brought to the host literatures in Europe . In Asia they provided an alternative to tradition @-@ bound native approaches and were identified as an avenue to modernism . Study of the translations , and especially those produced soon after the poem was written , has highlighted some of the difficulties that the text presents . These include ambiguities of word order and the fact that certain languages do not allow the understated way in which Gray indicates that the poem is a personalised statement in the final line of the first stanza , “ And leaves the world to darkness and to me ” . 
 Some of these problems disappeared when that translation was into Classical Latin , only to be replaced by others that Gray himself raised in correspondence with Christopher Anstey , one of the first of his translators into Latin . 
 “ Every language has its idiom , not only of words and phrases , but of customs and manners , which cannot be represented in the tongue of another nation , especially of a nation so distant in time and place , without constraint and difficulty ; of this sort , in the present instance , are the curfew bell , the Gothic Church , with its monuments , organs and anthems , the texts of Scripture , etc . There are certain images , which , though drawn from common nature , and everywhere obvious , yet strike us as foreign to the turn and genius of Latin verse ; the beetle that flies in the evening , to a Roman , I guess , would have appeared too mean an object for poetry . ” 
 Anstey did not agree that Latin was as <unk> as Gray suggests and had no difficulty in finding ways of including all these references , although other Latin translators found different solutions , especially in regard to inclusion of the beetle . He similarly ignored Gray ’ s suggestion in the same letter , referring back to his own alternative versions in earlier drafts of his poem : “ Might not the English characters here be romanized ? Virgil is just as good as Milton , and Cæsar as Cromwell , but who shall be Hampden ? ” Again , however , other Latin translators , especially those from outside Britain , found Gray ’ s suggested alternative more appealing . 
 One other point , already mentioned , was how to deal with the problem of rendering the poem ’ s fourth line . Gray remarked to Anstey , “ ’ That leaves the world to darkness and to me ’ is good English , but has not the turn of a Latin phrase , and therefore , I believe , you were in the right to drop it . ” In fact , all that Anstey had dropped was reproducing an example of <unk> with a respectable Classical history , but only in favour of replicating the same understated introduction of the narrator into the scene : et solus sub <unk> <unk> ( and I alone am left under the night ) . Some other translators , with other priorities , found elegant means to render the original turn of speech exactly . 
 In the same year that Anstey ( and his friend William Hayward Roberts ) were working on their Elegia <unk> in <unk> Rustico , Latine <unk> ( 1762 ) , another Latin version was published by Robert Lloyd with the title Carmen <unk> . Both were subsequently included in Irish collections of Gray ’ s poems , accompanied not only by John Duncombe ’ s “ Evening Contemplation ” , as noted earlier , but in the 1775 Dublin edition by translations from Italian sources as well . These included another Latin translation by Giovanni Costa and two into Italian by Abbate <unk> and Giuseppe <unk> . The pattern of including translations and imitations together continued into the 19th century with an 1806 bilingual edition in which a translation into French verse , signed simply L.D. , appeared facing the English original page by page . However , the bulk of the book was made up of four English parodies . Duncombe ’ s “ Evening contemplation ” was preceded by a parody of itself , “ Nocturnal contemplations in Barham Down ’ s Camp ” , which is filled , like Duncombe ’ s poem , with drunken <unk> disturbing the silence . Also included were Jerningham ’ s “ The Nunnery ” and <unk> ’ s “ Nightly thoughts in the Temple ” , the latter set in the gated lawyer ’ s quarter in London . 
 <unk> editions without such imitations were also appearing both in Britain and abroad . Gray ’ s Elegy in English , French and Latin was published from Croydon in 1788 . The French author there was Pierre <unk> de <unk> and the Latin translator ( like Gray and Anstey , a Cambridge graduate ) was Gilbert Wakefield . In 1793 there was an Italian edition of Giuseppe Torelli ’ s translation in rhymed quatrains which had first appeared in 1776 . This was printed facing Gray ’ s original and was succeeded by <unk> <unk> ’ s translation in blank verse and Giovanni Costa ’ s Latin version , both of which dated from 1772 . A French publication ingeniously followed suit by including the Elegy in an 1816 guide to the Père Lachaise Cemetery , accompanied by Torelli 's Italian translation and Pierre @-@ Joseph <unk> ’ s free Le Cimetière de village . 
 Such publications were followed by multilingual collections , of which the most ambitious was Alessandro Torri ’ s L <unk> di Tommaso Gray sopra un <unk> di <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> in più <unk> con <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Verona 1819 ) . This included four translations into Latin , of which one was Christopher Anstey ’ s and another was Costa ’ s ; eight into Italian , where versions in prose and terza rima accompanied those already mentioned by Torelli and <unk> ; two in French , two in German and one each in Greek and Hebrew . Even more translations were eventually added in the new edition of 1843 . By that time , too , John Martin ’ s illustrated edition of 1839 had appeared with translations into Latin , Greek , German , Italian and French , of which only the Torelli version had appeared in previous collections . What we learn from all this activity is that , as the centenary of its first publication approached , interest in Gray ’ s Elegy continued unabated in Europe and new translations of it continued to be made . 
 = = = Other media = = = 
 Many editions of the Elegy have contained illustrations , some of considerable merit , such as those among the Designs by Mr. Bentley , for Six Poems by Mr. T. Gray ( 1753 ) . But the work of two leading artists is particularly noteworthy . Between 1777 @-@ 8 William Blake was commissioned by John Flaxman to produce an illustrated set of Gray ’ s poems as a birthday gift to his wife . These were in watercolour and included twelve for the Elegy , which appeared at the end of the volume . Another individual book was created in 1910 by the illuminator Sidney Farnsworth , hand written in italic script with a mediaeval decorative surround and more modern @-@ looking inset illustrations . 
 Another notable illuminated edition had been created in 1846 by Owen Jones in a legible blackletter script with one decorative initial per page . Produced by chromolithography , each of its 35 pages was individually designed with two half stanzas in a box surrounded by coloured foliar and floral borders . An additional feature was the cover of deeply embossed brown leather made to imitate carved wood . A little earlier there had been a <unk> illustrated work for which the librarian John Martin had been responsible . Having approached John Constable and other major artists for designs to illustrate the Elegy , these were then engraved on wood for the first edition in 1834 . Some were reused in later editions , including the multilingual anthology of 1839 mentioned above . Constable 's charcoal and wash study of the " ivy @-@ mantled tower " in stanza 3 is held by the Victoria and Albert Museum , as is his watercolour study of Stoke Poges church , while the watercolour for stanza 5 , in which the narrator leans on a gravestone to survey the cemetery , is held at the British Museum ( see below ) . 
 While not an illustration in itself , Christopher Nevinson ’ s statement against the slaughter of World War I in his painting Paths of Glory ( 1917 ) takes its title from another line in the Elegy , “ The paths of glory lead but to the grave ” . The title had already been used two years before by Irvin S. Cobb in an account of his journalistic experiences at the start of that war . It was then taken up in the unrelated Humphrey Cobb 's 1935 anti @-@ war novel , although in this case the name was suggested for the untitled manuscript in a competition held by the publisher . His book also served in its turn as the basis for Stanley Kubrick ’ s film Paths of Glory , released in 1957 . This example is just one more among many illustrating the imaginative currency that certain lines of the poem continue to have , over and above their original significance . 
 Since the poem is long , there have been few musical settings . Musicians during the 1780s adopted the solution of selecting only a part . <unk> 's musical setting for voices was of the " Epitaph " ( 1785 ) , which was perhaps the item performed as a trio after a recitation of the poem at the newly opened Royalty Theatre in London in 1787 . At about that time too , Stephen Storace set the first two stanzas in his “ The curfew tolls ” for voice and keyboard , with a reprise of the first stanza at the end . At the period there were guides for the dramatic performance of such pieces involving expressive hand gestures , and they included directions for this piece . There is also an item described as " Gray 's Elegy set to music " in various settings for voice accompanied by harpsichord or harp by Thomas Billington ( 1754 @-@ 1832 ) , although this too may have only been an excerpt . A member of the theatrical world , Billington was noted as " fond of setting the more serious and gloomier passages in English verse ” 
 In 1830 , a well known composer of glees , George Hargreaves , set " Full many a gem " , the Elegy 's fourteenth stanza , for four voices . And finally , at the other end of the century , Alfred Cellier did set the whole work in a cantata composed expressly for the Leeds Festival , 1883 . The work was “ dedicated to Mrs Coleman of Stoke Park , in memory of some pleasant hours at the very spot where the scene of the elegy is supposed to be laid . ” A nearly contemporary cantata was also composed by Gertrude E. Quinton as Musa <unk> : being a setting to music of Gray 's Elegy ( London , 1885 ) . 
 The only other example yet discovered of a translation of the Elegy set to music was the few lines rendered into German by Ella Backus Behr ( 1897 – 1928 ) in America . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 The immediate response to the final draft version of the poem was positive and Walpole was very pleased with the work . During the summer of 1750 , Gray received so much positive support regarding the poem that he was in dismay , but did not mention it in his letters until an 18 December 1750 letter to Wharton . In the letter , Gray said , 
 The Stanza 's , which I now enclose to you have had the Misfortune by Mr W : s Fault to be made ... publick , for which they certainly were never meant , but it is too late to complain . They have been so applauded , it is quite a Shame to repeat it . I mean not to be modest ; but I mean , it is a shame for those who have said such superlative Things about them , that I can 't repeat them . I should have been glad , that you & two or three more People had liked them , which would have satisfied my ambition on this head amply . 
 The poem was praised for its universal aspects , and Gray became one of the most famous English poets of his era . Despite this , after his death only his elegy remained popular until 20th @-@ century critics began to re @-@ evaluate his poetry . The 18th @-@ century writer James Beattie was said by Sir William Forbes , 6th Baronet to have written a letter to him claiming , " Of all the English poets of this age , Mr. Gray is most admired , and I think with justice ; yet there are comparatively speaking but a few who know of anything of his , but his ' Church @-@ yard Elegy , ' which is by no means the best of his works . " 
 There is a story that the British General James Wolfe read the poem before his troops arrived at the Plains of Abraham in September 1759 as part of the Seven Years ' War . After reading the poem , he is reported to have said : " Gentlemen , I would rather have written those lines than take Quebec tomorrow . " Adam Smith , in his 21st lecture on rhetoric in 1763 , argued that poetry should deal with " A temper of mind that differs very little from the common tranquillity of mind is what we can best enter into , by the perusal of a small piece of a small length ... an Ode or Elegy in which there is no odds but in the measure which differ little from the common state of mind are what most please us . Such is that on the Church yard , or Eton College by Mr Grey . The Best of <unk> ( tho inferior to Mr Greys ) are all of this sort . " Even Samuel Johnson , who knew Gray but did not like his poetry , later praised the poem when he wrote in his Life of Gray ( 1779 ) that it " abounds with images which find a mirror in every breast ; and with sentiments to which every bosom returns an echo . The four stanzas beginning Yet even these bones , are to me original : I have never seen the notions in any other place ; yet he that reads them here , persuades himself that he has always felt them . " 
 Johnson 's general criticism prompted many others to join in the debate . Some reviewers of his Lives of the Poets , and many of Gray 's editors , thought that he was too harsh . An article in the Annual Register for 1782 recognised , with relation to the Elegy , " That the doctor was not over zealous to allow [ Gray ] the degree of praise that the public voice had universally assigned him , is , we think , sufficiently apparent " ; but it went on to qualify this with the opinion that " partiality to [ Gray 's ] beautiful elegy had perhaps allotted him a rank above his general merits . " Debate over Gray 's work continued into the 19th century , and Victorian critics remained unconvinced by the rest of it . At the end of the century , Matthew Arnold , in his 1881 collection of critical writings , summed up the general response : " The Elegy pleased ; it could not but please : but Gray 's poetry , on the whole , astonished his contemporaries at first more than it pleased them ; it was so unfamiliar , so unlike the sort of poetry in vogue . " 
 In 1882 , Edmund Gosse analyzed the reception of Gray 's poem : " It is curious to reflect upon the modest and careless mode in which that poem was first circulated which was destined to enjoy and to retain a higher reputation in literature than any other English poem perhaps than any other poem of the world written between Milton and Wordsworth . " He continued by stressing the poem 's wide acceptance : " The fame of the Elegy has spread to all countries and has exercised an influence on all the poetry of Europe , from Denmark to Italy , from France to Russia . With the exception of certain works of Byron and Shakespeare , no English poem has been so widely admired and imitated abroad and after more than a century of existence we find it as fresh as ever , when its copies , even the most popular of all those of Lamartine , are faded and tarnished . " He concluded with a reinforcing claim on the poem 's place in English poetry : " It possesses the charm of incomparable felicity , of a melody that is not too subtle to charm every ear , of a moral persuasiveness that appeals to every generation , and of metrical skill that in each line proclaims the master . The Elegy may almost be looked upon as the typical piece of English verse , our poem of poems ; not that it is the most brilliant or original or profound lyric in our language , but because it combines in more balanced perfection than any other all the qualities that go to the production of a fine poetical effect . " 
 = = = 20th @-@ century response = = = 
 Critics at the beginning of the 20th century believed that the poem 's use of sound and tone made it great . The French critic Louis <unk> claimed in 1927 that Gray " discovered rhythms , utilised the power of sounds , and even created evocations . The triumph of this sensibility allied to so much art is to be seen in the famous Elegy , which from a somewhat reasoning and moralizing emotion has <unk> a grave , full , melodiously monotonous song , in which a century weaned from the music of the soul tasted all the sadness of eventide , of death , and of the tender musing upon self . " I. A. Richards , following in 1929 , declared that the merits of the poem come from its tone : " poetry , which has no other very remarkable qualities , may sometimes take very high rank simply because the poet 's attitude to his listeners – in view of what he has to say – is so perfect . Gray and Dryden are notable examples . Gray 's Elegy , indeed , might stand as a supreme instance to show how powerful an exquisitely adjusted tone may be . It would be difficult to maintain that the thought in this poem is either striking or original , or that its feeling is exceptional . " He continued : " the Elegy may usefully remind us that boldness and originality are not necessities for great poetry . But these thoughts and feelings , in part because of their significance and their nearness to us , are peculiarly difficult to express without faults ... Gray , however , without overstressing any point composes a long address , perfectly accommodating his familiar feelings towards the subject and his awareness of the inevitable triteness of the only possible reflections , to the discriminating attention of his audience . And this is the source of his triumph . " 
 In the 1930s and 1940s , critics emphasised the content of the poem , and some felt that it fell short of what was necessary to make it truly great . In 1930 , William Empson , while praising the form of the poem as universal , argued against its merits because of its potential political message . He claimed that the poem " as the context makes clear " , means that " 18th @-@ century England had no scholarship system of <unk> <unk> aux talents . This is stated as pathetic , but the reader is put into a mood in which one would not try to alter it ... By comparing the social arrangement to Nature he makes it seem inevitable , which it was not , and gives it a dignity which was undeserved . Furthermore , a gem does not mind being in a cave and a flower prefers not to be picked ; we feel that man is like the flower , as short @-@ lived , natural , and valuable , and this tricks us into feeling that he is better off without opportunities . " He continued : " the truism of the reflection in the churchyard , the universality and impersonality this gives to the style , claim as if by comparison that we ought to accept the injustice of society as we do the inevitability of death . " T. S. Eliot ’ s 1932 collection of essays contained a comparison of the elegy to the sentiment found in metaphysical poetry : " The feeling , the sensibility , expressed in the Country Churchyard ( to say nothing of Tennyson and Browning ) is cruder than that in the Coy Mistress . " Later , in 1947 , Cleanth Brooks pointed out that " In Gray 's poem , the imagery does seem to be intrinsically poetic ; the theme , true ; the ' statement ' , free from ambiguity , and free from irony . " After describing various aspects and complexities within the poem , Brooks provided his view on the poem 's conclusion : " the reader may not be altogether convinced , as I am not altogether convinced , that the epitaph with which the poem closes is adequate . But surely its intended function is clear , and it is a necessary function if the poem is to have a structure and is not to be considered merely a loose collection of poetic passages . " 
 Critics during the 1950s and 1960s generally regarded the Elegy as powerful , and emphasised its place as one of the great English poems . In 1955 , R. W. Ketton @-@ Cremer argued , " At the close of his greatest poem Gray was led to describe , simply and movingly , what sort of man he believed himself to be , how he had fared in his passage through the world , and what he hoped for from eternity . " Regarding the status of the poem , Graham Hough in 1953 explained , " no one has ever doubted , but many have been hard put to it to explain in what its greatness consists . It is easy to point out that its thought is commonplace , that its diction and imagery are correct , noble but unoriginal , and to wonder where the immediately recognizable greatness has slipped in . " Following in 1963 , Martin Day argued that the poem was " perhaps the most frequently quoted short poem in English . " Frank Brady , in 1965 , declared , " Few English poems have been so universally admired as Gray 's Elegy , and few interpreted in such widely divergent ways . " Patricia Spacks , in 1967 , focused on the psychological questions in the poem and claimed that " For these implicit questions the final epitaph provides no adequate answer ; perhaps this is one reason why it seems not entirely a satisfactory conclusion to the poem . " She continued by praising the poem : " Gray 's power as a poet derives largely from his ability to convey the inevitability and <unk> of conflict , conflict by its nature unresolvable . " In 1968 , Herbert Starr pointed out that the poem was " frequently referred to , with some truth , as the best known poem in the English language . " 
 During the 1970s , some critics pointed out how the lines of the poems were memorable and popular while others emphasised the poem 's place in the greater tradition of English poetry . W. K. <unk> , in 1970 , suggested , " Perhaps we shall be tempted to say only that Gray transcends and outdoes Hammond and Shenstone simply because he writes a more poetic line , richer , fuller , more resonant and memorable in all the ways in which we are accustomed to analyze the poetic quality . " In 1971 , Charles Cudworth declared that the elegy was " a work which probably contains more famous quotations per linear inch of text than any other in the English language , not even excepting Hamlet . " When describing how Gray 's Elegy is not a conventional elegy , Eric Smith added in 1977 , " Yet , if the poem at so many points fails to follow the conventions , why are we considering it here ? the answer is partly that no study of major English elegies could well omit it . But it is also , and more importantly , that in its essentials Gray 's Elegy touches this tradition at many points , and consideration of them is of interest to both to appreciation of the poem and to seeing how [ ... ] they become in the later tradition essential points of reference . " Also in 1977 , Thomas Carper noted , " While Gray was a schoolboy at Eton , his poetry began to show a concern with parental relationships , and with his position among the great and lowly in the world [ ... ] But in the Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard these longstanding and very human concerns have their most affecting expression . " In 1978 , Howard <unk> noted , " With all its long tradition of professional examination the poem remains distant for many readers , as if the criticism could not explain why Johnson thought that " The Church @-@ yard abounds with images that find a <unk> in every mind " . He continued by arguing that it is the poem 's discussion of morality and death that is the source of its " enduring popularity " . 
 By the 1980s , critics emphasised the power of the poem 's message and technique , and it was seen as an important English poem . After analyzing the language of the poem , W. Hutchings declared in 1984 , " The epitaph , then , is still making us think , still disturbing us , even as it uses the language of conventional Christianity and conventional epitaphs . Gray does not want to round his poem off neatly , because death is an experience of which we cannot be certain , but also because the logic of his syntax demands continuity rather than completion . " Also in 1984 , Anne Williams claimed , " ever since publication it has been both popular and universally admired . Few readers then or now would dispute Dr. Johnson 's appraisal ... In the twentieth century we have remained eager to praise , yet praise has proved difficult ; although tradition and general human experience affirm that the poem is a masterpiece , and although one could hardly wish a single word changed , it seems surprisingly resistant to analysis . It is lucid , and at first appears as seamless and smooth as monumental alabaster . " Harold Bloom , in 1987 , claimed , " What moves me most about the superb Elegy is the quality that , following Milton , it shares with so many of the major elegies down to Walt Whitman 's ... Call this quality the pathos of a poetic death @-@ in @-@ life , the fear that one either has lost one 's gift before life has ebbed , or that one may lose life before the poetic gift has expressed itself fully . This strong pathos of Gray 's Elegy achieves a central position as the antithetical tradition that truly mourns primarily a loss of the self . " In 1988 , Morris Golden , after describing Gray as a " poet 's poet " and places him " within the pantheon of those poets with whom familiarity is inescapable for anyone educated in the English language " declared that in " the ' Elegy Written in a Country Church @-@ yard , ' mankind has felt itself to be directly addressed by a very sympathetic , human voice . " He later pointed out : " Gray 's ' Elegy ' was universally admired in his lifetime and has remained continuously the most popular of mid @-@ eighteenth @-@ century English poems ; it is , as Gosse has called it , the standard English poem . The reason for this extraordinary unanimity of praise are as varied as the ways in which poetry can appeal . The ' Elegy ' is a beautiful technical accomplishment , as can be seen even in such details as the variation of the vowel sounds or the poet 's rare discretion in the choice of adjectives and adverbs . Its phrasing is both elegant and memorable , as is evident from the incorporation of much of it into the living language . " 
 Modern critics emphasised the poem 's use of language as a reason for its importance and popularity . In 1995 , Lorna Clymer argued , " The dizzying series of displacements and substitutions of subjects , always considered a crux in Thomas Gray 's " Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard " ( 1751 ) , results from a complex manipulation of <unk> rhetoric . " Later , Robert Mack , in 2000 , explained that " Gray 's Elegy is numbered high among the very greatest poems in the English tradition precisely because of its simultaneous accessibility and inscrutability . " He went on to claim that the poem " was very soon to transform his life – and to transform or at least profoundly affect the development of lyric poetry in English " . While analyzing the use of " death " in 18th @-@ century poetry , David Morris , in 2001 , declared the poem as " a monument in this ongoing transformation of death " and that " the poem in its quiet portraits of rural life succeeds in drawing the forgotten dead back into the community of the living . " 
 = Group 4 element = 
 Group 4 is a group of elements in the periodic table . It contains the elements titanium ( Ti ) , zirconium ( Zr ) , hafnium ( Hf ) and rutherfordium ( Rf ) . This group lies in the d @-@ block of the periodic table . The group itself has not acquired a trivial name ; it belongs to the broader grouping of the transition metals . 
 The three Group 4 elements that occur naturally are titanium ( Ti ) , zirconium ( Zr ) and hafnium ( Hf ) . The first three members of the group share similar properties ; all three are hard refractory metals under standard conditions . However , the fourth element rutherfordium ( Rf ) , has been synthesized in the laboratory ; none of its isotopes have been found occurring in nature . All isotopes of rutherfordium are radioactive . So far , no experiments in a <unk> have been conducted to synthesize the next member of the group , <unk> ( <unk> ) , and it is unlikely that they will be synthesized in the near future . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Chemistry = = = 
 Like other groups , the members of this family show patterns in its electron configuration , especially the outermost shells resulting in trends in chemical behavior : 
 Most of the chemistry has been observed only for the first three members of the group . The chemistry of rutherfordium is not very established and therefore the rest of the section deals only with titanium , zirconium , and hafnium . All the elements of the group are reactive metals with a high melting point ( 1668 ° C , 1855 ° C , <unk> ° C , 2100 ° C ? ) . The reactivity is not always obvious due to the rapid formation of a stable oxide layer , which prevents further reactions . The oxides TiO2 , ZrO2 and HfO2 are white solids with high melting points and unreactive against most acids . 
 As tetravalent transition metals , all three elements form various inorganic compounds , generally in the oxidation state of + 4 . For the first three metals , it has been shown that they are resistant to concentrated alkalis , but halogens react with them to form tetrahalides . At higher temperatures , all three metals react with oxygen , nitrogen , carbon , boron , sulfur , and silicon . Because of the lanthanide contraction of the elements in the fifth period , zirconium and hafnium have nearly identical ionic radii . The ionic radius of Zr4 + is 79 picometers and that of <unk> + is 78 pm . 
 This similarity results in nearly identical chemical behavior and in the formation of similar chemical compounds . The chemistry of hafnium is so similar to that of zirconium that a separation on chemical reactions was not possible ; only the physical properties of the compounds differ . The melting points and boiling points of the compounds and the solubility in solvents are the major differences in the chemistry of these twin elements . Titanium is considerably different from the other two owing to the effects of the lanthanide contraction . 
 = = = Physical = = = 
 The table below is a summary of the key physical properties of the group 4 elements . The four question @-@ marked values are extrapolated . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Titanium = = = 
 William Gregor , Franz Joseph Muller and Martin Heinrich Klaproth independently discovered titanium between 1791 and 1795 . Klaproth named it for the Titans of Greek mythology . 
 = = = Zirconium = = = 
 Klaproth also discovered zirconium in the mineral zircon in 1789 and named it after the already known <unk> ( zirconia ) . 
 = = = Hafnium = = = 
 Hafnium had been predicted by Dmitri Mendeleev in 1869 and Henry Moseley measured in 1914 the effective nuclear charge by X @-@ ray spectroscopy to be 72 , placing it between the already known elements lutetium and tantalum . Dirk Coster and Georg von Hevesy were the first to search for the new element in zirconium ores . Hafnium was discovered by the two in 1923 in Copenhagen , Denmark , validating the original 1869 prediction of Mendeleev . There has been some controversy surrounding the discovery of hafnium and the extent to which Coster and Hevesy were guided by Bohr 's prediction that hafnium would be a transition metal rather than a rare earth element . While titanium and zirconium , as relatively abundant elements , were discovered in the late 18th century , it took until 1923 for hafnium to be identified . This was only partly due to hafnium 's relative scarcity . The chemical similarity between zirconium and hafnium made a separation difficult and , without knowing what to look for , hafnium was left undiscovered , although all samples of zirconium , and all of its compounds , used by chemists for over two centuries contained significant amounts of hafnium . 
 = = = Rutherfordium = = = 
 Rutherfordium was reportedly first detected in 1966 at the Joint Institute of Nuclear Research at Dubna ( then in the Soviet Union ) . Researchers there bombarded 242Pu with accelerated 22Ne ions and separated the reaction products by gradient thermochromatography after conversion to chlorides by interaction with ZrCl4 . 
 242 
 94Pu + 22 
 10Ne → 264 − x 
 104Rf → 264 − x 
 <unk> 
 = = Production = = 
 The production of the metals itself is difficult due to their reactivity . The formation of oxides , nitrides and carbides must be avoided to yield workable metals , this is normally achieved by the Kroll process . The oxides ( <unk> ) are reacted with coal and chlorine to form the chlorides ( <unk> ) .The chlorides of the metals are then reacted with magnesium , yielding magnesium chloride and the metals . 
 Further purification is done by a chemical transport reaction developed by Anton Eduard van Arkel and Jan Hendrik de Boer . In a closed vessel , the metal reacts with iodine at temperatures of above 500 ° C forming metal ( IV ) iodide ; at a tungsten filament of nearly 2000 ° C the reverse reaction happens and the iodine and metal are set free . The metal forms a solid coating at the tungsten filament and the iodine can react with additional metal resulting in a steady turn over . 
 M + 2 I2 ( low temp . ) → <unk> 
 <unk> ( high temp . ) → M + 2 I2 
 = = Occurrence = = 
 If the abundance of elements in Earth 's crust is compared for titanium , zirconium and hafnium , the abundance decreases with increase of atomic mass . Titanium is the seventh most abundant metal in Earth 's crust and has an abundance of <unk> ppm , while zirconium has an abundance of 162 ppm and hafnium has only an abundance of 3 ppm . 
 All three stable elements occur in heavy mineral sands ore deposits , which are placer deposits formed , most usually in beach environments , by concentration due to the specific gravity of the mineral grains of erosion material from mafic and ultramafic rock . The titanium minerals are mostly anatase and rutile , and zirconium occurs in the mineral zircon . Because of the chemical similarity , up to 5 % of the zirconium in zircon is replaced by hafnium . The largest producers of the group 4 elements are Australia , South Africa and Canada . 
 = = Applications = = 
 Titanium metal and its alloys have a wide range of applications , where the corrosion resistance , the heat stability and the low density ( light weight ) are of benefit . The foremost use of corrosion @-@ resistant hafnium and zirconium has been in nuclear reactors . Zirconium has a very low and hafnium has a high thermal neutron @-@ capture cross @-@ section . Therefore , zirconium ( mostly as <unk> ) is used as cladding of fuel rods in nuclear reactors , while hafnium is used as control rod for nuclear reactors , because each hafnium atom can absorb multiple neutrons . 
 Smaller amounts of hafnium and zirconium are used in super alloys to improve the properties of those alloys . 
 = = Biological occurrences = = 
 The group 4 elements are not known to be involved in the biological chemistry of any living systems . They are hard refractory metals with low aqueous solubility and low availability to the biosphere . Titanium is one of the few first row d @-@ block transition metals with no known biological role . Rutherfordium 's radioactivity would make it toxic to living cells . 
 = = Precautions = = 
 Titanium is non @-@ toxic even in large doses and does not play any natural role inside the human body . Zirconium powder can cause irritation , but only contact with the eyes requires medical attention . OSHA recommends for zirconium are 5 mg / m3 time weighted average limit and a 10 mg / m3 short @-@ term exposure limit . Only limited data exists on the toxicology of hafnium . 
 = Njai Dasima ( 1932 film ) = 
 Njai Dasima ( [ <unk> <unk> ] ; Perfected Spelling : Nyai Dasima ) is a 1932 film from the Dutch East Indies ( now Indonesia ) which was directed by Bachtiar Effendi for Tan 's Film . It was the second film adapted from G. Francis ' 1896 novel Tjerita Njai Dasima , following a silent version in 1929 . Starring Momo and Oesman , it followed a young Sundanese njai ( concubine ) who is tricked into marrying a man who does not love her and ultimately killed for her money . The film , the first talkie produced by its company , was also the first directed by a native Indonesian . The now @-@ lost work received mixed critical reception . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dasima is a njai ( concubine ) for the Englishman Edward William . Together with their daughter , Nancy , the couple live in a home near Gambir Square in Batavia ( modern day Jakarta ) . Their happy life is disturbed after the <unk> driver Samioen falls in love with Dasima , despite already being married to Hajati . He attempts to use magic ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) to win her heart , and asks an egg merchant , Mak Boejoeng , to frighten Dasima by telling the young woman that she has committed the sin of zina ( extramarital sex ) . 
 Samioen eventually succeeds , and Dasima goes to live with him and Hajati , taking along her gold and jewels . Hajati has agreed to let Samioen take a second wife as she wants Dasima 's money , which she will use for gambling . When Dasima realises that she has been tricked , she begins to keep a close eye on her remaining wealth . So that he can take all of her remaining funds , Samioen calls the thug <unk> and together they plan to kill Dasima . One night , as Dasima goes to hear a story @-@ telling , the two accost her , kill her , and throw her body off a bridge . Samioen and <unk> are later caught and sentenced to hang for their crime . 
 = = Production = = 
 Njai Dasima was directed by Bachtiar Effendi for Tan 's Film , a production company owned by the Tan brothers . With this he became the first native Indonesian film director in the Indies . It starred Momo and Oesman . The story was adapted from G. Francis ' 1896 novel Tjerita Njai Dasima , which Tan 's had already adapted in 1929 with the same name for their first release . The story was already well known in Batavia ( now Jakarta ) , in part because it was a popular part of stage performers ' repertoires . To ensure the quality of the story , Effendi worked with a scenario and , later , shooting script – two items which had , until then , never been used for a domestic production . 
 This was the first sound film released by Tan 's , but far from the first in the Indies . The earliest sound films released in the Indies , Fox Movietone Follies of 1929 and The Rainbow Man , were both shown in 1929 . The following year , a domestic part @-@ talkie , G. Krugers ' Karnadi Anemer Bangkong , was also released , becoming the first domestic sound film . Two other directors had followed with full @-@ talkies in 1931 : The Teng Chun with Boenga Roos dari Tjikembang and the Wong brothers with Indonesia <unk> . In order to ensure the quality of the sound , Tan 's hired Krugers and his single @-@ system camera to do the cinematography and sound direction for this black @-@ and @-@ white film . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Njai Dasima was released by January 1932 and advertised as a " speaking , singing , dancing , and music talkie " . It was open to audiences of all ages , including children . Critical reviews were mixed . One newspaper editorial , noting that the pamphlets described the film as " a hundred times better than [ the contemporary film ] <unk> op Bevel " , was scornful , stating that such a claim had very little validity as " the quality of the native films so far are rubbish " . The review then indicated numerous shortcomings in the selection of music , the cinematography , before concluding that the film did , overall , represent progress , praising the actor who played Puasa and noting a distinct lack of scenes unrelated to the plot . However , Armijn Pane , in a 1950 reflective review , wrote that the quality of the work was overall quite good . 
 Effendi did not direct another film until 1951 , with Djiwa Pemuda , and the first subsequent native film director , Andjar Asmara , only began his career in 1940 , with Kartinah . Tan 's shut down production soon after Njai Dasima 's release , although it was eventually reestablished in 1938 . After releasing several commercial successes , particularly Fatima ( 1938 ) , it was permanently shut down in 1942 , with the Japanese occupation of the Indies . 
 The film is likely lost . The American visual anthropologist Karl G. Heider writes that all Indonesian films from before 1950 are lost . However , JB Kristanto 's Katalog Film Indonesia ( Indonesian Film Catalogue ) records several as having survived at Sinematek Indonesia 's archives , and Indonesian film historian Misbach Yusa Biran writes that several Japanese propaganda films have survived at the Netherlands Government Information Service . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Battle of Malvern Hill = 
 The Battle of Malvern Hill , also known as the Battle of Poindexter 's Farm , was fought on July 1 , 1862 between the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia , led by Gen. Robert E. Lee , and the Union Army of the Potomac under Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan . It was the final battle of the Seven Days Battles during the American Civil War , taking place on a 130 @-@ foot ( 40 m ) elevation of land known as Malvern Hill , near the Confederate capital of Richmond , Virginia and just one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from the James River . Including inactive reserves , more than fifty thousand soldiers from each side took part , using more than two hundred pieces of artillery and three warships . 
 The Seven Days Battles were the climax of the Peninsula Campaign , during which McClellan 's Army of the Potomac sailed around the Confederate lines , landed at the tip of the Virginia Peninsula , southeast of Richmond , and struck inland towards the Confederate capital . Confederate commander @-@ in @-@ chief Joseph E. Johnston fended off McClellan 's repeated attempts to take the city , slowing Union progress on the peninsula to a crawl . When Johnston was wounded , Lee took command and launched a series of counterattacks , collectively called the Seven Days Battles . These attacks culminated in the action on Malvern Hill . 
 The Union 's V Corps , commanded by Brig. Gen. Fitz John Porter , took up positions on the hill on June 30 . McClellan was not present for the initial exchanges of the battle , having boarded the ironclad USS Galena and sailed down the James River to inspect Harrison 's Landing , where he intended to locate the base for his army . Confederate preparations were hindered by several mishaps . Bad maps and faulty guides caused Confederate Maj. Gen. John Magruder to be late for the battle , an excess of caution delayed Maj. Gen. Benjamin Huger , and Maj. Gen. Stonewall Jackson had problems collecting the Confederate artillery . 
 The battle occurred in stages : an initial exchange of artillery fire , a minor charge by Confederate Brig. Gen. Lewis Armistead , and three successive waves of Confederate infantry charges triggered by unclear orders from Lee and the actions of Maj. Gens . Magruder and D. H. Hill , respectively . In each phase , the effectiveness of the Federal artillery was the deciding factor , repulsing attack after attack , resulting in a tactical Union victory . After the battle , McClellan and his forces withdrew from Malvern Hill to Harrison 's Landing , where he remained until August 16 . His plan to capture Richmond had been thwarted . 
 In the course of four hours , a series of blunders in planning and communication had caused Lee 's forces to launch three failed frontal infantry assaults across hundreds of yards of open ground , unsupported by Confederate artillery , charging toward firmly entrenched Union infantry and artillery defenses . These errors provided Union forces with an opportunity to inflict heavy casualties . In the aftermath of the battle , however , the Confederate press heralded Lee as the savior of Richmond . In stark contrast , McClellan was accused of being absent from the battlefield , a harsh criticism that haunted him when he ran for president in 1864 . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Military situation = = = 
 In spring 1862 , Union commander Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan developed an ambitious plan to capture Richmond , the Confederate capital , on the Virginia Peninsula . His 121 @,@ 500 @-@ man Army of the Potomac , along with 14 @,@ 592 animals , 1 @,@ 224 wagons and ambulances , and 44 artillery batteries , would load onto 389 vessels and sail to the tip of the peninsula at Fort Monroe , then move inland and capture the capital . The bold and sweeping landing was executed with few incidents , but the Federals were delayed for about a month in the Siege of Yorktown . When McClellan 's army finally did attack on May 4 , the defensive earthworks around Yorktown were undefended . After some hours , the Army of the Potomac pursued the retreating Confederates . When Union troops encountered the Confederate rearguard at Williamsburg , the two armies fought an inconclusive battle . The Confederates continued their withdrawal that night . To stymie the Southerners ' retreat , McClellan sent Brig. Gen. William F. " Baldy " Smith to Eltham 's Landing by boat , resulting in a battle there on May 7 . When the Union Army tried to attack Richmond by way of the James River , they were turned back at Drewry 's Bluff on May 15 . All the while , McClellan continued his pursuit of Confederate forces , who were withdrawing quickly towards Richmond . 
 The lack of decisive action on the Virginia Peninsula spurred President Abraham Lincoln to order McClellan 's army to move into positions close to Richmond . By May 30 , McClellan had begun moving troops across the Chickahominy River , the only major natural barrier that separated his army from Richmond . However , heavy rains and thunderstorms on the night of May 30 caused the water level to swell , washing away two bridges and splitting the Federal army in two across the Chickahominy . In the subsequent Battle of Seven Pines , Confederate general @-@ in @-@ chief Joseph E. Johnston sought to capitalize on the bifurcation of McClellan 's army , attacking the half of the Union Army that was stuck south of the river . Johnston 's plan fell apart , and McClellan lost no ground . Late in the battle , Johnston was hit in the right shoulder by a bullet and in the chest by a shell fragment ; his command went to Maj. Gen. Gustavus W. Smith . Smith 's tenure as commander of the Army of Northern Virginia was short . On June 1 , after an unsuccessful attack on Union forces , Jefferson Davis , the President of the Confederacy , appointed Robert E. Lee , his own military adviser , to replace Smith as the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Confederate armies . 
 The subsequent two weeks on the peninsula were mostly quiet . On June 25 , though , a surprise attack by McClellan began a series of six major battles over the next week near Richmond — the Seven Days Battles . On the first day , as Lee led the Army of Northern Virginia toward the Union lines , McClellan preempted him with an attack at Oak Grove . Lee 's men successfully warded off the Union assault , and Lee continued with his plans . The next morning , the Confederates attacked the Army of the Potomac at Mechanicsville . Union forces turned back the Confederate onslaught , inflicting heavy losses . After Mechanicsville , McClellan 's army withdrew to a position behind Boatswain 's Swamp . There , on June 27 , the Union soldiers suffered another Confederate attack , this time at Gaines 's Mill . In the resulting battle , the Confederates launched numerous failed charges , until a final concerted attack broke the Union line , resulting in the only clear Confederate victory during the Seven Days . The action at Garnett 's and Golding 's Farm , fought next , was merely a set of skirmishes . Lee attacked the Union Army at the Battle of Savage 's Station on June 29 and the battles of Glendale and White Oak Swamp June 30 , but all three battles were inconclusive . After this series of conflicts that inflicted thousands of casualties on both armies , McClellan began to position his forces to an imposing natural position atop Malvern Hill . 
 = = = Geography and location = = = 
 Malvern Hill , a plateau @-@ like elevation in Henrico County , Virginia , provided an impressive natural military position about two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) north of the James River . The hill rose some 130 feet ( 40 m ) to its crest to form a crescent about 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) in length and 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) wide . Its slope was about one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) in length and very gradual , with only one or two notable depressions . Along the western side of the hill ran Malvern Cliffs , a bluff @-@ like formation that overlooked Turkey Run , a tributary of nearby Turkey Island Creek . Western Run was another tributary of Turkey Island Creek , which lay mostly along the eastern side of the hill and slanted slightly into the northern side . One depression dipped some sixty feet ( 18 m ) at the valley of Western Run and slanted upwards to the plateau . Malvern Hill 's center was slightly lower than the flanks . The gentle , bare slant meant that any assailing army could not easily take cover , and artillery would have the benefit of a clear , open field . 
 Several farms were positioned near Malvern Hill . Roughly 1 @,@ 200 yards ( 1 @,@ 100 m ) north of the hill were the Poindexter and Carter farms . Between the two farms was a swampy and thickly wooded area that made up the course of Western Run . The largest in the area was the <unk> family 's farm , usually called the Crew farm for a former owner , situated at the western side of the hill . About a quarter of a mile due east of Malvern Hill was the West farm . Between these two farms lay the Willis Church Road , which some locals called the Quaker Road . This road also ran past the Malvern house , the hill 's namesake , which was perched atop the southern edge of the plateau . " It was , altogether , an exceedingly formidable position " , wrote historian Douglas Southall Freeman . " Had the Union engineers searched the whole countryside below Richmond , they could not have found ground more ideally set for the slaughter of an attacking army . " 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Key participants = = = 
 = = = McClellan 's forces prepare = = = 
 A few days prior to the action on Malvern Hill , McClellan incorrectly believed that the Army of the Potomac was vastly outnumbered by its Confederate foe , and his fear of being cut off from his supply depot left him cautious and wary . On the night of June 28 , McClellan told his generals that he intended to move his army to a position on the north bank of the James River called Harrison 's Landing , where they would be protected by Union gunboats . The Army of the Potomac came to Malvern Hill , the army 's final stop before reaching the Landing , with approximately 54 @,@ 000 men . 
 On the morning of June 30 , 1862 , the Union V Corps under Fitz John Porter , a part of McClellan 's Army of the Potomac , amassed atop Malvern Hill . Col. Henry Hunt , McClellan 's skilled chief of artillery , posted 171 guns on the hill and 91 more in reserve in the south . The artillery line on the hill 's slope consisted of eight batteries of field artillery with 37 guns . Brig. Gen. George Sykes 's division would guard the line . In reserve were additional field artillery and three batteries of heavy artillery , which included five 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 11 cm ) Rodman guns , five 20 @-@ pounder ( 9 @.@ 1 kg ) Parrott rifles and six 32 @-@ pounder ( 15 kg ) howitzers . As more of McClellan 's forces arrived at the hill , Porter continued to reinforce the Union line . Brig. Gen. George Morell 's units , stationed between the Crew and West farms , extended the line to the northeastern section . Brig. Gen. Darius Couch 's division of the IV Corps , as yet <unk> by the skirmishes of the Seven Days , further extended the northeastern line . This left 17 @,@ 800 soldiers from Couch 's and Morell 's divisions at the northern face of the hill , overlooking the Quaker Road , from which the Federals expected Lee 's forces to attack . 
 Early the next day , Tuesday , July 1 , McClellan , having come from nearby Haxall 's Landing the night before , examined his army 's battle line on Malvern Hill . His inspection left him worried most about the Union Army 's right ( eastern ) flank , which lay behind Western Run . Western Run was an area necessary for McClellan 's plans to relocate to Harrison 's Landing , and he feared an attack might come from there . As a result , he posted the largest portion of his army there : two divisions from Edwin Sumner 's II Corps , two divisions from Brig. Gen. Samuel P. Heintzelman 's III Corps , two divisions from Brig. Gen. William Franklin 's VI Corps and one division from Maj. Gen. Erasmus Keyes 's IV Corps , who were stationed across the James . The division under Brig. Gen. George McCall , badly damaged in the fighting at Glendale with McCall himself wounded and captured , was held in general reserve . 
 McClellan did not believe his army was ready for a battle , and hoped that Lee would not give them one . Nonetheless , he left his troops at Malvern Hill and traveled downstream aboard the ironclad USS Galena to inspect his army 's future resting place at Harrison 's Landing . McClellan did not delegate an interim commander ; Porter , who was in command during the initial attack , became the de facto leader on the Union side of the battle . 
 = = = Lee 's forces advance = = = 
 With around 55 @,@ 000 soldiers , the Army of Northern Virginia was about evenly matched with the Federals , and with Lee at the helm , notably more aggressive . He wanted a final , decisive attack that would effectively scatter the Federals . Several pieces of evidence — abandoned commissary stores , wagons and arms , and the hundreds of Union stragglers and deserters his units had happened upon and captured — led Lee to conclude that the Army of the Potomac was demoralized and retreating . In all the battles up to Malvern Hill , Lee 's plans to destroy the Federal army had failed for one reason or another . Though he was undeterred , his chances for decisive victory were diminishing quickly . 
 Early on the morning of the battle , Lee met with his lieutenants , including Maj. Gens . James Longstreet , A. P. Hill , Thomas " Stonewall " Jackson , John Magruder and D. H. Hill . D. H. Hill , after talking with a chaplain familiar with the geography of Malvern Hill , cautioned against mounting an attack . " If General McClellan is there in strength , " Hill said , " we had better let him alone . " Longstreet laughed off Hill 's objections , saying " Don 't get so scared , now that we 've got him [ McClellan ] whipped . " 
 Lee chose the relatively well @-@ rested commands of D. H. Hill , Stonewall Jackson and John Magruder to lead the Confederate offensive , as they had barely participated in the fighting of the day before . Meanwhile , James Longstreet 's First Corps and A. P. Hill 's Light Division , who had fought the majority of the previous day 's hostilities , would be held in reserve . According to Lee 's plan , the Army of Northern Virginia would form a semi @-@ circle enveloping Malvern Hill . D. H. Hill 's five brigades would be placed along the northern face of the hill , forming the center of the Confederate line , and the commands of Stonewall Jackson and John Magruder would take the left and right flanks , respectively . Whiting 's forces would position themselves on the Poindexter farm , with the outfits of Brig. Gen. Charles Sidney Winder and Richard Ewell nearby . The infantry of these three detachments would provide reinforcement for the Confederate line if necessary . Maj. Gen. Theophilus Holmes would take up a position on the extreme Confederate right flank . 
 = = = Disposition of armies = = = 
 The Army of the Potomac 's disposition in the lead @-@ up to the battle was more orderly than Lee 's Army of Northern Virginia ; all of McClellan 's forces would be concentrated in one place , save for several divisions from Maj. Gen. Erasmus Keyes 's outfit and Keyes himself , who were posted across the James River at Haxall 's Landing . A Confederate scout observed Union soldiers resting in position , and moving about the hill unworried , whilst the disposition of the cannons around the hill 's slope gave him the impression that the position was " almost impregnable " . McClellan 's army was on the hill in force . 
 Throughout the Seven Days Battles , Lee 's forces had been separated and scattered due to swamps , narrow roads and other geographic obstacles , and occasionally due to unclear orders . As the days of marching and fighting wore on the number of stragglers swelled to fill narrow roads and significantly deplete the Confederate ranks , presenting a significant additional strain on their combat readiness . These hindrances continued during the Battle of Malvern Hill , with both Magruder and Huger making mistakes in the deployment of their forces . 
 At first , Magruder 's units were behind Stonewall Jackson 's column while marching down the Long Bridge Road , which led to Malvern Hill . Along this road were several adjoining pathways . One such road , called the Willis Church Road by some locals and the Quaker Road by others , led south from Glendale to Malvern Hill . Lee 's maps labeled this " Quaker Road " . Another of these paths began near a local farm and angled southwest toward an upriver point on the River Road — some locals called this the Quaker Road , including Magruder 's guides , who led Magruder 's army down this road rather than the Quaker Road shown on Lee 's maps . James Longstreet eventually rode after Magruder , and persuaded him to reverse course . This incident delayed Magruder 's arrival to the battlefield for three hours . 
 Huger , worried about clashing with Union forces while marching towards Malvern Hill , had also failed to manage his division effectively . He deployed two of his brigades , commanded by Brig. Gens . Lewis Armistead and Ambrose Wright , to perform a flanking maneuver around any Federals they found , to avoid the Union threat . Longstreet eventually notified Huger that he would be unobstructed by Federal forces if he marched to Malvern Hill . Huger , however , remained in place until someone from Lee 's headquarters came to guide them to the battlefield . 
 As noon drew near with no sight of either Huger or Magruder , who were supposed to be manning the Confederate right flank , Lee replaced these two forces with the smaller units of Brig. Gens . Armistead and Wright , two of Huger 's brigades that had reached the battlefield some time earlier . Huger and his other two brigades ( under Brig. Gens . Ransom and Mahone ) were still too far north of the scene . Despite the mishaps and disunity , Malvern Hill would be the first time during the Seven Days Battles that Lee managed to concentrate his force . 
 = = Opposing forces = = 
 = = = Union = = = 
 = = = Confederate = = = 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Lee orders artillery crossfire = = = 
 Lee surveyed the left flank himself for possible artillery positions . After a reconnoitering expedition on the right flank , James Longstreet returned to Lee ; the two compared their results and concluded that two grand battery @-@ like positions would be established at the left and right sides of Malvern Hill . The converging artillery fire from the batteries , they reasoned , could weaken the Union line so that a Confederate infantry attack could break through . If this plan did not work out , Lee and Longstreet felt the artillery fire would buy them time to consider other plans . 
 With a battle plan in order , Lee sent a draft to his lieutenants , written by his chief of staff , Col. Robert Chilton ( see right box ) . The orders were not well @-@ crafted , however , since they designated the yell of a single charging brigade as the only signal of attack for a full fifteen brigades . Amid the tumult and clamor of battle , this was bound to create confusion . Moreover , Chilton 's draft effectively left the attack solely at the discretion of Lewis Armistead , who had never before held command of a brigade during battle . The draft also did not note the time that it had been written , which later caused confusion for Magruder . 
 = = = Failed Confederate barrage = = = 
 Beginning around 1 pm , Union artillery fired first , initially upon infantry in the woods , and later upon any Confederate artillery that attempted to move into firing position . On the Confederate left flank , two batteries from Whiting 's division and one from Jackson 's soon began firing from their position upon Darius Couch 's division of the IV Corps , who were near the center of the Union line . This began a fierce firefight , with the Union 's eight batteries and 37 guns concentrated against three Confederate batteries and sixteen guns . The Union fire silenced the Rowan Artillery and made their position untenable . The other two Confederate batteries , placed by Jackson himself , were in somewhat better positions , and managed to keep firing . Over a period of more than three hours , a total of six or eight Confederate batteries engaged the Union Army from the Confederate left flank , but they were usually engaged only one at a time . 
 On the Confederate right flank a total of six batteries engaged the Federals , but they did so one @-@ by @-@ one instead of in unison , and each was consecutively cut to pieces by concentrated Union artillery fire . Moreover , they engaged the Union artillery later than the guns of the left flank , so the desired crossfire bombardment was never achieved . 
 In all , the Confederate artillery barrage on both flanks completely failed to achieve its objectives . Confederate fire did manage to kill Capt. John E. Beam of the Union 's 1st New Jersey Artillery , along with a few others , and several Federal batteries ( though none that were actually engaged ) had to move to avoid the fire . Although the barrage by Lee 's forces did claim a few lives , Union forces remained unfazed and continued their fearsome barrage . Indeed , Union Army Lt. Charles B. Haydon supposedly fell asleep during the artillery fight . On both the left and right flanks , several of the batteries that did engage lasted no more than minutes before being rendered incapable of fire . Moreover , in a failure of command that , according to historian Thomas M. Settles , must ultimately be placed on Lee 's shoulders , the movements of the two flanks were never coordinated with one another . D. H. Hill found the failure of the Confederate artillery discouraging and later dismissed the barrage as " most farcical " . 
 Meanwhile , the Union artillery fire was planned and directed nearly flawlessly . As historian Jennings Cropper Wise notes , Col. Hunt , McClellan 's chief of artillery , continuously refocused Union fire on various fronts , in an " enormous sheaf of fire of more than 50 superior pieces , disabling four of Huger 's and several of Jackson 's batteries almost the instant they came into action " . This severely hampered the Confederates ' ability to respond effectively to the Federal barrage . The Union artillery subdued a number of the Southerners ' batteries ; those few that remained attacked piecemeal , and failed to produce any significant result . 
 = = = Confederate infantry assaults = = = 
 Intense Confederate and especially Union artillery fire continued for at least an hour , slackening at about 2 : 30 pm . At about 3 : 30 pm , Lewis Armistead noticed Union skirmishers creeping towards his men where the grand battery on the Confederate right flank was , nearly within rifle range of them . Armistead sent three regiments ( about half of his brigade ) from his command to push back the skirmishers , thus beginning the infantry part of the battle . The skirmishers were repelled quickly , but Armistead 's men found themselves in the midst of an intense Union barrage . The Confederates decided to nestle themselves in a ravine along the hill 's slant . This position protected them from the fire , but pinned them down on the slopes of Malvern Hill , unsupported by either infantry or artillery . They did not have enough men to advance any further and retreating would have put them back into the crossfire . 
 = = = = Magruder 's charge = = = = 
 Not long after the advance of Armistead 's regiments , John Magruder and his men arrived near the battlefield , albeit quite late because of the confusion regarding the names of local roads — by this time , it was 4 pm . Magruder was told at that morning 's war council to move to Huger 's right , but he was unaware of Huger 's position , and sent Major Joseph L. Brent to locate Huger 's right flank . Brent found Huger , who said that he had no idea where his brigades were . Huger was noticeably upset that his men had been given orders by someone other than himself ; Lee had told Huger 's two brigades under Armistead and Ambrose Wright to advance to the right part of the Confederate line . Upon hearing of this , Magruder was quite confused . He sent Capt. A. G. Dickinson to find Lee and inform him of the " successful " charge of Armistead 's men and request further orders . Contrary to this message , Armistead was in fact pinned down halfway up Malvern Hill . At the same time , Whiting sent Lee an incorrect report that Union forces were retreating . Whiting had mistaken two events for a Federal withdrawal — the movement of Edwin Sumner 's troops , who were adjusting their position to avoid the Confederate fire , and the relaxing of Union fire on his side , which was actually the Union artillery concentrating their firepower to a different front . Whiting and Magruder 's erroneous reports led Lee to send a draft of orders to Magruder via Dickinson : " General Lee expects you to advance rapidly " , wrote Dickinson . " He says it is reported that the enemy is [ retreating ] . Press forward your whole line and follow up Armistead 's success . " Before Dickinson returned with these orders , Magruder was belatedly handed the order sent out three hours previously ( at 1 : 30 pm ) by Chilton . Since no time was affixed to the text of the orders , Magruder was unaware that these orders had been rendered meaningless by the failure of the Confederate artillery during the past few hours , and believed he had received two successive orders from Lee to attack . 
 Believing himself bound by Lee 's order to charge , but with his own brigades not yet in attacking position , Magruder mustered some five thousand men from Huger 's brigades , including those of Ambrose Wright and Maj. Gen. William Mahone and half of the men from Armistead 's brigade who were caught in the open battlefield . Magruder had also sent for Brig. Gen. Robert Ransom , Jr . , also under Huger 's command , who noted that he had been given strict instructions to ignore any orders not originating from Huger , and apologetically said he could not help Magruder . Magruder additionally ordered men under his personal command — three regiments of Brig. Gen. Howell Cobb 's brigade , plus Col. William Barksdale 's full brigade — to the attack . Because of the confusion regarding Quaker Road , however , these brigades were not yet near enough to do more than move into supporting position , and Magruder wanted to attack immediately . Despite this , under Magruder 's order at about 5 : 30 pm , Wright 's brigade with Armistead 's , then Mahone 's brigade , started darting out of the woods and towards the Union line . The artillery of the Confederate left flank , under Jackson 's personal command , also renewed their barrage with the late arrival of two batteries of Richard Ewell 's division . The Confederates were initially engaged solely by Union sharpshooters , but the latter quickly fell back to give their own artillery a clear field of fire . Antipersonnel canister shot was employed with deadly effect . Wright 's men were pinned down in a small depression on the rolling hillside , to the right of Armistead 's ; Mahone 's were driven back into retreat in about the same area . At some point during the first wave of assaults , Cobb moved into close supporting position behind Armistead . Barksdale 's men were also supporting , to the left of Armistead . 
 The firefight also alerted the three Union boats on the James — the ironclad USS Galena , and the gunboats USS Jacob Bell and USS Aroostook — which began lobbing missiles twenty inches ( 510 mm ) in length and eight inches ( 200 mm ) in diameter from their position on the James River onto the battlefield . The explosions and impacts of the gunboat fire impressed the Confederate troops , but the guns ' aim was unreliable , and the large shells did considerably less damage than might have been expected . 
 = = = = Hill 's charge = = = = 
 D. H. Hill had been discouraged by the failure of the Confederate artillery , and asked Stonewall Jackson to supplement Chilton 's draft . Jackson 's response was that Hill should obey the original orders : charge with a yell after Armistead 's brigade . No yell was heard for hours , and Hill 's men began building bivouac shelters to sleep in . Around 6 pm , Hill and his five brigade commanders had assumed that the lack of a signal meant that their army would not attempt any assault . They were conferring together about Chilton 's order when they heard yells and the commotion of a charge from their right flank , roughly where Armistead was supposed to be . Hill took the yell as the signal and shouted to his commanders , " That must be the general advance . Bring up your brigades as soon as possible and join in it . " D. H. Hill 's five brigades , with some 8 @,@ 200 men , had to contend with the dense woodlands around the Quaker Road and Western Run , which destroyed any order they may have had . Men advanced out of the woods towards the Union line in five separate , uncoordinated attacks , and each brigade charged up the hill alone : " We crossed one fence , went through another piece of woods , then over another fence [ and ] into an open field on the other side of which was a long line of Yankees " , wrote William Calder of the 2nd Regiment , North Carolina Infantry . " Our men charged gallantly at them . The enemy mowed us down by fifties . " Some brigades in Hill 's division made it close enough to exchange musket fire and engage in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat , but these were driven back . The artillery response on the Federal side to Hill 's charge was particularly withering , and soon , Hill 's men needed support just to hold their ground . In Extraordinary Circumstances : The Seven Days Battles , Brian K. Burton called Hill 's charge " unnecessary and costly . " The successive assaults of Hill 's brigades on the well @-@ entrenched Federals were short @-@ lived , and achieved little . 
 = = = = Final assaults = = = = 
 Preceding attacks by Lee 's army had done barely anything to accomplish Confederate objectives , but this did not deter Magruder , who rode back and forth across the battlefield , calling for reinforcements and personally launching unit after unit into a charge of the Union line . At this point , men who had always been directly under Magruder 's command began to join the battle . Magruder first encountered some units of Brig. Gen. Robert Toombs . With Toombs 's brigade widely dispersed , the individual units Magruder found were not with Toombs himself . Magruder personally led the men in a short @-@ lived charge , followed by a disordered retreat . Other units nominally under Toombs 's command appeared , charged and retreated at various times throughout the next few hours , with little or no organization . The brigades of Col. George T. Anderson and Col. William Barksdale emerged from the woods to the right of Toombs , but as they did so , Anderson 's men also became separated , as the left side outpaced the right . This created an advance with two of Anderson 's regiments on the far Confederate left next to Toombs , Barksdale 's men in the middle , and three more Anderson regiments on the far right , near the remnants of Wright and Mahone . Anderson 's right flank charged , but made it no farther than the foot of the hill before breaking and retreating under a hail of antipersonnel artillery . Anderson 's left flank never charged . Barksdale 's brigade charged at roughly the same time , and made it considerably farther up the hill , engaging the Union infantry of Brig. Gen. Daniel Butterfield in a firefight that lasted more than an hour . 
 Lee received Magruder 's calls for reinforcement and instructed Huger to let Ransom go support the men trapped on the field of battle . He also sent orders to the brigades of Brig. Gens . Joseph B. Kershaw and Paul Jones Semmes , in Maj. Gen. Lafayette McLaws 's division within Magruder 's command . Robert Ransom 's unit , after they finally showed up with Huger 's permission , first attempted to charge straight up the hill , following the path of other Confederate brigades attempting to aid Magruder . When this proved useless , Ransom ordered them to regroup in the woods to the Confederate right , march double @-@ time a half a mile in a hook to the right around all the other Confederate units and attack the far Union western flank . While Ransom was angling west , Jackson responded to a request for reinforcement from D. H. Hill by sending forward brigades from his own command to move from the east into the area where D. H. Hill had attacked . From his own division Jackson sent Brig. Gens . Alexander Lawton and Charles S. Winder , and from Ewell 's division , Brig. Gen. Isaac R. Trimble and Cols . Leroy A. Stafford and Jubal Early . 
 Ransom 's men managed to come closer to the Union line than any Confederates that day , guided by the flashing light of the cannons amidst an encroaching darkness ; however , George Sykes 's artillery repelled that attack . The brigades of Kershaw and Semmes , sent earlier by Lee , arrived to the front while Ransom was moving to attack in another position . Semmes and Kershaw were quickly sent in ; they too were repulsed not long after . Semmes was west of the junction of Carter 's Mill Road and Willis Church Road , in the vicinity of Barksdale , Mahone and Wright . Semmes made the final charge of the day west of these roads , and like the charges before , it was to little effect . Kershaw angled east , in the area where Toombs , Anderson and Cobb had attacked . This was an area of great confusion . Kershaw 's troops arrived ahead of all the reinforcements sent by Jackson , and took fire from both friendly and hostile forces : from Confederates behind them firing wildly and Federals in front firing effectively . Kershaw 's men retreated in rout . The brigades behind Kershaw charged incoherently , with some men pushing forward , and others getting separated from their units or confused when they encountered groups of retreating Confederates . Disorganized , retreating soldiers from various units were so numerous that they slowed Jackson 's men to nearly a standstill . Jackson 's unit commanders attempted to organize their various regiments and rally the <unk> to join in , but it was all to very little effect . A few units fought fiercely against Union infantry and artillery . In particular , three regiments of Barlow 's brigade made it close enough to Union lines to engage in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat with the troops of Brig. Gen. Daniel Sickles before being driven back . 
 Night was falling , however , and eventually all of these troops were ordered to merely hold their positions without charging . In the end , the charges of Semmes and Kershaw were the last coherent Confederate actions , and neither was successful . Brig. Gen. Porter summed up the Confederate infantry charges at Malvern Hill this way : 
 As if moved by a reckless disregard of life equal to that displayed at Gaines ' Mill , with a determination to capture our army , or destroy it by driving us into the river , brigade after brigade rushed at our batteries , but the artillery of both Morell and Couch mowed them down with shrapnel , grape , and canister , while our infantry , withholding their fire until the enemy were in short range , scattered the remnants of their columns , sometimes following them up and capturing prisoners and colors . 
 With the infantry part of the battle over , Union artillery continued to boom across the hill . They stopped firing at 8 : 30 pm , leaving a wreath of smoke upon the crest 's edge , and ending the action on Malvern Hill . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 The human toll of the Battle of Malvern Hill and the Seven Days Battles was shown clearly as both capitals , Washington and Richmond , set up numerous provisional hospitals to care for the dead , wounded and missing . Ships sailed from the Peninsula to Washington carrying the wounded . Richmond was nearest to the battlefields of the Seven Days , and the immense number of casualties meant that graves could not be dug quickly enough , overwhelming hospitals and doctors . People from about the Confederacy descended upon Richmond to care for the conflict 's casualties . 
 The Confederates counted some 5 @,@ 650 casualties . Some 30 @,@ 000 Confederates engaged that day , though several thousand more endured the Union shelling . Whiting 's unit suffered 175 casualties in the Malvern Hill conflict , even though they had limited involvement in the assaults . Charles Winder 's brigade of just over 1 @,@ 000 men suffered 104 casualties in their short involvement in the battle . D. H. Hill spent days removing the wounded , burying the dead and cleaning up the battlefield , with help from Magruder and Huger 's units . One of D. H. Hill 's brigades lost 41 percent of its strength at Malvern Hill alone . He later estimated that more than half of all the Confederate killed and wounded at Malvern Hill were as a result of artillery fire . 
 = = = Reasons for outcome = = = 
 The battle on Malvern Hill was a resounding Union tactical victory . The victory was due in no small part to Henry Hunt , the Union chief artillerist , who did proficient work in accumulating and concentrating the Union guns . Troop placement before the battle by the army 's principal topographical engineer , Col. A. A. Humphreys , was also carried out capably . The ground on Malvern Hill was used effectively and the Union line had depth with a healthy amount of rested troops available to defend it . Fitz John Porter , the de facto commander for the day , played an important role in this . He posted his men well on June 30 , and stationed reinforcements near to the Union line . Darius Couch , whose forces comprised half of the Union center , positioned his reinforcements skilfully as well and cooperated with George Morell , whose units formed the other part of the Union middle . The infantrymen performed well also . As Brian K. Burton notes , " [ the infantrymen ] stayed behind the guns most of the time and did not advance too far during countercharges . This behavior allowed the gunners a clear field of fire . " Furthermore , if more of anything was needed , infantry or artillery , it was available . At the forefront of the Union victory , however , was the overwhelming firepower of their artillery , as later accounts by soldiers from both armies repeatedly attested . 
 A number of shortcomings in planning and execution contributed to the debacle suffered by the Confederates . The Confederate brigade leaders performed well , with the exception of a few minor instances ; Burton surmises that the blame of July 1 must lie with the overall commanders . James Longstreet was overconfident about the artillery strategy , which proved less effective than it could have been largely because both he and Stonewall Jackson had problems gathering the artillery for the assault . The Confederate practice of moving artillery with individual units instead of in one mass and the difficult terrain surrounding Malvern Hill contributed to this issue . A potential solution to this problem lay with Brig. Gen. William N. Pendleton 's fourteen batteries in reserve . However , Lee 's headquarters never contacted Pendleton , who spent July 1 " await [ ing ] events and orders , in readiness for whatever service might be called for . " These orders never came , and Pendleton 's batteries went unused . Magruder might also share in the blame ; his late arrival to the battlefield was caused by bad maps and faulty guides . Since Magruder received Chilton 's draft late in the day , and with no time attached to it , there was no way for him to determine the relevance of the order . Burton suggests that Magruder cannot be reasonably blamed for his attacks on the Union line : he was responding to Lee 's orders and did initially try to form a unified attack on the Union line . Finally , Magruder was riding back and forth across the battlefield , making it difficult for him to be found by junior officers seeking guidance . Several other factors may have played into the Confederate repulse , including Theophilus Holmes 's refusal to participate in the battle , dismissing any notion of actively engaging the enemy . 
 Lee 's part in the Confederate defeat at Malvern Hill has been criticized by historians . Though he put rested troops on the field and accepted Longstreet 's suggestions , which did not commit him to a charge , Lee himself was not present on the battlefield to observe the fighting . Historian Stephen Sears points out that Lee 's ineffective communication with his generals and apparent failure to write his own communications to his brigadier generals ( instead leaving orders open to interpretation ) may have contributed to the defeat . Lee could also have countermanded Chilton 's orders when it became apparent they were fruitless , or verified the " success " of Armistead . Consequently , Lee must also share some blame in the repeated lack of coordination of attacks throughout the day . 
 = = = Subsequent events = = = 
 Despite the strength of Malvern Hill , as demonstrated in the battle , McClellan felt he needed to continue with his planned withdrawal to Harrison 's Landing , to Fitz John Porter 's chagrin . Porter felt that the Army of the Potomac should remain atop the hill or perhaps even continue their advance to Richmond . McClellan however insisted that Confederate troops greatly outnumbered his own , felt he could not protect Harrison 's Landing from his current position at Malvern Hill , and feared being cut off from his supply depot . McClellan 's mentality prevailed . The Union batteries and McClellan 's engineers began moving to Harrison 's Landing soon after the end of the Battle of Malvern Hill . Starting at about 11 p.m. unit after unit began to follow . Within hours , nearly all of McClellan 's Army of the Potomac was marching towards Harrison 's Landing . Once the last of these men had crossed the Turkey Island Bridge , they destroyed the bridge and felled trees over it to stymie any pursuit , leaving the James River between the Union and Confederate armies . 
 The areas around Malvern Hill hosted much of Lee 's army the night after the battle . Some of the Confederates were close enough to hear the sounds made by the Army of the Potomac retreating under cover of darkness , and see the lanterns of Northerners helping their wounded . The day after the Battle of Malvern Hill , Lee and Stonewall Jackson met President Jefferson Davis at Poindexter farm . They considered immediately pursuing McClellan ; however , in view of the rain and confusion , Davis and Lee deemed large @-@ scale pursuit of McClellan 's army too risky . Jackson disagreed , saying , " They have not all got away if we go immediately after them . " Jackson even had the bodies of the dead moved so that his soldiers had a clear line of attack when pursuing McClellan . However , Davis and Lee thought it necessary to rest the army . They did not completely rule out a pursuit though ; Lee even ordered J. E. B. Stuart to reconnoiter McClellan 's position for future attacks . Lee ordered Theophilus Holmes to move to Drewry 's Bluff , and decided to keep the men on Malvern Hill through July 3 to forestall any potential Union attack against that location . 
 On July 4 , 1862 , Lee 's men began marching towards Harrison 's Landing . He made his headquarters a few miles north of <unk> Heights , a sixty @-@ foot ( 18 m ) elevation approximately thirteen miles ( 21 km ) from Harrison 's Landing , and stayed nearby with his army for several days , searching for weaknesses in the Union line at the heights that might allow for an attack . No weakness presented itself though , and by the end of July 8 , the entire Army of Northern Virginia , save for cavalry stations and picket forces , was back near Richmond . The Peninsula Campaign was over . 
 = = = Reactions and effects = = = 
 Despite the defeat on Malvern Hill , the Seven Days Battles accomplished the original Confederate goal of removing any direct threat to Richmond from the Union Army . The three newspapers in Richmond exulted in this strategic victory and lionized Robert E. Lee as a national hero : " No captain that ever lived , " opined the Richmond Dispatch , " could have planned or executed a better plan . " Similarly , Confederate Navy Secretary Stephen Mallory said , " the Great McClelland [ sic ] the young Napoleon now like a whipped cur lies on the banks of the James River crouched under his Gun Boats . " Throughout Richmond and the once @-@ beleaguered South , there was a triumphant mood , and scant attention was paid to the flaws in Lee 's tactics or execution . 
 Lee was not exultant , but " deeply , bitterly disappointed " at the result . " Our success has not been as great or complete as we should have desired " , Lee wrote to his wife . In his official report , he wrote , " Under ordinary circumstances , the Federal Army should have been destroyed . " The North Carolinian D. H. Hill shared Lee 's bitterness , and wrote that the " blood of North Carolina poured like water " . In a post @-@ war article he wrote that the battle " was not war ; it was murder . " Lee did not distribute blame for the failure to reach his desired result , but there were repercussions . Several commanders were reassigned , including Theophilus Holmes and John Magruder , and his army was reorganized into two wings , one under Stonewall Jackson and another under James Longstreet . Further , Confederate artillery would now be moved in battalion @-@ sized units , at the head of Confederate columns . 
 In McClellan 's case , his success on Malvern Hill was overshadowed by his overall defeat in the Seven Days Battles . The Northern public met McClellan 's defeat with despondency , and his reputation was tarnished . Some of McClellan 's soldiers voiced their continued confidence in him . Such opinions were not unanimous , however ; one of McClellan 's engineers , Lt. William Folwell , wondered why " they deify a General whose greatest feat has been a masterly retreat . " A similar opinion was shared by many others in the rank and file of the Union military . Some in politics also abandoned the Democratic McClellan . He was also accused of being on the Galena during the Battle of Malvern Hill , and newspapers and tabloids around the country heaped scorn on him for this , especially when he ran for president in 1864 . President Lincoln was also losing faith in McClellan . On June 26 , the day of Lee 's first offensive during the Seven Days , the Army of Virginia was formed and the command given to Maj. Gen. John Pope . While McClellan was at Harrison 's Landing , parts of his Army of the Potomac were continuously reassigned to Pope . Pope and his Army of Virginia left for Gordonsville , Virginia on July 14 , setting the stage for the subsequent Northern Virginia Campaign . 
 In his Battle @-@ Pieces publication , Herman Melville penned a poem about the battle , titled with the same name as the hill on which it was fought . In the poem , Melville questions the elms of Malvern Hill of whether they recall " the haggard beards of blood " the day of the battle . 
 = = Battlefield preservation = = 
 The battlefield at Malvern Hill is credited by the National Park Service as being " the best preserved Civil War battlefield in central or southern Virginia . " Most recent preservation efforts there have been the consequence of cooperative efforts between Richmond National Battlefield Park and the Civil War Trust . The Trust has purchased 953 acres ( 3 @.@ 86 km2 ) at the heart of the battlefield since 2000 . Its efforts have been bolstered by the Virginia Land Conservation Fund , the Association for the Preservation of Virginia Antiquities , and officials from Henrico County . Most of this tract wraps around the intersection of Willis Church Road and Carter 's Mill Road . The land includes the starting point for the Confederate assaults on the day of the battle , the Willis Church Parsonage , the ruins of which remain visible today . Recent preservation efforts include the acquisition of the Crew house in 2013 . Some 1 @,@ 332 @.@ 6 acres ( 5 @.@ 393 km2 ) of land is protected on and around Malvern Hill to preserve the battlefield , according to the National Park Service . Driving and walking tours , among other services , are offered at the site . 
 = Marry the Night = 
 " Marry the Night " is a song by American singer and songwriter Lady Gaga . It was released as the fifth and final single from her second studio album , Born This Way ( 2011 ) . The song was written and produced by Lady Gaga and Fernando Garibay , and was recorded on the tour bus during The Monster Ball Tour with Garibay . Revealed in February 2011 , the song was inspired by the energy of Gaga 's previous song " Dance in the Dark " and the love for her hometown , New York City . The song was released for promotion on Farmville , six days before the release of Born This Way . 
 " Marry the Night " is a dance @-@ pop and synthpop song influenced by electro rock and house . The track features electronic church bells , a driving electro organ sound , techno beats and a funk rock influenced breakdown . The lyrics are a tribute to Gaga 's love of the nightlife and partying , while serving as a homage to her hometown . " Marry the Night " received mostly positive reviews from critics , who praised its grand and euphoric dance nature . They furthermore found influences of Italian disco music producer Giorgio Moroder and American rock musician Bruce Springsteen in the song . After the release of Born This Way , " Marry the Night " charted in some nations due to digital sales from the parent album . 
 Gaga directed the music video , which was filmed in New York City . It tells the story of when she was signed by her label Interscope Records after being dropped from her former record label , Def Jam Recordings , with scenes in a clinic , a dance studio , her own New York apartment and on a car 's rooftop at a parking lot . She sports outfits by Calvin Klein Collection , Yves Saint Laurent and Stéphane Rolland . Prior to its release , the music video was teased with video stills and previews . Critics wrote positively on the clip , deeming it creative and ambitious , while lauding its narrative theme . Gaga has performed the song in India 's Formula One , the MTV Europe Music Awards , The X Factor ( UK ) and others . She also recorded an acoustic version for her Thanksgiving Day special , A Very Gaga Thanksgiving . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 " Marry the Night " was written by Lady Gaga and Fernando Garibay while on the road for The Monster Ball Tour , and was produced by both . It was first mentioned by Gaga as a track from her album , Born This Way , Ryan Seacrest 's radio show , where she described it as one of her favorite songs from the album . Gaga and Garibay had worked previously on the song " Dance in the Dark " ( 2009 ) , from Gaga 's previous release , The Fame Monster . Before starting work on " Marry the Night " , Gaga listened to " Dance in the Dark " and decided she wanted to top that song 's energy with her new collaboration with Garibay . " I remember being backstage and hearing the concert start , so I go out there and hear ' Dance in the Dark ' open up the whole concert , and I wanted to outdo that feeling . I wanted to outdo that moment that opens up the show . I 'm just that way . " 
 Wanting to have a new style of music , Gaga made it clear she did not want her fans to like the song . She wanted to write a song that could define where she was with Born This Way and her life . In an interview with NME , Gaga explained that the main inspiration behind the song was singer Whitney Houston and also added : " This song is about me going back to New York . I wrote this about the courage it took for me to say ' I hate Hollywood , I just wanna live in Brooklyn and make music ' " . 
 As Gaga performed on The Monster Ball Tour , Garibay started working on the music of the song . After the show was over , Gaga came back to her studio bus and asked him about the progress . Garibay then explained that he had concocted a different kind of music for the song , and played the church @-@ bell inspired music to Gaga . After first hearing it , the singer said that she started to cry , noticing the vastness of the music , and she started writing the lyrics for " Marry the Night " . " Marry the Night " was originally recorded on the Bus Studio in 2010 , but was later mixed at The Mix Room in Burbank , California by Dave Russell , assisted by Paul Pavao . Gaga described the song as a " massive , gas @-@ station , disco record " , and she recorded it immediately after completing the lyrics . According to Garibay , Gaga meditated for a few minutes and then asked him to hand over a recording microphone to her , completing the process within an hour . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Marry the Night " is a dance @-@ pop and synthpop song with electro rock and house influences . The song starts out with electronic church bells and Gaga softly singing " I 'm gonna marry the night / I won 't give up on my life / I 'm a warrior queen / Live passionately tonight . " Soon the beat changes into a dance one , accompanied with techno beats , handclaps and funk music , and moves to the chorus , where Gaga stutters the line " Ma @-@ ma @-@ ma @-@ marry / Ma @-@ ma @-@ ma @-@ marry / Ma @-@ ma @-@ ma @-@ marry the night " . It was compared by Tim Jonze from The Guardian to the Eurodance song , " It 's My Life " by Dr Alban , while Nicola James from MTV compared the chorus with Jennifer Lopez 's 1999 single " Waiting for Tonight . In a pre @-@ release review of certain album tracks , Peter Robinson from the NME blog wrote that Gaga channels " Whitney Houston @-@ esque pop euphoria " into the song , notably that from the singer 's musical peak . 
 The chorus is followed by a funk @-@ rock influenced breakdown , where Gaga sings the line : " Nothing 's too cool / To take me from you / New York is not just a tan that you 'll never lose . " According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , " Marry the Night " was written in the time signature of common time , with a slow tempo of 64 beats per minute for the intro , followed by a driving pop beat of 132 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of A minor with Gaga 's vocal range spanning from G3 to E5 . It follows a basic sequence of Am – Dm / A – F / A – G as its chord progression . The church bells in the song were meant to draw parallels between Gaga 's fans and members of a religion or a cult . The lyrics are about partying and wreaking havoc during the night , and serves as a homage to the New York City downtown music scene . Evan Sawdey from PopMatters described the lyrics as a " ' let 's take the night ' rallying cry . " 
 = = Release = = 
 " Marry the Night " was planned to be the lead single from Born This Way , but was cancelled in favor of the title track . " Marry the Night " was then supposed to be the third single , but was cancelled yet again , this time in favor of " The Edge of Glory " . Gaga first premiered " Marry the Night " on the HBO Monster Ball Special , which aired on May 7 , 2011 . While backstage , she sang a cappella : " I 'm gonna marry the night / I won 't give up on my life / I 'm a warrior queen / Live passionately tonight . " During the promotional appearances for Born This Way , Gaga released " Marry the Night " to the online game Farmville on May 17 , 2011 . The song was released on <unk> , a subdivision of Farmville that Gaga helped design with game promotion company Zynga . Four months since the release of Born This Way , " Marry the Night " was confirmed as the fifth single from the album by Gaga herself . In September 2011 , Interscope Records , Gaga 's label , stated that while " Marry the Night " is sure to be released as the fifth single internationally , they were undecided which song would serve in its place in the US . " Marry the Night " officially impacted Australian radio on October 17 , 2011 . Gaga confirmed the single 's UK release for November 21 , 2011 , which included remixes . The date was pushed back to December 11 , 2011 , however . Gaga 's label later decided to release " Marry the Night " in the United States as well ; it was added to the playlists of rhythmic and mainstream music radio on November 15 , 2011 . 
 On October 17 , 2011 , Gaga revealed the official artwork for " Marry the Night " via TwitPic , citing the lyrics from the bridge of the song , " New York Is Not Just A Tan That You 'll Never Lose " . The artwork shows her sitting atop a rain @-@ soaked car while another vehicle burns in the background . She is wearing a pair of over @-@ the @-@ knee leather boots , a sculpted top and shorts while shaking her blond hair . AOL 's Contessa Gayles described the artwork as a " mysterious night @-@ crawler . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic gave the song a positive review , saying it " glistens with a neon pulse " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine named " Marry the Night " a stand @-@ out track on the album and called it " a worthy successor to ' Dance in the Dark ' " . BBC Music 's Mark Savage called " Marry the Night " as perfect as " a straightforward fist @-@ pumping entry into a colossus can be . " Christian Blauvelt of Entertainment Weekly compared the song with the work of Italian record producer Giorgio Moroder . Caryn Ganz of Spin was impressed with the track , calling it a " four @-@ on @-@ the @-@ floor banger . " Tim Jonze of The Guardian compared the chorus of the song " It 's My Life " by Dr Alban and felt that it was easily forgotten compared to some of the bigger dance songs on the album . Rolling Stone 's was impressed with the fact that " Marry the Night " just seemed to get " bigger , and bigger " to her , while listing pop and glam metal and artists like Pat Benatar , Bonnie Tyler and Bon Jovi as its influences . According to Kitty Empire of The Observer , " ' Marry the Night ' , is a <unk> carpe [ <unk> ] affair which draws on hi @-@ NRG club @-@ pop for its modus operandi . " 
 Evan Sawdey from PopMatters gave the song a negative review , saying " ' Marry the Night ' very much wants to be top @-@ notch Justice knockoff , but by adding a bridge of upbeat platitudes and an utterly pointless instrumental section after the 3 : 30 mark , she ultimately winds up weakening the power of her ' let ’ s take the night ' rallying cry " . Kerri Mason from Billboard found influences of gothic rock in it , but went on to call it an " unapologetic disco @-@ powered pop " that could have been a production number on Gaga 's debut album , The Fame ( 2008 ) . Neil McCormick from The Daily Telegraph gave an analogy with rock musician " Meat Loaf going to the disco " , while describing the song . NME 's Dan Martin felt that the song , although impressive , was conservative as the opening song of Born This Way . He further found similarities to the work of Moroder and influences of Bruce Springsteen 's 1975 single , " Born to Run " . 
 Robert Copsey of the website Digital Spy called the song an " electro @-@ thumping number with euphoric synths and uplifting melody " which according to him further drew comparison to Gaga 's own song " Born This Way " . Copsey further stated that " This is no bad thing , as it 's less in @-@ yer @-@ face , and it 's ' M @-@ m @-@ m @-@ marry the night ' hook is equally as catchy . " Awarding the song with four out of five stars Lewis Corner of the same website wrote : " ' I 'm gonna marry the night / I won 't give up on my life / I 'm a warrior queen , live passionately , tonight , ' GaGa calls out over a suitably grand introduction of deistic bells and rumbling techno synths – the result not to dissimilar , we imagine , to Paul Van Dyk playing an organ at a wedding ceremony . Defiant and epic , the track feeds into Stef 's cult @-@ focused fan base like a prophet calling upon their disciples – and given it 's the single they 've been waiting for , we have no doubt they 'll come in their droves . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Following the release of Born This Way on May 23 , 2011 , " Marry the Night " debuted at number 57 on the United States Billboard Hot Digital Songs Chart with sales of 35 @,@ 000 digital downloads , allowing it to enter the Billboard Hot 100 at number 79 . On the issue dated December 3 , 2011 , " Marry the Night " re @-@ entered the chart at number 97 , and moved to number 59 the second week . For the fourth week on the chart , the song moved to number 32 on the Hot 100 . It sold 20 @,@ 000 digital downloads ( up by 163 % ) and garnered 23 million audience impressions as per Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems . The song has peaked at number 29 on the chart , becoming Gaga 's first radio @-@ promoted single not to reach the top ten and ending her streak of eleven consecutive top ten hits . 
 " Marry the Night " debuted at number 24 on the Pop Songs , which is the third @-@ highest debut on that chart in 2011 , following Gaga 's " Born This Way " ( number 14 ) and Britney Spears ' " Hold It Against Me " ( number 16 ) . The following week , it jumped to number 18 , becoming Gaga 's twelfth consecutive top @-@ twenty on the US pop chart ; it has peaked at 14 on the chart . " Marry the Night " debuted at numbers 37 and 33 on the Adult Pop Songs and Hot Dance Club Songs chart , and has reached peaks of 27 and the top of the chart respectively . The number @-@ one peak of " Marry the Night " on Hot Dance Club Songs was achieved in five weeks , and was tied with Gaga 's previous single " Telephone " as her second fastest ascent to the top of that chart . The song was Gaga 's twelfth number @-@ one single on Hot Dance Club Songs . In March 2012 , " Marry the Night " was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , and as of April 2015 , it has sold 713 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 In Canada , the song entered at number 91 on the Canadian Hot 100 , while debuting on the Canadian Digital Songs chart at number 50 . It has reached a peak of number 11 there . In South Korea , " Marry the Night " reached number eleven on the Gaon International Singles Chart . Its other chart positions included reaching number 38 on the Ultratop 50 chart of Belgium 's Walloon region , and number 16 on the UK Singles Chart . In the United Kingdom , " Marry the Night " had initially entered the chart during the release of Born This Way for one week , but later re @-@ entered after its single release . In Ireland , " Marry the Night " debuted at number 34 on the Irish Singles Chart on November 18 , 2011 , and has reached a peak of number 24 . In Australia , " Marry the Night " debuted at number 88 on the ARIA Singles Chart and peaked at number 80 . In Germany , the song debuted at number 44 on the German Singles Chart on November 23 , 2011 , and has reached a peak of number 17 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and development = = = 
 Gaga filmed parts of the music video for " Marry the Night " in Staten Island and Harlem , New York , from October 10 to October 13 , 2011 . On October 17 , Gaga posted on her Twitter account that she had finished filming and could not " wait to unfold all its secrets and share with you moments from my past I have yet to reveal " . Talking about the filming of the video , Lynn Kelly , a CEO of the Snug Harbor Cultural Center , where the video was shot said , 
 We found both her and her crew to be easy to work with and low @-@ key . I think we would have expected a lot of drama , and the truth is , she is probably the most down @-@ to @-@ earth person . It was endearing . She was friendly and kind . ... I think , for us , we 're so excited to have someone of her talent , and to have somebody like that shoot here is a sheer honor . What her music does for music is so much more than entertainment . It 's connecting to the arts on a much deeper level , and that 's what I hope we can do here . " 
 On October 11 , 2011 , several publications announced that Gaga was seen during the filming of the video in Snug Harbor Cultural Center . She was wearing a custom @-@ made double zip lambskin jumpsuit by New York City designer , Asher Levine which was said to go along with the video 's " grungy " and " bloody " theme and with the " nod to New York downtown refinement . " Dancers and extras were spotted dressed in multiple looks : some as ballerinas and others in leopard print while Gaga 's mother was also seen on stage . Later , other photos of the filming were published on several websites and they showed Gaga with blue lipstick and a leather <unk> with several male dancers , in a long @-@ sleeve red dress with padded shoulders , a big satellite dish and a big black hat . Footage of the video was posted online on October 14 , 2011 . Gaga is seen dancing on the roof of a car as she sings the bridge from the song . She then slides down the car and begins running around the hood as the chorus starts . She 's dressed in black , with a blond bob wig and black heels while rain is visible in the background , but she appears unfazed by the weather . During an interview with NDTV on October 31 , Gaga revealed that she directed the video . She also worked with the director of photography Darius Khondji and art director Gideon Ponte . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Gaga teased on Twitter that the video would be her longest and " the beginning of the story I never told you . " On November 11 , 2011 , she posted a still from the video on Twitter that shows her as she is sent down a hallway on a stretcher by two nurses . The post was accompanied by the message " It 's not that I 've been dishonest , it 's just that I loathe reality . " James Montgomery of MTV News compared the scene — known as " The Prelude Pathétique " — to the 1975 drama film One Flew Over the Cuckoo 's Nest and the 1980 horror film The Shining . Gaga teased a two @-@ minute opening sequence of the music video on November 17 , 2011 , after her performance at Children In Need Rocks Manchester . 
 On November 20 , Gaga went on Alan Carr : Chatty Man and explained the meaning behind the " Marry the Night " music video . " I know how rejection feels in the business . I got signed , I got dropped , I got signed again . That 's actually what the ' Marry the Night ' video is about . It 's about one of the most horrible days of my life when I got dropped from my first record label and it 's the story of what happened that day . " A second preview of the music video , shot in a dance studio , premiered on November 25 , 2011 . Gaga told Vanity Fair magazine that the video is " autobiographical " and illustrates " the worst day of my life . " The entire video premiered on December 1 , 2011 on E ! Online at 8 @.@ 00 pm EST . However , the video appeared online several hours before its official release . Gaga took her Twitter to express dissatisfaction with the leak of the video , saying that it was " like an old tampon . " The video for the song is 13 minutes long . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The autobiographical story begins as a brunette Gaga is taken through a clinic on a stretcher , while an inner monologue about her past memories is heard . The nurses wear Calvin Klein Collection uniforms and Giuseppe Zanotti shoes . A nurse awakens Gaga and checks her heart rate and blood pressure . The nurse then tells Gaga how beautiful she is and how she looked just like her mother when she delivered the former . Gaga then claims that her mother was a saint , before taking a cigarette out of her bag . The nurse , startled by this , quickly then takes the cigarette out of her mouth and puts it on a table . Gaga cries and tells the nurse that she will become a star . She asks the nurse to play music and the camera zooms out to show viewers several female patients treated and wandering off . A new scene shows Gaga practicing ballet dancing to piano music , and a following one shows her taken back from the hospital to her New York apartment by her best friend Bo . Ludwig van Beethoven 's " Piano Sonata No. 8 " plays . Gaga is undressed from an outfit designed by Stéphane Rolland and taken to bed , but is interrupted by a phone call that notifies her of being dropped from her record label . Frustrated , she makes a mess in her apartment , pours breakfast cereal on herself , and jumps in the bath with her heels on . The piano music ends and Gaga is seen bleaching her hair , bathing in a tub , and humming " Marry the Night " . The monologue continues as Gaga says , " But I still had my <unk> and I had a lot of patches , shiny ones from M & J <unk> , so I wreaked havoc on some old denim . And I did what any girl would do — I did it all over again . " According to Jocelyn Vena of MTV News , Gaga resembles pop artist Madonna in the film Desperately Seeking Susan . Gaga 's dancers look down at her from a mezzanine as the clock chimes . 
 The video later shifts to a night scene on a building rooftop , where half of Gaga 's body is inside a car , while her legs protrude from the window and onto the roof of the car . She has blonde hair and wears a black plastic leather outfit . She gets her full body into the car , kissing a " Marry the Night " tape and inserting it into the audio player . The song begins playing as Gaga smokes on the driver 's seat . As the chorus begins , vehicles in the background explode aflame and Gaga exits the car and dances . In a new dance studio setting as the second verse begins , Gaga enters with her dancers , and warms up to do an intricate choreography during the chorus with her team . During the bridge , she and her dance team take a break and warm up to perform another choreography . The rooftop car parking scene and a bath scene intersperse . Gaga and her dancers repeat the choreography during the final chorus , as one dancers falls and is helped up by Gaga . During the breakdown , Gaga and her team dance on a street while interspersing scenes show her causing chaos , including falling down the stairs , attempting to get into a car with an ridiculously oversized hat and pouring water over herself with a marble plant pot in the bath . She enters a car and reveals " Interscope Records ; Hollywood , CA ; 4 p.m. " written on her palm . The last scene shows Gaga in couture and surrounded by flames . The video ends with Gaga suddenly vanishing . 
 = = = Reception and analysis = = = 
 Jason Lipshutz of Billboard commented that the video " features the pop star at her most gloriously provocative , with extended dance sequences , explosions , nudity , and a violent attack on a box of Honey Nut Cheerios . " Gin Sepre of E ! Online compared the video with the book Girl , Interrupted noting that " with equal parts autobiography and pure spectacle , it truly has something for everyone . " Sepre also praised the fact that the video is " certainly not hurting for a lack of creativity " with the scenes being shown in a " slightly more straightforward , [ and ] less metaphorical way " . Jocelyn Vena from MTV opined that " with references to everything from Fame and Black Swan to The Bell Jar , the video is a sweeping look into Gaga 's psyche . Entertainment Weekly 's Tanner Stransky described the video as " quite the trip to Total <unk> , population : 1 , Lady Gaga ... Leave it to Lady Gaga to <unk> a mini @-@ movie video that ’ s half the length of a sitcom episode . " Eleanor Gower from Daily Mail felt that the video was " no less spectacular than her past offerings . " Gilly Ferguson of Daily Mirror noted that the video " still has the shock factor – she 's naked for starters . " Tim Nixon of The Sun noted that Gaga " shocks in [ her ] most graphic video to date . " Sarah Anne Hughes of The Washington Post commented that the video " is slightly NSFW because of one word and some censored skin . " Oscar Moralde of Slant Magazine wrote that the video , " is one of her biggest epics not merely by length ( a weighty 14 minutes ) , but by the breadth of its modes of expression . " 
 Michael Cragg of The Guardian gave a positive review for the video and wrote : " Superstars are at their best when they 're simultaneously aware and unaware of their own ridiculousness and that 's what Marry the Night delivers for Lady Gaga . " Daily News ' Kathryn <unk> compared Gaga with Madonna in several scenes in the video . <unk> further praised the dancing during the video , describing it as " her best " . However , she criticized the scenes of nudity noting : " The rest of the video is pretty tame by Gaga standards . " Spin 's Marc Hogan wrote that " it 's hard to tell where Gaga is winking at us and where she 's simply fallen into a foxhole of unrestrained ego . " Camille Mann of CBS News described the video as a " avant @-@ garde short film " and noted that Gaga was " pushing [ her ] boundaries . " Leah Collins of Dose compared Gaga 's outfits with Christian Louboutin 's designs . She further compared the set in the video to the cover artwork of Born This Way and called it a " very fashionable recreation of Girl , Interrupted . " A writer of CNN commented , " Lady Gaga is known for creating evocative mini @-@ movies to provide the visuals for her singles , and ' Marry the Night ' is no different . " Describing the video as " rough " and " enigmatic " , Liz Raftery of People further <unk> that it " will certainly leave fans talking , if not scratching their heads . " An editor of ABC News praised Gaga 's " interesting perspective in the video . " NME 's Priya Elan wrote that Gaga sounds like " a lobotomized Carrie Bradshaw " during the introduction . He also commented , " It 's definitely an improvement on ' Judas ' , but could it maybe have been snipped a bit to make it shorter ? " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On October 31 , 2011 , Gaga performed a Bollywood version of " Marry the Night " in India during a Formula One after party in Greater Noida . Before the performance , she announced " I feel like I 've waited a long time to come here . And I feel very grateful . ... For the first time ever , I 'm going to sing ' Marry the Night ' . " She sat on the piano and played a slow version of the song , accompanied by a sitar . At the 2011 MTV Europe Music Awards , Gaga gave her first televised performance of " Marry the Night " dressed as a satellite landing on the moon . Wearing a red bikini , and a large red disc around her , Gaga was perched atop a semi @-@ circular replica of the moon which was covered in silver chains . Flames erupted around the stage as Gaga revealed another circular disc covering her face . She sang the song from that vantage point and near the end of the performance , removed the metal disc and performed a choreographed dance routine with her back @-@ up dancers . She also performed the song at the 2011 Bambi Awards in Wiesbaden , Germany , on November 10 . The stage included a vintage convertible with a keyboard built into the side of the door and Gaga also won an award later that night at the gala . 
 Gaga appeared on the eighth series of The X Factor on November 13 , 2011 , and performed the song . Whilst singing , she emerged from a confessional dressed as a decapitated corpse , carrying her own head . She sang most of the song before returning to the booth and re @-@ appearing in a leotard @-@ like outfit and performed the rest of the song and a dance routine with her dancers . At the Children in Need Rocks Manchester concert on November 17 , 2011 , " Marry the Night " was performed as the final song of her set list , along with " Born This Way " and " The Edge of Glory " . The performance was fast paced and included a dance routine by Gaga with her dancers , for the first time . On the British comedy show , Alan Carr : Chatty Man , Gaga performed a piano version of the song , while decked up in a pink dress and a gigantic bow on her head , which prompted Becky Bain from Idolator website to comment , " It 's been some time since we ’ ve seen Lady Gaga rock a bow on top of her noggin ' , and though the one she wore during her [ performance ] wasn 't her signature <unk> , it still made a big ( as in <unk> ) impression . " 
 On the ABC special , A Very Gaga Thanksgiving , the singer performed an acoustic version of " Marry the Night " . Her look , consisting of a shoulder @-@ less black dress with matching hand gloves , was compared by James Dinh of MTV News to actress Audrey Hepburn . The performance was shot on top of a balcony , with Gaga giving poses while holding the microphone . On the CBS special titled The Grammy Nominations Concert Live ! – Countdown to Music 's Biggest Night — where the nominations for the 54th Grammy Awards were revealed — Gaga opened the show with " Marry the Night " , performing in a zombie @-@ like costume . Todd Martens from Los Angeles Times described it as a " dance @-@ meets @-@ hair metal mix @-@ up " , while comparing the choreography of the dance to Michael Jackson 's music video for " Thriller " , and complimented Gaga 's vocals . At the 2011 Jingle Ball in Los Angeles , Gaga performed the song in an imitation of the music video , by perching atop a hospital bed and singing from there . She also headlined Z100 's Jingle Ball at Madison Square Garden . Her set included current hits from Born This Way and a hospital gown @-@ clad " Marry the Night " finale that paid tribute to her music video . On December 9 , 2011 she gave a ballet @-@ themed performance of the song on The Ellen DeGeneres Show . Gaga also performed " Marry the Night " on the 2011 Music Station Super Live in Japan and she performed a medley of " Heavy Metal Lover / Marry the Night / Born This Way " on Dick Clark 's New Year 's Rockin ' Eve with Ryan Seacrest on December 31 , 2011 . The song was performed as the second encore on the Born This Way Ball . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 In 2013 , pop singer Adam Lambert performed a cover version on Glee 's fifth season episode " A Katy or a Gaga " as his character Elliot " Starchild " Gilbert . Lambert 's cover would later chart at number 39 on the US Pop Digital Songs chart . 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording and management 
 Recorded at Studio Bus in Europe ( during The Monster Ball Tour ) 
 Mixed at The Mix Room ( Burbank , California ) 
 Mastered at Oasis Mastering ( Burbank , California ) 
 Published by Stefani Germanotta P / K / A Lady Gaga ( BMI ) Sony ATV songs LLC / House of Gaga Publishing Inc . / GloJoe Music Inc . ( BMI ) Sony ATV / Warner @-@ Tamerlane Publishing Corp. ( BMI ) and Garibay Music Publishing ( BMI ) 
 All rights on behalf of itself and Garibay Music Publishing administered by Warner @-@ Tamerlane Publishing Corp. 
 Personnel 
 Lady Gaga – vocals , songwriter , producer , background vocals 
 Fernando Garibay – songwriter , producer , programming , keyboards 
 DJ White Shadow – drum programming 
 Dave Russell – recording , audio mixing 
 Gene Grimaldi – audio mastering 
 Eric Morris – assistant 
 Paul Pavao – assistant 
 Credits adapted from Born This Way album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Ed Westcott = 
 James Edward Westcott ( born January 20 , 1922 ) is a photographer who worked for the United States government in Oak Ridge , Tennessee , during the Manhattan Project and the Cold War . As one of the few people permitted to have a camera in the Oak Ridge area during the Manhattan Project , he created the main visual record of the construction and operation of the Oak Ridge production facilities and of civilian life in the enclosed community of Oak Ridge . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Ed Westcott was born on January 20 , 1922 , in Chattanooga , Tennessee , the son of Jamie and Lucille Westcott , and moved to Nashville with his family as a child . After Ed expressed an interest in photography , his father saved for a year to buy him a <unk> Derby camera that cost $ 25 . The gift of that camera in the Depression year of 1934 started young Ed on the path to his future career . During his teenage years , he got into the business of developing film for friends and neighbors and worked in several Nashville portrait studios . In 1941 , he joined the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers , as a photographer in the Corps ' Nashville District . His job for the Corps sent him around the region to create photographic documentation of several dams , a site in Tennessee that later became prisoner of war camp , and the airport and other facilities at Fort Campbell on the Tennessee @-@ Kentucky border . 
 = = Photographer for the Manhattan Project and its aftermath = = 
 In December 1942 , the Army Corps transferred the 20 @-@ year @-@ old Westcott to the Clinton Engineer Works at the then @-@ secret Oak Ridge site . He later recalled that : 
 By November 1942 , work was nearing completion on army camps , air bases , dams and enemy internment camps in seven southern states where I photographed many areas for site selection and construction progress reports for the US Corps of Engineers . I was one of the last of the 10 cameramen to leave the Nashville District office of the Corps of Engineers and the only one to accept a transfer with the engineers . Having a choice of a project in Alaska or a new job starting near Knoxville that would take a predicted five years to complete , I selected Knoxville . 
 Westcott was the 29th employee hired for the Manhattan Project in Oak Ridge , where he was to work as an official government photographer from 1942 to 1966 . During much of World War II he was employed by the Roane @-@ Anderson Company , under contract to the Army Corps . As well as photographing the construction and mechanical workings of the X @-@ 10 , K @-@ 25 , Y @-@ 12 , and S @-@ 50 production facilities , he photographed civilian activities in Oak Ridge for the community 's Army @-@ sponsored weekly newspaper , the Oak Ridge Journal . All of Westcott 's wartime photos were produced with either a Speed Graphic or an <unk> Deardorff view camera . 
 Some of his images were among the photos that were distributed to news media with the announcement of the first atomic bomb and the secret project that created it . In the weeks before the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945 , prints of 18 of his photographs were made in secrecy in preparation for the announcement . The photographs were declassified and distributed as part of the press kit . He also processed film taken by the damage assessment teams in his laboratory in Oak Ridge . It took three days to print them . Armed guards outside the darkroom . 
 In June 1945 , Westcott became an Army employee again , and in the post @-@ war years he transitioned to employment with the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) after its formation in 1946 . In 1966 he was assigned to the AEC headquarters near Washington , DC , in Germantown , Maryland , where he worked for the AEC and its successor agencies ( the Energy Research and Development Administration and Department of Energy ) until retiring in 1977 . He photographed nuclear power stations all over the United States . 
 During Westcott 's 35 @-@ year professional career , his assignments included creating photographic documentation of many notable people , including Manhattan Project scientists J. Robert Oppenheimer , Arthur Compton , Glenn Seaborg , Vannevar Bush , Ernest O. Lawrence , and James Bryant Conant , U.S. Army Generals Leslie Groves , Maxwell Taylor and Kenneth Nichols , Admiral Hyman Rickover , Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson , U.S. Senators Estes Kefauver and Kenneth McKellar of Tennessee and Robert A. Taft of Ohio , Tennessee Valley Authority director and AEC chairman David Lilienthal , and seven or eight U.S. Presidents . 
 Westcott 's February 1946 photo portrait of Oppenheimer is highly regarded for depicting the Manhattan Project scientific director as a man weary from the tremendous weight of his experience . When he met with Oppenheimer , Westcott learned that the physicist wanted a cigarette but lacked the change to buy some . After Westcott gave him the money he needed , Oppenheimer bought his cigarettes and lit one . Westcott then captured the image of the physicist sitting next to a fireplace mantel in the Oak Ridge Guest House holding the freshly lighted cigarette in his hand . 
 In spite of the informality suggested by the cigarette , University of Tennessee photography professor Baldwin Lee points out that the photo was carefully planned and posed . According to Lee , Westcott instructed Oppenheimer to sit " slightly askance " and to lean forward slightly , and then he took the photograph from a low vantage point that " makes the viewer physically look up at the man , " thus enhancing the subject 's perceived importance . Lee 's critique also notes that Oppenheimer 's gaze does not appear to be directed anywhere in the room , but instead is aimed at " something very distant and something only he can see . " 
 = = Exhibits and publications = = 
 Much of Ed Westcott 's photographic work was classified when it was first created , and some of it remained classified for many years , but access to his work is now largely unrestricted . About 5 @,@ 000 negatives are archived by the National Archives in Washington , DC . His photographs have been widely reproduced , often without naming him as the photographer , in publications and exhibits about the Manhattan Project . 
 The first museum exhibition devoted to Westcott 's work was organized by the Children 's Museum of Oak Ridge in 1981 , entitled " Oak Ridge Seen 1943 @-@ 1947 : 20 Photographs by Edward Westcott . " In 2005 , the Ewing Gallery of Art and Architecture at the University of Tennessee in Knoxville mounted an exhibition of his photos , entitled " Through the Lens of Ed Westcott : A Photographic History of World War II 's Secret City " . The American Museum of Science and Energy and the Children 's Museum of Oak Ridge both have exhibits devoted to Westcott and his work , in addition to displaying his photos as part of exhibits on the city 's history . A selection of works from the Ewing Gallery exhibit is now a touring museum exhibit . 
 A photograph of an Oak Ridge supermarket that Westcott created in 1945 , " Tulip Town Market , Grove Center , " was featured by the National Archives as part of a 2005 @-@ 2006 exhibit named " The Way We Worked . " Collections of Westcott 's Oak Ridge photographs have been published in the catalog to the Ewing Gallery exhibit ( University of Tennessee , 2005 ; ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 @-@ 3 ) and in the book Oak Ridge by Ed Westcott ( Arcadia Publishing , 2005 ; ISBN 0 @-@ 7385 @-@ 4170 @-@ 2 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7385 @-@ 4170 @-@ 9 ) . A photo by Westcott of shift change at Y @-@ 12 during the Manhattan Project , blown up to 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) by 50 feet ( 15 m ) , is displayed on the wall of the cafeteria at the Y @-@ 12 National Nuclear Security Complex . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Westcott resides in Oak Ridge . He was married to Esther Seigenthaler Westcott for 56 years before her death . They had five children . His grandson Phil works as a photographer in Alaska for the National Park Service , documenting the effects of global warming . Westcott suffered a stroke in 2005 that impaired his speech . The Oak Ridge Kroger Marketplace shopping center , which opened in 2014 , is named the " Westcott Center " in his honor . 
 = Manoj – Babli honour killing case = 
 The Manoj – Babli honour killing case was the honour killing of Indian newlyweds Manoj Banwala and Babli in June 2007 and the successive court case which historically convicted defendants for an honour killing . The individuals involved in the murder included relatives of Babli ( Grandfather <unk> who is said to have been a Khap leader , Brother , Maternal and Paternal uncle and two cousins ) . Relatives of Manoj , specially his mother defended the relationship . 
 The killing was ordered by a khap panchayat ( khap ) , a religious caste @-@ based council among Jats , in their <unk> village in Kaithal district , Haryana . 
 The khap passed a decree prohibiting marriage against societal norms . Such caste @-@ based councils are common in the inner regions of several Indian states , including Haryana , Punjab , western Uttar Pradesh , parts of Rajasthan and Bihar , and have been operating with government approval for years . In any event , the state government expressed no concern about the ruling of the khap panchayat . 
 The Khap panchayat 's ruling was based on the assumption that Manoj and Babli belonged to the Banwala gotra , a Jat community , and were therefore considered to be siblings despite not being directly related and any union between them would be invalid and incestuous . Nevertheless , the couple went ahead with their marriage , following which they were abducted and killed by Babli 's relatives . 
 In March 2010 a Karnal district court sentenced the five perpetrators to be executed , the first time an Indian court had done so in an honour killing case . The khap head who ordered but did not take part in the killings received a life sentence , and the driver involved in the abduction a seven @-@ year prison term . According to Home Minister P. Chidambaram , the UPA @-@ led central government was to propose an amendment to the Indian Penal Code ( IPC ) in response to the deaths of Manoj and Babli , making honour killings a " distinct offense " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Manoj 's and Babli 's families lived in <unk> Village , Kaithal . Manoj 's mother , Chanderpati <unk> , had four children , of which Manoj was the eldest . Chanderpati was widowed at the age of 37 , when Manoj was only 9 . Manoj owned an electronics repair shop at Kaithal and was the only member of his family receiving income . Manoj 's cousin , <unk> , lived with the family and worked in Panchkula . 
 Babli 's mother , Ompati , also had four children , including eldest son , Suresh , and Babli . Like Manoj , Suresh was the only earning member of the family . Babli was still studying in school . Ompati is a widow . 
 = = Development of the relationship and subsequent marriage = = 
 In 2005 , Manoj and Babli began to show interest in each other . Manoj was two years older than Babli . All residents of their <unk> village belong to the same clan of Banwala , a Jat community , and marrying within the clan is considered incest . Chanderpati recalled , " We knew about Babli long before they decided to marry each other . She would call up often and I would <unk> to her about staying away from Manoj , fearing the fallout of such an alliance . They were , however , unconcerned and chatted for hours together . If I did walk into the room while they were talking , Manoj would quickly disconnect the phone and run off to avoid any questioning . " She continued , " I even went to Babli 's house and told her mother that Manoj and Babli were seeing each other . I asked her to dissuade Babli or quickly marry them before the word spread . " 
 Two years later , on 5 April 2007 , Chanderpati last saw Manoj . " He ate his food and left to sleep at the shop since he had a class XII compartment exam in English to take the next day . Unlike other days , next morning , he did not show up . " The following day Babli 's uncle arrived to speak with Manoj . According to Chanderpati , " He said he had come to recover some money that Manoj had borrowed , had tea and left when I told him that Manoj was away for an exam . We only discovered late in the evening that Babli , too , was missing and the two had run away . " Manoj had eloped with Babli to Chandigarh and married her on 7 April at a Durga temple , their commitment to one another transcending their willingness to abide by the societal norms . 
 Furious with the marriage , Babli 's family asked for intervention from the local khap panchayat , which annulled the marriage . The khap also announced a social boycott on Manoj 's family . Anyone who kept ties with them would be fined ₨ 25 @,@ 000 . Ompati tried to persuade her family that Babli did nothing dishonorable and that she and Manoj would move back home soon . 
 = = Court appearance = = 
 On 26 April , Babli 's family filed a First Information Report ( FIR ) against Manoj and his family for kidnapping Babli . On 15 June , Manoj went to court with Babli , testifying that they had married in conformity with the law and that he did not kidnap Babli . The judge ordered police protection for the two . <unk> did not attend the trial so that Babli 's family would not be aware that Manoj and Babli were in town . 
 After the trial , Manoj and Babli , accompanied by a team of five police officers assigned to them for protection , left for Chandigarh . The police left them at Pipli and slipped away . Suspecting foul play , Manoj and Babli did not continue toward Chandigarh , instead boarding a bus for Karnal . According to a statement filed by Chanderpati , later that day , around 3 : 40 pm , she received a call from a Pipli telephone booth from Manoj , who said that the police had deserted them , and Babli 's family members were trailing them , so they would try to take a bus to Delhi and call her back later . Babli asked for acceptance from Chanderpati , who replied affirmatively . That was the last time Manoj 's family heard from the couple . 
 On 20 June , Chanderpati 's complaint regarding the kidnapping was filed as an FIR at the <unk> police station following media pressure on the police . 
 = = Kidnapping and murder = = 
 The couple 's bus left for Delhi , but en route at 4 : 30 pm , Babli 's relatives stopped the bus near Raipur <unk> village , about 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) from Pipli . They kidnapped the couple in a Scorpio SUV driven by Mandeep Singh . Kuldip <unk> , a road contractor , witnessed the kidnapping and filed a complaint at the <unk> police station in Karnal district , giving the licence plate number of the Scorpio . Later , Chanderpati ascribed the murder to the unauthorised withdrawal of the couple 's security team ignoring the orders given by the district and sessions judge ( <unk> ) of Kaithal . Upon receiving no further news , Chanderpati 's nephew , Narendra Singh traced the contractor , and after he was shown a photo of the couple , the contractor recognised the couple . The family then understood that Manoj and Babli were the victims of the kidnapping . 
 After the kidnapping , the couple were beaten . Babli 's brother Suresh forced her to consume pesticide , while four other family members pushed Manoj to the ground , her uncle <unk> pulling a noose around Manoj 's neck and strangling him in front of Babli . They wrapped the bodies in gunny sacks and dumped them in Barwala Link Canal in Hisar district . On 23 June , nine days later , their mutilated bodies , hands and feet tied , were fished out of the canal by Kheri <unk> police . After autopsy , police preserved Manoj 's shirt and Babli 's anklet and cremated the bodies as unclaimed on 24 June . On 1 July the family identified them by the remnants of their clothing . The accused were subsequently arrested . 
 Police discovered a number of articles in the Scorpio used to kidnap the couple — parts of Babli 's anklet , two buttons from Manoj 's shirt , and torn photographs of the couple . Manoj 's purse was found on one of the accused . 
 = = Court judgement = = 
 No Karnal lawyer would adopt the case , so Manoj 's family had to find lawyers from Hisar . Later on <unk> Sunil Rana from <unk> accepted the case , arguing on their behalf public prosecutor Sunil Rana and lawyers Lal Bahadur , Surat Singh , Cornel <unk> , and Rakesh <unk> from Hisar , Haryana . Bahadur argued that the couples ' clothes recovered from the canal and photographs from the Scorpio established that day 's happenings . Bahadur also cited the contractor 's statement and the last phone call from Manoj , in which Manoj had related that Babli 's relatives were trailing them . However , the contractor " turned hostile " and withdrew his statement . 
 Arguing for the defence was lawyer <unk> Singh . He asserted that there was no evidence against the accused and that it was all contrived by the media , no evidence that the khap panchayat ever met to discuss the fate of the couple , and no evidence indicating that Manoj and Babli were dead . The cremated bodies recovered from the canal were never confirmed to be those of Manoj and Babli . 
 On 29 March 2010 , after 33 months of 50 hearings with 41 witnesses , the <unk> District court found the accused guilty of murder , kidnapping , conspiracy , and destroying evidence under respective sections in the IPC . The next day , 30 March , for the first time in Haryana state history , a death penalty verdict was announced in the double murder case for the five accused . All were related to Babli , and included her brother Suresh , cousins Gurdev and Satish , paternal uncle <unk> , and maternal uncle Baru Ram . The leader of the khap panchayat Ganga Raj ( 52 ) , was given a life sentence for conspiracy , while the driver , Mandeep Singh , held guilty of kidnapping , was given a jail term of seven years . The court asked the Haryana government to provide a compensation of ₨ 100 @,@ 000 to Chanderpati , who had filed the case . Ganga Raj was fined ₨ 16 @,@ 000 , and the other six convicts ₨ 6 @,@ 000 each . 
 The court also accused six police personnel of dereliction of duty and directed the SSP of Kaithal to take action against them . The personnel included head constable Jayender Singh , sub @-@ inspector Jagbir Singh , and the members of the escort party provided to the couple . They claimed that the couple wanted them to leave . The SSP 's statement was that " [ i ] t is correct that the deceased couple had given in writing not to take police security any further , but Jagbir Singh was well aware that there was a threat to their lives from the relatives of the girl . " The report stated that Jayender informed Gurdev Singh of the location of the police and that of Manoj and Babli over his mobile phone . Jayender was dismissed from the police force , and both he and Jagbir were penalised by a cut of two increments . 
 In her verdict , district judge Vani Gopal Sharma stated , " This court has gone through sleepless nights and tried to put itself in the shoes of the offenders and think as to what might have prompted them to take such a step . " " Khap panchayats have functioned contrary to the constitution , ridiculed it and have become a law unto themselves . " 
 Bahadur was satisfied with the decision , " Out of seven accused , five have been given death sentences . This will send a strong message to the public that law is greater than the khap . " However , he was disappointed that " the leader [ Ganga Raj ] got away with death penalty because he intentionally disappeared during the killing . " Narendra said , " We will appeal in High Court for death penalty to the main accused , Ganga Raj . We respect the court 's decision but he should be punished so that the instigators of the crime get the punishment . Also it is important that it is a very clear message so that no khap gives such directions , ever . " Seema seconded Narendra 's concerns , " We would have been happier if the main accused was also given the death sentence . The decision of the panchayat was not justified and people should not to be allowed to misuse their power . We have fought this battle alone when no one was supporting us . " She requested more security for her family , " They tried to bribe us to withdraw the case then they threatened that they would kill us if we didn 't withdraw the FIR . Even after the decision we 're afraid of a backlash from the Khap Panchayat . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Historical significance = = = 
 The case was the first resulting in the conviction of khap panchayats and the first capital punishment verdict in an honour killing case in India . The Indian media and legal experts hailed it as a " landmark judgement " , a victory over these infamous assemblies , which acted for years with impunity as parallel judicial bodies . Also , few honour killing cases went to court , and this was the first case in which the groom 's family in an honour killing filed the case . In a statement to the press , former Home Minister Chidambaram slammed the khap panchayats , asking tersely , " Who are these khap panchayats ? Who gave them the right to kill in the name of honour ? " 
 Surat Singh , director of the Haryana Institute of Rural Development , <unk> , anticipated that the verdict will end the diktats of khap panchayats . The khaps had never worried before because their " political bosses refrained from acting against them . With this verdict , those who try to impose a medieval order on society will think twice " . Political analyst Ranbir Singh agreed that the judgement will " act as a deterrent " . Additional Advocate General Arun Walia hailed the decision : " before passing ruthless judgments , the members will surely take note of this decision " . 
 The honour killing inspired Ajay Sinha to produce a film titled Khap — A Story of Honour Killing starring Om Puri , <unk> Chaudhary , Govind <unk> , Anuradha Patel , and Mohnish Behl , to raise awareness about the khap 's diktats . It will cost ₨ 25 – 30 million and was expected to enter theatres by late July 2010 . Sinha claimed that the film is based on not one distinct killing but many . He considered the film " a protest against such traditions and practice " . For research , Sinha had visited Haryana and spoken to khap members . 
 = = = Chanderpati = = = 
 Days after the verdict , a The Times of India headline hailed Chanderpati , who struggled years for justice , as " Mother Courage " for having done " what even top politicians and bureaucrats have shied away from doing — taken on the dreaded khap panchayats . " Chanderpati now lives with her two daughters and remaining son under the protection of two policemen . She withdrew her daughter Rekha from public school and sent Vinod to a school in another district . Chanderpati also reported threats from villagers , " The villagers have threatened to eliminate us . I am enemy number one and my son is a culprit . We 've been told our ordeal can end if we withdraw the police case but we refused . So , the nightmare continues . " 
 Chanderpati has stated she intends to continue until Ganga Raj is sentenced to death : " Our fight has not ended here . We will not rest till he [ Ganga Raj ] also gets the death penalty . " The khap panchayats remain defiant even after the verdict . " The verdict has done justice to my son 's death , but it has not changed the way the village works , " Chanderpati said . " I am fighting but my son died only because the girl 's male relatives could kill their own sister . Families allow themselves to be instigated . As long as men can kill their own daughters , what change will there be ? " 
 = = = Vani Gopal Sharma = = = 
 Judge Vani Gopal Sharma has supposedly been receiving threats since her verdict in the case . The High Court had directed adequate security to be provided to her , but later she again informed the High Court of the failure to increase security . She sought transfer to Panchkula , a city near Chandigarh . She requested this shortly after her verdict was denounced vehemently by the khap panchayats . The police chief of Karnal district , Rakesh Kumar Arya , claimed that Sharma did not complain about inadequate security . " There is no truth in reports that Karnal 's Additional District Sessions Judge wants to move out of the district on account of inadequate security , " he said . " I don 't know whether any such request was made , but it looks unlikely . " 
 = = = Khap protests = = = 
 A maha khap panchayat ( grand caste council ) representing 20 khap panchayats of Haryana , Uttar Pradesh , and Rajasthan held a meeting on 13 April 2010 , in Kurukshetra to challenge the court verdict and support those sentenced to death in the case . They planned to raise money for the families of the convicts to hire top lawyers for the appeal . Each family in Haryana that was part of a khap panchayat was to contribute ₨ 10 . They also demanded that the Hindu Marriage Act be amended to ban same @-@ gotra marriages . 
 The khaps threatened to boycott any MP and assembly member from Haryana who did not back the khaps request . They also blocked the Kurukshetra @-@ Kaithal highway in protest . 
 Dissatisfied with the decision at the April meeting , the maha khap panchayat called another meeting on 23 May in Jind to discuss their plans . 
 = = = Developments in honour killing law = = = 
 After the court judgement , state authorities began to take on the khap panchayats , and consequently , many village <unk> ( village heads ) supporting these councils were suspended . Top Jat leader and former minister Shamsher Singh <unk> said , " The diktats and fatwas issued by so @-@ called gotra khaps on breaking of marriages and other similar issues would lead to ' <unk> ' of society as such decisions were illegal and against the constitution . " 
 On 5 August 2010 , in a Parliament session , Chidambaram proposed a bill that included " public stripping of women and <unk> of young couples from villages and any ' act which is humiliating will be punished with severity ' " in the definition of honour killing and that would " make khap @-@ dictated honour killings a distinct offence so that all those who participate in the decision are liable to attract the death sentence " . He insinuated that the proposed law would place the " onus of proof on the accused " . A July 2010 The Times of India article anticipated that the bill would not pass in the monsoon session of Parliament in the same year . 
 = = Appeal = = 
 The accused appealed to the Punjab and Haryana High Court . Ganga Raj 's appeal for parole was declined . On 13 May 2010 , the court admitted the appeal of him and the other six convicts challenging the court 's verdict . On 11 March , the Punjab and Haryana High Court commuted the death sentence awarded to four convicts – Babli 's brother Suresh , uncles <unk> and Baru Ram and Gurdev in the Manoj – Babli honour killing case to life imprisonment . Ganga Raj , said to be the prime conspirator , and another convict Satish were acquitted . In an interview to <unk> , Manoj 's relatives – Seema and Chanderpati affirmed that they would challenge Ganga Raj 's and Satish 's acquittal in the Supreme Court . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The June 3 , 2012 , episode , Intolerance to Love of TV series , <unk> Jayate , hosted by actor Aamir Khan , featured an interview with Manoj ’ s sister and mother Seema and <unk> Banwala . The episode discussed this incident along with other cases in the episode . 
 In August 2013 , senior journalist Chander <unk> Dogra , published a book , Manoj and Babli : A Hate Story ( Penguin ) based on the honour killing case . 
 In 2015 , a Bollywood Hindi film Guddu <unk> used Manoj – Babli honour killing case in its storyline . 
 In 2015 , a <unk> film called NH10 was released to critical and public acclaim , with a story @-@ line loosely based on this case . 
 = The Rape of Nanking ( book ) = 
 The Rape of Nanking : The Forgotten Holocaust of World War II is a bestselling 1997 non @-@ fiction book written by Iris Chang about the 1937 – 1938 Nanking Massacre , the massacre and atrocities committed by the Imperial Japanese Army after it captured Nanjing , then capital of China , during the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War . It describes the events leading up to the Nanking Massacre and the atrocities that were committed . The book presents the view that the Japanese government has not done enough to redress the atrocities . It is one of the first major English @-@ language books to introduce the Nanking Massacre to Western and Eastern readers alike , and has been translated into several languages . 
 The book was a source of fame for Chang but was also controversial ; it was received with both acclaim and criticism by the public and by academics . It has been praised as a work that " shows more clearly than any previous account " the extent and brutality of the episode , while at the same time it was criticized as " seriously flawed " and " full of misinformation and harebrained explanations " . Chang 's research on the book was credited with the finding of the diaries of John Rabe and Minnie Vautrin , both of whom played important roles in the Nanking Safety Zone , a designated area in Nanjing that protected Chinese civilians during the Nanking Massacre . 
 The book prompted AOL executive Ted Leonsis to fund and produce Nanking , a 2007 documentary film about the Nanking Massacre . 
 = = Inspiration = = 
 When Iris Chang was a child , she was told by her parents , who had escaped with their families from China to Taiwan and then to the United States after World War II , that during the Nanking Massacre , the Japanese " sliced babies not just in half but in thirds and fourths . " In the introduction of The Rape of Nanking , she wrote that throughout her childhood , the Nanking Massacre " remained buried in the back of [ her ] mind as a metaphor for unspeakable evil . " When she searched the local public libraries in her school and found nothing , she wondered why no one had written a book about it . 
 The subject of the Nanking Massacre entered Chang 's life again almost two decades later when she learned of producers who had completed documentary films about it . One of the producers was Shao <unk> , who helped produce Magee 's Testament , a film that contains footage of the Nanking Massacre itself , shot by the missionary John Magee . The other producer was Nancy Tong , who , together with Christine Choy , produced and co @-@ directed In The Name of the Emperor , a film containing a series of interviews with Chinese , American , and Japanese citizens . Chang began talking to Shao and Tong , and soon she was connected to a network of activists who felt the need to document and publicize the Nanking Massacre . 
 In December 1994 , she attended a conference on the Nanking Massacre , held in Cupertino , California , and what she saw and heard at the conference motivated her to write The Rape of Nanking . As she wrote in the introduction to the book , while she was at the conference , she was " suddenly in a panic that this terrifying disrespect for death and dying , this reversion in human social evolution , would be reduced to a footnote of history , treated like a harmless glitch in a computer program that might or might not again cause a problem , unless someone forced the world to remember it . " 
 = = Research = = 
 Chang spent two years on research for the book . She found source materials in the US , including diaries , films , and photographs of missionaries , journalists , and military officers who were in Nanjing at the time of the massacre . Additionally , she traveled to Nanjing to interview survivors of the Nanking Massacre and to read Chinese accounts and confessions by Japanese army veterans . Chang did not , however , conduct research in Japan , and this left her vulnerable to criticisms on how she portrayed modern Japan in the context of how it deals with its World War II past . 
 Chang 's research led her to make what one San Francisco Chronicle article called " significant discoveries " on the subject of the Nanking Massacre , in the forms of the diaries of two Westerners who were in Nanjing leading efforts to save lives during the Japanese invasion . One diary was that of John Rabe , a German Nazi Party member who was the leader of the Nanking Safety Zone , a demilitarized zone in Nanjing that Rabe and other Westerners set up to protect Chinese civilians . The other diary belonged to Minnie Vautrin , the American missionary who saved the lives of about 10 @,@ 000 women and children when she provided them with shelter in <unk> College . The diaries documented the events of the Nanking Massacre from the perspectives of their writers , and provided detailed accounts of atrocities that they saw , as well as information surrounding the circumstances of the Nanking Safety Zone . Chang dubbed Rabe the " Oskar Schindler of Nanking " and Vautrin the " Anne Frank of Nanking " . Rabe 's diary is over 800 pages , and contains one of the most detailed accounts of the Nanking Massacre . Translated into English , it was published in 1998 by Random House as The Good Man of Nanking : The Diaries of John Rabe . Vautrin 's diary recounts her personal experience and feelings on the Nanking Massacre ; in it , an entry reads , " There probably is no crime that has not been committed in this city today . " It was used as source material by Hua @-@ ling Hu for a biography of Vautrin and her role during the Nanking Massacre , entitled American Goddess at the Rape of Nanking : The Courage of Minnie Vautrin . 
 = = The book = = 
 The Rape of Nanking is structured into three main parts . The first uses a technique that Chang called " the Rashomon perspective " to narrate the events of the Nanking Massacre , from three different perspectives : that of the Japanese military , the Chinese victims , and the Westerners who tried to help Chinese civilians . The second part concerns the postwar reaction to the massacre , especially that of the American and European governments . The third part of the book examines the circumstances that , Chang believed , have kept knowledge of the massacre out of public consciousness decades after the war . 
 = = = Atrocities = = = 
 The book depicted in detail the killing , torture , and rape that occurred during the Nanking Massacre . Chang listed and described the kinds of torture that were visited upon the residents , including live burials , mutilation , " death by fire " , " death by ice " , and " death by dogs " . Based on the testimony of a survivor of the massacre , Chang also described a killing contest amongst a group of Japanese soldiers to determine who could kill the fastest . On the rape that occurred during the massacre , Chang wrote that " certainly it was one of the greatest mass rapes in world history . " She estimated that the number of women raped ranged from 20 @,@ 000 to as many as 80 @,@ 000 , and stated that women from all classes were raped , including Buddhist nuns . Furthermore , rape occurred in all locations and at all hours , and both very young and very old women were raped . Not even pregnant women were spared , Chang wrote , and that after gang rape , Japanese soldiers " sometimes slashed open the bellies of pregnant women and ripped out the fetuses for amusement " . Not all rape victims were women , according to the book , Chinese men were sodomized and forced to perform repulsive sexual acts . Some were forced to commit incest — fathers to rape their own daughters , brothers their sisters , sons their mothers . 
 = = = Death toll = = = 
 Chang wrote of the death toll estimates given by different sources ; Chinese military specialist Liu Fang @-@ chu proposed a figure of 430 @,@ 000 ; officials at the Nanjing Massacre Memorial Hall and the procurator of the District Court of Nanjing in 1946 stated at least 300 @,@ 000 were killed ; the International Military Tribunal for the Far East ( IMTFE ) judges concluded that more than 260 @,@ 000 people were killed ; Japanese historian Fujiwara Akira approximated 200 @,@ 000 ; John Rabe , who " never conducted a systematic count and left Nanking in February " , estimated only 50 @,@ 000 to 60 @,@ 000 ; and Japanese author Ikuhiko Hata argued the number killed was between 38 @,@ 000 and 42 @,@ 000 . 
 The book discussed the research of historian Sun <unk> of the Jiangsu Academy of Social Sciences . In his 1990 paper , The Nanking Massacre and the Nanking Population , Sun estimated the total number of people killed at 377 @,@ 400 . Using Chinese burial records , he calculated that the number of dead exceeded the figure of 227 @,@ 400 . He then added estimates totaling 150 @,@ 000 given by Japanese Imperial Army Major Ohta Hisao in a confessional report about the Japanese army 's disposal efforts of dead bodies , arriving at the sum of 377 @,@ 400 dead . 
 Chang wrote that there is " compelling evidence " that the Japanese themselves , at the time , believed that the death toll may have been as high as 300 @,@ 000 . She cited a message that Japan 's foreign minister Kōki <unk> relayed to his contacts in Washington , DC in the first month of the massacre on January 17 , 1938 . The message acknowledged that " not less than three hundred thousand Chinese civilians [ were ] slaughtered , many cases in cold blood . " 
 = = Acclaim = = 
 The Rape of Nanking sold more than half a million copies when it was first published in the U. S. , and according to The New York Times , received general critical acclaim . Iris Chang became an instant celebrity in the U. S. ; she was awarded honorary degrees , invited to give lectures and to discuss the Nanking Massacre on shows such as Good Morning America , Nightline , and The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer , and was profiled by The New York Times and featured on the cover of Reader 's Digest . The book was on the New York Times ' Best Seller list for 10 weeks and sold more than 125 @,@ 000 copies in four months . Hillary Clinton invited her to the White House , U. S. historian Stephen Ambrose described her as " maybe the best young historian we 've got " , and the Organization of Chinese Americans named her National Woman of the Year . The book 's popularity prompted a lengthy book tour , with Chang visiting 65 cities in over a year and a half . 
 The book received praise from news media . The Wall Street Journal wrote that it was the " first comprehensive examination of the destruction of this Chinese imperial city " , and that Chang " skillfully excavated from oblivion the terrible events that took place " . The Atlantic Monthly described the book as " a crushing indictment of the Japanese army 's behavior " . The Chicago Tribune called it " a powerful new work of history and moral inquiry " and stated that " Chang takes great care to establish an accurate accounting of the dimensions of the violence . " The Philadelphia Inquirer wrote that it was a " compelling account of a horrendous episode that , until recently , has been largely forgotten " , and that " animals do not behave the way the Japanese troops of the Imperial Army behaved . " 
 According to William C. Kirby , Professor of History at Harvard University , Chang " shows more clearly than any previous account just what [ the Japanese ] did " , and that she " draws connections between the slaughter in Europe and in Asia of millions of innocents during World War II " . Ross Terrill , an associate in research at the Fairbank Center for East Asian Research at Harvard University , wrote that the book is " scholarly , an exciting investigation and a work of passion " . Beatrice S. Bartlett , Emeritus Professor of History at Yale University , wrote , " Iris Chang 's research on the Nanking holocaust yields a new and expanded telling of this World War II atrocity and reflects thorough research . " 
 = = Criticism = = 
 Joshua A. Fogel , at York University , argued that the book is " seriously flawed " and " full of misinformation and harebrained explanations . " He suggested that the book " starts to fall apart " when Chang tries to explain why the massacre took place , as she repeatedly comments on " the Japanese psyche " , which she sees as " the historical product of centuries of conditioning that all boil down to mass murder " even though in the introduction , she wrote that she would offer no " commentary on the Japanese character or the genetic makeup of a people who could commit such acts " . Fogel asserted that part of the problem was Chang 's " lack of training as a historian " and another part was " the book 's dual aim as passionate polemic and dispassionate history " . David M. Kennedy , a Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning professor of history at Stanford University , also pointed out that while Chang noted that " this book is not intended as a commentary on the Japanese character , " she then wrote about the " ' Japanese identity ' — a bloody business , in her estimation , replete with martial competitions , samurai ethics , and the fearsome warriors ' code of bushido " , making the inference that " ' the path to Nanking ' runs through the very marrow of Japanese culture . " Kennedy also suggested that " accusation and outrage , rather than analysis and understanding , are this book 's dominant motifs , and although outrage is a morally necessary response to Nanjing , it is an intellectually insufficient one . " Roger B. Jeans , professor of history at Washington and Lee University , referred to Chang 's book as " half @-@ baked history " , and criticized her lack of experience with the subject matter : 
 In writing about this horrific event , Chang strives to portray it as an unexamined Asian holocaust . Unfortunately , she undermines her argument — she is not a trained historian — by neglecting the wealth of sources in English and Japanese on this event . This leads her into errors such as greatly inflating the population of Nanjing ( Nanking ) at that time and uncritically accepting the Tokyo War Crimes Tribunal and contemporary Chinese figures for the numbers of Chinese civilians and soldiers killed . What particularly struck me about her argument was her attempt to charge all Japanese with refusing to accept the fact of the ' Rape of Nanking ' and her condemnation of the ' persistent Japanese refusal to come to terms with its <unk> 
 Jeans continued what he calls " giving the lie to Iris Chang 's generalizations about ' the Japanese ' " by discussing the clashing interest groups within Japanese society over such things as museums , textbooks , and war memory . 
 Robert <unk> , professor of history at St. Olaf College , criticized the work on the grounds that the " Japanese historical background Chang presents is clichéd , simplistic , stereotyped , and often inaccurate . " On Chang 's treatment of modern Japanese reaction to the massacre , he writes that Chang seemed " unable to differentiate between some members of the ultranationalist fringe and other Japanese " , and that " her own ethnic prejudice implicitly pervades her book . " Stating that Chang 's description of the massacre is " open to criticism " , <unk> further commented that Chang " does not adequately explain why the massacre occurred " . 
 Timothy M. Kelly , professor at Edogawa University , described Chang 's work as exhibiting " simple carelessness , sheer sloppiness , historical inaccuracies , and shameless plagiarism . " Kelly further criticized Chang for her " lack of attention to detail " . Finally , Kelly charged that Chang had plagiarized passages and an illustration from Japan 's Imperial Conspiracy by David Bergamini . 
 Kennedy criticized Chang 's accusation of " Western indifference " and " Japanese denial " of the massacre as " exaggerated " , commenting that " the Western world in fact neither then nor later ignored the Rape of Nanking " , " nor is Chang entirely correct that Japan has obstinately refused to acknowledge its wartime crimes , let alone express regret for them . " Chang argues that Japan " remains to this day a renegade nation , " having " managed to avoid the moral judgment of the civilized world that the Germans were made to accept for their actions in this nightmare time . " However , according to Kennedy , this accusation has already become a cliché of Western criticism of Japan , most notably exemplified by Ian Buruma 's The Wages of Guilt ( 1994 ) , whose general thesis might be summarized as " Germany remembers too much , Japan too little . " Kennedy pointed out that a vocal Japanese left has long kept the memory of Nanking alive , noting the 1995 resolution of Japan 's House of Councillors that expressed " deep remorse " ( <unk> <unk> ) for the suffering that Japan inflicted on other peoples during World War II and clear apologies ( <unk> ) for Imperial Japan 's offenses against other nations from two Japanese Prime Ministers . 
 <unk> Efron of the Los Angeles Times warned that the bitter row over Iris Chang 's book may leave Westerners with the " <unk> " that little has been written in Japan about the Nanjing Massacre , when in fact the National Diet Library holds at least 42 books about the Nanjing massacre and Japan 's wartime misdeeds , 21 of which were written by liberals investigating Japan 's wartime atrocities . In addition , Efron noted that geriatric Japanese soldiers have published their memoirs and have been giving speeches and interviews in increasing numbers , recounting the atrocities they committed or witnessed . After years of government @-@ enforced denial , Japanese middle school textbooks now carry accounts of the Nanjing massacre as accepted truth . Fogel also writes : " Dozens of Japanese scholars are now actively engaged in research on every aspect of the war .... Indeed , we know many details of the Nanjing massacre , Japanese sexual exploitation of ' comfort women , ' and biological and chemical warfare used in China because of the trailblazing research " of Japanese scholars . 
 San Francisco Chronicle staff writer Charles Burress wrote that Chang 's quote of a secret telegram sent by Japan 's foreign minister in 1938 was incorrectly cited as " compelling evidence " that Japanese troops killed at least 300 @,@ 000 Chinese civilians in Nanjing . According to Burress , the figure of 300 @,@ 000 Chinese civilians killed actually came from a message sent by a British reporter , concerning deaths not only in Nanjing but in other places as well . Additionally , Burress questioned Chang 's motivation for writing the book - whether she wrote it as an activist or as a historian , stating that the book " draws its emotional impetus " from her conviction to not let the Nanking Massacre be forgotten by the world . Burress also cited Ikuhiko Hata , a Japanese history professor at Nihon University , who argued that 11 photos in the book were misrepresented or fake . One particular photo shows women and children walking across a bridge with Japanese soldiers , and captioned as " The Japanese rounded up thousands of women . Most were gang @-@ raped or forced into military prostitution . " Hata stated that the photo originally appeared in 1937 in a Japanese newspaper as part of a series of photos that showed peaceful scenes of Chinese villagers under Japanese occupation . 
 Chang responded to Charles Burress 's criticism in a letter written to the San Francisco Chronicle , but the letter was not published by the newspaper . In the letter , she offered criticism of her own concerning Burress 's article . Chang found a " disturbing tendency " by Burress to quote right @-@ wing Japanese critics " without demanding evidence to back up their allegations " . She argued that Ikuhiko Hata , a source cited by Burress , was not " regarded as a serious scholar " in either Japan or in the U. S. , because he was a regular contributor to " ultra right @-@ wing " Japanese publications . One such publication had published an article from a Holocaust denier that argued that no gas chambers were used in Germany to kill Jews . This caused the parent publisher to shut down the publication . On Burress 's criticism of her inaccurate photo captioning , Chang disputed the contention that the caption was wrong . She wrote that her book dealt with the " horror of the Japanese invasion of China " , and that the caption reading " The Japanese rounded up thousands of women . Most were gang @-@ raped or forced into military prostitution " contained two statements of indisputable fact . 
 Chang also issued a rejoinder to Burress 's argument that she incorrectly cited a telegram sent by Japan 's foreign minister . She wrote that while the original figure of 300 @,@ 000 Chinese civilian deaths in Nanjing was reported by a British reporter , this figure was cited in a message that Japan 's foreign minister sent to his contacts in Washington , DC . Chang argued that figure 's use by a high @-@ ranking Japanese government official was evidence that the Japanese government recognized 300 @,@ 000 as the number of Chinese civilian deaths . Finally , she criticized Burress for his " nitpick " of small details in order to draw attention away from the scope and magnitude of the Nanking Massacre , writing that such was a " common tactic " of Holocaust deniers . 
 = = Reaction in Japan = = 
 The Rape of Nanking has caused controversy in Japan . Los Angeles Times staff writer , <unk> Efron , reported that Chang was also criticized by both Japanese " ultranationalists " , who believe that the massacre in Nanjing never took place , and Japanese liberals , who " insist the massacre happened but allege that Chang 's flawed scholarship damages their cause " . Associate Professor David Askew of <unk> Asia Pacific University stated that Chang 's work dealt a " severe blow " to the " Great Massacre School " of thought , which advocates for the validity of the findings at the Tokyo Trials , the tribunal convened to try the leaders of the Empire of Japan for crimes committed during World War II . Askew further argued that " the Great Massacre School has thus been forced into the ( unusual ) position of criticising a work that argues for a larger death toll . " 
 Following the publication of The Rape of Nanking , Japanese critic Masaaki Tanaka had his 1987 book on Nanking translated into English . Entitled What Really Happened in Nanking : The Refutation of a Common Myth , Tanaka stated in his introduction " I am convinced that [ American researchers ] will arrive at the realization that violations of international law of the magnitude alleged by Iris Chang in The Rape of Nanking ( more than 300 @,@ 000 murders and 80 @,@ 000 rapes ) never took place . " 
 Chang 's book was not published in a translated Japanese language edition until December 2007 . Problems with translation efforts surfaced immediately after a contract was signed for the Japanese publishing of the book . A Japanese literary agency informed Chang that several Japanese historians declined to review the translation , and that one professor backed out because of pressure placed on his family from " an unknown organization " . According to Japan scholar Ivan P. Hall , revisionist historians in Japan organized a committee of right @-@ wing scholars to condemn the book with repeated appearances at the Foreign Correspondents ' Club in Tokyo and throughout Japan . They prevailed on Kashiwa Shobo , the contracted Japanese publisher of the book , to insist that Chang edit the book for " corrections " they wanted made , to delete photographs and alter maps , and to publish a rebuttal to Chang 's book . Chang disagreed with the changes and , as a result , withdrew the Japanese publishing of the book . The rebuttal piece was nonetheless published as a book by <unk> Fujioka and Shudo <unk> entitled A Study of ' The Rape of Nanking ' . 
 Shudo <unk> , a professor of intellectual history at Asia University of Japan , argued in Sankei Shimbun that the book was " pure baloney " , that there was " no witness of illegal executions or murders " , and that " there existed no ' Rape of Nanking ' as alleged by the Tokyo Trial . " He identified 90 historical factual errors in the first 64 pages of the book , some of which were corrected in the 1998 Penguin Books edition . 
 = = = Chang 's death = = = 
 The book was the main source of fame for Iris Chang , who was well respected in China for raising awareness of the Nanking Massacre in the Western world . At the same time , Chang received hate mail , primarily from Japanese ultranationalists , threatening notes on her car and believed her phone was tapped . Her mother said the book " made Iris sad " . Suffering from depression , Chang was diagnosed with brief reactive psychosis in August 2004 . She began taking medications to stabilize her mood . She wrote : 
 I can never shake my belief that I was being recruited , and later persecuted , by forces more powerful than I could have imagined . Whether it was the CIA or some other organization I will never know . As long as I am alive , these forces will never stop hounding me . 
 Chang committed suicide on November 9 , 2004 . A memorial service was held in China by Nanking Massacre survivors coinciding with her funeral in Los Altos California . The Memorial Hall of the Victims in the Nanjing Massacre , a memorial site in Nanjing built to commemorate the victims of the Nanking Massacre , added a wing dedicated to her in 2005 . 
 In the U. S. , a Chinese garden in Norfolk , Virginia , which contains a memorial to Minnie Vautrin , added a memorial dedicated to Chang , including her as the latest victim of the Nanking Massacre , and drawing parallels between Chang and Vautrin , who also took her own life . Vautrin exhausted herself trying to protect women and children during the Nanking Massacre and subsequently during the Japanese occupation of Nanjing , finally suffering a nervous breakdown in 1940 . She returned to the US for medical treatment , committing suicide a year later . 
 = = Editions = = 
 English : Chang , Iris ( 1997 ) . The Rape of Nanking : The Forgotten Holocaust of World War II . Basic Books. p . 290 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 465 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Chang , Iris ( 1998 ) . The Rape of Nanking : The Forgotten Holocaust of World War II . Penguin USA ( Paper ) . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . Foreword by Harvard professor William C. Kirby . 
 French : Chang , Iris ( 2010 ) . Le viol de Nankin – 1937 : un des plus grands massacres du <unk> siècle . <unk> p . 367 . ISBN 978 @-@ 2 @-@ 228 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Chinese : 张 , <unk> ( 2005 ) . <unk> . Translated by <unk> , <unk> , <unk> . <unk> p . 382 . ISBN 978 @-@ 7 @-@ 5060 @-@ 1052 @-@ 8 . 
 Japanese : <unk> 『 ザ ・ <unk> ・ オブ ・ 南京 — <unk> 』 （ <unk> 、 <unk> ） ISBN 4 @-@ <unk> @-@ 617 @-@ 8 
 ( Corrected version ) <unk> 『 「 ザ ・ <unk> ・ オブ ・ 南京 」 <unk> 』 （ <unk> 、 <unk> ） ISBN 4 @-@ <unk> @-@ 618 @-@ 6 
 = Aniru Conteh = 
 Aniru Sahib Sahib Conteh ( 6 August 1942 – 4 April 2004 ) was a Sierra Leonean physician and expert on the clinical treatment of Lassa fever , a viral haemorrhagic fever endemic to West Africa caused by the Lassa virus . Conteh studied medicine at the University of Ibadan in Nigeria and taught at Ibadan Teaching Hospital . He later returned to Sierra Leone where he joined the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) Lassa fever program at Nixon Methodist Hospital in Segbwema , first as superintendent and then as clinical director . 
 After the Sierra Leone Civil War began in 1991 , the CDC closed their program in Segbwema . Conteh and his medical team moved from Segbwema to the Kenema Government Hospital ( <unk> ) , where he spent the next two decades running the only dedicated Lassa fever ward in the world . Conteh collaborated with the British charity Merlin to promote public health in Sierra Leone through education and awareness campaigns intended to prevent Lassa fever . With little funding and few supplies , Conteh successfully reduced mortality rates and saved many lives until an accidental needlestick injury led to his own death from the disease in 2004 . 
 Conteh received renewed public attention in 2009 as the hero of Ross I. Donaldson 's memoir , The Lassa Ward . 
 = = Early life , education , and teaching = = 
 Aniru Sahib Sahib Conteh was born on 6 August 1942 , in the town of Jawi <unk> , Eastern Province , Sierra Leone , the son of a farmer and chief of the village . He moved to Freetown , the capital of Sierra Leone , after his mother died while he was in his teens . Conteh studied chemistry and biology at <unk> Bay College and began teaching after receiving his BSc . In 1968 , he began studying medicine in Nigeria at the modern University of Ibadan , graduating in 1974 . Conteh spent the next four years employed by the Ibadan Teaching Hospital . He returned home to Sierra Leone in 1979 . Conteh married and raised a family with his wife Sarah , producing several sons and daughters . 
 = = Medical career = = 
 Conteh spent his professional career working with patients suffering from Lassa fever , a viral haemorrhagic fever endemic to West Africa . Lassa fever was first brought to the attention of the public in 1969 during an outbreak in Nigeria . Identified in 1972 , the disease is known to spread through its host , the Natal multimammate mouse ( Mastomys natalensis ) , and infects an estimated 300 @,@ 000 people and results in 5000 deaths annually in Sierra Leone , Liberia , and Guinea . In 1976 , a nosocomial outbreak in the <unk> Catholic Hospital attracted attention in the United States . In response , the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) established research programs in Segbwema , Kenema , and <unk> to study the disease . 
 = = = Nixon Methodist Hospital = = = 
 In 1979 , Conteh began working with the CDC and team leader Joseph B. McCormick at the Nixon Methodist Hospital in Segbwema . Conteh became Medical Superintendent of the hospital in 1980 . The Sierra Leone Civil War broke out in 1991 , forcing the CDC to close their program and move to Guinea . The hospital was destroyed in the conflict and the spread of Lassa fever grew worse . During the civil war , the Natal multimammate mouse infested abandoned houses , increasing the likelihood of infection . 
 = = = Kenema Government Hospital = = = 
 Conteh now found himself in the middle of a war zone , starving and homeless . He wandered about for several months and finally came to Kenema where he began treating the sick in the midst of the fighting . Although he had friends overseas , and could have procured a job outside Sierra Leone , he chose to stay and help his people because " they had no one to help them " . Due to the war , most experts familiar with Lassa fever had left the country , and patients suspected of having the disease began to be brought to Conteh for treatment . The Lassa team moved from Segbwema to the Kenema Government Hospital ( <unk> ) . In Kenema , Conteh became director of the only Lassa fever isolation ward in the world . Rebels from the Revolutionary United Front took over the town of Kenema in 1997 and 1999 , but Conteh never left his post . It is thought that the rebels spared the hospital from destruction because they were afraid of catching Lassa fever . When the civil war ended in 2002 , the government of Sierra Leone began the process of rebuilding the country . 
 = = = Contributions to medicine = = = 
 During the civil war , Conteh was the only clinician in Sierra Leone who had the skills and qualifications to manage patients with Lassa fever . In the absence of the CDC , the Lassa ward was supported by Merlin , a medical relief agency based in the UK . According to Nicholas Mellor , co @-@ founder of Merlin , " Conteh worked with Merlin to get a new laboratory built that would enable collaboration with international research centres with an interest in haemorrhagic diseases . He also worked on training and Lassa fever awareness campaigns . " Conteh 's Lassa fever program " provided the blueprint for many experts " . In 1996 , Daniel Bausch at the Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine began working with Conteh and the CDC on research related to Lassa fever . 
 In 2000 , Conteh coauthored a study published in the Journal of Clinical Microbiology comparing the efficacy and outcome of diagnosing Lassa fever patients with the indirect fluorescent @-@ antibody ( IFA ) test and the enzyme @-@ linked immunosorbent assay ( ELISA ) . According to <unk> N. <unk> , the study " focused specifically on the development of a diagnostic test for Lassa fever " . In 2001 , Conteh travelled to London , England to attend an international conference on Lassa fever where he presented a paper on managing the disease . Conteh returned to London in September 2003 to receive the " Spirit of Merlin " award for his outstanding role in " saving lives and alleviating suffering " . 
 = = Death = = 
 The Lassa ward was short @-@ staffed , and Conteh would often draw blood from patients himself . On 17 March 2004 , Conteh was infected with the Lassa virus when he received a needlestick injury while drawing blood from a young pregnant nurse suffering from the disease . The nurse died the next day , and Conteh himself became ill on 23 March . As his condition worsened , he was treated with intravenous ribavirin . Conteh initially survived the critical stage of Lassa fever , but died on 4 April from renal failure — 18 days after first becoming infected with the Lassa virus . Reporter Sulaiman <unk> described the outpouring of grief in the wake of Conteh 's death : 
 News of his death spread in Kenema and its environs like a bush fire in the <unk> . Most people were devastated to learn that the only Lassa Fever specialist in Sierra Leone was gone , gone forever . Nurses cried , patients wept . Kenema was thrown into a state of shock and mourning . 
 Conteh 's funeral was held in the town of Daru . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Conteh 's work in the Lassa ward spanned 25 years and saved thousands of lives . He played a key role in helping Merlin implement a program to support the Lassa ward and fever control measures in Sierra Leone . Because of his skill and dedication , deaths due to cases of suspected Lassa fever declined by 20 % . After Conteh 's death , Merlin and the peacekeepers in the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone ( UNAMSIL ) left Sierra Leone and the Lassa ward in Kenema was barely functioning . In 2004 , Tulane University , in co @-@ ordination with the World Health Organization , began monitoring Lassa fever patients in Sierra Leone , Liberia , and Guinea through the Mano River Union Lassa Fever Network ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) . Today , the Lassa Fever Program is fully operational at Kenema Government Hospital , and focuses on " treatment , containment , prevention and research " . 
 Conteh was the mentor for UCLA medical professor Ross I. Donaldson in the summer of 2003 , and is the hero of Donaldson 's 2009 memoir , The Lassa Ward . 
 = = Publications = = 
 " Lassa Video " . Sierra Leone : Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , Special Pathogens Branch . 1989 . Appearance in documentary film . 
 Bausch , DG ; Rollin , PE ; <unk> , AH ; Coulibaly , M ; Kanu , J ; Conteh , AS ; Wagoner , KD ; McMullan , LK ; et al . ( 2000 ) . " Diagnosis and clinical virology of Lassa fever as evaluated by enzyme @-@ linked immunosorbent assay , indirect fluorescent @-@ antibody test , and virus isolation " . Journal of clinical microbiology 38 ( 7 ) : 2670 – 7 . PMC <unk> . PMID <unk> . 
 = Ordinances of 1311 = 
 The Ordinances of 1311 were a series of regulations imposed upon King Edward II by the peerage and clergy of the Kingdom of England to restrict the power of the king . The twenty @-@ one signatories of the Ordinances are referred to as the Lords Ordainers , or simply the Ordainers . English setbacks in the Scottish war , combined with perceived extortionate royal fiscal policies , set the background for the writing of the Ordinances in which the administrative prerogatives of the king were largely appropriated by a baronial council . The Ordinances reflect the Provisions of Oxford and the Provisions of Westminster from the late 1250s , but unlike the Provisions , the Ordinances featured a new concern with fiscal reform , specifically redirecting revenues from the king 's household to the exchequer . 
 Just as instrumental to their conception were other issues , particularly discontent with the king 's favourite , Piers Gaveston , whom the barons subsequently banished from the realm . Edward II accepted the Ordinances only under coercion , and a long struggle for their repeal ensued that did not end until Thomas of Lancaster – the leader of the Ordainers – was executed in 1322 . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Early problems = = = 
 When Edward II succeeded his father Edward I on 7 July 1307 , the attitude of his subjects was generally one of good will toward their new king . However , discontent was brewing beneath the surface . Some of this was due to existing problems left behind by the late king , while much was due to the new king 's inadequacies . The problems were threefold . First there was discontent with the royal policy for financing wars . To finance the war in Scotland , Edward I had increasingly resorted to so @-@ called prises – or purveyance – to provision the troops with victuals . Though a perfectly legitimate method of raising money , the peers felt that the purveyance had become far too burdensome and compensation was in many cases inadequate or missing entirely . In addition , they did not like the fact that Edward II took prises for his household without continuing the war effort against Scotland , causing the second problem . While Edward I had spent the last decade of his reign relentlessly campaigning against the Scots , his son abandoned the war almost entirely . In this situation , the Scottish king Robert Bruce soon took the opportunity to regain what had been lost . This not only exposed the north of England to Scottish attacks , but also jeopardized the possessions of the English baronage in Scotland . 
 The third and most serious problem concerned the king ’ s favourite , Piers Gaveston . Gaveston was a Gascon of relatively humble origins , with whom the king had developed a particularly close relationship . Among the honours Edward heaped upon Gaveston was the earldom of Cornwall , a title which had previously only been conferred on members of the royal family . The preferential treatment of an upstart like Gaveston , in combination with his behaviour that was seen as arrogant , led to resentment among the established peers of the realm . This resentment first came to the surface in a declaration written in Boulogne by a group of magnates who were with the king when he was in France for his marriage ceremony to the French king 's daughter . The so @-@ called Boulogne agreement was vague , but it expressed clear concern over the state of the royal court . On 25 February 1308 , the new king was crowned . The oath he was made to take at the coronation differed from that of previous kings in the fourth clause ; here Edward was required to promise to maintain the laws that the community " shall have chosen " ( " aura eslu " ) . Though it is unclear what exactly was meant by this wording at the time , this oath was later used in the struggle between the king and his earls . 
 = = = Gaveston ’ s exile = = = 
 In the parliament of April 1308 , it was decided that Gaveston should be banned from the realm upon threat of excommunication . The king had no choice but to comply , and on 24 June , Gaveston left the country on appointment as Lieutenant of Ireland . The king immediately started plotting for his favourite 's return . At the parliament of April 1309 , he suggested a compromise in which certain of the earls ' petitions would be met in exchange for Gaveston 's return . The plan came to nothing , but Edward had strengthened his hand for the Stamford parliament in July later that year by receiving a papal annulment of the threat of excommunication . The king agreed to the so @-@ called " Statute of Stamford " ( which in essence was a reissue of the Articuli super Cartas that his father had signed in 1300 ) , and Gaveston was allowed to return . 
 The earls who agreed to the compromise were hoping that Gaveston had learned his lesson . Yet upon his return , he behaved worse than ever , conferring insulting nicknames on some of the greater nobles . When the king summoned a great council in October , several of the earls refused to meet due to Gaveston ’ s presence . At the parliament of February in the following year , Gaveston was ordered not to attend . The earls disobeyed a royal order not to carry arms to parliament , and in full military attire presented a demand to the king for the appointment of a commission of reform . On 16 March 1310 , the king agreed to the appointment of Ordainers , who were to be in charge of the reform of the royal household . 
 = = The Lords Ordainers = = 
 The Ordainers were elected by an assembly of magnates , without representation from the commons . They were a diverse group , consisting of eight earls , seven bishops and six barons – twenty @-@ one in all . There were faithful royalists represented as well as fierce opponents of the king . 
 Among the Ordainers considered loyal to Edward II was John of Brittany , Earl of Richmond who was also by this time one of the older remaining earls . John had served Edward I , his uncle , and was Edward II 's first cousin . The natural leader of the group was Henry Lacy , Earl of Lincoln . One of the wealthiest men in the country , he was also the oldest of the earls and had proved his loyalty and <unk> through long service to Edward I. Lincoln had a moderating influence on the more extreme members of the group , but with his death in February 1311 , leadership passed to his son @-@ in @-@ law and heir Thomas of Lancaster . Lancaster – the king ’ s cousin – was now in possession of five earldoms which made him by far the wealthiest man in the country , save the king . There is no evidence that Lancaster was in opposition to the king in the early years of the king 's reign , but by the time of the Ordinances it is clear that something had negatively affected his opinion of King Edward . 
 Lancaster ’ s main ally was Guy Beauchamp , Earl of Warwick . Warwick was the most fervently and consistently antagonistic of the earls , and remained so until his early death in 1315 . Other earls were more amenable . Gilbert de Clare , Earl of Gloucester , was Gaveston ’ s brother @-@ in @-@ law and stayed loyal to the king . Aymer de Valence , Earl of Pembroke , would later be one of the king ’ s most central supporters , yet at this point he found the most prudent course of action was to go along with the reformers . Of the barons , at least Robert Clifford and William Marshall seemed to have royalist leanings . 
 Among the bishops , only two stood out as significant political figures , the more prominent of whom was Robert Winchelsey , Archbishop of Canterbury . Long a formidable presence in English public life , Winchelsey had led the struggle against Edward I to uphold the autonomy of the church , and for this he had paid with suspension and exile . One of Edward II ’ s first acts as king had been to reinstate Winchelsey , but rather than responding with grateful loyalty , the archbishop soon reassumed a leadership role in the fight against the king . Although he was trying to appease Winchelsey , the king carried an old grudge against another prelate , Walter Langton , Bishop of Lichfield . Edward had Langton dismissed from his position as treasurer of the Exchequer and had his temporal possessions confiscated . Langton had been an opponent of Winchelsey during the previous reign , but Edward II ’ s move against Langton drew the two Ordainers together . 
 = = The Ordinances = = 
 Six preliminary ordinances were released immediately upon the appointment of the Ordainers – on 19 March 1310 – but it was not until August 1311 that the committee had finished its work . In the meanwhile Edward had been in Scotland on an aborted campaign , but on 16 August , Parliament met in London , and the king was presented with the Ordinances . 
 The document containing the Ordinances is dated 5 October , and contains forty @-@ one articles . In the preamble , the Ordainers voiced their concern over what they perceived as the evil councilors of the king , the precariousness of the military situation abroad , and the danger of rebellion at home over the oppressive prises . The articles can be divided into different groups , the largest of which deals with limitations on the powers of the king and his officials , and the substitution of these powers with baronial control . It was ordained that the king should appoint his officers only " by the counsel and assent of the baronage , and that in parliament . " Furthermore , the king could no longer go to war without the consent of the baronage , nor could he make reforms of the coinage . Additionally , it was decided that parliament should be held at least once a year . Parallel to these decisions were reforms of the royal finances . The Ordinances banned what was seen as extortionate prises and customs , and at the same time declared that revenues were to be paid directly into the exchequer . This was a reaction to the rising trend of receiving revenues directly into the royal household ; making all royal finances accountable to the exchequer allowed greater public scrutiny . 
 Other articles dealt with punishing specific persons , foremost among these , Piers Gaveston . Article 20 describes at length the offenses committed by Gaveston ; he was once more condemned to exile and was to abjure the realm by 1 November . The bankers of the Italian Frescobaldi company were arrested , and their goods seized . It was held that the king ’ s great financial dependence on the Italians was politically unfortunate . The last individuals to be singled out for punishment were Henry de Beaumont and his sister , Isabella de <unk> , two foreigners associated with the king ’ s household . Though it is difficult to say why these two received particular mention , it could be related to the central position of their possessions in the Scottish war . 
 The Ordainers also took care to confirm and elaborate on existing statutes , and reforms were made to the criminal law . The liberties of the church were confirmed as well . To ensure that none of the Ordainers should be swayed in their decisions by bribes from the king , restrictions were made on what royal gifts and offices they were allowed to receive during their tenure . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Ordinances were published widely on 11 October , with the intention of obtaining maximum popular support . The decade following their publication saw a constant struggle over their repeal or continued existence . Although they were not finally repealed until May 1322 , the vigour with which they were enforced depended on who was in control of government . 
 Before the end of the year , Gaveston had returned to England , and civil war appeared imminent . In May 1312 , Gaveston was taken captive by the Earl of Pembroke , but Warwick and Lancaster had him abducted and executed after a mock trial . This affront to Pembroke ’ s honour drove him irrevocably into the camp of the king , and thereby split the opposition . The brutality of the act initially drove Lancaster and his adherents away from the centre of power , but the Battle of Bannockburn , in June 1314 , returned the initiative . Edward was humiliated by his disastrous defeat , while Lancaster and Warwick had not taken part in the campaign , claiming that it was carried out without the consent of the baronage , and as such in defiance of the Ordinances . 
 What followed was a period of virtual control of the government by Lancaster , yet increasingly – particularly after the death of Warwick in 1315 – he found himself isolated . In August 1318 , the so @-@ called " treaty of Leake " established a modus vivendi between the parties , whereby the king was restored to power while promising to uphold the Ordinances . Lancaster still had issue with the king though , particularly with the conduct of the new favourite , Hugh Despenser the younger , and his father , Hugh Despenser the elder . In 1322 , full rebellion broke out which ended with Lancaster ’ s defeat and execution at the Battle of Boroughbridge in March . At the parliament of May in the same year , the Ordinances were repealed . However , six clauses were retained that concerned such issues as household jurisdiction and appointment of sheriffs . Any restrictions on royal power were unequivocally annulled . 
 The Ordinances were never again reissued , and therefore hold no permanent position in the legal history of England in the way that Magna Carta , for instance , does . The criticism has been against the conservative focus of the barons ' role in national politics , ignoring the ascendancy of the commons . Yet the document , and the movement behind it , reflected new political developments in its emphasis on how assent was to be obtained by the barons in parliament . It was only a matter of time before it was generally acknowledged that the Commons were an integral part of that institution . 
 = We 're New Here = 
 We 're New Here is a remix album by American recording artist Gil Scott @-@ Heron and English music producer Jamie xx , released on February 21 , 2011 , by Young Turks and XL Recordings . A longtime fan of Scott @-@ Heron , Jamie xx was approached by XL label head Richard Russell to remix Scott @-@ Heron 's 2010 studio album I 'm New Here . He worked on the album while touring with his band The xx in 2010 and occasionally communicated with Scott @-@ Heron through letters for his approval to rework certain material . 
 Incorporating dubstep and UK garage styles , Jamie xx applied electronic music techniques in his production to remix Scott @-@ Heron 's vocals from the original album over his own instrumentals . Although it is structured similarly , We 're New Here eschews the original album 's stark style and lo @-@ fi production for bass @-@ driven , musically varied production and sonical illumination of Scott @-@ Heron 's vocals . It has been noted by music writers for <unk> Scott @-@ Heron 's narratives in Jamie xx 's own musical influences and tastes . 
 Although it did not chart in the United States , the album debuted at number 33 on the UK Albums Chart , on which it spent two weeks . It was promoted with a multi @-@ format release , including a limited edition box set , and the release of two singles , " NY Is Killing Me " and " I 'll Take Care of U " . We 're New Here received universal acclaim from critics upon its release . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following a period of personal and legal troubles with drug addiction , Gil Scott @-@ Heron recorded and released his first album of original material in sixteen years , I 'm New Here ( 2010 ) , with the assistance of XL Recordings @-@ label head Richard Russell . Produced by Russell , the album served as a departure from Scott @-@ Heron 's earlier work , both musically and thematically , eschewing its soul , jazz , and funk styles and social commentary for more personal , reflective lyrics with ruminations on love , loss , and identity , set to contemporary electronic music . It was well received by fans and music critics , who viewed it as a comeback for Scott @-@ Heron . 
 Russell , a fan of English indie pop band The xx , proposed the idea of remixing I 'm New Here to the band 's percussionist and producer Jamie xx . Russell 's production on I 'm New Here was heavily influenced by the xx 's self @-@ titled debut album , which showcased Jamie xx 's <unk> , beat @-@ oriented and minimalist production . After its success , Jamie xx had occupied himself with solo production work , remixing other artists , and DJing in clubs in the United Kingdom and Europe . He was a longtime fan of Scott @-@ Heron 's music , which had been introduced to him by his parents as a youth . Russell later said of his decision to enlist him , " We didn 't want lots of remixes by different people . That can be confusing . Gil was open to Jamie re @-@ interpreting the whole album " . According to Jamie xx , he himself had no point of reference in remixing another artist 's album , and later said of taking on the project , " It was a bit nerve @-@ wracking because this is the first time I 've ever done an album on my own . But I was really just eager to get at and I knew exactly what I wanted to do " . 
 = = Production = = 
 Although Scott @-@ Heron received top @-@ billing for the release , Jamie xx worked solely on the remix project . For We 're New Here , he remixed 13 of the original album 's 15 songs , including its " interlude " cuts , mixing Scott @-@ Heron 's vocal tracks from the original recording sessions over his own beats and instrumentals , rather than the original music . Many of the remixes were created by Jamie xx on his laptop , while on tour with The xx . In a March 2010 interview , he said that the label " gave me the parts and let me do whatever I want , so I 've been doing it on my laptop on tour . [ I 'm ] only using [ Gil 's ] vocals , I 'm not using any of the original music from it , which is very freeing " . On his intentions for the album 's music , he explained in an interview for The Irish Times , " I wanted it to sound like everything I had been listening to in London . I wanted it to sound like something you ’ d hear on pirate radio . You hear so many different genres , and it ’ s all so convoluted and mixed @-@ up , but it makes sense when you turn on the station " . 
 In addition to vocal tracks from I 'm New Here , Jamie xx mixed vocals from Scott @-@ Heron 's 1970s work . In an interview for Pitchfork Media , he explained his incorporation of these vocals and its meaning to the work as a whole , stating : 
 Although he was permitted by XL to remix I 'm New Here , Jamie xx wrote longhand letters to Scott @-@ Heron for his approval to rework the other vocal material : " Originally , I sent him the album and there were a couple of tracks he wasn 't sure about . I had to write to him — he does handwritten letters , not e @-@ mail — and explain why I wanted to use some of his older vocal tracks on the album ... So after I wrote him the letter , he said I was free to do whatever because he knew what I was doing " . Scott @-@ Heron was credited as a producer for the album , along with Russell and Malcolm Cecil , a producer and engineer on Scott @-@ Heron 's past work . The original vocals had been produced and engineered at Clinton Studios and Looking Glass Studios in New York . We 're New Here was mixed at London 's XL Studio , where additional recording also took place . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Similar to I 'm New Here , We 're New Here features 13 songs that include four interludes and is rhythmically stressed in sound . However , it contrasts the original album 's stark style and lo @-@ fi production with bass @-@ driven , musically varied production and sonical illumination of Scott @-@ Heron 's vocals . We 're New Here is considered a post @-@ dubstep work . In remixing the album , Jamie xx incorporated dubstep tones , dance @-@ influenced tempos , pitch @-@ shifted and sped @-@ up samples , wobble , sub @-@ bass , and drum ' n ' bass beats into the music . We 're New Here also contains elements of trance , house , techno , hip hop breakbeats , and electro music . Dan Hancox of The National noted in its sound " a melange of creaking bass hums , cascading UK garage drums and washes of electronic noise " . 
 According to Thom Jurek of Allmusic , " Richard Russell 's production on I 'm New Here kept Scott @-@ Heron 's voice front and center ; [ Jamie xx ] displaces it often , all but covering it with effects , beats , and pitched vocals in styles that cross the electronic music gamut " . Tim Noakes of Dazed & Confused describes the album as " [ his ] love letter to sample culture and the history of the UK electronic underground . Against [ Jamie xx ] ' s booming backdrop of sub bass breakdowns , obscure samples and two @-@ step rhythms , Scott @-@ Heron ’ s scarred poetic missives take on a more sinister edge " . Ian <unk> of Slate comments on the album 's music , " The beats and bass are classic dub [ ... ] and the use of stretched and pitched vocal samples cement the albums place in the ever @-@ developing dubstep cannon " . Music critic Max Feldman notes " smothering " bass lines and " robust " beats , and writes that the album performs a " balancing act between the avant @-@ garde end of the dubstep fallout " and " dance @-@ ability " . 
 The title track incorporates a sped @-@ up sample of Gloria Gaynor 's " Casanova Brown " , with an emphasis on the line " I was lonely and naïve " from the sample . " Running " has Scott @-@ Heron 's spoken word vocals scattered and repeated . " Ur Soul and Mine " samples the vocals from Rui da Silva 's house classic " Touch Me " , distorting the vocals in the song 's verse , but retaining its refrain . The densely produced " Home " features clattering snares , a heavily reverbed keyboard sample , a drum loop , and a vocal sample of Scott @-@ Heron singing the line " home is where the hatred is ... " , taken from the song of the same name from his 1971 album Pieces of a Man . BBC Online 's Ele Beattie said that Jamie xx 's sampling " tunes the listener in and out of his musical predecessors . He <unk> a personal musical canon into something utterly contemporary " . Robert Christgau characterizes Scott @-@ Heron 's original narratives as those of " a drug fiend of considerable perversity and tremendous intelligence who 's gonna be dead soon " , and comments that Jamie xx " hears in [ Scott @-@ Heron 's ] last testament an irreversible disintegration that he translates into heavily sampled minimalist electro marked indelibly by Scott @-@ Heron 's weariness , arrogance , and wit . " 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 We 're New Here was released by Young Turks and XL Recordings on February 21 , 2011 , in the United Kingdom , and on February 22 , 2011 , in the United States . It was released on multiple formats , including CD , vinyl LP , vinyl box set , and digital download . Its limited edition box set release was made available via the album 's official website and included the LP on pink heavyweight vinyl , an LP of instrumentals on green heavyweight vinyl , CDs of both the standard and instrumental album , and two photographic prints . Prior to its release , We 're New Here had been made available for streaming via The Guardian website on February 14 . 
 The album 's first single , " NY Is Killing Me " , was released digitally on November 30 , 2010 , and on January 10 , 2011 , as a limited edition one @-@ sided 12 @-@ inch single . Sean Michaels of The Guardian wrote of the song , " Ghostly samples rise around Scott @-@ Heron 's vocals , combining the poet 's inner @-@ city canvas with [ Jamie xx ] ' s dubstep roots . It 's as good as anything the DJ has produced " . The second single " I 'll Take Care of U " was released on January 6 , 2011 . It features euphoric , house @-@ inspired piano hooks and echoing guitar riffs . A music video for the single was directed by photographer Jamie @-@ James Medina and AG Rojas , and it was released on March 4 , 2011 . Set in New York City , the video 's plot follows a female boxer as she takes care of her child and trains for a fight . 
 We 're New Here debuted at number 33 on the UK Albums Chart in the week ending March 5 , 2011 . It also entered at number four on the UK Indie Chart and at number 18 on the Digital Chart . The album dropped to number 60 on the UK Albums Chart in its second week , and fell off the chart in its third week of release . We 're New Here did not chart in the United States . In Belgium , the album debuted at number 44 and subsequently spent five weeks on the Ultratop 50 Albums chart . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 We 're New Here received widespread acclaim from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the album received an average score of 83 , based on 28 reviews . AllMusic 's Thom Jurek called it " a mercurial collaboration ... full of nods to other club styles and eras " , and praised Jamie xx for " successfully ( re ) presenting Scott @-@ Heron 's music — integrity intact — in the present tense to a fickle yet discerning groove @-@ centric culture without kitsch or excess " . Chris Martins from The A.V. Club praised " the everlasting gravity of [ Scott @-@ Heron ] ’ s words and wisdom " , writing that " his pained , bluesy musings are as universally human as they are perennially pertinent ... Scott @-@ Heron talks , sings , hums , and pontificates , sometimes over the beat and sometimes from deep within the snowdrift " . Pitchfork Media critic Sean Fennessey commended Jamie xx for being bold rather than respectful of Scott @-@ Heron 's material with a " finicky , hard @-@ charging production [ that ] trumps Scott @-@ Heron 's voice , overpowering it with ideas , if not focus " . Ben Ratliff of The New York Times said that the album is an improvement over " the bummed @-@ out original " with " patience and breadth and almost zero pretension " . Max Feldman from PopMatters commented that " Ultimately , We ’ re New Here succeeds because it manages to seamlessly reconcile the different traditions from which it draws — not just Gil Scott Heron ’ s uttering utterances , but UK Garage , the fibrous gloss of Seventeen Seconds @-@ era The Cure , and R & B futurism " . 
 In a mixed review for The Observer , Kitty Empire wrote that Jamie xx " tear [ s ] up Russell 's <unk> entirely and showcase [ s ] his own emerging versatility " , but said that while his productions are " consistently excellent , they aren 't really there to augment Scott @-@ Heron 's words " . Andy Gill of The Independent commented that the remixing techniques " only occasionally work in its favour " . Louise <unk> of NME wrote that he " coaxes fresh narratives from the source material " and that it " isn ’ t exactly groundbreaking , but it showcases a producer so in love with the music of now that he not only preserves the power of his source material , but makes it more relevant " . In MSN Music , Christgau called the record " a young man 's bad dream about mortality , and of interest as such " , and wrote of the source material 's importance to Jamie xx 's remix , " the snatches of Scott @-@ Heron 's voice , cracked for sure but deeper than night nonetheless , delivers it from callow generalization and foregone conclusion . " August Brown of the Los Angeles Times felt that " the duo lends each other gravitas and levity on this very curious but ultimately immersive LP " . 
 At the end of 2011 , , Uncut magazine named We 're New Here the 32nd best album of the year . Christgau ranked it 20th on his list of the year 's best albums for The Barnes & Noble Review . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = = Sample credits = = = 
 " I 'm New Here " contains a sample of the recording " Casanova Brown " as performed by Gloria Gaynor . 
 " I 've Been Me ( Interlude ) " contains a sample of " Boxcar Hobo " by <unk> . 
 " Certain Things ( Interlude ) " contains a sample of the recording " Slaves " as performed by Giuliano <unk> . 
 " The <unk> " contains excerpts from " That 's How Heartaches Are Made " as performed by Baby Washington . 
 " Ur Soul and Mine " contains a sample of " Touch Me " by Rui da Silva . 
 " Parents ( Interlude ) " contains a sample of " Hap 'nin ' " , written by Bernard Purdie . 
 " Jazz ( Interlude ) " contains a sample of the recording " Sixty @-@ Eight Ways " . 
 = = Personnel = = 
