 Malcolm Cecil – engineer , producer , synthesizer programming 
 Romy Madley Croft – guitar 
 Jamie xx – additional production , design , musician , remixing 
 Royce Jeffries – assistant 
 Phil Lee – design 
 Rodaidh McDonald – engineer , mixing 
 <unk> <unk> – engineer , mixing 
 Mandy Parnell – mastering 
 Mischa Richter – photography 
 Richard Russell – vocal producer 
 Gil Scott @-@ Heron – vocal producer , vocals 
 Lawson White – engineer , mixing 
 = = Charts = = 
 = The Wiz ( film ) = 
 The Wiz is a 1978 American musical adventure film produced in collaboration between Universal Pictures and Motown Productions , and released by Universal Pictures on October 24 , 1978 . An urban reimagining of L. Frank Baum 's classic 1900 children 's novel The Wonderful Wizard of Oz featuring an entirely African @-@ American cast , The Wiz was loosely adapted from the 1974 Broadway musical of the same name . The film follows the adventures of Dorothy , a shy twenty @-@ four @-@ year @-@ old Harlem , New York City , schoolteacher who finds herself magically transported to the urban fantasy Land of Oz , which resembles an alternative fantasy version of the Big Apple . <unk> by a Scarecrow , a Tin Man , and a Cowardly Lion , she travels through the city to seek an audience with the mysterious Wiz , who they say is the only one powerful enough to send her home . 
 Produced by Rob Cohen and directed by Sidney Lumet , The Wiz stars Diana Ross , Michael Jackson , Nipsey Russell , Ted Ross , Mabel King , Theresa Merritt , Thelma Carpenter , Lena Horne , and Richard Pryor . The film 's story was reworked from William F. Brown 's Broadway libretto by Joel Schumacher , and Quincy Jones supervised the adaptation of Charlie Smalls and Luther Vandross 's songs for film . A handful of new songs , written by Jones and the songwriting team of Nickolas Ashford & Valerie Simpson , were added for the film version . Upon its original theatrical release , The Wiz was a critical and commercial failure , and marked the end of the resurgence of African @-@ American films that began with the blaxploitation movement of the early 1970s . Despite its initial failure , the film version of The Wiz became a cult classic , particularly among African @-@ American audiences , Oz enthusiasts , and fans of Michael Jackson . Certain aspects of this film adaptation influenced the The Wiz Live ! , a live television adaptation of the musical . 
 = = Summary = = 
 A crowded Thanksgiving dinner brings a host of family together in a small Harlem apartment , where a shy , twenty @-@ four @-@ year @-@ old schoolteacher named Dorothy ( Diana Ross ) lives with her Aunt Em ( Theresa Merritt ) and Uncle Henry ( Stanley Greene ) . Extremely introverted , Dorothy is teased by Aunt Em for never having been south of 125th Street , as she has delayed moving out to start her own , independent life as an adult . 
 While Dorothy cleans up after the meal , Dorothy 's dog Toto runs out the open kitchen door into a violent snowstorm . She succeeds in retrieving him , but finds herself trapped in the storm . A magical whirlwind made of snow – the work of Glinda , the Good Witch of the South – materializes and transports them to the realm of Oz . Released by the snowstorm , Dorothy smashes through an electric " Oz " sky sign as she descends from the atmosphere , and which falls upon and kills Evermean , the Wicked Witch of the East who rules Munchkinland . As a result , Dorothy frees the Munchkins who populate the playground into which she lands ; they had been transformed by Evermean into graffiti for " tagging " the park walls . 
 Dorothy soon meets the Munchkins ' main benefactress , Miss One , the Good Witch of the North ( Thelma Carpenter ) , a magical " numbers runner " who gives Evermean 's pretty charmed silver slippers to her by teleporting them on Dorothy 's feet . However , Dorothy declares she doesn 't want the shoes and desperately just wants to get home to Aunt Em . Miss One urges her to follow the yellow brick road to the capital Emerald City and seek the help of the mysterious " Wizard " who she believes holds the power to send Dorothy back to Harlem . After telling her to never take the silver shoes off , the good witch and the Munchkins then disappear and Dorothy is left to search for the road on her own . 
 The next morning , Dorothy happens upon a Scarecrow ( Michael Jackson ) made of garbage and rags , and saves him from being viciously teased and picked on by a group of humanoid crows and whom she befriends . The two of them discover the yellow brick road and happily begin to follow it together . The Scarecrow hopes the Wizard might be able to give him the one thing he feels that he lacks – a brain . Along the way to the Emerald City , Dorothy , Toto , and the Scarecrow meet the Tin Man ( Nipsey Russell ) , in an abandoned turn @-@ of @-@ the @-@ century amusement park and the Cowardly Lion ( Ted Ross ) , a vain dandy banished from the jungle who hid inside one of the stone lions in front of the New York Public Library . The Tin Man and Lion join them on their quest to find the Wizard , hoping to gain a heart and courage , respectively . Before the five adventurers reach the Emerald City , they must face obstacles such as a deadly subway where they meet a crazy subway peddler ( a homeless man ) who unleashes evil puppets in his control . They narrowly escape the subway and then encounter the " Poppy " Girls ( a reference to the poppy field from the original story ) , flamboyant prostitutes who attempt to put Dorothy , Toto , and the Lion into an eternal sleep with magic poppy perfume . 
 Finally reaching the Emerald City ( an analogue of the real @-@ life World Trade Center plaza ) , the quintet gains passage into the city because of Dorothy 's ownership of the silver slippers ; they marvel at the spectacle of the city and its sophisticated , fashion forward dancers . They are granted an audience with the Wiz ( Richard Pryor ) , who lives at the very top of the Towers . He appears to them as a giant fire @-@ breathing metallic head . He will only grant their wishes if they kill the sister of the Wicked Witch of the East , Evillene ( Mabel King ) , the Wicked Witch of the West , who runs a sweatshop in the underground sewers of Oz . Before they can reach her domain , Evillene learns of their quest to kill her and sends out the Flying Monkeys ( a motorcycle gang ) to kidnap them . 
 After a long chase , the Flying Monkeys succeed in capturing their targets and bring them back to Evillene . <unk> for Dorothy having killed her sister , she dismembers the Scarecrow , flattens the Tin Man , and tortures the Lion in hopes of making Dorothy give her the silver shoes . When she threatens to throw Toto into a fiery cauldron , Dorothy nearly gives in until the Scarecrow hints to her to activate a fire sprinkler switch , which she does . The sprinklers put out the fire but also melt Evillene . She is flushed down into her throne , the lid of which slams shut like a toilet . With Evillene finally gone , her spells lose their power : the Winkies are freed from their permanent costumes ( revealing attractive humans underneath ) and their sweatshop tools disappear . They rejoice in dance and praise Dorothy as their <unk> . The Flying Monkeys give her and her friends a triumphant ride back to the Emerald City . 
 Upon arriving , the quartet takes a back door into the Wizard 's quarters and discovers that he is a " phony " . The " great and powerful Oz " is actually Herman Smith , a failed politician from Atlantic City , New Jersey , who was transported to Oz when a balloon he was flying to promote his campaign to become the city <unk> was lost in a storm . The Scarecrow , Tin Man , and Lion are distraught that they will never receive their respective brain , heart , and courage , but Dorothy makes them realize that they already have had these things all along . Just as it seems as if she will never be able to get home , Glinda the Good Witch of the South ( Lena Horne ) , appears and implores her to find her way home by searching within and using the magic of the silver slippers by clicking the heels together three times . After thanking Glinda and saying goodbye to her friends , she takes Toto in her arms , thinks of home and the things she loves most about it . When Dorothy clicks her heels , she immediately finds herself back in her neighborhood of Harlem . Now a changed woman , Dorothy carries Toto back to their apartment building ; implying she now has the strength to face her fears and move forward with her life . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Songs = = 
 All songs written by Charlie Smalls , unless otherwise noted . 
 " Overture Part I " ( instrumental ) 
 " Overture Part II " ( instrumental ) 
 " The Feeling That We Had " - Aunt Em and Chorus 
 " Can I Go On ? " ( Quincy Jones , Nickolas Ashford and Valerie Simpson ) - Dorothy 
 " Tornado " / " Glinda 's Theme " ( instrumental ) 
 " He 's the Wizard " - Miss One and Chorus 
 " Soon As I Get Home " / " Home " - Dorothy 
 " You Can 't Win , You Can 't Break Even " - Scarecrow and The Four Crows 
 " Ease on Down the Road # 1 " - Dorothy and Scarecrow 
 " What Would I Do If I Could Feel ? " - Tin Man 
 " Slide Some Oil to Me " - Tin Man 
 " Ease on Down the Road # 2 " - Dorothy , Scarecrow , and Tin Man 
 " I 'm a Mean Ole Lion " - Cowardly Lion 
 " Ease on Down the Road # 3 " - Dorothy , Scarecrow , Tin Man , and Cowardly Lion 
 " Poppy Girls Theme " ( Anthony Jackson ) ( instrumental ) 
 " Be a Lion " - Dorothy , Scarecrow , Tin Man , and Cowardly Lion 
 " End of the Yellow Brick Road " ( instrumental ) 
 " Emerald City Sequence " ( music : Jones , lyrics : Smalls ) - Chorus 
 " Is This What Feeling Gets ? ( Dorothy 's Theme ) " ( music : Jones , lyrics : Ashford & Simpson ) - Dorothy ( vocal version not used in film ) 
 " Don 't Nobody Bring Me No Bad News " - Evillene and the Winkies 
 " Everybody Rejoice / A Brand New Day " ( Luther Vandross ) - Dorothy , Scarecrow , Tin Man , Cowardly Lion , and Chorus 
 " Believe in Yourself ( Dorothy ) " - Dorothy 
 " The Good Witch Glinda " ( instrumental ) 
 " Believe in Yourself ( Reprise ) " - Glinda the Good Witch 
 " Home ( Finale ) " - Dorothy 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ production and development = = = 
 The Wiz was the eighth feature film produced by Motown Productions , the film / TV division of Berry Gordy 's Motown Records label . Gordy originally wanted the teenaged future R & B singer Stephanie Mills , who had played the role on Broadway , to be cast as Dorothy . When Motown star Diana Ross asked Gordy if she could be cast as Dorothy , he declined , saying that Ross — then 33 years old — was too old for the role . Ross went around Gordy and convinced executive producer Rob Cohen at Universal Pictures to arrange a deal where he would produce the film if Ross was cast as Dorothy . Gordy and Cohen agreed to the deal . Pauline Kael , a film critic , described Ross 's efforts to get the film into production as " perhaps the strongest example of sheer will in film history . " 
 After film director John Badham learned that Ross was going to play the part of Dorothy , he decided not to direct the film , and Cohen replaced him with Sidney Lumet . Of his decision not to direct The Wiz , John Badham recalled telling Cohen that he thought Ross was " a wonderful singer . She 's a terrific actress and a great dancer , but she 's not this character . She 's not the little six @-@ year @-@ old girl Dorothy in The Wizard of Oz . " Though 20th Century Fox had financially backed the stage musical , they ended up exercising their first refusal rights to the film production , which gave Universal an opening to finance the film . Initially , Universal was so excited about the film 's prospects that they did not set a budget for production . 
 Joel Schumacher 's script for The Wiz was influenced by Werner Erhard 's teachings and his Erhard Seminars Training ( " est " ) movement , as both Schumacher and Diana Ross were " very enamored of Werner Erhard " . " Before I knew it , " said Rob Cohen , " the movie was becoming an est @-@ ian fable full of est buzzwords about knowing who you are and sharing and all that . I hated the script a lot . But it was hard to argue with [ Ross ] because she was recognizing in this script all of this stuff that she had worked out in est seminars . " Schumacher spoke positively of the results of the est training , stating that he was " eternally grateful for learning that I was responsible for my life . " However , he also complained that " everybody stayed exactly the way they were and went around spouting all this bull * * * * . " Of est and Erhard references in the film itself , The Grove Book of Hollywood notes that the speech delivered by Glinda the Good Witch at the end of the film was " a litany of est @-@ like platitudes " , and the book also makes est comparisons to the song " Believe in Yourself " . Although Joel Schumacher had seen the Broadway play before writing the script , none of the Broadway play 's writing was incorporated into the film 's . 
 During production , Lumet felt that the finished film would be " an absolutely unique experience that nobody has ever witnessed before . " When asked about any possible influence from MGM 's popular 1939 film adaptation of The Wizard of Oz , Lumet stated that " there was nothing to be gained from [ the 1939 film ] other than to make certain we didn 't use anything from it . They made a brilliant movie , and even though our concept is different – they 're Kansas , we 're New York ; they 're white , we 're black , and the score and the books are totally different – we wanted to make sure that we never overlapped in any area . " 
 Michael Jackson , a former Motown star who by the start of development on The Wiz in 1977 , had left Motown for Epic Records with his brothers The Jacksons , was cast as the Scarecrow . Jackson was dedicated to the role , and watched videotapes of gazelles , cheetahs , and panthers in order to learn graceful movements for his part . Ted Ross and Mabel King were brought in to reprise their respective roles from the stage musical , while Nipsey Russell was cast as the Tin Man . Lena Horne , mother @-@ in @-@ law to Sidney Lumet during the time of production , was cast as Glinda the Good Witch , and comedian Richard Pryor portrayed The Wiz . 
 = = = Principal photography = = = 
 The Wiz was filmed at Astoria Studios in Queens , New York . The decaying New York State Pavilion from the 1964 New York World 's Fair was used as the set for Munchkinland , <unk> at Coney Island was used for the Tinman scene with The Cyclone as a backdrop , while the World Trade Center served as the Emerald City . The scenes filmed at the Emerald City were elaborate , utilizing 650 dancers , 385 crew members and 1 @,@ 200 costumes . Costume designer Tony Walton enlisted the help of high fashion designers in New York City for the Emerald City sequence , and obtained exotic costumes and fabric from designers such as Oscar de la Renta and Norma Kamali . Albert Whitlock created the film 's visual special effects , while Stan Winston served as the head makeup artist . 
 Quincy Jones was the musical supervisor and music producer for the film . He later wrote that he initially did not want to work on the film , but did it as a favor to Sidney Lumet . The film production marked Jones ' first time working with Michael Jackson , and Jones would later produce three hit albums for Jackson : Off the Wall , Thriller , and Bad . Jones recalled working with Jackson as one of his favorite experiences from The Wiz , and spoke of Jackson 's dedication to his role , comparing his acting style to Sammy Davis , Jr . Jones had a brief cameo during the " Gold " segment of the Emerald City sequence , playing what looks like a fifty @-@ foot grand piano . 
 = = Commercial reaction = = 
 The Wiz proved to be a commercial failure , as the $ 24 million production only earned $ 13 @.@ 6 million at the box office . Though prerelease television broadcast rights had been sold to CBS for over $ 10 million , in the end , the film produced a net loss of $ 10 @.@ 4 million for Motown and Universal . At the time , it was the most expensive film musical ever made . The film 's failure steered Hollywood studios away from producing the all @-@ black film projects that had become popular during the blaxploitation era of the early to mid @-@ 1970s for several years . 
 The film was released on VHS home video in 1989 by MCA / Universal Home Video ( with a reissue in 1992 ) and was first broadcast on television on CBS on May 5 , 1984 ( edited to 100 minutes ) , to capitalize on Michael Jackson 's massive popularity at the time . It continues to be broadcast periodically on networks such as BET , <unk> , VH1 Soul , and was the inaugural broadcast on the Bounce TV digital broadcast network . The Wiz is often broadcast on Thanksgiving Day ( attributed to the opening scene of Dorothy 's family gathered for a Thanksgiving dinner ) . 
 The film was released on DVD in 1999 ; a remastered version entitled The Wiz : 30th Anniversary Edition was released in 2008 . Extras on both DVD releases include a 1978 featurette about the film 's production and the original theatrical trailer . A Blu @-@ ray version was released in 2010 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Critics panned The Wiz upon its October 1978 release . Many reviewers directed their criticism at Diana Ross , who they believed was far too old to play Dorothy . Most agreed that what had worked so successfully on stage simply did not translate well to the screen . Hischak 's Through the Screen Door : What Happened to the Broadway Musical When It Went to Hollywood criticized " Joel Schumacher 's <unk> screenplay " , and called " Believe in Yourself " the score 's weakest song . He described Diana Ross 's portrayal of Dorothy as : " cold , neurotic and oddly unattractive " ; and noted that the film was " a critical and box office bust " . In his work History of the American Cinema , <unk> characterized the film as " one of the decade 's biggest failures " , and , " the year 's biggest musical flop " . The Grove Book of Hollywood noted that " the picture finished off Diana Ross 's screen career " , as the film was Ross 's final theatrical feature . In his book Blockbuster , Tom Shone referred to The Wiz as " expensive crud " . In the book Mr. and Mrs. Hollywood , the author criticized the script , noting , " The Wiz was too scary for children , and too silly for adults . " Ray Bolger , who played the Scarecrow in the 1939 The Wizard of Oz film , did not think highly of The Wiz , stating " The Wiz is overblown and will never have the universal appeal that the classic MGM musical has obtained . " 
 Michael Jackson 's performance as the Scarecrow was one of the only positively reviewed elements of the film , with critics noting that Jackson possessed " genuine acting talent " and " provided the only genuinely memorable moments . " Of the results of the film , Jackson stated : " I don 't think it could have been any better , I really don 't . " In 1980 , Jackson stated that his time working on The Wiz was " my greatest experience so far . . . I 'll never forget that . " The film received a positive critique for its elaborate set design , and the book American Jewish Filmmakers noted that it " features some of the most imaginative adaptations of New York locales since the glory days of the Astaire @-@ Rogers films . " In a 2004 review of the film , Christopher Null wrote positively of Ted Ross and Richard Pryor 's performances . However , Null 's overall review of the film was critical , and he wrote that other than the song " Ease on Down the Road " , " the rest is an acid trip of bad dancing , garish sets , and a Joel Schumacher @-@ scripted mess that runs 135 agonizing minutes . " A 2005 piece by Hank Stuever in The Washington Post described the film as " a rather appreciable delight , even when it 's a mess " , and felt that the singing – especially Diana Ross 's – was " a marvel " . 
 The New York Times analyzed the film within a discussion of the genre of blaxploitation : " As the audience for blaxploitation dwindled , it seemed as if Car Wash and The Wiz might be the last gasp of what had been a steadily expanding black presence in mainstream filmmaking . " The St. Petersburg Times noted , " Of course , it only took one flop like The Wiz ( 1978 ) to give Hollywood an excuse to retreat to safer ( i.e. , whiter ) creative ground until John Singleton and Spike Lee came along . Yet , without blaxploitation there might not have been another generation of black filmmakers , no Denzel Washington or Angela Bassett , or they might have taken longer to emerge . " The Boston Globe commented , " the term ' black film ' should be struck from the critical vocabulary . To appreciate just how outmoded , deceptive and limiting it is , consider the following , all of which have been described as black films , . . . " and characterized The Wiz in a list which also featured 1970s films Shaft , Blacula , and Super Fly . 
 Despite its lack of critical or commercial success in its original release , The Wiz became a cult classic , especially because it features Michael Jackson 's only starring theatrical film role . 
 = = Nominations = = 
 The Wiz was nominated for four Academy Awards : Best Art Direction ( Tony Walton , Philip Rosenberg , Edward Stewart , Robert Drumheller ) , Best Costume Design , Best Original Music Score and Best Cinematography , but did not win any of them . 
 = Rampart Dam = 
 The Rampart Dam or Rampart Canyon Dam was a project proposed in 1954 by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to dam the Yukon River in Alaska for hydroelectric power . The project was planned for Rampart Canyon ( also known as Rampart Gorge ) just 31 miles ( 50 km ) southwest of the village of Rampart , Alaska and about 105 miles ( 169 km ) west @-@ northwest of Fairbanks , Alaska . 
 The resulting dam would have created a lake roughly the size of Lake Erie , making it the largest man @-@ made reservoir in the world . The plan for the dam itself called for a concrete structure 530 feet ( 162 m ) high with a top length of about 4 @,@ 700 feet ( 1 @,@ 430 m ) . The proposed power facilities would have consistently generated between 3 @.@ 5 and 5 gigawatts of electricity , based on the flow of the river as it differs between winter and summer . 
 Though supported by many politicians and businesses in Alaska , the project was canceled after objections were raised . Native Alaskans in the area protested the threatened loss of nine villages that would be flooded by the dam . Conservation groups abhorred the threatened flooding of the Yukon Flats , a large area of wetlands that provides a critical breeding ground for millions of waterfowl . Fiscal conservatives opposed the dam on the grounds of its large cost and limited benefit to Americans outside Alaska . 
 Because of these objections , United States Secretary of the Interior Stewart Udall formally opposed construction of the dam in 1967 , and the project was shelved . The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers nevertheless completed its engineering study of the project in 1971 , and the final report was released to the public in 1979 . In 1980 , U.S. President Jimmy Carter created the Yukon Flats National Wildlife Sanctuary , which formally protected the area from development and disallowed any similar project . 
 = = Site = = 
 From its headwaters in the Coast Mountains , the Yukon River flows northwest , across the Yukon – Alaska border , until it intersects the Porcupine River at the settlement of Fort Yukon . At that point , the river turns west and southwest , flowing through the Yukon Flats , a low @-@ lying wetland area containing thousands of ponds , streams , and other small bodies of water . As the river flows southwest , it intersects the Tanana and Koyukuk rivers before looping south , then north into Norton Sound in the Bering Sea . 
 During the river 's flow through eastern Alaska , and before it intersects the Tanana River , the Yukon flows through the Central Plateau region of Alaska . During the millions of years of its flow , it has cut through ridges , forming canyons in some places near its juncture with the Tanana . One of the deepest of these canyons is known as Rampart Gorge , or Rampart Canyon . The gorge is located 31 miles ( 50 km ) downstream of the village of Rampart , 36 miles ( 58 km ) upstream of the village of Tanana , and immediately downstream from the mouth of Texas Creek . It is named for the nearby village of Rampart , Alaska , a former gold @-@ mining community now home to subsistence fishermen . 
 At the proposed dam site , the river is 1 @,@ 300 feet ( 396 m ) wide and has an elevation of 183 feet ( 56 m ) above sea level . On the south bank , the land rises sharply to a ridge 1 @,@ 500 feet ( 457 m ) high . North of the river , the bank rises to 1 @,@ 200 feet ( 366 m ) before ascending gradually northwest to the Ray Mountains . Below the surface of the ground are patches of permafrost , and the area is seismically active . An earthquake measuring 6 @.@ 8 on the Richter Scale struck the region in 1968 , and a 5 @.@ 0 earthquake hit the area in 2003 . Geologically , igneous rock predominates , and quartz can be seen in places . 
 <unk> , the portion of the river upstream of the proposed dam drains about 200 @,@ 000 square miles ( 517 @,@ 998 km2 ) . On average , the Yukon flows at a rate of 118 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 3 @,@ 341 m3 / s ) through the canyon , with the fastest flow occurring in the later part of May and the first part of June , and the slowest flow occurring after the river has frozen over . This occurs no later than early November and lasts until mid April . 
 = = Surveying = = 
 In 1944 , the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers considered building a bridge across Rampart Gorge as part of a project to extend the Alaska Railroad from Fairbanks to Nome to facilitate Lend @-@ Lease shipments to the Soviet Union during World War II . The war ended before the project got beyond the planning stages , and the bridge idea was scrapped . 
 As early as 1948 , U.S. Government officials eyed the Rampart site for its hydroelectric potential . A report by Joseph Morgan , chief of the Alaska Investigations Office for the United States Bureau of Reclamation declared , " The demand for electric power supply in the [ Alaska ] Territory is expanding so rapidly that new installations of hydroelectric power plants are needed . " Morgan 's report listed 72 potential hydroelectric power sites in Alaska , but the Rampart site was one of the few to have a potential capacity of more than 200 @,@ 000 kilowatts . 
 In his report , Morgan addresses the potential of the site : 
 Reconnaissance topography indicates several potential dam sites in Lower Ramparts , but the best site probably will be found about 31 miles ( 50 km ) downstream from the village of Rampart . ... this site on the Yukon River would easily be one of the major potential hydroelectric power developments in North America . 
 = = Planning = = 
 The first serious consideration of a dam project was made in a 1954 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers assessment of the resources of the Yukon and <unk> River basin . Engineers considered Rampart Canyon to be a prime site for a hydroelectric dam . In April 1959 , four months after President Dwight D. Eisenhower signed Alaska 's declaration of statehood , junior U.S. Senator from Alaska Ernest Gruening passed a resolution calling for the Corps of Engineers to begin an official study of the project , and $ 49 @,@ 000 was allocated by the federal government for that purpose . Preliminary estimates said the project would cost $ 900 million ( 1959 dollars ) and generate 4 @.@ 7 million kilowatts of electricity . At the time , the largest hydroelectric project in Alaska was the <unk> Dam , which produced just 32 @,@ 000 kilowatts . 
 The project competed with the smaller @-@ scale Susitna Hydroelectric Project proposed by the Federal Bureau of Reclamation for south @-@ central Alaska , but thanks to Gruening 's support and that of other backers , the Rampart project took precedence . The Rivers and Harbors Act of 1960 passed by the U.S. Congress in that year included a $ 2 million appropriation to conduct a full four @-@ year feasibility study of the project , including its economic feasibility and the impact it would have on fish and wildlife . In March 1961 , a team of engineers from the Corps ' Alaska district began drilling operations at the site to determine bedrock depth and gather other data . In order to examine the economic feasibility of the dam , the Corps of Engineers created the Rampart Economic Advisory Board ( REAB ) in February 1961 . The REAB hired David E. Lilienthal 's Development and Resources Corporation in April to complete the study , and a team of Corps engineers and REAB members arrived in the state in June to study the Rampart project first @-@ hand . At that time , Sen. Gruening estimated that the project would cost roughly $ 1 @.@ 2 billion to complete . 
 As investigation and planning work continued , the Corps of Engineers reached an agreement with the Department of the Interior , the parent agency of the Bureau of Reclamation , in March 1962 . The agreement stated the Corps would have responsibility for design and construction of the project , while the Interior Department would be responsible for running and maintaining the dam after completion . In the planning stages , the Interior Department also would be responsible for examining the economic feasibility of the project and its effect upon natural resources . This agreement negated much of the work of the REAB to that point , as the Interior Department promptly began its own three @-@ year study of the dam 's economic feasibility and environmental impact . The DRC report , though trumped by the Interior Department 's new precedence in such matters , nevertheless released a report in April 1962 , stating that the project was economically feasible and would attract new industries to Alaska . Meanwhile , the Corps of Engineers continued engineering studies . 
 The interim Corps of Engineers report was released in December 1963 , and reported that building the dam was feasible from an engineering standpoint . President John F. Kennedy supported the project , and lobbied for an appropriation of $ 197 @,@ 000 ( 1963 dollars ) to continue study of the project . The needed money was included in a House appropriations bill , and studies continued . The initial report included some figures about the size of the project . The dam would be a concrete structure 530 feet ( 162 m ) high and about 4 @,@ 700 feet ( 1 @,@ 430 m ) long . It would raise the height of the Yukon River from 215 feet ( 66 m ) above sea level to approximately 445 feet ( 136 m ) . The resulting reservoir would be 400 miles ( 640 km ) long , 80 miles ( 130 km ) wide , and have a surface area greater than that of Lake Erie . The power facilities for the project would produce a maximum of 5 gigawatts of electricity . In total , the proposed reservoir was anticipated to cover an area of 10 @,@ 700 square miles ( 27 @,@ 700 km2 ) and have a capacity of 1 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 1 @,@ 600 km3 ) . 
 In April 1964 , the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service ( FWS ) released its report on the project . Though only a part of the larger Department of the Interior study , the FWS report came down strongly opposed to the dam on the grounds that it would irrevocably destroy the Yukon Flats , a critical waterfowl breeding ground . In January 1965 , the Bureau of Land Management set aside almost 9 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 3 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 ha ) of land for construction of the dam and reservoir . It was a typical process that had been done for other dam projects several times before , but the amount of land to be set aside generated several months of hearings before the decision . 
 In June 1964 the Natural Resources Council asked Stephen H. Spurr , dean of the Graduate School of the University of Michigan and an authority on forestry and forest ecology , to form a group to evaluate the proposed Rampart Dam . The Spurr report determined that the scenarios offered as justification for the project were overly optimistic with respect to Alaska ’ s projected long @-@ term population growth , its per capita use of electricity , and the predicted rate of entry of <unk> industries like the aluminum industry ( which had substantial power requirements ) into Alaska . Moreover , the proposed dam would have greatly reduced the catch of five species of Pacific salmon , especially the chinook ( king ) , chum ( dog ) and coho ( silver ) salmon . It would also eliminate vast numbers of migratory waterfowl , including an estimated 1 @.@ 5 million ducks and 12 @,@ 500 geese that migrated annually from the Yukon flats . There would also have been a sharp decline in both large mammals - the moose , black and grizzly bear , and caribou - and smaller mammals : muskrats , mink , beavers , and river otters in aquatic habitats , and marten , wolverines , weasels , lynx , snowshoe hares , red fox and red squirrels in terrestrial or upland habitats . Spurr ’ s report noted : " [ It ] is a truism of wildlife ecology that displacement of a population from the area where it normally lives is tantamount to eliminating it completely . Adjoining habitats ordinarily are carrying all the wildlife that the local resources will support . In short , loss of habitat is synonymous with loss of the animal population supported by the inundated habitat . " 
 In March 1966 Spurr ’ s team issued its final report , finding that the dam was not a cost @-@ effective investment . 
 In January 1965 , the Department of the Interior completed its three @-@ volume , 1 @,@ 000 @-@ page study of the Rampart project 's feasibility and impact . The Fish and Wildlife study released in 1964 was included , as were studies of the impact on the region 's Alaska Native population . United States Secretary of the Interior Stewart Udall then created a task force to review the findings before he made a final decision . Throughout 1965 and 1966 , opponents and proponents of the project funded studies of their own , aimed either at supporting or rejecting the arguments for the dam . 
 In June 1967 , the Department of the Interior made its final recommendation and suggested that the dam not be built . Secretary Udall cited the fish and wildlife losses that would result , the availability of less @-@ costly alternatives , and the fact that no recreational benefits would accrue . 
 = = Final design = = 
 Despite the Interior Department 's rejection of the overall Rampart Dam project , the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers continued its engineering feasibility study on the project . That plan was completed on June 25 , 1971 , and it included most of the previous federal documents pertaining to the project , including the electricity market studies published by the Department of the Interior in 1965 , the Fish and Wildlife study of 1964 , and other studies about the economic feasibility of the project . A detailed description of potential construction methods and the overall plan for the project were included , as were reports about the site 's geography and hydrology . In total , the report encompassed two volumes including more than 480 pages . Because the construction season at the site is only five months , the Corps of Engineers projected that several decades would be needed to build the dam and associated structures . 
 = = = Preparation = = = 
 Due to the lack of any land transportation route to the dam site , the first stage of construction would have involved the building of a temporary road from Eureka , about 30 miles ( 48 km ) away , to the dam site . Consideration also was given to the extension of the Alaska Railroad from Fairbanks to the site . A period of about four years would have been required for <unk> planning , including detailed construction surveying and finalizing the design of the dam , powerhouse , and other structures . Engineers estimated that after the four years of final planning and surveying , three years would be needed to dig river diversion tunnels and construct the cofferdams needed to clear the Yukon River streambed for construction . Housing and construction offices also would have been constructed for workers on the south bank of the site , and the cost for this effort was included in overall cost proposals for the project . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Site clearing and foundation work would have been scheduled to begin after completion of the diversion work in the seventh year of the project . The first pouring of concrete was scheduled for the project 's eighth year , and work on the powerhouse would have begun in the 11th year . Owing to the large size of the reservoir , engineers estimated that the diversion tunnels would be closed in the 13th year , allowing construction to pace the filling of the new lake . The reservoir would have reached a pool elevation of 550 feet ( 168 m ) in the 21st year , the dam would have been completed to elevation 660 feet ( 201 m ) in the 25th year , and the reservoir would have been filled to the full 640 @-@ foot ( 195 m ) level in the 31st year after the project 's start . The installation of power generators was planned to follow as needed , with the last unit scheduled for installation by the 45th year of the project . 
 In total , the dam would have consisted of a concrete gravity structure with a structural height of 510 feet ( 155 m ) and a hydraulic height of 430 feet ( 131 m ) . At the elevation of 660 feet ( 201 m ) , the dam would have stretched for 4 @,@ 700 feet ( 1 @,@ 430 m ) from north to south . On the south bank would have been a concrete gravity spillway with a crest at elevation 600 feet ( 183 m ) and a maximum flow of 603 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 17 @,@ 100 m3 / s ) at maximum pool elevation . The power facilities would have consisted of twenty @-@ two 266 @,@ 000 kilowatt units and two 10 @,@ 000 kilowatt service units . 
 <unk> , building the dam would have required 15 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 11 @,@ 470 @,@ 000 m3 ) of concrete aggregate , 2 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 2 @,@ 220 @,@ 000 m3 ) of rock fill , and another 1 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 1 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 m3 ) of various other types of fill . Engineers suggested that some of the material could be found at the site , but the remainder would have to be brought from outside sources . 
 = = = Reservoir = = = 
 At the projected pool elevation of 645 feet ( 197 m ) , the resulting reservoir would have had a total capacity of 1 @,@ 145 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 1 @,@ 410 km3 ) . The full pool length would have been about 270 miles ( 435 km ) , and the maximum width would have been 80 miles ( 129 km ) . The resulting lake would have had approximately 3 @,@ 600 miles ( 5 @,@ 800 km ) of shoreline and a total surface area of about 9 @,@ 844 square miles ( 25 @,@ 496 km2 ) . Because the Yukon also is a transportation route , transshipment facilities were planned for below and above the dam site and would have been connected by road and rail links . Because of the large size of the proposed reservoir and the need to allow some flow of the Yukon River downstream of the dam site for river navigation and fishing , engineers anticipated that filling the reservoir would take no fewer than 16 years to complete . 
 = = = Anticipated costs = = = 
 The Rampart Dam 's large size had a correspondingly large price tag . The Corps of Engineers anticipated spending $ 618 @.@ 4 million ( 1970 dollars ) on construction of the physical dam alone , another $ 492 million for power @-@ generating equipment , and $ 1 @.@ 39 billion in total . That total included $ 15 @.@ 59 million for relocating Alaskans from the area to be flooded , $ 56 million for fish and wildlife facilities to mitigate the anticipated losses , and $ 39 @.@ 7 million for roads and bridges to access the area . After completion of the dam , the Corps of Engineers estimated that operation and maintenance of the project would cost $ 6 @.@ 5 million annually , including $ 570 @,@ 000 for replacement power equipment and $ 2 million for the maintenance of fish and wildlife facilities . 
 = = Weather effects = = 
 From the initial planning stages , proponents and opponents speculated that the large size of the reservoir created by the dam could affect the weather in Interior Alaska and the Yukon . Several studies were conducted in regards to these potential changes , and most of the reports hypothesized an effect similar to the weather that occurs around Great Slave Lake and Lake Baikal , both of which were of similar sizes and latitudes to the proposed reservoir . Forecasts predicted the lake would hold in heat longer during the autumn , thus keeping area temperatures slightly warmer than normal . In the spring , however , the area around the lake would have been prone to increased precipitation due to the phenomenon of lake @-@ effect snow . In the summer , the long periods of daylight would have caused the land around the lake to become warmer than the lake itself , also creating the possibility of storms . 
 = = Supporters = = 
 Support for the dam project came from a variety of sources , but supporters tended to use three primary arguments in favor of its construction : the electricity generated by the project would be cheap and plentiful , industries would be attracted to Alaska by the cheap electricity , and the dam 's construction would have minimal impact on the environment and human populations . 
 During the campaign that preceded the 1960 U.S. Presidential election , both candidates — Richard Nixon and John F. Kennedy — made campaign stops in Alaska . Both men gave their support to the Rampart Dam project , with Kennedy saying , " I see the greatest dam in the free world at Rampart Canyon , producing twice the power of the Tennessee Valley Authority to light homes and mills and cities and farms all over Alaska . " Nixon , arriving three months after Kennedy , said , " As far as Rampart Canyon Dam is concerned , certainly you can expect progress , more progress , I believe , in our administration than his " . 
 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers leaders strongly supported the project in its initial phases . In 1960 , Harold Moats of the Corps ' Alaska district said , " Rampart Canyon , the big one , is Alaska 's most valuable resource , and as it is developed , Alaska will take her rightful place in the family of states contributing richly to the economy of the nation and the welfare of the whole free world . " 
 In early September 1963 , a group of Alaska businesspeople , local government leaders , and industry representatives met at McKinley Park Lodge to organize lobbying efforts in favor of the dam . The resulting organization was called the Yukon Corporation for Power for America , later shortened to Yukon Power for America , Inc . The organization began with a $ 100 @,@ 000 budget , which it used to produce " The Rampart Story " , a color brochure distributed in Alaska and Washington , D.C. to promote the dam project . 
 Alaska senator Ernest Gruening remained a staunch backer of the project from its inception to its cancellation , and made it a major personal political priority . Gruening led a coalition of Alaska lawmakers that included most of the Alaska Legislature . In the 1962 Alaska state elections , every candidate elected to the state legislature was a supporter of the project . In the years that followed , the Alaska Legislature voted several times to allocate state funding for the project . Politicians at the city level also got into the action , as the city of Anchorage and the Fairbanks Public Utilities Board each voted to contribute $ 10 @,@ 000 to a pro @-@ Rampart organization . Among the group 's members was Ted Stevens , who was appointed in 1968 as one of Alaska 's representatives to the U.S. Senate . 
 = = = Electrical argument = = = 
 As planned , the dam would have produced roughly 34 terawatt hours annually , nearly 50 times the total energy use for the entire state of Alaska in 1960 ( 700 gigawatt hours ) . Gruening , in particular , believed that the dam would have an effect similar to that of the Tennessee Valley Authority in the 1930s , with cheap electricity providing the economic basis of the region . Dam proponents also suggested that the electricity might be transmitted to the rest of the United States , lowering utility prices in those states by increasing the amount of available power . Anthony <unk> , a salmon biologist employed by Yukon Power for America , claimed that one day , " a housewife in Phoenix or L.A. will fry her eggs at breakfast with electricity generated on the far @-@ off Yukon . " 
 = = = Industrial argument = = = 
 Supporters of the project suggested that the cheap electricity provided by the dam would be a strong enticement for electricity @-@ intensive industries , such as aluminum smelting , to move to Alaska . They were encouraged by a 1962 economic feasibility study by the Development and Resources Corporation , which stated that the electricity generated would attract aluminum , magnesium and titanium industries to the region and help process locally produced minerals . The report also stated that the dam would attract a wood pulp mill on at least a temporary basis to process the hundreds of millions of board feet of timber that would otherwise be lost as the dam 's reservoir flooded . The authors of the DRC report were specific enough to predict that 19 @,@ 746 jobs would be created by the dam 's construction — not including jobs opened during the construction process . Both the 1962 study , and another report by University of Michigan researcher Michael Brewer in 1966 , stated that tens of thousands of jobs would be created by the construction process alone , even if the cheap electricity generated by the dam failed to attract any additional industries to Alaska . 
 = = = Impact argument = = = 
 At the time Rampart Dam was being considered , Alaska as a whole , and Interior Alaska in particular , was sparsely settled . The 1960 United States Census recorded just 226 @,@ 127 people as residents of Alaska , making it the least @-@ populated state in the United States at that time . Interior Alaska contained about 28 @,@ 000 residents , and promoters suggested that the dam 's benefits would vastly outweigh the costs to the few residents who would be displaced . An unnamed Gruening staffer once said the area to be flooded by the dam was worthless , containing " not more than ten flush toilets . Search the whole world and it would be difficult to find an equivalent area with so little to be lost through flooding . " In a 1963 letter responding to a Sports Illustrated article about the dam , Gruening wrote , 
 As for the 2 @,@ 000 <unk> Indians , they could not but be better off than they are now . Their villages are flooded intermittently by the Yukon . Their habitations are miserable and their livelihood a bare subsistence supplemented by relief . Construction of the Rampart Dam will give them ample gainful employment , and in their new locations , chosen by them on the lake 's borders , they will have better homes , better community facilities and a permanent income from now nonexistent activities , generated by the lake . 
 In the same letter , Gruening also promoted the possibility of the dam creating a thriving tourism industry in Interior Alaska , a hypothesis that was raised by other dam supporters as well . <unk> stated that the project would be similar to Lake Powell , in that it would create a range of recreational activities , including water skiing and picnicking . 
 = = Opposition = = 
 Opposition to the project was based on three separate objections to its construction : ecological , human , and financial . Conservation groups opposed the dam 's construction because it would flood the Yukon Flats , a large wetland area that provides breeding ground for millions of waterfowl and habitat for game and fur @-@ bearing animals . Alaska Native groups objected to the project 's human cost — the need to relocate more than 1 @,@ 500 people and 9 villages — and Native groups outside the reservoir area objected to the potential devastation of the Yukon River salmon population . The third objection to construction of the dam stemmed from its high cost and the belief that cheap electricity would not be enough to attract industry to Alaska . 
 = = = Ecological objections = = = 
 In late 1960 , the Alaska Conservation Society became the first large conservation group to oppose construction of the dam . The organization believed the flooding of the Yukon Flats would cause critical damage to Alaska waterfowl and promoted the alternative Susitna Hydroelectric Project to supply Alaska 's electric needs . This was followed in early 1961 by an Alaska Sportsmen 's Council resolution that criticized the Corps of Engineers for reducing its funding for studies of the impact of the project on fish and game stocks . In April of that year , Alaska Sportsman magazine took a formal stand against the project . 
 The California Fish and Game Commission was among the first non @-@ Alaska conservation groups to oppose construction of the dam , saying in 1963 that it would inundate the Yukon Flats , an area of wetlands that is among North America 's largest waterfowl breeding grounds . Following that objection , other groups began to organize during the 1963 North American Wildlife and Natural Resources Conference . Fifteen conservation groups pooled a total of $ 25 @,@ 000 at the meeting to begin an independent scientific study of the project and start an opposition campaign . 
 In the spring of 1964 , the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service released a report on the impact of dam construction on the Flats . The report strongly opposed construction of the dam , saying in part , " Nowhere in the history of water development in North America have the fish and wildlife losses anticipated to result from a single project been so overwhelming . " The report also pointed out the threat the dam would pose to the Yukon River 's large salmon population , which swim upstream each year to spawn . Arthur Laing , Canada 's minister of northern affairs and natural resources , also expressed alarm at the potential waterfowl losses and the threat the dam posed to Canada 's portion of the Yukon River salmon population . 
 A May 1965 article in The Atlantic magazine by author Paul Brooks illustrated the growing protests of conservationists concerned about the project . After traveling the Yukon River , Brooks hypothesized that construction of the dam would be catastrophic from an ecological and human standpoint , would cost an exorbitant amount of money , and that the claims of attracting industry and tourism to Alaska were greatly exaggerated . In real terms , he estimated that construction of the dam would eliminate the habitat for 1 @.@ 5 million ducks , 12 @,@ 500 geese , 10 @,@ 000 cranes , 270 @,@ 000 salmon , 12 @,@ 000 moose , and seven percent of Alaska 's fur @-@ bearing animals . Similar articles appeared in magazines such as Field and Stream , which called the project " a catastrophe of major proportions " , and the Audubon Society Magazine , said the dam " would negate 30 years of endeavor in waterfowl preservation . Even sporting magazine Sports Illustrated got into the act , asking if the cost of so many waterfowl would be worth building the dam . 
 = = = Human objections = = = 
 In planning the dam project , engineers anticipated that building the dam would flood nine Alaska Native villages , forcing the relocation of an estimated 1 @,@ 500 people . Although some of the affected villagers felt the increased job opportunities would outweigh the forced move , most objected to the potential loss of the region 's history . Among the affected villages was Fort Yukon , which is the oldest English @-@ speaking settlement in Alaska . In 1964 , several groups of Native dam opponents in the Yukon Flats came together to form an organization called <unk> <unk> <unk> , which lobbied against the project . The Tundra Times , an Alaska newspaper devoted to Native issues , also came out strongly in opposition to the project , saying that all but one village from the head of the proposed reservoir to the mouth of the Yukon River were against the dam . Don Young , Alaska 's representative to the U.S. House of Representatives , was elected to the Alaska Legislature in 1964 from Fort Yukon on a platform of opposition to Rampart Dam . 
 A survey of the archaeological and paleontological potential of the Yukon Flats , conducted in 1965 , objected to the potential loss of the area . In part , it said , " ... it may be said that relatively speaking , the archaeological potential of the Rampart <unk> area is great ; the practical difficulties of field work will have to be overcome in order to obviate the possible loss of what may be some of the most important prehistoric records in North America . " 
 The Canadian government also strongly opposed the Rampart Dam project . According to the Treaty of Washington , signed in 1871 , Canada was allowed free navigation of the Yukon River . It was feared that construction of the dam would block navigation routes and violate the treaty . 
 = = = Financial objections = = = 
 Opposition to the dam project also arose in concern of the dam 's cost . Several United States congressmen and fiscal conservatives protested the proposal on the grounds that the money that would be spent on its construction would be better used to support other projects . They pointed to the lack of existing infrastructure in the region and said it was unlikely that enough electricity generated by the dam could be sold at a high enough price to pay for its construction . 
 In his 1966 analysis of the project 's economic feasibility , Michael Brewer refuted the conclusions of the 1962 federal study , saying that the ability of the dam to pay for itself was " an exercise in speculation " . He also wrote that even if the dam was built and cheap electricity made available , " Alaska did not possess a competitive advantage " . He concluded by saying that the project was " not economically efficient " . Because of arguments like these , the common belief among informed observers outside Alaska was that the project was designed to benefit Alaska alone , and thus could almost be considered " foreign aid . " An editorial in The New York Times summed up non @-@ Alaska opinions when it asked if the dam project was " the world 's biggest boondoggle " . 
 = = Cancellation = = 
 Owing to increasing public pressure , in June 1967 , United States Secretary of the Interior Stewart Udall announced he was strongly opposed to the dam , citing economic and biological factors as well as the drastic impact on the area 's native population . Though this effectively ended the project , planning continued to go ahead until the final Army Corps of Engineers report was released in 1971 and recommended the project " not be undertaken at this time " . Alaska governor William Allen Egan protested the statement , saying the report was out of date due to population growth in Alaska and rising demand for electricity . 
 The report was duly reconsidered , but in 1978 , the Army Corps of Engineers confirmed the project no longer was justified . The audited report was accepted by the U.S. Senate , and no further funding was allocated to study the issue . The final nail in the coffin came on December 1 , 1978 , when President Jimmy Carter authorized the creation of the Yukon Flats National Wildlife Monument , which became the Yukon Flats National Wildlife Refuge in 1980 . The refuge status eliminated any possibility of flooding the Yukon Flats , a process that would have been inevitable with the construction of the dam . 
 In summer 1985 , the last remnants of the dam project were eliminated when the 8 @.@ 96 million acres ( 36 @,@ 300 km2 ) set aside for development of the dam were released by the Bureau of Land Management for other uses . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The controversy surrounding the Rampart Dam project illustrated the growing shift in the environmental movement during the 1960s . Rather than becoming focused singularly on solely preserving the natural beauty of a particular landscape , as had inspired the creation of the U.S. National Park Service in the United States during the first half of the twentieth century , naturalists and environmentalists began to consider the human cost of development as well . Though opposition to Rampart was founded primarily on economic and natural grounds , it consequences for the Alaska Native population in the region reflected later concerns about industrial development in more urban areas . 
 Among Alaska Natives , the Rampart Dam project encouraged organization and the creation of communications links between various like @-@ minded communities and tribal groups . When the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline was proposed in the late 1960s and early 1970s , Native organizations that had formed to oppose Rampart Dam were revived in opposition to the pipeline . Only after Native land claims were recognized in the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act did the pipeline progress . 
 = = Further information = = 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 Cooke , A. " The Rampart Dam proposal for Yukon River " . Polar Record , December 1964 @.@ pp. 277 – 280 . 
 Leopold , A. and Leonard , Justin . " The Rampart Project " . Natural History , January 1966 @.@ p . 12 
 Spurr , Stephen H. " Rampart Dam : A costly gamble " . Audubon , May – June 1966 @.@ pp. 173 – 175 
 = = = Audio / Visual = = = 
 Development and Resources Corporation . " Senator Ernest Gruening and Gus Norwood discuss the marketing potential of Rampart Dam " . Alaska Film Archives , University of Alaska Fairbanks . 1961 . 
 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers . " Sen. Ernest Gruening listens to a report from Chief of engineers General Walter Wilson about his recent trip to Alaska " . Alaska Film Archives , University of Alaska Fairbanks . 1961 . 
 U.S. Senate . " Senator Ernest Gruening and Jim Brooks discuss effects of the proposed Rampart Dam on fish and wildlife " . Alaska Film Archives , University of Alaska Fairbanks . 1961 . 
 U.S. Senate . " Senator Ernest Gruening and Oscar Chapman discuss power usage of the proposed Rampart Dam " . Alaska Film Archives , University of Alaska Fairbanks . 1961 . 
 U.S. Senate . " Senator Ernest Gruening and Oscar Chapman discuss weather changes from the proposed Rampart Dam " . Alaska Film Archives , University of Alaska Fairbanks . 1961 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Ivan Bloch and Associates ( Industrial Consultants ) . Background Facts on Rampart Canyon Project , Yukon River , Alaska . Portland , Oregon . October 1963 . 
 <unk> , Claus M. and Hunt , William R. The Politics of Hydroelectric Power in Alaska : Rampart and Devil Canyon – A case study . Fairbanks , Alaska . University of Alaska , January 1978 . 
 = German destroyer Z12 Erich Giese = 
 Z12 Erich Giese was a Type 1934A @-@ class destroyer built for Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine in the late 1930s . At the beginning of World War II , the ship was used in the German Bight to lay minefields in German waters . In late 1939 the ship made one successful minelaying sortie off the English coast that claimed two merchant ships . While returning from that sortie , she torpedoed a British destroyer without being detected and continued on her way . During the early stages of the Norwegian Campaign , Erich Giese fought in both naval Battles of Narvik in mid @-@ April 1940 and was sunk by British destroyers during the Second Battle of Narvik . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Erich Giese had an overall length of 119 meters ( 390 ft 5 in ) and was 114 meters ( 374 ft 0 in ) long at the waterline . The ship had a beam of 11 @.@ 30 meters ( 37 ft 1 in ) , and a maximum draft of 4 @.@ 23 meters ( 13 ft 11 in ) . She displaced 2 @,@ 171 metric tons ( 2 @,@ 137 long tons ) at standard and 3 @,@ 190 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 140 long tons ) at deep load . The Wagner geared steam turbines were designed to produce 70 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 51 @,@ 000 kW ; 69 @,@ 000 shp ) which would propel the ship at 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam was provided to the turbines by six high @-@ pressure Benson boilers with superheaters . Erich Giese carried a maximum of 752 metric tons ( 740 long tons ) of fuel oil which was intended to give a range of 4 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 100 km ; 5 @,@ 100 mi ) at 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) , but the ship proved top @-@ heavy in service and 30 % of the fuel had to be retained as ballast low in the ship . The effective range proved to be only 1 @,@ 530 nmi ( 2 @,@ 830 km ; 1 @,@ 760 mi ) at 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . 
 Erich Giese carried five 12 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 34 guns in single mounts with gun shields , two each superimposed , fore and aft . The fifth gun was carried on top of the rear deckhouse . Her anti @-@ aircraft armament consisted of four 3 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 30 guns in two twin mounts abreast the rear funnel and six 2 cm C / 30 guns in single mounts . The ship carried eight above @-@ water 53 @.@ 3 @-@ centimeter ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes in two power @-@ operated mounts . A pair of reload torpedoes were provided for each mount . Four depth charge throwers were mounted on the sides of the rear deckhouse and they were supplemented by six racks for individual depth charges on the sides of the stern . Enough depth charges were carried for either two or four patterns of 16 charges each . Mine rails could be fitted on the rear deck that had a maximum capacity of 60 mines . ' GHG ' ( German : Gruppenhorchgerät ) passive hydrophones were fitted to detect submarines . 
 = = Career = = 
 The ship was ordered on 4 August 1934 and laid down at Germania , Kiel on 3 May 1935 as yard number <unk> . She was launched on 12 March 1937 and completed on 4 March 1939 . Erich Giese was initially assigned to 8th Destroyer Division ( 8 . <unk> @-@ Division ) part of the 4th Destroyer Flotilla ( 4 . <unk> @-@ Flottille ) under the command of Commander ( Fregattenkapitän ) <unk> . Two months later , the ship escorted into Hamburg the convoy returning the German Condor Legion from Spain . When World War II began , Erich Giese was assigned to the German Bight where she joined her sisters in laying defensive minefields . The ship also patrolled the Skagerrak to inspect neutral shipping for contraband goods . The ship attempted to lay a minefield off the British coast on the night of 12 / 13 November , but had to turn back to escort her consorts , Theodor Riedel and Hermann Schoemann , back to Germany when they suffered machinery breakdowns . Eight days later , she was one of the destroyers escorting the battleships Gneisenau and Scharnhorst through the North Sea to breakout into the North Atlantic . 
 Led by Commander ( Fregattenkapitän ) Erich Bey in his flagship Hans Lody , Erich Giese and Bernd von Arnim left port on the morning of 6 December to lay a minefield off Cromer . The latter ship had severe boiler problems and was ordered to return to port in the late afternoon while the other two continued their mission . They spotted several darkened ships as they approached their destination , including the destroyers HMS Juno and HMS Jersey , but were not spotted in return . As the two German destroyers withdrew after having laid their mines , they spotted the two British destroyers again at a range of 8 @,@ 000 meters ( 8 @,@ 700 yd ) and closed to attack . When the range dropped to 4 @,@ 600 meters ( 5 @,@ 000 yd ) , Lody fired three torpedoes at Juno , the leading British ship , while Giese fired four at Jersey . None of Lody 's torpedoes struck their target , but one of Giese 's hit Jersey abreast her aft torpedo mount . The torpedo detonated in an oil fuel tank and started a major fire . Neither British ship spotted the German destroyers and they continued on while Juno turned about to help her sister . Two British ships totalling 5 @,@ 286 Gross Register Tons were sunk by this minefield . Giese was refitted at the Germaniawerft shipyard after her return on 8 December . 
 The ship was allocated to Group 1 for the Norwegian portion of Operation Weserübung . The group 's task was to transport the 139th Mountain Infantry Regiment ( 139 . Gebirgsjäger Regiment ) and the headquarters of the 3rd Mountain Division ( 3 . Gebirgs @-@ Division ) to seize Narvik . The ships began loading troops on 6 April and sailed the next day . Giese fell behind the rest of Group 1 as the result of oil leaks , machinery breakdowns , and contaminated fuel oil . She fell further behind when Lieutenant Commander ( Korvettenkapitän ) Karl <unk> turned the ship about to recover a soldier who had been washed overboard by the high seas . Giese had little usable fuel left by this time and was forced to continue at a slower speed to conserve fuel . When the ship arrived at her destination on 9 April , she landed her troops in the Herjangsfjord ( a northern branch of the Ofotfjord ) to reinforce the other troops previously landed there in order to capture the Norwegian Army armory at Elvegårdsmoen . Later in the day , Erich Giese moved to Narvik harbor , but was not able to refuel before she was ordered to return to the Herjangsfjord well before dawn together with her sisters Wolfgang Zenker and Erich Koellner . 
 Shortly before dawn on 10 April , the five destroyers of the British 2nd Destroyer Flotilla surprised the German ships in Narvik harbor . They torpedoed two destroyers and badly damaged the other three while suffering only minor damage themselves . As they were beginning to withdraw they encountered the three destroyers of the German 4th Flotilla which had been alerted when the British began their attack . The Germans opened fire first , but the gunnery for both sides was not effective due to the mist and the smoke screen laid by the British as they retreated down the Ofotfjord . The German ships had to turn away to avoid a salvo of three torpedoes fired by one of the destroyers in Narvik . Giese and Koellner were very low on fuel and all three were running low on ammunition , so Commander Bey decided not to continue the pursuit of the British ships since they were being engaged by the last two destroyers of Group 1 . 
 Commander Bey was ordered during the afternoon of 10 April to return to Germany with all seaworthy ships that evening . Only Erich Giese and Wolfgang Zenker were ready for sea and they slipped out of the Ofotfjord and turned south . Visibility was good that night and they spotted the light cruiser HMS Penelope and her two escorting destroyers and Commander Bey decided to turn back even though his ships had not been spotted by the British . Three other destroyers refuelled and completed their repairs on 11 April , but Bey decided against another breakout attempt despite the fog and poor visibility that night . Bey made no attempt to breakout during the night of 12 / 13 April , possibly because two of the destroyers had been damaged earlier in the day when they ran aground . 
 That night he received word to expect an attack the following day by British capital ships escorted by a large number of destroyers and supported by carrier aircraft . Erich Giese reported that she was only capable of 28 knots ( 52 km / h ; 32 mph ) , although her torpedoes had been replenished from the damaged destroyers . The battleship HMS Warspite and nine destroyers duly appeared on 13 April , although earlier than Commander Bey had expected , and caught the Germans out of position . The five operable destroyers , not including Giese , charged out of Narvik harbor and engaged the British ships . The ship did not have enough steam raised to participate and remained in the harbor . She attempted to leave the harbor after the British had driven off the other German ships , but her port engine seized up and left her almost dead in the water at the mouth of the harbor . While attempting to repair her engine , Giese was approached by the destroyers HMS Punjabi and HMS Bedouin which fired five torpedoes at her . All of them missed and Giese 's torpedoes were equally unsuccessful . She did hit Punjabi with six or seven 12 @.@ 7 cm shells which holed the ship several times just above the waterline , wrecked her fire @-@ control system , severed her main steam line and started several fires . Casualties aboard Punjabi were seven killed and 14 wounded . In the meantime , Giese had managed to repair her engine after ten minutes of work and limped forward at her maximum speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) to engage the remaining British destroyers . Bedouin closed to point @-@ blank range and had her forward gun turret knocked out by Giese , but the latter was hit at least 20 times and reduced to a blazing wreck that finally sank shortly before midnight . Eighty @-@ three of her crew were killed outright during the battle , but the destroyer HMS Foxhound did rescue 11 men , although two subsequently died of their wounds . Surviving crew members later testified , that they had been fired upon while drifting in the water . The ship 's remaining crewmen managed to get ashore one way or another . 
 In 2011 , a 150 kilograms ( 330 lb ) bronze Reichsadler was salvaged from the wreck of Giese , in order to be displayed at the War Museum in Narvik . The ship 's bell from Giese was removed by looters in the 1960s , as were the Reichsadler from the nine other German destroyers sunk at Narvik . 
 = Trillium grandiflorum = 
 Trillium grandiflorum ( common names white trillium , large @-@ flowered trillium , great white trillium , white wake @-@ robin , French <unk> blanc ) is a species of flowering plant in the family <unk> . A monocotyledonous , herbaceous perennial , it is native to eastern North America , from northern Quebec to the southern parts of the United States through the Appalachian Mountains into northernmost Georgia and west to Minnesota . It also thrives on Vancouver Island in British Columbia . There are also several isolated populations , such as in Nova Scotia and Iowa . 
 Trillium grandiflorum is most common in rich , mixed upland forests . It is easily recognised by its attractive three @-@ petaled white flowers , opening from late spring to early summer , that rise above a whorl of three , leaf @-@ like bracts . It is an example of a spring ephemeral , a plant whose life @-@ cycle is synchronised with that of the deciduous woodland which it favours . 
 = = Description = = 
 Trillium grandiflorum is a perennial that grows from a short rhizome and produces a single , showy white flower atop a whorl of three leaves . These leaves are ovate ( i.e. , egg @-@ shaped ) in outline with pointed tips . They lack petioles ( or have extremely short ones ) and measure 12 – 20 cm long by 8 – 15 cm wide ( 5 @-@ 8 in long by 3 – 6 in width ) , with very prominently engraved venation . The leaves and the stem share a dark green color and persist into autumn . Leaves and petals both have somewhat undulate margins , the leaves often much more strongly so . Individuals grow to between about 15 and 30 cm tall ( 6 – 12 inches ) . A single rootstock will often form clonal colonies , which can become very large and dense . 
 The erect , odorless flowers are large , especially compared to other species of Trillium , with 4 to 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 to 3 in ) long petals , depending on age and vigor . The petals are shaped much like the leaves and curve outward . They have a visible venation , though this is nowhere near as marked as on the leaves . Their overlapping bases and curve give the flower a distinctive funnel shape . Between the veined petals , three acuminate ( ending with a long point ) sepals are visible ; they are usually a paler shade of green than the leaves , and are sometimes streaked with maroon . Flowers are perched on a pedicel ( i.e. , flower stalk ) raising them above the leaf whorl , and grow pinker as they age . 
 Flowers have six stamens in two whorls of three , which persist after fruiting . The styles are white and very short compared to the 9 – 27 mm ( 0 @.@ 35 – 1 @.@ 06 in ) anthers , which are pale yellow but becomes a brighter shade when liberating pollen due to the latter 's color . The ovary is six @-@ sided with 3 greenish @-@ white stigmas that are at first weakly attached , but fuse higher up . The fruit is a green , mealy and moist orb , and is vaguely six @-@ sided like the ovary . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Trillium grandiflorum was originally described as T. <unk> var. grandiflorum by André Michaux in his 1803 work Flora <unk> @-@ Americana . T. <unk> is now a synonym of the closely related species T. erectum . T. grandiflorum was first treated as a species by Richard Anthony Salisbury only two years later . The species was traditionally placed in the subgenus Trillium , but recent work has shown the phylogeny of this grouping to be paraphyletic . Since then no phylogeny of the genus has garnered much agreement ( The other subgenus , <unk> , includes sessile @-@ flowered species ) . T. grandiflorum is , alongside the western T. <unk> , one of the closer relatives to the subg . <unk> members . 
 One form of the plant , T. grandiflorum f. <unk> , opens with light pink petals instead of the common white . It is generally found very rarely throughout the range , but in the Blue Ridge Mountains of Virginia is can be found somewhat frequently in mixed or sometimes pure colonies . It should be noted that the white flowers of the common pure white variety of T. grandiflorum turn a very distinctive pink and remain so for several days just prior to the wilting of the flowers . Plants bearing these pink flowers are often mistaken for a " pink variety " of trillium . 
 Many variants of T. grandiflorum have green markings on the petals , as well as anywhere from 4 to 30 extra petals or bracts along with other highly deformed characteristics . Although many of these forms have been given taxonomic names , it has been shown that <unk> @-@ like bacteria are responsible for the altered morphology in these individuals and not genetic variation . T. grandiflorum does , however , occasionally produce double @-@ flowered forms such as T. g. f. <unk> . These are almost invariably sterile , but are much sought after for their appearance by trillium growers . It is the species of trillium that produces double flowers most frequently . On the other hand , and unlike other species such as T. erectum which hybridize fairly easily , T. grandiflorum is not known to form hybrids . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Trillium grandiflorum favors well @-@ drained , neutral to slightly acid soils , usually in second- or young @-@ growth forests . In the Northern parts of its range it shows an affinity for maple or beech forests , but has also been known to spread into nearby open areas . Depending on geographical factors , it flowers from late April to early June , just after T. erectum . Like many forest perennials , T. grandiflorum is a slow growing plant . Its seeds require double dormancy , meaning they normally take at least two years to fully germinate . Like most species of Trillium , flowering age is determined largely by the surface of the leaf and volume of the rhizome the plant has reached instead of age alone . Because growth is very slow in nature , T. grandiflorum typically requires seven to ten years in optimal conditions to reach flowering size , which corresponds to a minimum of 36 cm2 ( 5 @.@ 6 sq in ) of leaf surface area and 2 @.@ 5 cm3 ( 0 @.@ 15 cu in ) of rhizome volume . In cultivation , however , wide disparity of flowering ages are observed . 
 = = = Conservation concerns = = = 
 Some forms of the species have pink instead of white petals , while others with extra petals , also called " double " forms , are naturally quite common in the species , and these are especially popular with trillium gardeners . In fact , the species is the most popular of its genus in cultivation , which has led to conservation concerns due to the majority of commercially available plants being collected from the wild . A few regional governments in Canada and the United States have declared the plant vulnerable as a result . 
 Due to the popularity of Trillium grandiflorum as a garden specimen , conservation concerns have been raised as the vast majority of plants sold in commercial nurseries are believed to be collected from the wild . Indeed , there is little indication of any commercial nursery growth . Frederick and Roberta Case , botanists who specialize in trilliums , wrote in 1997 , " to our knowledge , no true commercial quantity ' propagation ' takes place at the present time . " Such heavy collecting , combined with other pressures such as habitat destruction and grazing , may effectively endanger the plants in some <unk> grandiflorum is legally listed as vulnerable in Quebec , primarily due to habitat destruction as the plant is found in forests neighboring the province 's most populous regions . It is listed as <unk> vulnerable in the state of New York , meaning that it might become threatened should certain factors not be mitigated . In Maine , it is listed as endangered , and might have been extirpated entirely . 
 = = = Pollination and seed dispersal = = = 
 Trillium grandiflorum has long been thought to self @-@ pollinate based on the fact that pollinators had rarely been observed visiting the plants and because there is low variation in chromosomal banding patterns . This has been strongly challenged , as other studies have shown high pollination rates by bumblebees and very low success of self @-@ pollination in controlled experiments , implying that they are in fact self @-@ incompatible . Several ovules of a given individual often fail to produce seeds . One contributing factor is pollen limitation , and one study showed that open pollinated plants had 56 % of their ovules produce seeds , while in hand pollinated individuals the figure was 66 % . Plants with reduced exposure to pollinators were 33 % to 50 % less likely to produce fruits than those that were , while hand pollinated individuals showed a 100 % fruit set ( though these fruits did not contain a 100 % seed set ) . Plant resources were shown to be a limiting factor in seed production : when pollen was in abundance , larger plants had a significantly greater seed to ovule ratio than smaller ones . The overall suboptimal seed to ovule ratios suggest that Trillium grandiflorum has evolved to maximize reproductive success in the face of highly stochastic pollination , where some plants may only be visited by a single pollinator in a season . 
 Trillium grandiflorum has been studied extensively by ecologists due to a number of unique features it possesses . It is a representative example of a plant whose seeds are spread through myrmecochory , or ant @-@ mediated dispersal , which is effective in increasing the plant 's ability to outcross , but ineffective in bringing the plant very far . This has led ecologists to question how it and similar plants were able to survive glaciation events during the ice ages . The height of the species has also been shown to be an effective index of how intense foraging by deer is in a particular area . 
 Fruits are released in the summer , containing about 16 seeds on average . These seeds are most typically dispersed by ants , which is called myrmecochory , but yellow jackets ( Vespula vulgaris ) and harvestmen ( order Opiliones ) have both been observed dispersing the seeds at lower frequencies . Insect dispersal is aided by the presence of a conspicuous elaiosome , an oil @-@ rich body attached to the seed , which is high in both lipids and oleic acid . The oleic acid induces corpse @-@ carrying behavior in ants , causing them to bring the seeds to their nesting sites as if they were food . As ants visit several colonies of the plant , they bring genetically variable seeds back to a single location , which after germination results in a new population with relatively high genetic diversity . This has the ultimate effect of increasing biological fitness . 
 Although myrmecochory is by far the most common dispersal method , white @-@ tailed deer have also been shown to disperse the seeds on rare occasions by ingestion and defecation . While ants only move seeds up to about 10 meters , deer have been observed to transport the seeds over 1 kilometer . This helps to explain post @-@ agricultural colonization of forest sites by Trillium grandiflorum , as well as long distance gene flow which has been detected in other studies . Furthermore , it helps resolve what has been called " Reid 's paradox " , which states that migration during glaciation events must have been impossible for plants with dispersal rates under several hundred meters per year , such as Trillium grandiflorum . Thus occasional long distance dispersal events , such as by deer , probably helped save this and other species with otherwise short distance dispersal ability from extinction during the glaciations of the ice ages . Furthermore , nested clade analysis of cpDNA haplotypes has shown that Trillium grandiflorum is likely to have persisted through the last glacial period in two sites of refuge in the southeastern United States and that long distance dispersal was responsible for the post @-@ glacial recolonization of northern areas . 
 In addition to the lateral dispersion ( by invertebrates and deer ) there is also importance in the fact that burial ( vertical dispersion ) by ants ( or other vectors ) increases the survival of new plants by two mechanisms . First , vertical dispersion ensures sufficient depth to preserve the seeds through their dormancy ( Trillium seeds are normally dormant for their first year ) . Second , vertical dispersion ensures adequate anchorage of the rhizomes . This is particularly important for young plants because their small rhizomes , with few & short roots , are easily dislodged ( e.g. frost <unk> and other erosion factors ) and desiccated . 
 = = = Interaction with deer = = = 
 Trillium grandiflorum as well as other trilliums are a favored food of white @-@ tailed deer . Indeed , if trilliums are available deer will seek these plants , with a preference for T. grandiflorum , to the exclusion of others . In the course of normal browsing , deer consume larger individuals , leaving shorter ones behind . This information can be used to assess deer density and its effect on understory growth in general . 
 When foraging intensity increases , individuals become shorter each growing season due to the reduction in energy reserves from less photosynthetic production . One study determined that the ideal deer density in northeastern Illinois , based on T. grandiflorum as an indicator of overall understory health , is 4 to 6 animals per square kilometer . This is based on a 12 to 14 cm stem height as an acceptable healthy height . In practice , deer densities as high as 30 deer per square kilometers are known to occur in restricted or fractured habitat where natural control mechanisms ( that is , predators like wolves ) are lacking . Such densities , if maintained over more than a few years , can be very damaging to the understory and lead to extinction of some local understory plant populations . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Trillium grandiflorum is one of the most popular trilliums in cultivation , primarily because of the size of its flowers and its relative ease of cultivation . Although not particularly demanding , its cultivation is a slow and rather uncertain process , due to usually slow growth , wide variations in growth speed and sometimes capricious germination rates . As a result , the vast majority of plants and rhizomes in commerce are collected in the wild , and such heavy collecting , combined with other pressures such as habitat destruction and grazing , may effectively endanger the plants in some areas . This also creates tensions between Trillium enthusiasts and conservation proponents . Transplantation ( as with almost all non @-@ weedy wild plants ) is a delicate process , and in many cases results in the death of the plant . In cultivation , T. grandiflorum may flower in as little as 4 to 5 years after germination ( compared to the usual 7 to 10 in the wild ) , but these cases appear to be exceptions rather than the rule . One study revealed 20 or so individuals performing so well out of about 10 @,@ 000 seeds planted , only 20 % of which germinated after a year . However , barring plant destruction , T. grandiflorum can continue flowering every year after it has begun . 
 This plant has gained the Royal Horticultural Society 's Award of Garden Merit . 
 = = Cultural usage = = 
 As a particularly conspicuous forest flower , T. grandiflorum was designated the provincial emblem of Ontario in 1937 ( Flora Emblem Act ) , and as the state wild flower of Ohio in 1987 . As a symbol of Ontario , a stylized trillium flower features prominently on the official flag of the province 's French @-@ speaking community . It is also frequently used by the Canadian Heraldic Authority to represent Ontario in grants of arms . Although a network of laws make picking wildflowers illegal in the province on any Crown or provincially owned land , it is not , unlike widely believed , specifically illegal ( or necessarily harmful ) to pick the species in Ontario . 
 = Neverwinter Nights 2 : Mask of the Betrayer = 
 Neverwinter Nights 2 : Mask of the Betrayer is a role @-@ playing video game developed by Obsidian Entertainment and published by Atari . It is an expansion pack for Neverwinter Nights 2 . It was released in Autumn 2007 for the PC in North America , Europe , and Australia . Like the first game , Mask of the Betrayer is set in the Forgotten Realms campaign setting of the paper and pencil role @-@ playing game Dungeons & Dragons and employs the 3 @.@ 5 edition rules . 
 Mask of the Betrayer continues the story of Neverwinter Nights 2 by following the fictional main character , the Shard @-@ bearer , who is afflicted by a curse that requires the devouring of spirits ( and occasionally souls ) to survive , and the character 's quest to determine the nature of the curse . The game takes place in two nations of the Forgotten Realms , Rashemen and Thay , which are considered part of Faerûn 's " <unk> East . " 
 The expansion received generally favorable reviews upon its release . New character traits , such as spells and combat abilities , were welcomed by players , as were the storyline and setting . The game 's technical aspects received mixed reception , with some reviewers welcoming the changes and others complaining that the technical glitches present in the original game had still not been addressed . The new " spirit eating " mechanic , which forces players to constantly replenish the main character 's life force by sucking out the force of spirits , undead , and gods was not appreciated by many reviewers . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Mask of the Betrayer is an expansion pack for Neverwinter Nights 2 and its core gameplay is identical . The game uses the 3 @.@ 5 edition rules of the tabletop role @-@ playing game Dungeons & Dragons . Players can create a character from scratch and make use of Mask of the Betrayer 's new races , classes , and feats , or import an existing character from Neverwinter Nights 2 . Characters must be at level 18 to begin the game . The level cap has been raised from 20 to 30 , allowing for epic level characters and accompanying prestige classes and feats . Mask of the Betrayer features all of the races from Neverwinter Nights 2 , as well as introducing two types of elves ( the wild elf and the half @-@ drow ) , and four types of genasi . It also contains two new base classes , the " favored soul " and " spirit shaman " , and five new prestige classes . The game adds more than 100 new feats and magical spells to the base game . 
 Like other Dungeons & Dragons games , the player character in Mask of the Betrayer generally relies on combat to progress throughout the game . The hero has different options in combat depending on their choice of class and abilities , including melee or ranged physical attacks and spells . The player character also has the opportunity to solve puzzles occasionally , such as breaking a contract with a devil by searching for loopholes . Certain actions , such as defeating enemies , result in the player character being awarded with experience points which are used to gain levels and become more powerful . Throughout the adventure , the player character is able to recruit followers and create a party . Each follower has their own agenda , and the hero may alienate followers with their actions if they disagree on a course of action . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Like other games in the Neverwinter Nights series , Mask of the Betrayer takes place in the Forgotten Realms campaign setting . The story is a direct sequel to the plot of Neverwinter Nights 2 , set almost immediately following the events at the main game 's end . The main campaign is set in Rashemen near the kingdom of Thay , and the Red Wizards of Thay are a driving force behind the campaign story . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 In Act I , the Shard @-@ bearer 's story resumes after the defeat of the King of Shadows . The player awakens alone in an underground barrow in Rashemen , where he meets Safiya , a Red Wizard of Thay . The player follows Safiya to the Veil Theater in the nearby town of Mulsantir , hoping to find Lienna , an acquaintance of Safiya ’ s mother , who is supposed to provide the player with some much @-@ needed answers . Unfortunately , the player finds that the theater has been attacked by Red Wizards , and Lienna has been killed . At the back of the theater , the player finds a portal to the Plane of Shadow , a dark reflection of the Prime Material Plane , where he defeats the Red Wizards who murdered Lienna . Upon returning to the Prime Material Plane , the player finds that the spirit @-@ god <unk> has besieged Mulsantir , demanding the player ’ s blood . The player confronts <unk> and defeats his spirit army . At the end of the battle , the player learns that he has become a spirit @-@ eater , an accursed being who must feed upon <unk> and elementals ( and sometimes mortal souls ) in order to survive . 
 In Act II , the player meets a group of gargoyle @-@ like creatures who reveal that Lienna and her " red twin " ordered them to kidnap the player from the Sword Coast . This plot was allegedly inspired by the <unk> Coven , a sisterhood of hag oracles who dwell in an ancient flooded city . The player follows this clue to Lake Mulsantir , where he finds another portal to the Plane of Shadow . In this " alternate reality , " the player enters the flooded city and confronts the hags . The <unk> Coven reveal that Lienna , along with Safiya 's mother Nefris , were responsible for the hero 's current dilemma . They send the player to Nefris 's Academy in Thay to discover her motive . 
 At the Academy , the player enters a portal to the Astral Plane where they meet <unk> , the former god of the dead . <unk> reveals that the spirit @-@ eater “ curse " originated as a punishment for his former servant , Akachi " The Betrayer " , who once led a crusade against the realm of the dead . Akachi ’ s empty and hungering soul now resides in the player ’ s body , and the player ’ s own soul has been displaced to the Wall of the Faithless , in the realm of the dead . 
 In Act III , the player meets the Founder of the Academy , and Safiya realizes that she , Lienna , and Nefris are all splinters of the Founder ’ s soul , and that the Founder was once Akachi ’ s lover . The Founder explains that , while Lienna and Nefris understood their identities , the truth was hidden from Safiya for her own safety . The Founder also admits that she is responsible for the player 's plight - she wanted to use the player to end the spirit @-@ eater curse ( and Akachi ’ s suffering , as well ) . She returns the silver sword of Gith to the player , which allows him to open the Betrayer 's Gate and travel to the realm of the dead . There the player finds the City of Judgment , ruled by the current God of the Dead , Kelemvor <unk> . As the player arrives , an army is assembling outside the walls , led by Akachi ’ s captains from his First Crusade - <unk> , a fallen solar , <unk> , a <unk> , and Sey <unk> , a blue dragon . The captains recognize the player as Akachi ’ s heir , and the player must decide whether to lead their crusade against the City of Judgment or to oppose them . 
 Depending upon his choice , the player character must assault or defend three key positions around the City of Judgment . After the battle , the player learns where his own soul is located and wrests it from the Wall of the Faithless . The player is then pulled into a dreamscape where he must battle Akachi 's avatar , The Faceless Man , for control of his soul . After defeating the Faceless Man , Kelemvor narrates the ending , which varies based on the player 's choices throughout the game . 
 = = Development = = 
 Obsidian Entertainment began planning Mask of the Betrayer , codenamed " <unk> " by its developers , before the release of Neverwinter Nights 2 . The game was announced in April 2007 . Obsidian Entertainment 's CEO , Feargus Urquhart , said that Mask of the Betrayer would continue the story of Neverwinter Nights 2 , and improvements would be made in character development and the companion system along the lines of a previous Obsidian game , Star Wars : Knights of the Old Republic II . Lead designer Kevin Saunders described the game as " high @-@ level " , and characters would need to be at least level 18 before starting . A character could be imported from the first game , or players could make one from scratch and take advantage of Mask of the Betrayer 's new races , classes , and other features . The races consisted of two new types of elf as well as all four basic types of elemental genasi ; all of which had been commonly requested by the fan community . New base classes include the favored soul and the spirit shaman , both divine in nature . Prestige classes include the Red Wizard of Thay , the first time the class has appeared in a video game , and the Arcane Scholar of Candlekeep , a new class created by the game 's developers . Obsidian stated that the game would also include over 100 new feats and spells , including many epic feats . 
 A priority for developers was the improvement of the original game 's performance . Saunders said " Throughout the course of the project , we fixed many bugs , optimized performance , made better use of the graphics technology , and in general , tied up loose ends . For example , we revamped the camera and party controls , adding an RTS @-@ like strategy mode that makes combat much more enjoyable . " Neverwinter Nights 2 programmers made improvements to the engine , . such as the addition of a color desaturation filter that turns almost all colors into shades of black and white . The art team developed new environments for the regions of Rashemen and Thay that they felt would be appealing to the game 's modding community , such as snow @-@ covered forests and a magical academy . Mask of the Betrayer is the first time either region has been featured in a Dungeons & Dragons video game ; Obsidian stated that one design goal was " to immerse the player in the land of Rashemen . The art , music and characters were chosen and crafted to convey this very intriguing area of the Forgotten Realms . " 
 Modifications were also made to the Neverwinter Nights 2 toolset with the intention of giving more options to module creators in the fan community and making it easier for players taking the role of the Dungeon Master . Urquhart said that the additions include " an Appearance editor for humanoids and monsters to make it easier to cloth and color them , the saving and loading of lighting sets , undo functionality for terrain drawing , creating blueprints more easily , adding in more trees to use , [ and ] refining the texture sculpting tools . " Over two dozen monsters were created for Mask of the Betrayer , such as new types of golem , dragons , and <unk> . New spell effects , character models , and environmental effects were also added ; Saunders stated that the genasi models in particular had been a challenge for artists and he had originally opposed the inclusion of the new races because of this . 
 The design team was focused on making the companion system deeper and contain a sense of accountability with players . Companions who are treated well and who agree with the protagonist 's actions bestow certain benefits , such as bonuses in combat . Companions who are treated poorly will not cooperate with the hero and may even abandon the hero . The story , revolving around the hole in the player character 's chest and his need to feed on the spirits of others to survive , was described by Obsidian as less all @-@ encompassing than the first game and more personal in nature . Saunders commented " It 's an epic story , but it 's a very personal one . You awaken in a pool of your own blood . Your immediate goal is survival . The shard of the Sword of Gith has been ripped from your chest and in its place is a dark hunger , a craving that threatens to consume you . The early part of the game involves determining the source and implications of this craving . " Saunders also stated that the story , written by creative lead George <unk> , was " very dark " and that the ending would bring some closure to the story of the Shard @-@ Bearer . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Reviews of Mask of the Betrayer were generally favorable . Obsidian Entertainment 's handling of epic levels in the expansion was particularly praised , although some reviewers said that at higher levels the expansion became unbalanced . A number of reviewers mentioned that the expansion allows for more customization of both characters and levels , with Game Informer saying that " Piles of new feats , spells , and classes will give even seasoned D & D vets plenty to explore , either in the official campaign or custom scenarios built by the community . Likewise , builders can benefit from the ever @-@ improving toolset and ( supposedly ) fixed persistent @-@ world implementation . " Eurogamer also described the new classes , prestige classes , and races as " pretty damn neat " . Eurogamer stated that starting Neverwinter Nights 2 over from the beginning after installing Mask of the Betrayer is also interesting because the expansion " integrate [ s ] with the previous game ( i.e. you can select one of the new races and classes and go back and play NWN2 with them ) " . 
 Reviewers said that the expansion 's single @-@ player game was more difficult than that of Neverwinter Nights 2 ; 1UP.com stated that Obsidian " [ <unk> ] the ante with tougher enemies and a more challenging experience altogether " The expansion also has more puzzles which make the player think , rather than somehow being resolvable through combat , with one reviewer noting that the expansion has " genuinely tough logic puzzles ( some frustratingly short on clues ) and a series of side quests that completely vary ( some might not even open up ) depending on your party makeup " . Multiple reviewers mentioned that the expansion is more serious than Neverwinter Nights 2 . 
 The game ’ s story and writing were praised by many reviewers , with some noting its avoidance of common fantasy clichés . Some reviewers also compared the quality and tone of the writing to Neil Gaiman 's The Sandman series and to Planescape : Torment . 
 " Planescape : Torment fans will feel right at home , reading the intriguing passages that depict the character ’ s actions and feelings , among other things , while newcomers will probably just skip them ( their loss ) . And even though the amount of text is nowhere near as large as that of PS : T , the quality is right up there with the big boys , with even the most insignificant ally having at least one or two interesting things to say . " 
 The expansion 's sound was described by GameZone as being " exactly what it needs to [ be ] , in that it supports the story and gameplay . " Its voice work was described as " decent " , although some dialogue is purely text . Graphics were also improved from Neverwinter Nights 2 , with better textures and spell effects , in addition to a new option so that the player can change the game 's level of violence . Reviewers also mentioned that the graphics , especially that of spells such as lightning , could make combat difficult ; GameSpy said , 
 " All those high @-@ level spells also throw out a ton of spectacular graphics effects that do wonders to obscure what 's going on during a battle . As beautiful as they are [ ... ] , we 'd trade all the eye candy in the world for the ability to accurately select a target . " 
 Mask of the Betrayer was nominated for Best RPG of the Year by G4 TV , and it was named Runner @-@ up for RPG of the Year by <unk> . 
 Criticism of the expansion was aimed at its poor camera angles and other technical issues , although the game and updates since Neverwinter Nights 2 's release fixed many bugs of the original . IGN criticized the spirit meter mechanic , a statement echoed by GameSpy , who said , 
 " On a purely mechanical level , the spirit meter ends up being more annoyance than fun . [ ... ] from a role @-@ playing / story standpoint it 's actually the reverse of what the mechanic was supposed to accomplish . " 
 John Walker , for GamesRadar , criticized the companions available : 
 " NWN2 was immediately joyful , with hilarious characters and dialogue juxtaposing the dark story . <unk> is far more serious , and while the companions fulfill the role of representing personality extremes , none of them are particularly entertaining company . There 's no one to compare with <unk> 's dwarfish temper , nor <unk> 's impish naughtiness . Most are positively dull . And this isn 't helped by the opening dungeon being tedious beyond belief . " – John Walker , GamesRadar 
 = Enterprise ( NX @-@ 01 ) = 
 Enterprise is a fictional spaceship which appeared in the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Enterprise . It had the in @-@ universe registration of NX @-@ 01 and appeared earlier in the franchise timeline than any other Starfleet ship named Enterprise . The producers of the series had originally intended to use an Akira @-@ class starship as seen in Star Trek : First Contact ( 1996 ) , but production designer Herman Zimmerman talked them into using a design with greater influence from Star Trek : The Original Series . Doug Drexler designed the exterior of the vessel , eventually arriving at the final design after also suggesting a Daedalus @-@ class starship with a sphere @-@ shaped primary hull , and a ship more reminiscent of the USS Enterprise ( NCC @-@ 1701 ) complete with secondary hull . 
 These ideas were turned down by the producers , who instead pushed for the final version as seen . Drexler also proposed a refit design , which may have been used if the series continued into a fifth season . The interior of the ship was designed by a number of staff members , but primarily by Zimmerman . He took inspiration from the fast attack submarines of the United States Navy as well as considering the previous vessels named Enterprise in the franchise . In the series itself , the ship was first seen in the pilot episode " Broken Bow " and was seen throughout the series undergoing various upgrades . Its missions included an initial period of deep space exploration and a mission into the Delphic Expanse following the Xindi attack on Earth ; it was also instrumental in the formation of the Coalition of Planets with the Vulcans , Andorians and Tellarites . 
 The final appearance occurred in " These Are The Voyages ... " , where the ship is seen en route to the signing of the Federation charter and the decommissioning of the ship . Enterprise has appeared in several non @-@ canon novels , which describe both its actions in the Romulan War and the vessel 's final fate as a museum ship in orbit of Pluto . A model of the NX @-@ 01 was seen on screen in the 2013 film Star Trek Into Darkness , and it has appeared in the video game Star Trek : Encounters . There was a negative fan reaction to the design , but television critics were mostly positive , calling the design " a sort of retro @-@ futurism " . Several Enterprise toys and models have been released , including versions by Art Asylum , Diamond Select Toys , QMx and <unk> Publications . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the original pitch for Star Trek : The Original Series by creator Gene Roddenberry , the vessel that the series was set on was called the SS Yorktown . The starship was subsequently renamed USS Enterprise before the start of the series because of the growing real world fame of the recently launched U.S. Navy aircraft carrier of the same name . The name Enterprise has been linked with Star Trek since . A second Enterprise made its debut in Star Trek IV : The Voyage Home ( 1986 ) , suffixed NCC @-@ 1701 @-@ A. The fourth version was introduced in a third season episode of Star Trek : The Next Generation entitled " Yesterday 's Enterprise " . That series was set on the fifth version of the vessel , prefixed NCC @-@ 1701 @-@ D. The missing third Enterprise , prefixed NCC @-@ 1701 @-@ B , was introduced in Star Trek Generations ( 1994 ) . 
 Following the end of Star Trek : Voyager , which had been used to launch UPN , they were seeking a new Star Trek series . The network contacted Rick Berman during the fifth season of Star Trek : Voyager , and informed him that if he didn 't develop a new Star Trek show then they would find someone else who would . Berman had previously been an executive producer on Voyager , and other series dating back to The Next Generation . Berman contacted Brannon Braga , and the two became the executive producers on the new show . The new series launched after the end of Voyager , but was set some 150 years before the events seen in The Original Series . The new series was originally called Enterprise , without the Star Trek prefix . UPN president Dean Valentine said that " Paramount felt it was no longer necessary . Enterprise is synonymous with Star Trek " . Berman 's idea was to set it in an earlier time period , with limited technology such as the ship only being able to travel up to warp 5 , as he felt that after three series being set in roughly the same time period it would be exciting for the fans . 
 = = Concept and design = = 
 The first season was originally intended to be based around the construction of the ship . However , UPN wanted a more typical ship @-@ based Star Trek series and so the ship was presented as almost finished in the pilot episode , " Broken Bow " . Before the start of the series , the ship was referred to as the SS Enterprise . 
 An early design was for a version with a secondary hull , but it appeared to be too similar to the ship seen in The Original Series . That design had been partially inspired by Berman viewing the 2002 Ford Thunderbird , and seeing that it was a modern update of the original design . So the designers took the design of the USS Enterprise from The Original Series and updated it , but ultimately it looked like an update to the same vessel . 
 The second design concept was similar to the Akira @-@ class starship as seen on television in the Star Trek : Deep Space Nine and Voyager era , with the producers initially intending to use that class of vessel for Enterprise before Herman Zimmerman convinced them to go with a design with greater inspiration from The Original Series . The Akira itself had been created by Alex Jaeger for the 1996 film Star Trek : First Contact with influences from the Battlestar Galactica , the Klingon Bird of Prey and the Miranda @-@ class starship originally seen in Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan . A similar design was created for Star Trek : The Academy Years , a film proposed by Harve Bennett in 1989 . This featured the primary hull of the Enterprise seen in The Original Series , but without a secondary hull . 
 = = = Exterior design = = = 
 The Enterprise NX @-@ 01 was designed by Doug Drexler , and based on the features of the Akira @-@ class . The new class itself was designated as NX by the producers , but Drexler referred to it as the Enterprise class due to the naval tradition of naming the class after the first vessel . Drexler had intended for the ship to be similar in design to the Daedalus @-@ class starship with a sphere @-@ shaped primary hull , but the producers wanted a flat saucer @-@ shaped hull as it was more immediately recognizable as a Star Trek vessel . Drexler deliberately attempted to insert references to The Original Series into the ship . One of these was narrow struts leading from the body of the ship to the warp nacelles – however Dan Curry wanted them made bulkier as seen in ships of later series . Drexler included a leading edge at the front of the nacelles , and later described that the original struts would have been around a third more than those . 
 Drexler also wanted the <unk> collectors at the front of the warp nacelles to be orange like The Original Series , but this was overruled by producers once more , who wanted them red also like the later series . Drexler thought that this was because Rick Berman wasn 't fond of bright colors , and so Star Trek : Enterprise was filmed in greys and dark blues . The rear ends of the nacelles were influenced by the Enterprise from The Original Series , with the spheres that appeared on the 1960s version split in two for the NX @-@ 01 . Direct elements from The Original Series which did make it on to the NX @-@ 01 were the impulse engine cones and the lower sensor dome . The most prominent element from the first television Enterprise was the deflector dish . For the NX @-@ 01 , it was compressed on the vertical axis and placed at the front of the saucer . The process of Drexler getting his designs approved by the producers was later described as " a long hard battle " by production illustrator and creator of the Enterprise @-@ E , John Eaves . 
 The exterior model was created in CGI rather than as a physical model , with the production done by Pierre Drolet from Foundation Imaging using LightWave 3D . Two versions were created – a high definition version which was created for use in the television series itself and a lower resolution , which was also referred to as the " approved model " . The low @-@ res model was used for promotional purposes while work was conducted on the television model . The exterior of the ship made its debut in a centerfold spread in the July 14 , 2001 edition of TV Guide using the approved model . This version looked smaller as the windows on the ship were larger than used on the television version , and the hull had a bronze tint . Regarding this change in coloration , Drexler later said that he didn 't know when the change was made as both he and Zimmerman approved the prior version . 
 Following this initial usage , the approved model was only used as a stand @-@ in for the production version in the previews in the fourth season . The drawing of the exterior of Enterprise in the captain 's ready room was created by John Eaves in less than 24 hours alongside four other drawings of earlier incarnations of the name . The shuttlecraft on the show were directly inspired by the Lockheed Martin X @-@ 33 , with Zimmerman saying that the re @-@ entry vehicles used now will be the same technology used in the time of Enterprise because up until then they won 't have had the technological push that comes from developing the advanced technology seen being introduced for the first time on the show . These were referred to as <unk> in the show ; Enterprise was equipped with two of them . 
 = = = = Season 5 = = = = 
 Doug Drexler had intended for Enterprise to undergo a major refit if a fifth season had been produced , and the series had not been cancelled at the end of the fourth season . This would have seen the addition of a secondary hull , and resulted in the ship taking on an appearance closer to the vessels in The Original Series and later series . The redesign made its debut in the 2011 edition of the official Ships of the Line calendar . It was one of two designs for vessels never seen on screen to appear in that year 's calendar , with Matt Jefferies ' design for the USS Enterprise ( <unk> @-@ 330 ) also appearing . 
 Subsequent Enterprise relaunch novels ( such as Rise of the Federation : A Choice of Futures by Christopher L. Bennett ) have used this new design as part of their plots . Admiral Jonathan Archer asks that the refitted design be named Columbia class , in honor of the NX @-@ 02 Columbia which was lost with all hands . 
 = = = Interior design = = = 
 The interior of the vessel was designed by Zimmerman , who visited United States Navy fast @-@ attack submarines for inspiration . He also kept in mind the heritage of the other ships named Enterprise in the history of Star Trek . The designs attempted to allow a greater freedom of filming angles than seen in previous Star Trek series . The bridge stations were originally designed with both angular and tubular elements , but the tubular elements were dropped as they seemed out of place . John Eaves created the designs for the stations , while Mike and Denise Okuda , Jim Van Over and Anthony Fredrickson created the mechanical and detailed elements . Inspiration was taken from United States Navy ships and the Space Shuttle , such as the inclusion of operations manuals on some of the stations such as communications . Other elements which were added included a switch from the touch screen controls seen in series such as The Next Generation to more hands @-@ on dials and buttons as appeared in The Original Series . The set also included what was described as " busy boxes " by the crew , which were parts of the consoles which folded out and were filled with wires - so that background actors could look busy during a shot when the Enterprise was being refitted or when there was battle damage to be seen on screen . 
 Zimmerman and his team took feedback from the directors of previous Star Trek series to make the new space easier in which to film . Whereas in other series there has been purpose built sets for briefing rooms , following the feedback this area was built into the bridge itself as the directors had stated that it proved difficult to make several people sit around a table seem interesting . The transporter design was intended as a reference to the original series design that was created by Matt Jefferies , with Zimmerman including certain design elements such as the wall patterns around the transporter itself . The design of the engineering deck was overhauled from previous series with the intention for it to look like the engine room of a nuclear submarine . Zimmerman described it saying , " You 're going to see a very powerful engine that looks like a very powerful engine . " 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Deep space exploration = = = 
 The ship first appeared in the pilot of Star Trek : Enterprise , " Broken Bow " . The episode showed the maiden voyage of Enterprise , with the crew returning a Klingon named Klang ( Tom Lister , Jr . ) to his homeworld , Qo 'noS . Following that success , the ship and crew are ordered to begin a deep space exploration mission . At launch , the vessel was limited to a maximum speed of warp 5 and was equipped with an experimental transporter . The ship was launched three weeks ahead of schedule on April 16 , <unk> , and several of its weapon systems were not yet online but it was equipped with polarized hull plating as a defensive measure . It was not until the following month while in combat with an unknown foe that its spatial torpedoes were calibrated ; and the phase cannons were installed in the following September . 
 The exploration mission was temporarily cancelled in the final episode of the first season , " Shockwave " , following the destruction of a colony after a shuttlepod from Enterprise ignited the atmosphere . The ship was recalled to Earth , but after an investigation showed that the Suliban were responsible , the mission resumed . In " Minefield " , Enterprise suffered a hull breach from a Romulan mine , but the crew was informed of a nearby repair facility where the breach was repaired in " Dead Stop " . Following the failure of a plasma injector in the warp drive , the ship had to make a detour to the Kreetassan homeworld in " A Night in Sickbay " . 
 = = = The Delphic Expanse = = = 
 In the episode " The Expanse " , the final episode of the second season , Enterprise was recalled once again to Earth following an attack by the Xindi resulting in the deaths of seven million people , mostly in Florida . The ship and crew were given a new mission , to go into the Delphic Expanse and track down the Xindi to prevent the use of a greater weapon which would destroy Earth . Before departure , the ship was equipped with photonic torpedoes , a new command centre and took on board a detachment of Military Assault Command Operations ( MACO ) soldiers . During the year @-@ long mission in the expanse , the ship and its crew searched for the location of the Xindi superweapon . During this time , Enterprise was repeatedly damaged by the spatial anomalies in the area , which appear to be caused by several alien @-@ built moon @-@ sized spheres . The ship suffers a further hull breach and other damage during the events of " Chosen Realm " when the ship and crew are caught up in the <unk> civil war . 
 While investigating a possible location of the superweapon in " Azati Prime " , Enterprise was severely damaged by several Xindi vessels and its warp coil was destroyed . This necessitates the crew stealing a warp core from an Illyrian vessel in the following episode " Damage " as without it the ship could not travel at warp and intercept the Xindi weapon . Following that acquisition , the ship and crew is approached by a version of Enterprise which had been sent 117 years into the past and has become a generational ship attempting not to disrupt the timeline . The crew of the two versions of Enterprise work together and enable the present @-@ day Enterprise to enter a subspace corridor to allow Captain Jonathan Archer ( Scott Bakula ) to meet with the Xindi Council . The whereabouts of the future Enterprise are unknown , but there is speculation as to whether it was destroyed or ceased to exist . 
 After tracking down the Xindi weapon in " The Council " , the weapon was launched in " Countdown " with Enterprise in pursuit . While Captain Archer leads a boarding party onto the weapon in the final episode of third season , " Zero Hour " , Enterprise is commanded by T 'Pol ( Jolene Blalock ) who directs it to a nearby sphere and Commander Tucker modifies the ship 's deflector dish to use it as a weapon to destroy the sphere . Despite the interference of several Sphere Builders , the modifications destroy the sphere and set off a chain reaction which destroys all the other spheres within the Expanse . Enterprise rendezvous with Archer 's away team and it is revealed to the crew that Archer didn 't make it off the superweapon before it was destroyed . The heavily damaged ship is returned to Earth inside a Xindi @-@ Aquatic vessel . Upon arrival , the crew find that the events of the Temporal Cold War have overtaken them and the vessel is sent back in time to an alternative 20th century where Nazi Germany has successfully invaded the United States . After the crew defeat the alien Vosk ( Jack Gwaltney ) and recover Captain Archer , the ship is returned to its correct time by Temporal Agent Daniels ( Matt Winston ) in " Storm Front " . 
 = = = The Coalition of Planets and the Romulan War = = = 
 Following the Xindi mission , Enterprise undergoes a further refit in " Home " . In " Daedalus " , Dr. Emory Erickson ( Bill Cobbs ) , the inventor of the device , performed an upgrade on the transporter . Further upgrades occurred to the plasma injector in the warp drive , allowing Enterprise to reach a cruising speed of warp 5 @.@ 02 and an emergency speed of warp 5 @.@ 2 . While carrying a Tellarite Ambassador to a conference on Babel One , the ship is diverted due to attacks on several nearby vessels . It is discovered to be a Romulan vessel which uses holograms to change its appearance . The attacks are explained in " The Aenar " as being an attempt by the Romulans to provoke a war between the Andorians and the Tellarites , but instead Enterprise is used as the location for peace talks and is also one of a fleet of vessels used to create a sensor grid to track down the Romulan ship . This temporary alliance between the humans , Vulcans , Andorians and <unk> becomes known as the Coalition of Planets . 
 Enterprise returns to Earth once more to transport Commander Tucker for his transfer to the USS Columbia in " Affliction " . He moves back once again to Enterprise in the following episode , " Divergence " , after the two vessels undergo a dangerous high warp zip line transfer after Enterprise 's warp drive is sabotaged by Klingons . A Mirror Universe version of Enterprise is seen in the first part of " In a Mirror , Darkly " under the command of Captain Maximilian Forest ( Vaughn Armstrong ) . The ship is destroyed in combat with Tholians shortly after a mutiny by Commander Archer . In " Demons " and " Terra Prime " , Enterprise travels back to Earth to resolve a crisis with a terrorist cell called Terra Prime which seeks to remove all alien influence from Earth . 
 The Romulan war was not seen on screen , but instead has been described in the non @-@ canon novel The Romulan War : Beneath the Raptor 's Wing by Michael A. Martin , and subsequent follow @-@ up books . The events of the episode " These Are the Voyages ... " on board Enterprise are set six years after those seen in " Terra Prime " in 2161 , but are actually related in the holodeck on board Enterprise @-@ D during the events of the Star Trek : The Next Generation episode " The Pegasus " . Following the Romulan war , Enterprise is diverted en route to Earth where is it due to be present for the signing of the Federation charter . The non @-@ canon Shatnerverse novel Captain 's Glory states that following its decommissioning , Enterprise was placed into the orbit of Pluto as a museum piece . 
 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 Enterprise appeared in the video games Star Trek : Encounters and Star Trek : Legacy , both released in 2006 . It is the first vessel that the player controls in each storyline , before moving onto the USS Enterprise seen in The Original Series and later depictions . The most recent appearance of Enterprise was as a model in a collection depicting the history of flight in Fleet Admiral Alexander Marcus ' ( Peter Weller ) office in Star Trek Into Darkness ( 2013 ) . It was placed next to other historical vessels such as the Wright Flyer , the Space Shuttle and the NX @-@ Alpha . 
 = = Reception and commentary = = 
 There was a negative fan reaction to the design of Enterprise , and criticism of the efforts of Drexler and the other designers . When questioned about this , Geoffrey <unk> stated in an interview , " Having been around then , I also know that Doug Drexler and John Eaves did EXACTLY what the producers asked them to : Rick and Braga had very strong opinions , and knew exactly what they wanted . " 
 Allan Johnson , while writing for the Chicago Tribune , said that Enterprise looked " sleeker and less cheesy than the original ' Trek ' . " Johnson added that although it contained technology that wasn 't as advanced as that seen in the earlier Star Trek series set in the 24th century , it " still maintains a techno @-@ savvy , post @-@ 1960s ' Trek ' flair . " David Kronke in the Los Angeles Daily News , said that the sets were " largely gun @-@ metal gray , representing a sort of retro @-@ futurism – sort of what might 've happened if ' 50s sci @-@ fi design cliches had had today 's technology to work with " and that the consoles had a " simpler mechanical feel " . In his review of " Broken Bow " for The Washington Post , David Segal , described Enterprise 's speed of warp 4 as slower than a Hyundai . 
 = = = Models and toy lines = = = 
 The initial 7 @-@ inch ( 18 cm ) figure range by Art Asylum each shipped with a Enterprise bridge console . They slotted together to form a bridge diorama . The actual Enterprise was also released by Art Asylum , and debuted at the 2002 New York Toy Fair . Following the acquisition of Art Asylum by Diamond Select Toys in 2007 , the company continued to release Enterprise toys . These included both the main television version and a Mirror Universe configuration as seen in " In A Mirror , Darkly " . 
 Enterprise has also been released as part of model lines . These include a 350 : 1 scale replica of the CGI model by QMx . It features more than 150 LEDs , sound effects and a signed plaque by Doug Drexler . Each QMx model takes 150 hours to make and was limited to a production run of 1 @,@ 000 units . QMx also produced the models seen in Star Trek Into Darkness , including the one of Enterprise . Enterprise has also been released as a model kit by Round 2 Models as part of their Polar Lights line . These include both the version seen in the television series , and the refit design intended for season five . 
 = Germany Schulz = 
 Adolph George " Germany " Schulz ( April 19 , 1883 – April 14 , 1951 ) was an All @-@ American American football center for the University of Michigan Wolverines from 1904 to 1905 and from 1907 to 1908 . While playing at Michigan , Schulz is credited with having invented the spiral snap and with developing the practice of standing behind the defensive line . As the first lineman to play in back of the line on defense , he is credited as football 's first linebacker . 
 During his time at Michigan , Schulz also became involved in one of college football 's earliest recruiting controversies , as some suggested that he was a " ringer " recruited by Michigan coach Fielding H. Yost . Schulz was 21 years old when he enrolled at Michigan and had worked in an Indiana steel mill and reportedly played for either amateur or professional teams . Michigan was refused re @-@ entry into the Western Conference in 1908 when it insisted on playing the 25 @-@ year @-@ old Schulz for a fourth season in violation of conference eligibility rules . 
 Despite the controversies , Schulz is remembered both as an innovator and one of the toughest football players in the early days of the game . In 1951 , Schulz was selected as the greatest center in football history in a poll conducted by the National Football Foundation and became one of the initial inductees into the College Football Hall of Fame . He has also been inducted into the Michigan Sports Hall of Fame and the University of Michigan Athletic Hall of Honor . 
 After his days as a collegiate athlete ended , Schulz assumed a variety of assistant coaching , athletic director , and head coaching positions in college football . He eventually entered the insurance industry , where he enjoyed a long career . He died in 1951 , several days after being named the greatest center in football history by the College Football Foundation . 
 = = Childhood = = 
 Schulz was born in Fort Wayne , Indiana , the son of German immigrants . His father , Adolph F. Schulz , Sr. , was a doctor who was born in 1854 , and his mother , Sophia , was born in 1850 . The couple emigrated from Germany to the United States in 1880 with their infant daughter Wilhelmina ( born December 1879 ) . Schulz also had two brothers , Fred Schulz and Arthur Schulz , both of whom became doctors . Schulz played football for Fort Wayne High School and was also a member of amateur city teams for several years . 
 = = Star athlete at the University of Michigan = = 
 = = = Concerns that Schulz was a ringer = = = 
 In 1904 , Schulz enrolled at the University of Michigan at age 21 , standing 6 ft 2 in ( 1 @.@ 88 m ) and weighing 215 pounds ( 98 kg ; 15 st 5 lb ) . In the early 1900s , many decried the increasing recruitment of ringers — older , experienced players whose qualifications as " student athletes " were suspect . Michigan 's coach , Fielding H. Yost , whose teams outscored their opponents 2 @,@ 821 to 42 between 1901 and 1905 , had been accused of using ringers before . When Yost accepted the head coaching job at Michigan , he had recruited his star player , 23 @-@ year @-@ old Willie Heston , to transfer to Michigan from the California State Normal School . When the 21 @-@ year @-@ old Schulz joined the team , there were suggestions that he was Yost 's newest ringer . The suspicions were exacerbated by reports that Schulz was a factory worker in an Indiana steel mill who had played for a half @-@ dozen professional teams before enrolling at Michigan . 
 Until the time of his death , reports of his having been a ringer angered Schulz . While he did work in a steel mill , Schulz insisted that he did not " come out " of the steel mill to play football . Instead , Schulz said he " went into " the mill to harden himself up for the football season . When asked years later how he got to Michigan , Schulz recalled that , in the summer of 1904 , he was working in the mill and had received several offers to play football . One day , his father called to say that Fielding Yost of Michigan was in his office . Schulz ran down the street and rushed into his father 's office , where he was introduced to Yost . His father promptly told him , " Adolph , this is Mr. Yost . You are to play football for him at Michigan . We have made all the arrangements " . 
 In September 1904 , on his way to Ann Arbor , Michigan ( the home of the University of Michigan ) , Schulz recalled that he stopped in Chicago , Illinois , where he spent four days drinking beer and generally having a " swell time " . A group of Michigan representatives eventually found him in Chicago and put him on the next train to Ann Arbor . When he arrived in Ann Arbor , Yost was furious and accused Schulz of flirting with Amos Alonzo Stagg , the legendary coach of the University of Chicago . Schulz was immediately taken out to Michigan 's training camp at Whitmore Lake and kept asking Yost when he was going to be allowed to register . Yost told Schulz that he had taken care of it . According to Schulz , he was registered two weeks before he ever saw the campus . 
 Yost 's account differed dramatically from that of Schulz . Sensitive to allegations that he was recruiting ringers , Yost denied having recruited Schulz and claimed that Schulz was just another student who tried out for the team . According to Yost , the first time he ever saw Schulz was in the fall of 1904 when Schulz was waiting tables at a fraternity house in Ann Arbor and told Yost he would like to play football . Yost went so far as to say that he initially thought the young waiter looked too awkward to be a football player , but " did not want to discourage anybody " . 
 = = = Freshman year : Michigan 's undefeated season = = = 
 Schulz was the only freshman to play on Michigan 's 1904 football team . The team featured the school 's all @-@ time scoring leader , Willie Heston , finished with a record of 10 – 0 , and outscored opponents 567 – 22 . Schulz started all ten games for the 1904 team . 
 Schulz began his playing career at Michigan as a guard , starting five games at that position . However , mid @-@ way through the season , Yost moved Schulz to center , where he started the remaining five games . Schulz 's play at center was reported to have been " gilt @-@ edged " , and his accuracy in snapping the ball was praised by the team 's quarterback , Fred Norcross . Six games into the season , Schulz 's hometown newspaper reported on Schulz 's accomplishments under the headline : " Makes Good at Michigan " . The article noted : " Schulz went to Ann Arbor practically green at the game , but by hard and consistent work he has succeeded in winning a place on the greatest team in America , and is the only freshman out of fifty who was able to do so " . 
 Schulz was one of the larger football players of his time and was known as a fierce hitter . Schulz liked to tell a story about an incident during Michigan 's 1904 game against Oberlin College . He recalled : " We were playing Oberlin in 1904 . Their regular center was hurt and a little 155 @-@ pound fellow came in . I hit him as hard as I could . Imagine my surprise when he looked up and said , ' please sir , if you are determined to be fierce , let me know and I 'll get out of the way . ' I was no good the rest of the afternoon . Every time I looked at the little fellow , I had to break out laughing " . 
 = = = 1905 season : Stardom = = = 
 Before the 1905 season got underway , Schulz contracted malaria in the spring . Newspapers reported it was a " serious attack " and that he " has been quite ill " , but he was able to recuperate before the 1905 football season . In October 1905 , Coach Yost said : " In looking over the whole bunch , I do not see anyone who has improved more than Schulz . He is bigger and stronger than ever , and I do not know a man in the world that has it the least bit over him in the center position . I would not trade him for any other center rush in the country today . He looks good to me for the All @-@ America team right now " . Though he was not selected for the All @-@ America team in 1905 , Schulz did receive All @-@ Western honors . 
 = = = Innovations : The " spiral snap " and the " roving center " = = = 
 Schulz is widely credited with two important innovations in the development of the modern game of American football . First , he is credited with having invented the spiral snap . Before Schulz , centers passed the ball to one of the backs in an end @-@ over @-@ end manner . 
 Second , Schulz is credited with being the first center to step back from the line while playing defense . Prior to Schulz 's innovation , centers played in the line on defense . In 1905 , Schulz began dropping back from the line , enabling him to use his speed to move laterally and giving him greater coverage across the field of play . At the time , the innovation was referred to as a " roving center " , but it was effectively the birth of the linebacker position in American football . Asked how he developed the " roving center " idea , Schulz noted that the backs started from five yards behind the line and concluded , " No back living could move five yards while I was moving four " . He described his thinking to Coach Yost this way : " It 's all very simple , Yost . The ball carrier travels five yards while I travel only four yard to meet him . I know of no back who can beat me in a five @-@ yard race after giving me a one @-@ yard handicap " . 
 In 1954 , sports columnist Dave Lewis explored the history of the linebacker position , and concluded that Schulz was the " first of the breed " . Lewis wrote : " Schulz revolutionized defensive line play being the first to back up the line " . 
 Schulz recalled that the first time he stepped back from the line on defense , Coach Yost was horrified . Yost said , " Dutchman , what are you trying to do ? " " Stop ' em " , replied Schulz . " But you 're supposed to play in the line " , Yost insisted . " They 'll run over us . " " Listen Yost " , Schulz claims to have said , " My way is best . If any of ' em gets by me , I 'll move back into the line and stay there " . Yost eventually saw the wisdom in Schulz 's technique , and soon nearly all centers were backing up the line on defense . 
 = = = Ineligibility for the 1906 season = = = 
 Schulz 's promising football career took a detour in 1906 . Some sources indicate that Schulz missed the 1906 season for financial reasons . Schulz 's official biography at the College Football Hall of Fame states : " He missed the 1906 season ; he had dropped out of school because of a lack of funds . He worked in a steel mill in Fort Wayne , Indiana , and earned the money to return to college " . In fact , Schulz 's father was a successful doctor , and contemporary reports indicate that Schulz was ineligible to play in 1906 for academic reasons . In February 1906 , one paper reported that Schulz had been " dropped from the rolls on account of poor work during the semester " . Another report in March 1906 indicated that Schulz had left the university " by desire of the faculty " after he fell behind in his studies . In September 1906 , The Washington Post reported that Schulz 's academic problems continued to render him ineligible to play . 
 = = = All @-@ American in 1907 = = = 
 When Schulz returned to the team in 1907 , he was the talk of the campus . One newspaper reported that Ann Arbor had " 5 @,@ 000 students continually gossiping about him " , as Schulz 's return was seen as " a gigantic stride in the direction of ( Michigan 's ) winning back her former football prestige " . Coach Yost noted : " We need him not only as a player , but also as a leader . In energy , ability to stand hard knocks , and courage he is a model for the rest of the team to strive after " . With Schulz in the lineup , Michigan won its first five games by a combined score of 107 – 0 . In Michigan 's game against Ohio State , Schulz was reported to have been " a brick wall of defense " and " hard as nails " . 
 After starting the season 5 – 0 , Michigan closed the 1907 season playing the University of Pennsylvania . For the first time , one of the eastern schools had agreed to play a game at Ferry Field in Ann Arbor . In the buildup to the game , the press focused on Schulz as the key to Michigan 's chances . One writer noted : " There is one man in the Michigan eleven that Pennsylvania fears and will endeavor to stop if possible when the two great teams meet in Ann Arbor November 16 , 1907 . That man is Germany Schulz , Yost 's great center " . Penn even announced that they were moving their star tackle , Draper , to center in an effort to stop Schulz . In the end , Penn beat Michigan , 6 – 0 , marking the first time the Wolverines had ever lost a game at Ferry Field . 
 Despite the loss , press reports after the game credited Schulz with a great effort . One account noted : " Pennsy is said to have delegated three players to watch him , the heavyweight center played a star game throughout . He broke through the line repeatedly and stopped plays . Then again he would dash out to the end and tackle the man attempting to circle the wing . He was down under punts and in the open play showed as much speed as any player on the field . And he weighs 234 pounds " . 
 At the end of the season , there was a consensus that " The giant center of Michigan practically stands in a class by himself at the pivot position " . University of Chicago star Walter Eckersall , said : " Schulz , of Michigan , easily outshone his opponents in every game . He is finely built , runs fast , snaps accurately , tackles hard , and is all over the field in every play " . One writer referred to Schulz in 1907 as a " human catapult " and said : " Schulz of Michigan is a very heavy man , weighing over 200 pounds , yet he is strikingly fast on his feet and is unusual on that account . He propels his massive frame at a rate of speed that terrifies opponents . . . . The acknowledged prowess of Schulz makes him an especial object of unfair attack in scrimmages by opponents who hope , by disabling him , to weaken the Michigan team " . 
 Coach Yost added : " Schultz is without doubt the best center in the country . In fact , Schulz is the best man in the middle of the line I have ever seen in all my football experience " . In naming Schulz to his All @-@ America team , Walter Camp said : " He is well over six feet in height , yet a fast , powerful man who gets well over the field and makes more tackles in a game than any other man on his team . In addition he is an accurate passer and feeds the ball well to his backs either for kicks or runs " . 
 = = = Controversy over eligibility for 1908 = = = 
 As the 1907 season ended , a controversy was sparked when the Michigan players unanimously voted Schulz as the captain for the 1908 season . Michigan had been suspended by the Western Conference after the 1906 season , and if it was to seek readmission in 1908 , it was required to comply with Western Conference eligibility rules . Under those rules , a player was limited to three years of play , though Michigan 's rule allowed a player four years of eligibility . Michigan officials contended that Schulz should not be governed by the rule , because he had begun play before the conference 's rule was enacted . 
 Schulz found himself in the middle of football 's first eligibility controversy . At the same time , David Starr Jordan , the President of Stanford University , made a speech referring to modern college football as " unethical " , " unchristian " , " unsportsmanlike " and " a monstrosity " . Starr noted that " practically all the major universities employ questionable methods in securing athletes " . Jordan heaped particular scorn on Michigan , where he claimed " the alumni and cheap gamblers of the town brought in men who were professionals and paid them salaries to play on Michigan athlete teams " . The New York Times ran a front page story repeating Jordan 's charges . 
 The Western Conference 's eligibility rules had been at the center of Michigan 's dispute with the conference for more than a year . Unlike the Western Conference , the eastern schools had looser eligibility standards , and it was " generally conceded that playing under [ the Western Conference 's ] strict eligibility rules Michigan is at a big disadvantage in games with eastern colleges , where , to say the least , the lines are not so clearly drawn " . 
 Schulz complained amid the controversy about inaccurate reporting of his age . " As a rule my age is generally given as twenty @-@ five , when in fact I am but twenty @-@ three . " Schulz would have been 24 at the time of his comments . 
 Michigan presented its case for Schulz to a meeting of the " Big Nine " in Chicago . One account noted : " The Michigan case will be discussed at the meeting and it is very likely that a vote requesting the Ann Arbor institution to withdraw from the body will be passed . Michigan 's open violation of the conference rules during the last year has aroused a strong hostile spirit , and it is known that a majority of the schools favor dropping the Wolverines from the association " . Manager Charles Baird was given the task of arguing Schulz 's case to the Conference at its January meeting . 
 The student newspaper , The Michigan Daily , urged the school not to abandon Schulz . It wrote : " Germany Schulz is now recognized as the captain of Michigan 's next football team . . . , and while Michigan students are not averse to going back into active alliance with the western schools , any attempt to debar Schulz from his fairly won honor is sure to cause an uproar , which may upset all of the feeling of compromise which is now evident " . Ultimately , the Western Conference forced Michigan to choose between Schulz or the conference . Michigan chose Schulz , and the Big Nine remained the Big Eight for the 1908 season . 
 = = = 1908 season and further academic eligibility problems = = = 
 After a strong show of support from the University , Schulz ran into further academic problems . In February 1908 , the University announced that Schulz was ineligible for the track team ( Schulz competed in the shot put and the discus ) due to his performance on a semester exam in hydraulics . While he would be allowed to get his work straightened out before it came time to compete in football , news accounts noted that " the outlook is rather gloomy at present " . 
 By the time football season arrived , Schulz 's academic problems had worsened . Contemporary reports indicated that " It is not physical conditions which are keeping the giant player from the game ( as was announced ) , but educational ones " . In early October 1908 , Schulz had " three conditions in the engineering course , more than a player can carry and continue his athletic relations " . Though " every effort " had been made for two weeks to have the conditions removed , those efforts had failed . A meeting of the eligibility board was held , and they concluded that Schulz could not play until he removed at least two of the conditions . While it was possible for Schulz to remove the conditions by the end of October by " burning the midnight oil " , it was reported that " this is an optimistic view of the situation shared by few " . 
 Schulz ultimately had his eligibility restored in late October and was greeted with " cheers from the bleachers " when he appeared in his first practice on October 22 , 1907 . It appears that Schulz 's academic problems continued , as a 1910 article concerning the post @-@ college success of football players reported that Schulz " didn ’ t finish " his course at Michigan . 
 = = = 1908 Penn game = = = 
 In 1908 , Michigan went into its rivalry game against Penn undefeated . Michigan hoped to avenge two straight defeats to the Quakers , and its hopes were based to a large extent on Schulz . Penn announced before the game that it would bring four available centers so there " might be a fresh antagonist facing the Michigan captain throughout the game " . Special trains from all over Michigan poured large crowds into Ann Arbor , and the crowd was said to be " the largest attendance which has been on Ferry Field " . Though Michigan was beaten that day , 29 – 0 , Schulz 's courageous performance , and the pummeling he took from the Penn team , was recounted many times in the following decades . Not all of these accounts are consistent with each other , but the story of the Penn game has become an integral part of the Germany Schulz hagiography . 
 In one of the few contemporaneous accounts , the Toledo Blade wrote that the Penn players , knowing that Schulz was " the power in the Michigan game " , focused their energy on wearing him down . There were two Penn players who " did nothing but look after Schultz " . And they did more than look : " In every scrimmage , he was bumped as hard as the rules allowed , and maybe a little harder , when nobody was looking . ... Every time Schultz started anywhere he would find a couple of Penn men digging headfirst into his stomach . They would elbow him , jam him with the straight arm , and if he went to the ground in a scrimmage there generally would be a knee grinding him in the wind . Pretty soon Schultz began to show it . ... He limped along pitifully . He couldn 't run . His strength was almost gone . When he did tackle , his groan of pain could almost be heard in the stands " . But the fans continued to urge Schulz with yells of " G @-@ r @-@ r @-@ r @-@ r @-@ rah , Schultz ! " Schulz buckled down and continued to play , and the pummeling continued . 
 At half @-@ time , the trainers found on Schulz " a mass of black and blue spots " . His " face was distorted with bumps " , and there were " welts on his back and groin " . As the second half started , Schulz insisted he felt better and went back into the game . But the attack continued . " Another scrimmage and two more Penn men were after him again . He went into the play and for an instant , his strength came back , but it couldn 't last , and it didn 't . ” Yost finally sent in a substitute , and Schulz limped to the sideline and walked slowly away " with head bowed and hands to his stomach " . And when the " rubbers " removed his <unk> and examined him , " they marveled that he was able to walk " . In the end , Schulz " didn 't say a word — big tears rolled down as he lay there ; Schultz was thoroughly beaten , but it took the entire Pennsylvania eleven to do it " . 
 Penn 's captain , Bill Hollenback , said : “ This fellow Schulz is a monster in size and a perfect athlete . He is both wonderfully agile and fast for a man of his size . In our game with Michigan , we had two men instructed to play against Schulz and at times three and four were opposed to him . For some time , he handed out as much as we passed to him in the roughing end of the game . He was here , there and everywhere . He did most of the tackling . He broke up innumerable plays . He was the star of the contest until the continued battering of our men injured him to such an extent that he had to retire . The rest was easy " . Coach Yost said of Schulz 's performance : " He gave the greatest one @-@ man exhibition of courage I ever saw on a football field " . 
 From the 1920s through the 1950s , the story was told , re @-@ told and likely embellished in columns by Grantland Rice , Art Carlson , Frank Blair and Dave Lewis — more than one of them writing that they had seen the game in person . In Carlson 's 1925 account , " the giant center had been rendered practically useless from the Penn attack " , but refused to leave the game . Carlson recalled Schulz 's removal from the game this way : " It was a scene I shall never forget — the giant Schulz , towering above the rest of the combatants , literally dragged off the field , tears streaming down his mud @-@ spattered cheeks as he frantically protested his removal from the game " . 
 In 1942 , Grantland Rice wrote that Schulz held the Penn team in check for 50 minutes and that the score was 0 – 0 when Schulz " left the field a battered wreck " . ( In fact , contemporaneous accounts show the score was 6 – 0 at halftime . ) 
 In Frank Blair 's 1951 telling , Schulz played with the " strength of Samson " , and Penn " put five men -- center , both guards and both tackles — on the Wolverine giant " . According to Blair , who claimed to have attended the game as a high school student , Schulz played like a madman , making nearly all the tackles for 50 minutes , and Penn was held scoreless until Schulz was " carried from the field " . 
 In a 1954 article , sports writer Dave Lewis wrote that Penn assigned five players to the task of mowing down Schulz . Lewis quoted Schulz as having said : " I can still see those five pairs of eyes staring at me every time we lined up . . . ready to tear me apart " . According to Lewis , all five men piled on Schulz every play , and Schulz held Penn scoreless for 50 minutes before they " finally knocked him out " . Lewis concluded : " Never before or since has there been such a one @-@ man show of defensive football as Schulz displayed against Penn " . 
 A few months before his death , Schulz told Detroit News sports writer H. G. Salsinger that he had only one regret : " I wish I could have lasted 10 minutes longer . That was one game I wanted to finish " . 
 = = = Awards and accolades = = = 
 In January 1910 , Walter Camp published his All @-@ Time All @-@ American list in Century magazine , selecting the best player at each position over the 20 years he had been watching college football . He selected Schulz as his center , the first of many such All @-@ Time All @-@ American selections for Schulz . At the time , Camp said : " Big , strong and fast , he combined all the defensive and offensive qualities of the best line men with the speed , sure tackling and intuition as to what to do on the instant that are winning qualities of the defensive back . In addition , his passing was excellent , as he had plenty of speed for his kicker , steadiness for his quarter , and ability to pass in directions other than in a straight line which made him especially valuable in certain formation plays " . 
 In 1949 , Grantland Rice chose him as the center for his All @-@ Time All @-@ American team . At the time , Rice said : " Schulz was 6 feet 4 and he weighed 245 pounds . He was as fast as a good halfback . I have never seen a center who was his equal at backing up a line and then protecting both flanks . He was a terrific tackler " . 
 In 1951 , the College Football Foundation commissioned the Associated Press to conduct a poll of more than 100 sports editors to choose an All @-@ Time All @-@ American team . Those chosen would be the initial inductees into the new College Football Hall of Fame . Schulz won the great majority of the votes at center and thus became one of the initial inductees into the College Football Hall of Fame . In announcing the selection , the Associated Press said : " Schulz was a giant of a man — six feet five and 285 pounds — with tremendous ham @-@ like hands that worked to his advantage in that era of mass formations when ground was gained on brute strength alone " . On being told of his selection , Schulz , who died ten days later , said he was honored and noted : " I haven 't missed one of those teams yet " . 
 He was inducted into the Michigan Sports Hall of Fame in 1960 . He was also posthumously inducted into the University of Michigan Athletic Hall of Honor in 1979 . In 2004 , He was selected as one of the top fifteen football players in U @-@ M history in 2004 by The Michigan Daily . 
 = = Professional football in the Tri @-@ State league = = 
 In 1909 and 1910 , Schulz played briefly in the infant Tri @-@ State professional football league operating in Ohio , Illinois and Pennsylvania . He played for the Dayton Oakwoods team . His first game with the Oakwoods was on Thanksgiving 1909 . In that game , the Oakwoods defeated the Pittsburgh Lyceum , which had gone undefeated for three seasons and was considered the top professional team of its era . 
 At the time of the 1910 United States Census , Schulz was listed as residing with his parents in Fort Wayne , and his occupation was listed as being an engineer with an electric works . 
 The Oakwoods made Schulz an offer to return in 1910 as the team 's captain , but contemporaneous press accounts indicate he was weighing the remuneration to be paid by the Oakwoods against his steady job at the Fort Wayne Electric works . Though some accounts indicate that he ultimately accepted the Oakwoods ' offer , official records of play have not been located to determine whether Schulz actually played for the Oakwoods in 1910 . In December 1910 , Schulz did play on an all @-@ star team against the All @-@ Harvard club in a game in Memphis , Tennessee , for the benefit of the United Charities association . 
 = = College football coach and athletic director = = 
 = = = University of Wisconsin = = = 
 In 1911 and 1912 , Schulz worked as the line coach for the University of Wisconsin . After two years , he resigned to accept the management of an automobile concern in Fort Wayne . 
 = = = University of Michigan = = = 
 Schulz returned to coaching in 1913 as the line coach and chief assistant coach for Fielding H. Yost at Michigan . He held that position for three seasons from 1913 – 1915 . While working as an assistant coach at Michigan , Schulz has been credited with introducing the technique of <unk> a lineman on defense . In 1913 , Schulz developed a new blocking technique by shifting one of the linemen . Coach Yost was unconvinced until Schulz performed a demonstration using Michigan 's left guard Royce Traphagen . Schulz first put Traphagen in the line position designated by Yost , Schulz lined up on the other side of the line and charged , " almost wrecking Traphagen " . Then , Schulz had the groggy Traphagen line up in the spot designated by Schulz , and when Schulz charged he missed . Schulz implemented the <unk> technique during the 1913 season . 
 In late November 1915 , Schulz 's mother , Sophia Schulz , died at age 65 . Two days after her death , Schulz announced that he was withdrawing from the Michigan coaching staff , though it was noted at the time that several Midwestern universities were working to get Schulz as their head coach . 
 In January 1916 , the Fort Wayne Sentinel reported that Schulz was back to work at his old position in the general testing room at the Fort Wayne Electric works , after an absence of two years . 
 = = = Kansas State = = = 
 In September 1916 , Schulz returned to coaching as the assistant athletic director at Kansas State Agricultural College , now known as Kansas State University . Schulz spent four years in Manhattan , Kansas , working as an assistant under head coach Zora G. Clevenger . When Kansas State beat Southwestern 53 – 0 , the Fort Wayne paper ran a story : “ Germany ’ s Team Wins . ” During the first three years under Schulz and Clevenger , the Wildcats went 16 – 4 – 1 and outscored their opponents 464 – 90 . However , in 1919 , Kansas State gave up 109 points ( more than in the three prior seasons combined ) and finished with a 3 – 5 – 1 . Schulz announced his resignation in January 1920 . 
 In a draft registration card completed in September 1918 , Schulz identified his occupation as an athletic coach for the Kansas Agricultural College at Manhattan , Kansas . During World War I , Schulz also served as the athletic director at Fort Riley in Kansas . He was assigned to direct athletic exercises for the men serving at the camp . At the time of the 1920 United States Census , Schulz was listed as an athletic coach living in Manhattan , Kansas . 
 = = = Tulane University = = = 
 In August 1920 , Schulz was hired by Tulane University in New Orleans , Louisiana , as the director of the school 's new " department of physical education " . Reporters took note of Schulz 's size when he arrived in New Orleans : " It is a fortunate thing for all concerned that Schulz has taken up the more peaceful pursuit of physical director . It is a stroke of good fortune for Tulane and her athletes that the athletic council was able to land a big man like Schulz " . Though he served as the school 's athletic director , Schulz also chose to take charge of the linemen during football season , working alongside football coach Clark Shaughnessy . In 1920 , Schulz arranged for the Tulane football team to play Michigan as part of the most extensive trip made to that point by a southern football team . Schulz 's team faced off against Coach Yost and the Wolverines on October 30 , 1920 , and were shut out , 21 – 0 . 
 = = = University of Detroit = = = 
 In December 1922 , Schulz was hired as head football coach at the University of Detroit . Shortly after his appointment , Schulz announced that he was looking for " eleven raving maniacs " to fill out his team , a phrase that was picked up in wire service reports around the country . He noted : " You can 't beat eleven raving maniacs with football heads " . In September 1923 , the press reported that Schulz suffered a shoulder injury while demonstrating proper tackling technique on a tackling " dummy " . After going 39 – 7 in the five seasons before Schulz took over , the Detroit team fell to 4 – 3 – 2 in 1923 . In January 1924 , the University announced that it would not renew Schulz 's contract , and Schulz announced his " permanent retirement from football coaching " . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Schulz worked in the insurance business , including as a state agent for an insurance company in Michigan , from 1924 until his death in 1951 . After retiring from football in the early 1920s , Schulz led a private life , and little has been written about the last 30 years of his life . At the time of the 1930 United States Census , Schulz was living in Grand Rapids , Michigan , with his wife , Emilie V. Schulz ( age 35 ) , his mother @-@ in @-@ law , Emilie V. <unk> ( age 82 ) , and his sister @-@ in @-@ law , Louise <unk> . His occupation was listed in the 1930 Census as an insurance salesman . 
 Schulz died in 1951 , less than two weeks after being selected as the center on the All @-@ Time All @-@ American Team . Schulz had undergone an operation for a " malignant ulcer of the stomach " in February 1951 and suffered a relapse in April . He died at Detroit 's Henry Ford Hospital at age 67 . 
 = ZX81 = 
 The ZX81 is a home computer produced by Sinclair Research and manufactured in Scotland by Timex Corporation . It was launched in the United Kingdom in March 1981 as the successor to Sinclair 's ZX80 and was designed to be a low @-@ cost introduction to home computing for the general public . It was hugely successful , and more than 1 @.@ 5 million units were sold before it was discontinued . The ZX81 found commercial success in many other countries , notably the United States , where it was initially sold as the ZX @-@ 81 . Timex manufactured and distributed it under licence and enjoyed a substantial but brief boom in sales . Timex later produced its own versions of the ZX81 for the US market – the Timex Sinclair 1000 and Timex Sinclair 1500 . Unauthorised clones of the ZX81 were produced in several countries . 
 The ZX81 was designed to be small , simple , and above all cheap , using as few components as possible to keep the cost down . Video output was to a television set rather than a dedicated monitor . Programs and data were loaded and saved onto audio tape cassettes . It had only four silicon chips on board and a mere 1 KB of memory . The machine had no power switch or any moving parts ( with the exception of a VHF TV channel selector switch present on early " ZX81 USA " models and the Timex @-@ Sinclair 1000 ) and used a pressure @-@ sensitive membrane keyboard for manual input . The ZX81 's limitations prompted the emergence of a flourishing market in third @-@ party peripherals to improve its capabilities . Such limitations , however , achieved Sinclair 's objective of keeping the cost of the machine as low as possible . Its distinctive design brought its designer , Rick Dickinson , a Design Council award . 
 The ZX81 could be bought by mail order in kit form or pre @-@ assembled . In what was then a major innovation , it was the first cheap mass @-@ market home computer that could be bought from high street stores , led by W. H. Smith and soon many other retailers . The ZX81 marked the first time that computing in Britain became an activity for the general public , rather than the preserve of businesspeople and electronics hobbyists . It inspired the creation of a huge community of enthusiasts , some of whom founded their own businesses producing software and hardware for the ZX81 . Many went on to play a major role in the British computer industry in later years . The ZX81 's commercial success made Sinclair Research one of Britain 's leading computer manufacturers and earned a fortune and an eventual knighthood for the company 's founder , Sir Clive Sinclair . 
 = = Features = = 
 The ZX81 came with 1 KB of on @-@ board memory that could officially be expanded externally to 16 KB . Its single circuit board was housed inside a wedge @-@ shaped plastic case measuring 167 millimetres ( 6 @.@ 6 in ) deep by 40 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) high . The memory was provided by either a single <unk> ( 1024 bit × 8 ) or two 2114 ( 1024 bit × 4 ) RAM chips . There were only three other chips on board : a 3 @.@ 5 MHz <unk> 8 @-@ bit microprocessor from NEC , an uncommitted logic array ( ULA ) chip from Ferranti and an 8 KB ROM providing a simple BASIC interpreter . The entire machine weighed just 350 grams ( 12 oz ) . Early versions of the external RAM cartridge contained 15 KB of memory using an assortment of memory chips , while later versions contained 16 KB of chips , but the lowest addressed kilobyte was disabled . 
 The front part of the case is occupied by an integrated 40 @-@ key membrane keyboard displaying 20 graphic and 54 inverse video characters . Each key has up to five functions , accessed via the <unk> and <unk> keys or depending on context . For example , the P key combined the letter P , the " character and the BASIC commands <unk> and TAB . The ZX81 uses a standard QWERTY keyboard layout . The keyboard is mechanically very simple , consisting of 40 pressure @-@ pad switches and 8 diodes under a plastic overlay , connected in a matrix of 8 rows and 5 columns . 
 The ZX81 's primary input / output is delivered via four sockets on the left side of the case . The machine uses an ordinary UHF television set to deliver a monochrome picture via a built @-@ in RF modulator . It can display 24 lines of 32 characters each , and by using the selection of 2 × 2 block character graphics from the machine 's character set offered an effective 64 × 44 pixel graphics mode , also directly addressable via BASIC using the PLOT and <unk> commands , leaving 2 lines free at the bottom . Two 3 @.@ 5 mm jacks connect the ZX81 to the EAR ( output ) and MIC ( input ) sockets of an audio cassette recorder , enabling data to be saved or loaded at a rate of 50 <unk> . This provides a somewhat temperamental storage medium for the machine , which has no built @-@ in storage capabilities . The ZX81 requires 420 mA of power at 7 – 11 V DC , delivered via a custom 9 V Sinclair DC power supply . 
 The ULA chip , described by the ZX81 manual as the " dogsbody " of the system , has a number of key functions that competing computers shared between multiple chips and integrated circuits . These comprise : 
 <unk> the screen display ; 
 Generating a 6 @.@ 5 MHz clock , from which a 3 @.@ 25 MHz clock is derived for the processor ; 
 <unk> an audio signal to a cassette recorder in <unk> mode ; 
 Processing the incoming cassette audio signal in LOAD mode ; 
 Sensing keystrokes ; 
 Using memory addresses provided by the CPU to decide when ROM and RAM should be active ; 
 Controlling general system timing . 
 The ZX81 's built @-@ in RF modulator can output a video picture to either a UHF 625 @-@ line colour or monochrome television ( used in the UK , Australia , and most western European countries ) . France required a slightly modified version of the machine to match the positive video modulation of <unk> sets , while the USA and Canada required a different ULA chip and modulator to cope with their 525 @-@ line VHF ( NTSC ) television systems . Both the ZX81 and its predecessor , the ZX80 , have a significant drawback in the way that they handle visual output . Neither machine has enough processing power to run at full speed and simultaneously maintain the screen display . On the ZX80 , this means that the screen goes blank every time the machine carries out a computation and causes an irritating flicker whenever a shorter computation – such as processing a keystroke – takes place . 
 The ZX81 's designers adopted an improved approach , involving the use of two modes called SLOW and FAST respectively . In SLOW mode , also called " compute and display " mode , the ZX81 concentrates on driving the display . It runs the current program for only about a quarter of the time – in effect slowing the machine down fourfold , although in practice the speed difference between FAST and SLOW modes depends on what computation is being done . In FAST mode , processing occurs continuously , but the display is abandoned to its own devices – equivalent to the ZX80 's standard operating mode . 
 Another hardware quirk produced one of the most distinctive aspects of the ZX81 's screen display – during loading or saving , moving zigzag stripes appear across the screen . The same pin on the ULA is used to handle the video signal and the tape output , producing the stripes as an interference pattern of sorts . The ULA cannot maintain the display during <unk> and LOAD operations , as it has to operate continuously to maintain the correct <unk> rate for data transfers . The interference produces the zigzag stripes . 
 The unexpanded ZX81 's tiny memory presented a major challenge to programmers . Simply displaying a full screen takes up to 793 bytes , the system variables take up another 125 bytes , and the program , input buffer and stacks need more memory on top of that . Nonetheless , ingenious programmers were able to achieve a surprising amount with just 1 KB . One notable example was 1K ZX Chess by David Horne , which managed to include most of the rules of chess into only 672 bytes . The ZX81 conserved its memory to a certain extent by representing entire BASIC commands as one @-@ byte tokens , stored as individual " characters " in the upper reaches of the machine 's unique ( non @-@ ASCII ) character set . 
 The edge connector or external interface at the rear of the ZX81 is an extension of the main printed circuit board . This provides a set of address , control , and data lines that can be used to communicate with external devices . Enthusiasts and a variety of third @-@ party companies made use of this facility to create a wide range of add @-@ ons for the ZX81 . 
 = = = Comparisons between ZX81 and other computing devices = = = 
 The following table provides a comparison between the capabilities of the ZX81 and various other competing microcomputers that were already on the market at the time of the ZX81 's launch . The prices given are as of December 1982 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Clive Sinclair 's first company Sinclair Radionics , established in 1962 , made its name producing a wide range of cheap electronics aimed at the hobbyist market . Its products included amplifiers , radios , <unk> and other items generally sold in kit form to hi @-@ fi enthusiasts and other electronics hobbyists . The company entered a new market in 1972 when it launched the first " slimline " pocket calculator , the Sinclair Executive . It was a major success that Radionics followed up by launching a wide range of pocket calculators . The company 's subsequent expansion made it Europe 's biggest calculator manufacturer by 1975 . 
 By the late 1970s , however , Sinclair Radionics was in serious difficulties . It lost its ability to compete effectively in the calculator market following the launch of a new generation of Japanese @-@ produced calculators with liquid crystal displays , which were much more capable and power @-@ efficient than Sinclair 's LED calculators . Projects to develop a pocket television and digital watch turned out to be expensive flops . The company made losses of over £ 350 @,@ 000 in 1975 – 76 , bringing it to the edge of bankruptcy . In July 1977 Radionics was rescued by a state agency , the National Enterprise Board ( NEB ) , which recapitalised it , provided a loan facility and took effective control of the company by acquiring a 73 % stake . 
 Clive Sinclair 's relationship with the NEB was fraught due to conflicting notions about which direction the company should go . Radionics had begun a project to develop a home computer but the NEB wanted to concentrate on the instrument side of the business , which was virtually the only area where Radionics was profitable . Sinclair disagreed vehemently with what he characterised as the view " that there was no future in consumer electronics " . This and other disputes led to Sinclair resigning from Radionics in July 1979 . 
 While he was struggling with the NEB , Clive Sinclair turned to a " corporate lifeboat " in the shape of an existing corporate shell under his exclusive control – a company called <unk> Ltd , which he had established in 1973 and later renamed Science of Cambridge . It became a vehicle through which he could pursue his own projects , free of the interference of the NEB . Despite his later success in the field , Sinclair saw computers as merely a means to an end . As he told the Sunday Times in April 1985 , " We only got involved in computers in order to fund the rest of the business " , specifically the development of the ultimately unsuccessful <unk> pocket television and C5 electric vehicle . In an interview with Practical Computing , Sinclair explained : 
 I make computers because they are a good market , and they are interesting to design . I don 't feel bad about making them or selling them for money or anything , there is a demand for them and they do no harm ; but I don 't think they are going to save the world . 
 = = = Precursors : the MK14 and ZX80 = = = 
 By the late 1970s , American companies were producing simple home computer kits such as the MITS Altair and IMSAI 8080 . This aroused interest among electronics hobbyists in the UK but relatively high prices and lower disposable income reduced the appeal of the American products . New Scientist stated in 1977 that " the price of an American kit in dollars rapidly translates into the same figure in pounds sterling by the time it has reached the shores of Britain " . Off @-@ the @-@ shelf personal computers were also available for the high end of the market but were extremely expensive ; Olivetti 's offering cost £ 2 @,@ 000 , and the Commodore PET , launched in 1979 , sold for £ 700 . There was nothing for the hobbyist at the low end of the market . Sinclair realised that this provided a useful commercial opportunity . 
 Sinclair 's first home computer was the MK14 , which was launched in kit form in June 1978 . It was a long way from being a mass @-@ market product . Its very name – MK standing for " Microcomputer Kit " – was indicative of its origins as a product developed by , and for , hobbyists . It had no screen but instead used an LED segment display ( though Science of Cambridge did produce an add @-@ on module allowing it to be hooked up to a UHF TV ) ; it had no case , consisting of an exposed circuit board ; it had no built @-@ in storage capabilities and only 256 bytes of memory ; and input was via a 20 @-@ key hexadecimal keyboard . Despite the limitations of the machine it sold a respectable 10 – 15 @,@ 000 units ; by comparison , the much more expensive Apple II had only sold 9 @,@ 000 units in the United States , a much bigger market , in 1978 . This success convinced Clive Sinclair that there was an untapped market for low @-@ cost computers that could profitably be exploited . 
 Sinclair followed up the MK14 by producing the ZX80 , at the time the world 's smallest and cheapest computer , which was launched in January 1980 costing £ 99 @.@ 95 ( equivalent to £ 319 at 2009 prices . ) The company conducted no market research whatsoever prior to the launch of the ZX80 ; according to Clive Sinclair , he " simply had a hunch " that the general public was sufficiently interested to make such a project feasible and went ahead with ordering 100 @,@ 000 sets of parts so that he could launch at high volume . 
 The ZX80 's design introduced many key features that were carried over to the ZX81 ; as Sinclair himself later said , " the ZX80 was very much a stepping stone to the ZX81 " . The design was driven entirely by the desired price – the machine had to cost less than £ 100 but still make a healthy profit . Its distinctive wedge @-@ shaped white case concealing the circuitry and the touch @-@ sensitive membrane keyboard were the brainchild of Rick Dickinson , a young British industrial designer who had recently been hired by Sinclair . As he later recalled of Sinclair 's approach , " Everything was cost driven . The design was the face of the machine . " The unconventional keyboard was the outcome of Sinclair 's cost @-@ cutting . It made use of a sheet of plastic , on which the keys were printed , overlaying a metallic circuit that registered when a key was pressed . This avoided the expense of providing a typewriter @-@ style keyboard , though the design had many drawbacks when it came to usability and " feel " . 
 Inside the case , there were many more similarities with the ZX81 . Like its successor , it used the <unk> microprocessor and had only 1 KB of on @-@ board RAM . It came with a specially written BASIC interpreter on a dedicated ROM chip and could use a television as a display . It relied on an ordinary cassette tape recorder for data storage . The main difference between the two machines lay in the internal software ; when the ZX81 was released , ZX80 owners were able to upgrade by the relatively simple expedient of plugging a new ROM onto the circuit board . 
 The ZX80 was an immediate success , selling 20 @,@ 000 units over the following nine months . Science of Cambridge was producing <unk> at the rate of 9 @,@ 000 a month by the end of 1980 and within 18 months of its launch the company had sold 100 @,@ 000 units . The commercial success of the ZX80 made a follow @-@ up product inevitable . The company was renamed Sinclair Computers in November 1980 , reflecting its new focus , and became Sinclair Research in March 1981 . 
 = = = The BBC Micro affair = = = 
 The launch of the ZX81 was catalysed in part by the British Broadcasting Corporation 's plan to produce a TV series , to be broadcast in 1982 , aimed at popularising computing and programming . The BBC intended to commission an existing manufacturer to provide it with a BBC @-@ branded home computer to tie in with the series . When Sinclair got wind of the project in December 1980 , he wrote to the BBC informing them that he would be announcing a new version of the ZX80 , to be called the ZX81 , in early 1981 . It would remedy some of the ZX80 's deficiencies and would be both cheaper and more advanced . Sinclair naturally wanted the ZX81 to be a candidate for the BBC contract and lobbied for its adoption . He pointed out that there were already 40 @,@ 000 users of the ZX80 and that by the time the series was broadcast there were likely to be upwards of 100 @,@ 000 ZX81 users ( which turned out to be an underestimate by over 400 @,@ 000 – an indication of how the ZX81 's success exceeded even Sinclair 's expectations ) . 
 A prototype ZX81 was demonstrated to BBC representatives in January 1981 , while Sinclair 's local rival Acorn Computers put forward their proposed Proton computer , a design – of which a prototype did not yet exist – based on the Acorn Atom . To Sinclair 's dismay , the contract to produce the BBC Microcomputer went to Acorn , which launched the machine in January 1982 . Paul <unk> , the producer of The Computer Programme , explained his reservations in a March 1982 interview with Your Computer : 
 I would have been very reluctant for the BBC to sell something like the Sinclair [ ZX81 ] because it is so limited . The Sinclair cannot be expanded ; it is fundamentally a throw @-@ away consumer product . Its usefulness lies in learning about programming , but I do not believe that the future of computers lies in everyone learning to program in BASIC . 
 Sinclair was critical of the BBC 's decision , accusing it of incompetence and arrogance . Shortly after Acorn won the BBC contract the Government issued a recommended list of computers , including the BBC Micro and Research Machines <unk> , that schools could purchase , with the aid of a grant , for half price ; Sinclair 's computers were not included on the list . Sinclair responded by launching his own half @-@ price deal , offering schools the chance to buy a ZX81 and 16 KB RAM pack for £ 60 , plus a ZX Printer at half price , for a total cost of £ 90 . As the cheapest Government @-@ approved system was £ 130 , this was an attractive offer for many schools and about 2 @,@ 300 bought Sinclair 's package . 
 = = = Development and manufacture = = = 
 The development of the ZX81 got under way even before the ZX80 had been launched . Sinclair 's chief engineer , Jim Westwood , was given the task of improving the ZX80 's hardware to reduce the number of components and thus bring down the cost . He also sought to fix some of the more annoying problems with the ZX80 . Westwood and his colleagues found that the component count could be reduced greatly by combining eighteen of the ZX80 's chips into a single uncommitted logic array ( ULA ) , a type of general @-@ purpose chip that allowed manufacturers to reprogram it to meet their particular requirements rather than having to develop their own customised chip at greater expense . Ferranti produced the new chip for Sinclair , who hailed Westwood 's design as a triumph of innovation : " The ZX81 had four chips when our nearest competitor in this respect , the TRS @-@ 80 , had 44 . " Only 70 % of the logic gates on the ULA were supposed to be used , but Sinclair decided to obtain maximum benefit by using them all . This resulted in the machine becoming uncomfortably warm during usage . Computing folklore held that the ZX81 had to be refrigerated by balancing a carton of cold milk on top of the case . 
 The ZX81 's ROM was doubled to 8 KB , from the ZX80 's 4 KB ROM . This enabled a fuller implementation of a version of ANSI Minimal BASIC ( termed Sinclair BASIC by the company ) . Clive Sinclair re @-@ commissioned a company called Nine Tiles , which had produced the ZX80 ROM , to develop the new ROM software for the ZX81 . The code was written by John Grant , the owner of Nine Tiles , and Steve Vickers , who had joined the company in January 1980 . Grant concentrated on the software that drove the ZX81 's hardware , while Vickers developed the new BASIC and the accompanying manual . Sinclair 's brief to the pair was fairly non @-@ specific but primarily concerned remedying a key defect of the ZX80 so that the new machine could be used for practical programming and calculations . Vickers later recalled : 
 As far as Clive was concerned , it wasn 't a question of what the machine ought to be able to do , but more what could be crammed into the machine given the component budget he 'd set his mind on . The only firm brief for the ' 81 was that the ' 80 's math package must be improved . 
 The new ROM incorporated trigonometric and floating point functions , which its predecessor had lacked – the ZX80 could only deal with whole numbers . Grant came up with one of the ZX81 's more novel features , a syntax checker that indicated errors in BASIC code as soon as it was entered ( rather than , as was standard at the time , only disclosing coding errors when a program was run ) . Unfortunately for Vickers , he introduced a briefly notorious error – the so @-@ called " square @-@ root bug " that caused the square root of 0 @.@ 25 to be returned erroneously as 1 @.@ <unk> – as a result of problems with integrating the ZX Printer code into the ROM . Although it was eventually fixed , the bug became the subject of controversy and Sinclair was forced to replace some of the ZX81s sold to early customers . On a more positive note , Vickers ' work on the manual was received favourably , being described in 1983 as " one of the classic texts on BASIC " . Max Phillips commented in a What Micro ? retrospective : 
 It does a reasonable job and sensibly provides lots for the reader to do . It 's quite honest about the [ ZX81 ] ' s shortcomings and provides hints and tips for ways round them ... Best of all , the manual is complete and comprehensive . There 's some fairly advanced and often undisclosed information in there . The beginner won 't understand it for a long time but if he or she learns some more advanced ideas , the manual is ready for them . 
 The task of designing the ZX81 's case again fell to Rick Dickinson , who produced an updated version of the ZX80 's wedge @-@ shaped case . This time round , the design team were able to use injection moulding , which enabled them to deliver a higher @-@ quality case . Dickinson originally envisaged the ZX81 as " an expandable range of boxes following a vaguely modular approach with a common width " , though this approach was eventually dropped . From start to finish , the design process took about six months . 
 The ZX81 was launched on 5 March 1981 in two versions ( though with identical components ) – a pre @-@ assembled machine or a cheaper kit version , which the user could assemble himself . Both versions were manufactured in Dundee , Scotland by Timex Corporation at the company 's Dryburgh factory . Timex had not been an obvious choice of manufacturing subcontractor , as the company had little previous experience in assembling electronics . It was a well @-@ established manufacturer of mechanical watches but was facing a crisis at the beginning of the 1980s . Profits had dwindled to virtually zero as the market for mechanical watches stagnated in the face of competition from the digital and quartz watches . Recognising the trend , Timex 's director , Fred Olsen , determined that the company would diversify into other areas of business . 
 This shift by Timex came at an ideal time for Sinclair . The ZX80 had proved more popular than expected and Sinclair 's existing manufacturer , a small electronics company in St Ives , lacked the resources to deal with the demand . Timex took over production of the ZX80 late in 1980 . The arrangement worked well for both companies and Timex took on the manufacture of the ZX81 , aided by capital investment in its Dundee plant . Sinclair initially planned to produce 10 @,@ 000 ZX81s a month , rising to 30 @,@ 000 a month within a year . However , Timex initially had significant problems in producing enough ZX81s to satisfy demand . As a consequence , it took up to nine weeks for ZX81s to be delivered by mail order . It was not until September 1981 , five months after the launch of the ZX81 , that the delivery times finally came down to the promised twenty @-@ eight days . Those who already owned or had recently ordered the ZX80 were not excluded ; anyone who had ordered a ZX80 in the two weeks before the ZX81 's launch would receive the newer machine , while existing owners were able to upgrade their <unk> by plugging an extra £ 20 ROM chip into the circuit board . 
 The reliability of the ZX81 was controversial . W.H. Smith , one of the machine 's key distributors , had a company policy of ordering a third more ZX81s than were actually required for sale , so that it would have enough replacements for faulty machines . Similar problems were reported in the US market , where contemporary reports suggested that only a third of the ZX81s shipped actually worked . However , figures released by Sinclair claimed that only 2 @.@ 4 per cent of pre @-@ assembled machines were returned , although 13 per cent of kits were returned . Clive Sinclair strongly denied any problem with reliability : 
 We have a lower rate of failure on our computers than anybody else in the world , and the reason for that is that we do everything to keep the quality right . The ZX81 production line is a miracle of efficiency ; after all , one is made every 10 seconds . They go through the most amazing quality control . Also we have a far lower component count than anyone else . We have only four chips where everyone else has 40 . 
 Sinclair attributed the higher failure rate of the kits to customers breaking the components by inserting or soldering them the wrong way , though the company admitted that there was a persistent problem with power supplies that affected both kits and pre @-@ assembled ZX81s . The bigger problem was perhaps Sinclair 's lack after @-@ sales service , which Robin Clarke of New Scientist described as " one of the worst after @-@ sales performance records of any company ever established . " The Financial Times observed that " Clive Sinclair 's offices are filled with returned computers which can take months to be repaired . " The company 's slowness in replacing returns and delivering freshly ordered machines meant that Sinclair Research gained a poor reputation for poor customer service . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 The marketing of the ZX81 was handled by Sinclair 's long @-@ standing marketing agency Primary Contact ( now part of Ogilvy & Mather ) , which had provided marketing services for Sinclair since 1971 and was to continue doing so until 1985 . Sinclair 's entry into the nascent home computing market gave Primary Contact a major challenge – how to market a product simultaneously at hobbyists and at the " man on the street " , who probably had little or no computer literacy . The answer was to pursue what the journalist David O 'Reilly of <unk> magazine described as a single @-@ minded " user @-@ friendly strategy . " Chris Fawkes , one of Primary Contact 's directors , explained : " We brought personal computers to the mass market by showing that you didn 't have to be a <unk> to use one . " As Clive Sinclair put it in a 1982 interview with Your Computer , 
 There are two big markets . There is the hobbyist and the man in the street . The hobbyist was a dead certainty . We knew we could sell to him because we have so much experience of it and we were offering a better product . The much less certain prospect was the man in the street . There the view was that if we offered him a computer plus a self @-@ training book at a keen enough price he would buy by mail order – which , of course , he has . 
 According to Ben Rosen , by pricing the ZX81 so low , " Sinclair has opened up a completely new market among people who had never previously considered owning a computer . " Clive Sinclair acknowledged the role that guesswork had played in his decision to launch the ZX81 on such a large scale : " It was a surmise that the man in the street would want such a computer . He does , and our information is that a lot of people are using the machines avidly . " A New Scientist retrospective published in 1986 commented : 
 Sir Clive 's marketing achievement was to downgrade the " concept " of a computer to the point where he could claim to provide one for less than the magical £ 100 mark . To this end , efficient keyboards and monitors , useful amounts of memory , efficient filing and storage systems and the like were stripped away , to leave an affordable facsimile of a " computer " . The market image was more important than what the computer could do , but the burgeoning industry in computer games provided an application which adolescents – young and old – eagerly seized on as the raison d 'être for their new gadget . In the main , it was ignorance of genuine computer technology that fired the success of the ZX range , despite the availability of accessories that , albeit inefficiently , turned the Z80 processor chip at the heart of these up @-@ market toys into the core of a useful machine . 
 High @-@ profile advertising was central to the marketing campaign . Although Sinclair Research was a relatively small company , it had a long @-@ standing policy of using large @-@ scale advertisements that stood out in stark contrast to the more muted advertisements of other manufacturers . <unk> , exhortations , appeals to patriotism , testimonials , eye @-@ catching drawings and photographs on double @-@ page spreads , varying from month to month , were used to drum up mail order business for Sinclair . The launch advertising for the ZX81 illustrates this approach . A photograph of the ZX81 alongside the official Sinclair peripherals dominated the centre of a double @-@ page spread . The value for money of Sinclair 's products was emphasised by the prices being printed in larger type than any other text on the spread . The ZX81 's benefits were promoted with the aspirational slogan " Sinclair ZX81 Personal Computer – the heart of a system that grows with you " . The advertisement highlighted ZX81 BASIC Programming , the manual written by Steve Vickers , as " a complete course in BASIC programming , from first principles to complex programs . " The educational benefits of the ZX81 were stressed ( " it 's still very simple to teach yourself computing " ) and its technical advantages were explained in relatively non @-@ technical terms . For instance , the ZX81 's idiosyncratic method of typing commands with a single keystroke – the result of the memory @-@ saving method of using one @-@ byte tokens to represent keywords – was presented as " eliminat [ ing ] a great deal of tiresome typing " . The ZX81 's British character was emphasised ; it was " designed by Sinclair and custom @-@ built in Britain . " Sinclair 's advertising in the United States provides an illustration of how the company perceived the ZX81 's purpose : 
 For less than $ 100 , the Sinclair ZX81 will get you started in personal computing right now . Your children will gain an understanding of computers that will benefit them for the rest of their lives . And you will be prepared to make informed decisions about using and buying computers , both in your career and in your home . 
 This approach to advertising was driven by Sinclair 's reliance on mail @-@ order marketing . It came with a high up @-@ front cost in terms of purchasing space in publications but it had the advantage of ensuring that all sales were firm and pre @-@ paid . A big splash on launch produced a large influx of cash at the outset of a campaign , though it did also depend on the advertiser having enough product to satisfy the initial surge in demand . The advertisements served an additional purpose of priming the market for over @-@ the @-@ counter sales by " getting the story across " , as Clive Sinclair put it : " Not that big a proportion do buy on mail order , but they see the ads , and that helps to prepare them for buying when the item appears in the shops . " 
 Sinclair himself became a focal point for the marketing campaign , putting a human face on the business , while Sinclair Research was portrayed in the media as a plucky British challenger taking on the technical and marketing might of giant American and Japanese corporations . As David O 'Reilly noted , " by astute use of public relations , particularly playing up his image of a Briton taking on the world , Sinclair has become the best @-@ known name in <unk> . " The popular press soon latched onto the image . His " Uncle Clive " persona is said to have been created by the gossip columnist for Personal Computer World , while the media praised Sinclair as a visionary genius ( or even , in the words of The Sun , " the most prodigious inventor since Leonardo . " ) As Ian Adamson and Richard Kennedy put it , Sinclair outgrew " the role of microcomputer manufacturer and accepted the mantle of pioneering boffin leading Britain into a technological utopia . " 
 Pricing was central to the marketing strategy , as it had been through Sinclair 's career . The ZX81 had been designed to meet a £ 70 price point and was launched at a price of £ 69 @.@ 95 ( built ) or £ 49 @.@ 95 ( kit ) . One Sinclair brochure presented a side @-@ by @-@ side comparison of the ZX81 with the four machines that Sinclair considered its main rivals – the Acorn Atom , Apple II Plus , Commodore PET and TRS @-@ 80 . The comparison highlighted the vast differences in cost , from £ 630 in the case of the Apple II Plus to just £ 70 for the ZX81 , though even by Sinclair 's own comparison the Apple was by far the more capable machine . 
 According to Sinclair himself , the £ 69 @.@ 95 price was chosen after applying the " experience curve " developed by the Boston Consulting Group . Sinclair 's prior experience in the calculator market had highlighted the fact that a product will be more profitable selling at ( for instance ) twice the manufactured cost than at three times . He could have launched the ZX81 at a higher price , marketing it in a more traditional way as a premium product , but chose not to . In effect , he used the lower price to establish an unassailable lead before the competition moved in . 
 An essential part of Sinclair 's marketing strategy was to use regular cost @-@ cutting at strategic intervals to maintain market share . Ian Adamson and Richard Kennedy comment that Sinclair 's approach was " to secure and extend [ his ] market lead and panic the competition . While most companies reduce prices when their products are in steep decline , Sinclair tends to discount shortly after sales have peaked . The advantage of his approach is that vacillating customers are drawn into the fold while the product 's promotion retains a commercial urgency , and the costings of the competition are thrown into utter disarray . " 
 This tactic proved highly successful , with Sinclair announcing by March 1982 that it had sold 250 @,@ 000 ZX81s worldwide . When sales fell in the wake of the launch of its successor , the ZX Spectrum , Sinclair reduced the price of the pre @-@ assembled version to £ 49 @.@ 95 in May 1982 . It was cut by another £ 10 the following April . Despite the increased competition from much more capable computers , the ZX81 was still shipping in excess of 30 @,@ 000 units a month even as late as July 1983 , more than two years after it had been launched . By that time , according to Sinclair Research , over 1 @.@ 5 million ZX81s had been sold . 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 The ZX81 's distribution arrangements were an essential part of its success and marked a watershed in the way that computers were sold in the UK . Sinclair had previously made its name as a mail @-@ order retailer – the ZX81 was initially available only through mail @-@ order – but the only truly effective way to reach the mass market was via high street stores . Fortunately for Sinclair , an opportunity to do just that was provided by W.H. Smith , a venerable <unk> and magazine @-@ seller and stationery chain . The company had stagnated in the 1970s and was looking for ways to revitalise its image and expand its product range . 
 Smith 's had begun selling audio and photographic equipment and calculators at the end of the 1970s , with a modest degree of success . In 1980 its marketing development manager , John Rowland , hit upon the idea of creating " Computer Know @-@ How " sections in major branches to sell computer books and magazines . Most of the items on display were imports from the United States but their relatively high cost reduced their attractiveness to the casual buyer . The commercial success and mass market potential of the ZX80 caught Rowland 's interest ; he approached Sinclair , saw a prototype ZX81 and agreed to market the machine through Smith 's on an exclusive basis for the first six months after launch . As Rowland put it , " what we 've done now is bring the computer @-@ orientated publications together with an actual computer , to create the Computer Know @-@ How section of the store " , alongside computer software and blank cassette tapes . The ZX81 would be sold in 112 stores around the UK and would serve as the centrepiece of the " Computer Know @-@ How " sections . 
 Selling the ZX81 over the counter was seen as something of a gamble and Rowland 's colleagues were initially unenthusiastic about the scheme . Branch buyers thought that the ZX81 was unlikely to sell more than 10 – 15 units per branch at launch . Rowland himself thought that the ZX81 would sell about 10 @,@ 000 units during the first five months of the retail agreement , equivalent to one month 's mail order sales by Sinclair . In the event , the ZX81 was a massive success for Smith 's , it went on sale for £ 99 making it the first home PC in the UK to retail for under £ 100 . The " Computer Know @-@ How " sections were swamped with eager customers , overwhelming the 300 staff who had been trained to demonstrate the machines ; a Financial Times correspondent wrote of being " dazed and bewildered by the crowds of schoolchildren clustered round the ZX81 in your local branch of W.H. Smith . " Within a year , Smith 's had sold 350 @,@ 000 ZX81s , making an estimated net profit of £ 10 million . Sales of peripherals , software , books and magazines netted even more profit . 
 The British chain stores Boots , John Menzies and Currys began selling the ZX81 as soon as Smith 's exclusive distribution deal expired and a number of companies secured overseas distribution rights for the ZX81 , which was being sold in 18 countries by March 1982 . Sinclair launched the ZX81 in the United States in November 1981 at a price of $ 149 @.@ 95 assembled and $ 99 @.@ 95 in kit form , initially selling directly to the American market by mail order . To be useful the computer needed an extra <unk> RAM pack which cost $ 49 @.@ 95 . Sales reached 15 @,@ 000 a month by January 1982 , while American Express sold thousands more to its own customers . In February 1982 Timex obtained a licence from Sinclair to sell the ZX81 directly through thousands of retail outlets in the US , paying Sinclair Research a 5 per cent royalty on all Sinclair hardware and software sold by Timex . The company was later to produce its own licensed clones and variants of the ZX81 . By August 1982 Sinclair had lowered the American mail @-@ order price of the assembled ZX81 to $ 99 @.@ 95 and kit to $ 79 @.@ 95 , and its advertisements stated that " more than 10 @,@ 000 are sold every week " . In December 1981 Mitsui obtained rights to distribute the ZX81 in Japan , selling it by mail order for ¥ 38 @,@ 700 ( equivalent to £ 83 in 1982 prices ) , and had sold 5 @,@ 000 units by July 1982 . The Japanese market 's favourable reaction to the ZX81 led Mitsui to begin selling the ZX81 over the counter in large bookshops from September 1982 , with annual sales of 20 @,@ 000 units predicted . In the Netherlands , the regular Sinclair ZX81 was for sale as well as a Bang & Olufsen branded version called <unk> . 
 The ZX81 was also sold for a while in duty @-@ free shops at UK airports . However , this fell foul of government export restrictions aimed at preventing the Soviet bloc countries from obtaining Western high technology goods . It was not uncommon for visitors from the Soviet Union and other eastern European countries to pick up gadgets in Western countries with the aim of transferring their technology to their own states ' industries . In 1983 the government ordered that the ZX81s were to be withdrawn from sale at airports . There was no such restriction on sales to communist China and in November 1983 Sinclair Research announced that it had signed an agreement to export ZX81 kits to a factory in Guangzhou , where they would be assembled for the Chinese market . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reviews of the ZX81 highlighted the great value for money offered by the machine but noted its technical shortcomings . As Tim Hartnell put it in Your Computer , " the ZX81 is both a delight and a disappointment " . He applauded the improvements that had been made over the ZX80 , such as a much better manual , display and string handling , and called the ZX81 " a very good first computer " that " will open the world of computing to many who would be denied access to it by cost . " However , the built @-@ in memory was so small that use of a memory expansion pack was " mandatory for any worthwhile use " . He also found the ZX81 to be alarmingly unreliable , having to have his first two test machines replaced before getting one that worked properly . 
 New Scientist 's Malcolm <unk> commented that it was " great technical value for money particularly for computing enthusiasts " but thought that others were " likely to be bored very quickly by the basic system " . He highlighted weaknesses in the manual and Sinclair 's accompanying software , criticising them for " a misconceived design and sloppiness in execution which make the machine seem harder to use and more limited than it should " and questioned whether it might be more worthwhile to save up for a more powerful computer such as Acorn or Commodore 's offerings . Overall , he concluded , the ZX81 might have a limited value in helping to teach BASIC programming and overcoming psychological barriers to computing , but " the Sinclair systems have a long way to go before they raise the quality and level of understanding of the nature and use of computer @-@ based information systems among computer unbelievers . " 
 While the editor of Personal Computer World was on holiday in May 1981 , his colleagues publicised the magazine 's review of the ZX81 with a cover showing a chimpanzee with the machine above the strapline " Editor <unk> the ZX81 " . ( The chimp returned in later issues to " <unk> " all of Sinclair 's subsequent computers . ) The review , which was written by PCW staffer Dave <unk> , acknowledged that the machine had significant shortcomings but nonetheless represented " absolutely amazing value for money " . He described the ZX81 as " a lovely product which will have enormous appeal to people wanting to find out more about computers , but without it costing them an arm and a leg " and concluded : " If you know nothing about computers and you want to enjoy finding out about them , then this machine offers a value for money way of doing just that . Children will love the ZX81 , there can be no question about that , and I suspect that more than a few people who are already familiar with computers will buy one , just to have a bit of fun . " 
 Paul Taylor of the Financial Times found the ZX81 to be " a powerful and flexible little computer ideally suited as a fun introduction to the mysteries of home computing " but cautioned readers about its limitations . It lacked ready @-@ made software , the keyboard was not easy to use , it did not have sufficiently advanced graphics to be able to replicate arcade @-@ style games and its built @-@ in memory was inadequate . Even so , he suggested , " the ZX81 is a unique British product , part toy , part puzzle , part learning tool and I think that , provided one accepts its limitations and recognises that any computer will only do what it is told to do , it is good value as an introduction to the hobby of home computing . " 
 The Age described the ZX81 as " not extremely sophisticated , and its memory capability is rather limited . It also has a rather toy @-@ like appearance " . It concluded that the computer was " an ideal toy for youngsters who want to become acquainted with the computer world . It is responsive , cheap , and very easy to use " . 
 Billy Garrett of Byte , who already owned a ZX80 , complimented the Timex / Sinclair 1000 's manual ( although he regretted the removal of the British original 's humour ) , the " state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art circuitry " , and the BASIC for being " remarkably powerful " despite the small ROM size . He concluded that " the major use ... will probably be for learning about BASIC or computers in general . [ It ] has limited expansion capabilities , and the keyboard is too small and cramped for any serious work " . 
 David <unk> described the ZX81 as " a wonderfully brainy little micro which won 't let you waste your time and make a fool of yourself " . In a comparison between the ZX81 and IBM PC published in Which Micro ? , he commended the ZX81 's user @-@ friendliness and its on @-@ the @-@ fly syntax checking of BASIC programs , which he described as " the feature that I , as a newcomer to computing , want to see incorporated into every micro . " 
 = = Peripherals and software = = 
 The success of the ZX81 led almost immediately to enthusiasts producing a huge variety of peripherals and software . Clive Sinclair was " amused and gratified " by the attention the machine received but made little effort to exploit the demand , effectively ceding a very lucrative market to third party suppliers , a decision that undoubtedly forfeited a lot of potential earnings . W.H. Smith , for instance , was able to exploit a peculiarity of the ZX81 ; owners found that technically obsolete low @-@ fidelity mono tape cassette recorders worked better as storage devices than higher @-@ quality music systems . Smith 's purchased cheap " shoebox " cassette recorders in the Far East and sold them with the W.H. Smiths logo as " data recorders " . Over 100 @,@ 000 were sold in 18 months . 
 Other than what Clarke described as " a few remarkably poor programs on cassette " Sinclair released only two official peripherals for the ZX81 , a 16 KB RAM pack ( actually the same one previously released for the ZX80 , but rebadged ) and the ZX Printer , both of which plugged into the edge connector at the rear of the ZX81 . They retailed at a launch price of £ 49 @.@ 95 each but both had notable flaws . The RAM pack was top @-@ heavy and was supported only by the edge connector . It had a habit of falling out of its socket at crucial points and crashing the ZX81 , losing anything that the user had typed in . Users turned to using sticky lumps of chewing gum , double @-@ sided tape or Blu @-@ Tack to cure what became known as the " RAM pack wobble " problem . The ZX Printer was a tiny spark printer that used two electrically charged styli to burn away the surface of aluminium @-@ coated paper to reveal the black underlay . It worked reasonably well at first but its output deteriorated rapidly after a time . 
 Many non @-@ Sinclair peripherals aimed to remedy the ZX81 's flaws and provide many new capabilities . These included RAM packs providing up to 64 KB of extra memory and promising to " fit snugly ... giving a firm connection " to the computer , typewriter @-@ style keyboards , more advanced printers and sound generators , and even a hard disk interface , which Clive Sinclair thought was " quite <unk> the lily " . A wide range of software was also published . Within only a year of the ZX81 's launch , around 200 independent companies had been established to manufacture and sell Sinclair @-@ compatible hardware . The people behind the ZX81 cottage industry were very often not computer professionals but were , as the Financial Times noted , " school teachers , civil servants , electrical engineers and technicians [ who ] have set up small operations in their own time " . 
 The ZX81 's popularity was publicly demonstrated in January 1982 when civil servant Mike Johnstone organised a " ZX <unk> " at Westminster Central Hall . Seventy exhibitors set up stalls with only a few hundred visitors expected in a hall with a capacity of 650 people . More than 12 @,@ 000 people came and the police had to control the crowd . Thousands , many of whom had travelled long distances , queued outside for up to three hours to get into the hall ; Clarke , who was only able to enter after identifying himself as a journalist , wrote that " no one knows how many gave up in despair " . The exhibitors sold thousands of pounds ' worth of software and hardware " as fast as three pairs of hands on each stall could hand them over and stuff the <unk> into improvised overflowing cash boxes " , he added . The fair also showed Sinclair Research 's relatively unimportant role in the computer 's success , with only small crowds at its booth compared to the " rugby scrum " elsewhere . By August 1983 seven more ZX <unk> were held . 
 Thousands of ZX81 programs were published , either as printed listings that could be typed in or as ready @-@ made applications that could be loaded from cassette tape . Many computer magazines featured ZX81 program listings – some , such as Sinclair Programs , were dedicated entirely to listings – while many individuals became the archetypal " bedroom programmers " , producing games and applications which they produced , marketed , recorded , and sold from their own homes . Some went on to found their own software houses , employing teams of programmers – some of whom were still at school – to produce programs for the ZX81 and other computers . Existing companies also sold software ; Psion produced a series of ZX81 programs in close association with Sinclair , including a flight simulator , while ICL 's range of ZX81 programs sold over 100 @,@ 000 cassettes in less than three months . Psion 's success with the ZX81 had a profound effect on the future of the company . Its work on the ZX81 database program Vu @-@ File led to Psion switching its focus to the development of personal digital assistants , which resulted in the launch in 1984 of the Psion Organiser , the world 's first handheld personal computer . Some of the most popular ZX81 games ( Psion 's Flight Simulation being an example ) were rewritten for the Spectrum to take advantage of the newer machine 's colour and sound capabilities . 
 Enterprising programmers were able to produce games for the ZX81 using nothing more than text characters and the machine 's limited text <unk> . Some ZX81 games achieved lasting fame , such as 3D Monster Maze , a tense first @-@ person perspective game that involved the player escaping a labyrinth with a Tyrannosaurus rex in pursuit . Written in a combination of BASIC and machine code , its innovative design led it to be hailed as the first home computer 3D game and a landmark in the history of computer and video games . 
 One of the more bizarre software products for the ZX81 came about as a result of music companies attempting to capitalise on the popularity of Sinclair 's computers . In 1983 , EMI released a single by Chris <unk> that had a ZX81 program recorded on the B @-@ side . Island Records responded with <unk> by Buzzcocks frontman Pete Shelley , packaged with a program for the ZX Spectrum . 
 = = Clones and variants = = 
 Sinclair 's licensing agreement with Timex enabled the American company to produce three clones or offshoots of Sinclair machines for the US market . These were the Timex Sinclair 1000 , Timex Sinclair 1500 ( both variants of the ZX81 ) and the Timex Sinclair 2068 ( a variant of the ZX Spectrum ) . The TS1000 was launched in July 1982 and sparked a massive surge of interest ; at one point , the Timex <unk> was receiving over 5 @,@ 000 calls an hour , 50 @,@ 000 a week , inquiring about the machine or about microcomputers in general . It was virtually identical to the ZX81 save for re @-@ branding and the addition of an extra 1 KB of memory , making for a grand total of 2 KB . In the five months following the TS1000 's launch , the company sold 550 @,@ 000 machines , earning Sinclair over $ 1 @.@ 2 million in royalties . 
 Timex produced a second version of the ZX81 in the form of the <unk> , essentially an Americanised ZX81 launched in August 1983 . It dispensed with the membrane keyboard and used a case similar to that of the ZX Spectrum , incorporating 16 KB of on @-@ board memory . It was effectively a stopgap between the ZX81 and Spectrum . However , it was unsuccessful due to increased competition from rival US machines and the after @-@ effects of Timex 's botched marketing of the TS1000 . Although the TS1000 had initially been a great success , Timex failed to provide the essential RAM pack upgrades to the market for two or three months after it launched the TS1000 . Consumers would take the machine home , plug it in and find that it would not do anything useful due to the lack of memory . 
 In addition , consumers ' attitude in the US was quite different from that in the UK . Clive Sinclair told Informatics magazine in June 1981 that " our competitors thought that consumers didn 't want to learn programming . We [ Sinclair Research ] think they failed because of this and because of price . " Timex evidently shared this belief but events proved it to be a false assumption . The TS1000 / ZX81 's price advantage was erased when its main rivals – the Texas Instruments <unk> / 4A and the Commodore VIC 20 – had their prices cut to below the all @-@ important $ 100 mark . Competitors such as Apple , Atari , Commodore and Texas Instruments promoted their machines as being for business or entertainment rather than education , highlighting the value of computers with ready @-@ made applications and more advanced features such as graphics , colour and sound . 
 By late 1983 Wayne Green reported a " rising chorus of frustrated Timex users who are telling friends not to waste their money . " " Hard core " early adopters , he wrote , " became discouraged with the quality of the product , with the poverty of software available and with the almost total lack of information on how to cope with it . " Consumers deserted the TS1000 once its novelty value had worn off and , as publishers of programming guides found to their cost , the American public showed little interest in using the machine to learn about computer programming . American retailers were left with large stocks of unsold machines . Burned by this experience , many were unwilling to stock the later Timex Sinclair machines in large numbers and the big chain stores dropped the Timex Sinclair line altogether . 
 Some companies outside the US and UK produced their own " pirate " versions of the ZX81 and Timex Sinclair computers , aided by weak intellectual property laws in their countries of origin . Several Brazilian companies produced ZX81 clones , notably the TK series ( such as the <unk> ) from <unk> Eletronica of Brazil ) and <unk> 's CP @-@ 200 . <unk> Eletronica of Argentina produced the <unk> and <unk> , clones of the ZX81 and <unk> respectively . Lambda Electronics of Hong Kong produced the Lambda 3000 , based on the ZX81 , which was itself widely copied by other Chinese manufacturers . 
 The machines were not all straight copies of the ZX81 ; some , such as the CP @-@ 200 , came with extra memory and a larger case ( often with a <unk> keyboard in place of the original membrane keyboard ) . One clone , the <unk> from <unk> of Italy , could emulate either the ZX80 or ZX81 and switch between the two machines via a jumper . 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 The ZX81 had an immediate impact on the fortunes of Sinclair Research and Clive Sinclair himself . The company 's profitability rose enormously , from a <unk> profit of £ 818 @,@ 000 on a turnover of £ 4 @.@ 6 million in 1980 – 81 to £ 8 @.@ 55 million on a turnover of £ 27 @.@ 17 million in 1981 – 82 . Clive Sinclair became one of the UK 's highest @-@ profile businessmen and a millionaire , receiving a £ 1 million bonus on top of a salary of £ 13 @,@ 000 . He received a knighthood in the Queen 's Birthday Honours and the Young Businessman of the Year award in 1983 . 
 The machine also had a widespread and lasting social impact in the United Kingdom . According to Clive Sinclair , purchasers of the ZX81 came from " a reasonably broad spectrum " that ranged from readers of the upmarket Observer and Sunday Times newspapers to the more downmarket but numerous Sun readers . The largest age group was around 30 years old . The Financial Times reported in March 1982 that most Sinclair computers were being bought for educational purposes , both for adults and children , though the children were usually able to learn much more quickly . Ian Adamson and Richard Kennedy note that the popularity of the ZX81 was " subtly different from the run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill social fad " ; although most enthusiasts were in their teens or early twenties , many were older users – often parents who had become fascinated by the ZX81s that they had bought for their children . However , the ZX81 boom was overwhelmingly male @-@ dominated . 
 One of the ZX81 's key legacies was that it spurred large numbers of people to try programming for the first time . The ZX81 plays a significant part in the plot of William Gibson 's 2003 novel Pattern Recognition . One character , an artist using old ZX81s as a sculptural medium , explains the cultural and intellectual impact that the machine had on British society : 
 Walking on , he explains to her that Sinclair , the British inventor , had a way of getting things right , but also exactly wrong . Foreseeing the market for affordable personal computers , Sinclair decided that what people would want to do with them was to learn programming . The ZX81 , marketed in the United States as the Timex 1000 , cost less than the equivalent of a hundred dollars , but required the user to key in programs , tapping away on that little motel keyboard @-@ sticker . This had resulted both in the short market @-@ life of the product and , in Voytek 's opinion , twenty years on , in the relative preponderance of skilled programmers in the United Kingdom . They had their heads turned by these little boxes , he believes , and by the need to program them ... 
 ... " But if Timex sold it in the United States , " she asks him , " why didn 't we get the programmers ? " 
 " You have programmers , but America is different . America wanted Nintendo . Nintendo gives you no programmers . Also , on launch of product in America , RAM @-@ expansion unit did not ship for three months . People buy computer , take it home , discover it does almost nothing . A disaster . " 
 Among those whose first experience of home computing was provided by the ZX81 are Terry Pratchett ( who used it for " very primitive word processing " ) , Edward de Bono and – perhaps proving William Gibson 's point – many video game developers including Charles Cecil , Raffaele <unk> , Pete Cooke , David Perry ( whose first published game , a driving game , involved " a black blob avoiding other black blobs " ) , Rhianna Pratchett , and Jon Ritman . 
 Even 30 years after launch , the ZX81 has a German user forum , and one in English . 
 New hardware and software continues to be developed for the ZX81 , including : 
 a ZX81 @-@ based webserver . 
 the <unk> , a combined SD card interface , <unk> configurable memory expansion , and optional joystick port and AY sound interface . 
 New games on cassette tape by Revival Studios , such as Avalanche , Mayhem , Down , <unk> and more . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = News reports = = = 
 = = = Other sources = = = 
 = Moving Mountains ( song ) = 
 " Moving Mountains " is a song recorded by American R & B singer Usher . It was released on May 23 , 2008 , as the third single from his fifth studio album , Here I Stand . It was written by Usher with Christopher " Tricky " Stewart , Kuk Harrell and The @-@ Dream , and was produced by Stewart and The @-@ Dream . " Moving Mountains " is a slow tempo ballad , with lyrics describing a love struggle . The song received mostly positive attention from critics , with comparisons made to 2004 's " Burn " . 
 The song appeared on the Billboard Hot 100 and Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , as well as the single charts of several European countries . It peaked highest in New Zealand , where it reached number six on the singles chart and was certified gold . The music video for " Moving Mountains " was filmed in front of a green screen as a sequel to the video of " Love in This Club " . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Moving Mountains " was written by The @-@ Dream , Christopher " Tricky " Stewart , Kuk Harrell and Usher , and produced by The @-@ Dream and Stewart . Recorded at Triangle Sound Studios and Chalice Recording Studios , it was leaked in February 2008 , before being officially released for sale on May 23 , 2008 . 
 " Moving Mountains " is a slow jam ballad , and contains synth beats and electronic influences . Portions of the song follow a chord progression used in OneRepublic 's " Apologize " . Partway through the song the beat is adjusted , while the musical instruments are accentuated . Usher 's voice ranges from tenor to falsetto . The song 's lyrics are of a " struggle to get through to his girl " , and contain an extended metaphor , relating his fight for love to that of moving mountains , wishing for the situation to change . Fraser McAlpine from BBC called it " a cold , sad song with cold , sad lyrics " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Moving Mountains " received mostly positive reviews from critics . Leah Greenblatt called it " an easy pick " as a single , while Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine lauded it as " further evidence that Usher always delivers musically " . " Moving Mountains " was dubbed by The Guardian 's Rosie Swash " a marked improvement on the sex @-@ <unk> " of " Love in This Club " , and the AbsolutePunk reviewer called it " one of Usher ’ s most impressive efforts to date " , likening the song to Usher 's 2004 single " Burn " . However , while Alex Fletcher of Digital Spy was impressed with the technicalities of Usher 's vocals , he found it " hard to take Usher completely seriously when he insists on wailing each line " , advising Usher to " stick to party bangers in the future " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Moving Mountains " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number seventy @-@ two on the chart date June 14 , 2008 . It peaked at number sixty @-@ seven on August 2 , 2008 , falling off the chart two weeks later , after spending a total of nine weeks on the chart . The song is Usher 's lowest @-@ peaking song on the Hot 100 . It fared better on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , where it peaked at number eighteen and spent seventeen weeks on the chart . It placed at number eighty @-@ four on the end @-@ of @-@ year R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . " Moving Mountains " reached number fifty @-@ six on the Pop 100 . 
 The song appeared on the UK Singles Chart in July 2008 at number sixty @-@ seven , rising to peak at number twenty @-@ five . After thirteen charting weeks it fell off the chart . " Moving Mountains " was commercially well received in the rest of Europe , reaching the high point of number twenty @-@ two on the European Hot 100 Singles . In individual countries , the song reached the top forty in Austria , Czech Republic , Germany , Ireland , Slovakia and Sweden . It also appeared on the Ultratop charts in both Flanders and Wallonia at number twenty . The song also had chart success in Japan and Australia , reaching the high positions of thirty @-@ three and thirty @-@ six , respectively . " Moving Mountains " had the most impact in New Zealand , where it reached number six on the singles chart , and , on March 29 , 2009 , was certified gold by the RIANZ for over 7 @,@ 500 sales . The song ranked at number forty @-@ seven on the New Zealand 2008 year @-@ end Singles Chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video to " Moving Mountains " was released on May 21 , 2008 . Directed by the Brothers Strause , it is a continuation of the video for " Love in This Club " . The video was shot in front of a green screen . 
 The video begins with Usher exiting the club in which the " Love in This Club " video takes place , then shows a fiery transition into the next scene , showing the burnt @-@ down club . As the song begins , Usher inspects the smoking ruins and imagines a woman in a shard of a broken mirror . He travels through a desert , and takes off his jacket to reveal a tight @-@ fitting t @-@ shirt , and again imagines the woman , this time in a desert pond . Upon reaching a mountain on which his love interest appears , Usher climb the mountain and rain starts to fall . When he reaches the top of the mountain , the rain clears to be replaced by snowfall . Usher finds that the woman is , yet again , merely an illusion . He opens a locket to reveal a portrait of himself and his partner , which freezes over and cracks . As the video ends , Usher kneels , and the mountains breaks around him , leaving a sole pillar for him to stand on . 
 Idolator noted similarities in some scenery between the music video and Madonna 's " Frozen " video . It was placed at number eight on BET 's Notarized : Top 100 Videos of 2008 list . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Source : 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Hurricane Jimena ( 2003 ) = 
 Hurricane Jimena was the tenth named storm and second hurricane of the 2003 Pacific hurricane season . Jimena formed on August 28 in the far Eastern Pacific Ocean as a tropical depression and moved westward where it rapidly became a hurricane the following day . The storm moved westward into the Central Pacific Ocean where it became a Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . After reaching its peak strength as a Category 2 hurricane , the storm began to weaken due to increasing wind shear . Jimena brushed past the Hawaiian Islands before becoming a tropical depression on September 3 . The weakening storm then crossed the international dateline before dissipating on September 5 , becoming one of the few storms to cross both <unk> and International Date Line . 
 Jimena was the first Pacific hurricane to threaten Hawaii since Hurricane Daniel of the 2000 Pacific hurricane season . However , the storm weakened as it passed south of the islands and the effects from Jimena were minimal ; there were no reported fatalities or injuries from the storm . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 An area of disturbed weather formed on August 26 , 2003 and drifted westward . The disturbed weather then began to organize and the system became a tropical depression on August 28 . Moving westward over waters greater than 82 ° F ( 28 ° C ) , Tropical Depression Ten @-@ E rapidly strengthened into a tropical storm and was named Jimena by the National Hurricane Center . 
 Jimena continued to intensify as it moved westward . On August 29 , satellite imagery showed a well defined eye developing in the storm as the storm winds increased to 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) . Jimena then was upgraded to hurricane status later that day . At 1500 UTC , visible satellite imagery showed the storm having a small cloud filled eye and developing banding features south of the storm 's center as Jimena continued to move west northwest . As the hurricane neared the Central Pacific Basin , it winds reached a peak intensity of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) and the barometric pressure fell to 970 millibars on August 30 . At 0600 UTC , the National Hurricane Center issued its last advisory on Jimena as the storm crossed into the Central Pacific Hurricane Center 's area of responsibility . 
 On August 31 , Jimena encountered strong southerly wind shear , causing it to quickly weaken back to a tropical storm by September 1 . Jimena then turned west @-@ southwest where the center of the storm passed 105 miles ( 165 km ) south of Hawaii at 1500 UTC . Jimena continued to weaken as wind shear increased and the storm weakened to a tropical depression on September 3 . After weakening back to a depression , Jimena crossed the International Date Line on September 5 at 0600 UTC , where it became the first storm to exist in all three Pacific basins since 1999 's Hurricane Dora . However , Jimena was only tracked briefly by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center , since strong wind shear resulted in the low level circulation to be exposed from the center and at 1727 UTC , the low level had nearly dissipated . At 1800 UTC , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center issued their final advisory on Jimena as the storm dissipated 715 miles ( 1151 km ) southeast of Wake Island . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Forecasters at the Central Pacific Hurricane Center began issuing a Hurricane Watch for the Big Island of Hawaii on August 31 at 0000 UTC ; the following day the Central Pacific Hurricane Center ( CPHC ) issued a tropical storm warning at 0300 UTC and a flash flood watch . The watches and warnings prompted residents to board up windows and stock up on emergency supplies . The storm 's approach also closed down beaches and prompted officials to cancel outdoor activates as a precaution and the American Red Cross opened shelters and provided emergency services . The preparations for Hurricane Jimena cost the American Red Cross $ 5 @,@ 000 ( 2003 USD ) . 
 As Jimena passed south of Hawaii as a weakening tropical storm , it brought high winds and heavy rainfall to the island . High wind gusts of 53 – 58 mph ( 85 – 93 km / h ) were reported in South Point and Kahoolawe . In Honolulu , a weather station reported winds of 36 mph ( 58 km / h ) while a station in Kauai reported winds of 22 mph ( 35 km / h ) . The storm dropped 6 – 10 inches of rain across the Big Island . In Glenwood , Hawaii , the storm dropped 8 @.@ 43 inches ( 214 mm ) of rain . The rainfall from Jimena helped reduce drought conditions across the Big Island . Coastal sections of the Hawaiian Islands reported high surf ranging from 11 to 15 feet ( 3 – 5 meters ) high . 
 High winds from Jimena knocked down trees and damaged power lines , leaving 1 @,@ 300 residents without electricity . Heavy rainfall from the storm also caused minor flooding on the eastern side of the Big Island . Offshore , high surf and strong currents brought by the storm resulted in 350 swimmers being rescued by the United States Coast Guard , residents , and state and local police and fire departments . Overall there were no fatalities or injuries from Hurricane Jimena . The name Jimena was not retired by the World Meteorological Organization in the spring of 2004 and was used in the 2009 season . 
 = U.S. Route 89 in Utah = 
 In the U.S. state of Utah , U.S. Route 89 ( US @-@ 89 ) is a long north – south state highway spanning more than 502 miles ( 807 @.@ 891 km ) through the central part of the state . Between Provo and Brigham City , US @-@ 89 serves as a local road , paralleling ( and occasionally concurring with ) Interstate 15 , but the portions from Arizona north to Provo and Brigham City northeast to Wyoming serve separate corridors . The former provides access to several national parks and Arizona , and the latter connects I @-@ 15 with Logan , the state 's only Metropolitan Statistical Area not on the Interstate . 
 When US @-@ 89 was established in the state in 1926 , the road initially extended north to US @-@ 91 in Spanish Fork . Following the extension of the former to the Canada – US border , Interstate 15 was constructed roughly paralleling US @-@ 89 to the west and replacing US @-@ 91 south of Brigham City . During this process , US @-@ 89 was rerouted in southern Utah and northern Arizona with the old roadway becoming US @-@ 89A . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Arizona border to I @-@ 70 = = = 
 US @-@ 89 enters Utah from the south inside the Glen Canyon National Recreation Area , about 7 miles ( 11 km ) north of the Glen Canyon Dam , where it crosses the Colorado River near Page , Arizona . After leaving the recreation area and passing the small town of Big Water , the highway curves west through the Grand Staircase @-@ Escalante National Monument . US @-@ 89 stays near the monument 's southern boundary , crossing the East Clark Bench and The Cockscomb and passing south of the Vermilion Cliffs of the Grand Staircase . At the city of Kanab , US @-@ 89 meets the north end of US @-@ 89A , an alternate route south into Arizona , and abruptly turns north and begins climbing the staircase . Here the Mount Carmel Scenic Byway begins ; one of the Utah Scenic Byways , it stretches north to SR @-@ 12 at Bryce Canyon Junction . The Vermilion Cliffs are ascended via the canyon carved by Kanab Creek . Near the White Cliffs , US @-@ 89 meets SR @-@ 9 at Mt . Carmel Junction , where travelers can turn to reach Zion National Park . The final " step " is the Pink Cliffs , where the highway follows alongside the Virgin River to the highest point on US @-@ 89 in southern Utah and the east end of SR @-@ 14 , a summit at Long Valley Junction ( elevation <unk> feet / 2300 m ) . 
 North from Long Valley Junction , US @-@ 89 descends through the valley of the Sevier River , meeting SR @-@ 12 , a scenic highway that leads to Bryce Canyon National Park , at Bryce Canyon Junction , SR @-@ 143 in Panguitch , and SR @-@ 20 at Bear Valley Junction . As the highway continues north , the valley narrows significantly into the Circleville Canyon before opening out near the town of Circleville . In this part of the valley , the Sevier River is dammed to create the <unk> Reservoir , and US @-@ 89 meets SR @-@ 62 near Kingston . North of Marysvale , the valley again narrows into the Sevier Canyon , which carries the river to its confluence with Clear Creek and US @-@ 89 to its overlap with Interstate 70 , beginning at Sevier . 
 = = = I @-@ 70 to the Wasatch Front = = = 
 Although US @-@ 89 follows the I @-@ 70 freeway from Sevier to Salina , the old alignment can still be driven , and is state @-@ maintained north of Elsinore as SR @-@ 258 , SR @-@ 118 ( which overlaps I @-@ 70 Business through Richfield ) , SR @-@ 24 , and US @-@ 50 . Both highways stay mainly in the west half of the Sevier River 's valley , with the faster I @-@ 70 / US @-@ 89 bypassing the communities that the surface road passes through . Just south of Salina , I @-@ 70 curves to the east , rising alongside Salina Creek , and US @-@ 89 exits into downtown Salina , where it rejoins its pre @-@ freeway alignment . US @-@ 50 overlaps US @-@ 89 between I @-@ 70 and Salina , following I @-@ 70 east and a separate alignment northwest from the area ; the short Interstate 70 Business also uses this roadway as a business spur from I @-@ 70 to the city . North of Salina , US @-@ 89 bypasses Redmond ( SR @-@ 256 follows the former route through the town ) and passes through <unk> to Gunnison , where it meets SR @-@ 28 and finally turns away from the Sevier River . 
 At Gunnison , US @-@ 89 turns east before curving northeast into the Sanpete Valley , formed by the San Pitch River , a tributary of the Sevier River . Along US @-@ 89 in this valley are several small cities : Manti , Ephraim , Mount Pleasant , and Fairview . Between Ephraim and Mount Pleasant , US @-@ 89 meets the south end of SR @-@ 132 at Pigeon Hollow Junction . SR @-@ 132 was formerly US @-@ 189 , connecting US @-@ 89 with US @-@ 91 in Nephi . Beyond Fairview , where the scenic SR @-@ 31 turns east , US @-@ 89 climbs out of the valley , reaching a summit at Hill Top ( elevation 6400 feet / 2000 m ) . Thistle Creek parallels the next leg of the highway , descending through a canyon to the junction with US @-@ 6 near the ghost town of Thistle , flooded by a landslide in 1983 . Thistle Creek and Soldier Creek , paralleled by US @-@ 89 and US @-@ 6 , merge near this junction to form Spanish Fork , which the overlapped routes follow northwest through Spanish Fork Canyon into the Utah Valley at <unk> Junction . US @-@ 89 splits to the north from US @-@ 6 there , skirts the west edge of Mapleton , and merges with SR @-@ 51 - the old Arrowhead Trail ( US @-@ 91 ) - south of downtown Springville . 
 = = = Southern Wasatch Front = = = 
 From Springville north to Salt Lake City , US @-@ 89 parallels — and for a distance overlaps — Interstate 15 , following the old Arrowhead Trail , once the main highway from Salt Lake City to Los Angeles , through a number of downtowns . Numerous state highways connect US @-@ 89 to I @-@ 15 , including SR @-@ 77 in Springville , SR @-@ 114 in Provo , SR @-@ 52 in Orem , SR @-@ 180 and SR @-@ 145 in American Fork , and SR @-@ 73 in Lehi . In Provo , US @-@ 89 meets US @-@ 189 , its only branch , which heads northeast through Provo Canyon to Heber City , connecting to I @-@ 80 and bypassing Salt Lake City . North of Lehi , US @-@ 89 merges with I @-@ 15 ( at exit 282 ) , which has been built on or near the old road through a gap in the Traverse Mountains ( elevation 4800 feet / 1500 m ) into the Salt Lake Valley . The routes split in Draper , formerly with a direct interchange north of SR @-@ 71 , but US @-@ 89 traffic must now exit at SR @-@ 71 ( exit 291 ) , turn east to Factory Outlet Drive , and follow this frontage road to the location of the former split . From here all the way to downtown Salt Lake City , US @-@ 89 is marked along State Street , a major north – south street that ends at the Utah State Capitol . After passing through Sandy , Midvale , Murray , Millcreek Township , and South Salt Lake , State Street enters Salt Lake City at the intersection with SR @-@ 201 ( 2100 South ) . 
 Until 2007 , US @-@ 89 followed State Street to North Temple ( 100 North ) , two blocks from the capitol , but now it turns at 400 South , following the former alignment of SR @-@ 186 and SR @-@ 176 west and north on 300 West , and rejoining its pre @-@ 2007 route at North Temple . In this area , modern US @-@ 89 runs for one block with the UTA TRAX Red Line in its median before crossing the TRAX line in Main Street 's median , then passing the Frank E. Moss United States Courthouse , Pioneer Park , the historic Warehouse District at Pierpont Avenue , Japantown , EnergySolutions Arena , the Arena TRAX station , the Triad Center , and West High School . As it leaves downtown , 300 West curves northwesterly and becomes Beck Street , meeting the modern terminus of SR @-@ 186 at Victory Road at the back side of Capitol Hill . 
 = = = Northern Wasatch Front = = = 
 US @-@ 89 leaves Salt Lake City at exit 312 of I @-@ 15 , where it acts as I @-@ 15 's frontage roads . Just south of I @-@ 15 's junction with I @-@ 215 , US @-@ 89 splits to the northeast , passing through Bountiful and Woods Cross . A northerly curve onto 500 West removes the highway from Bountiful 's Main Street , and it merges with I @-@ 15 at exit 317 to bypass Centerville and Farmington , where the old road ( former US @-@ 91 , but never US @-@ 89 ) is SR @-@ 106 , through the narrow strip of land that separates Farmington Bay from the Wasatch Mountains . US @-@ 89 leaves I @-@ 15 at exit 324 , where the Legacy Parkway also ends , and proceeds north on a freeway . This portion of US @-@ 89 is the only one to include exit numbers based on its own mileage , as opposed to the overlapping I @-@ 15 or I @-@ 70 . The freeway ends after US @-@ 89 crosses SR @-@ 273 , the former surface alignment of US @-@ 91 in both directions , and heads north as a four @-@ lane road along the Wasatch foothills , to the east of Layton and Hill Air Force Base . After crossing I @-@ 84 in Uintah , US @-@ 89 enters Ogden , which it traverses via Washington Boulevard , rejoining old US @-@ 91 ( now SR @-@ 26 ) south of downtown . Beyond Ogden , US @-@ 89 continues in a general northerly direction along the thin strip between Willard Bay and the Wasatch Mountains to Brigham City , where it finally turns east away from the I @-@ 15 corridor . 
 = = = Wasatch Front to Idaho border = = = 
 US @-@ 89 meets the current alignment of US @-@ 91 in the southern outskirts of Brigham City , turning east for an overlap on the city 's southeast bypass . ( SR @-@ 13 and SR @-@ 90 are the former alignment through Brigham City . ) The two routes head east up Box Elder Canyon in the southern Wellsville Mountains , finally leaving the valley of the Great Salt Lake into a small valley that contains Mantua Reservoir ( elevation 5200 feet / 1585 m ) . US @-@ 89 / US @-@ 91 turns north there , bypassing the town of Mantua to the west , and continues to ascend through Dry Canyon to Sardine Summit ( elevation 5900 feet / 1798 m ) . Another small valley leads to Wellsville Canyon , where the four @-@ lane roadway again turns east and descends into the Cache Valley . In that valley , US @-@ 89 / US @-@ 91 heads northeast , bypassing Wellsville to the east , into downtown Logan . US @-@ 91 continues northerly from Logan into Idaho , but US @-@ 89 splits to the east , beginning a long climb of the Bear River Range through Logan Canyon . The Logan Canyon Scenic Byway , a Utah and National Scenic Byway , begins at Logan and follows US @-@ 89 up the canyon , past the access road to the Beaver Mountain ski area , to Garden City and on to the state line . Bear Lake Summit ( elevation 7800 ft / <unk> m ) , at the top of the range , is the highest point on US @-@ 89 in Utah , from which it descends the east slope via horseshoe curves to Garden City on the shore of Bear Lake ( elevation 5900 ft / 1798 m ) . The final segment of US @-@ 89 to the Idaho state line follows the lake 's west shore , its location constrained by the Bear River Range just to the west . 
 = = History = = 
 When US @-@ 89 was created in 1926 , it only went as far north as Spanish Fork , where travelers could continue to Salt Lake City via US @-@ 91 . The highway was extended north to the Canada – US border near Glacier National Park in the mid @-@ 1930s , though a dispute between Utah and Idaho on the one side and Wyoming on the other was not settled until 1938 . The American Association of State Highway Officials decided in favor of Utah and Idaho , placing US @-@ 89 on or near US @-@ 91 between Spanish Fork and Logan , where it split northeasterly to Yellowstone National Park . ( US @-@ 89 only left US @-@ 91 twice : between Farmington and Ogden , where it still travels today , and via an all @-@ weather route from Brigham City into the Cache Valley , now SR @-@ 38 and SR @-@ 30 . ) Wyoming 's preferred routing , which left US @-@ 91 at Provo , instead became US @-@ 189 . Beginning in the 1950s , Interstate 15 was constructed , replacing US @-@ 91 for through traffic south of Brigham City , and leading to that route 's truncation there in 1974 . On the other hand , US @-@ 89 follows independent corridors south of Spanish Fork and north of Logan . It has not been truncated , and mostly follows US @-@ 91 's final alignment , except between Farmington and Ogden ( where old US @-@ 91 is now I @-@ 15 , SR @-@ 126 , and SR @-@ 26 ) . 
 The southern part of US @-@ 89 , running northerly from Kanab , mostly follows a succession of linear valleys . The Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad opened a branch ( later the Marysvale Branch ) from its main line at Thistle to Manti in 1890 , and extended it ( through a subsidiary , the Sevier Railway ) , to Salina in 1891 , Belknap in 1896 , and Marysvale in 1900 . No rail line ever reached farther south , and so residents of towns such as Junction , Panguitch , Alton , Glendale , and Kanab had to travel north to the railhead at Marysvale . The old county road through Circleville Canyon was poorly constructed , with steep grades and a rough surface . The State Road Commission designated the highway from Nephi east through Salt Creek Canyon and then south through these valleys to Kanab as a state road in or soon after 1910 . Initially the route from the summit at Long Valley Junction to Kanab went through Alton and Johnson Canyon , entering Kanab from the east . A more direct route via Long Valley was considered , serving the communities of Glendale , Orderville , and Mt . Carmel , but this would have required difficult construction over a mesa covered in loose sand to reach Kanab . In summer 1912 , the commission added a branch from Long Valley Junction to Mt . Carmel , allowing these communities access to the state road system , along with a connection west from the junction to Cedar City . Several years later , in December 1915 , the commission added the Mt . Carmel @-@ Kanab road over the sand hills to the system , and began construction of a sand @-@ clay road in 1916 . A connection from Pigeon Hollow Junction north to Thistle was also added in 1912 , following the rail line through a canyon and providing another route to Salt Lake City . 
 In 1919 , the state legislature redefined the state road system to include only a short list given in the law and any federal aid projects . The entire route from Kanab north was kept , including both approaches to Kanab and the two roads to Nephi and Thistle . In addition , a short extension from Kanab south to Arizona was added . An amendment in 1923 removed most of the original route through Johnson Canyon , but added a second route to Alton from the west , effectively forming a large triangular loop through that town . ( The old route from Alton south to Kanab would be re @-@ added to the state road system in 1933 as SR @-@ 136 . ) In the early 1920s , the State Road Commission assigned numbers to several major state roads ; the route from Arizona northerly through Kanab and Richfield to Nephi became State Route 11 . The numbers were officially adopted by the legislature in 1927 , with both the main route and the loop through Alton being defined as SR @-@ 11 ; a new State Route 32 followed the branch to Thistle . The Alton loop was removed from SR @-@ 11 in 1941 , with the south half remaining in the system as part of SR @-@ 136 . Despite these designations , the majority of SR @-@ 11 and all of SR @-@ 32 were instead marked as US @-@ 89 , with the remainder of SR @-@ 11 between Pigeon Hollow Junction and Nephi marked as US @-@ 189 from about 1930 until 1938 . 
 State Route 1 , which became U.S. Route 91 in 1926 , ran north – south through central and northern Utah in the 1920s . State Route 2 left SR @-@ 1 at Logan and ran east through Logan Canyon to Garden City ; this had been built with federal aid as a forest road in about 1918 . The road north from Garden City to Idaho was added to the system in 1921 , and became part of State Route 3 . In 1927 , the legislature added State Route 49 , an alternate southern entrance to Ogden that left SR @-@ 1 at Farmington and merged with SR @-@ 5 ( US @-@ 30S ) at Uintah . ( Present SR @-@ 60 was numbered as a branch of SR @-@ 49 until 1935 . ) State Route 69 , stretching from US @-@ 191 ( now SR @-@ 13 ) just north of Brigham City north and east to US @-@ 91 in Logan , became a state highway in 1931 . The 1930s extension of US @-@ 89 took it north from Thistle along US @-@ 50 ( SR @-@ 8 ) to Springville , US @-@ 91 ( SR @-@ 1 and SR @-@ 106 , later all SR @-@ 1 ) to Farmington , SR @-@ 49 to Uintah , US @-@ 30S ( SR @-@ 5 ) to Ogden , US @-@ 91 ( SR @-@ 1 ) to Brigham City , SR @-@ 69 to Logan , SR @-@ 2 to Garden City , and SR @-@ 3 to Idaho . US @-@ 89 was removed from SR @-@ 69 and overlapped with US @-@ 91 between Brigham City and Logan in the mid @-@ 1950s . 
 In 1957 , one year after construction began on the Glen Canyon Dam , the legislature designated a new State Route 259 , heading east and southeast from SR @-@ 11 in Kanab to Arizona en route to the dam and adjacent bridge . This replaced about eight miles ( 13 km ) of SR @-@ 136 ( the original state highway from the 1910s ) at its south end , but the remainder was a new roadway , through an area not previously served by improved roads . The route past the dam was initially designated as an alternate route of US @-@ 89 , but when completed on February 20 , 1959 it instead became US @-@ 89 's mainline , as it was a better route during all weather , and the old route ( SR @-@ 11 south of Kanab ) became U.S. Route 89 Alternate . 
 Major numbering changes were made in Utah 's state highway system in the 1960s and 1970s , beginning with the construction of Interstate Highways and culminating in the 1977 renumbering , where state route numbers concurrent with other types were dropped entirely . However , the majority of these changes were not visible to the public , as signs continued to display US @-@ 89 and other U.S. Routes and Interstates . The following changes were made to state routes related to US @-@ 89 : 
 In particular , SR @-@ 11 was cut back to only the roadway south from Kanab , which had become US @-@ 89A in 1959 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Drayson Bowman = 
 Drayson Jack Bowman ( born March 8 , 1989 ) is an American professional ice hockey center . He is currently playing with Düsseldorfer EG of the Deutsche Eishockey Liga ( DEL ) , after previously playing for the Montreal Canadiens and Carolina Hurricanes of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . Bowman was selected 72nd overall by the Hurricanes in the 2007 NHL Entry Draft . 
 Bowman spent four years at the major junior level with the Spokane Chiefs of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) . He won a Memorial Cup with the Chiefs in 2008 and was named a WHL West Second Team All @-@ Star in 2009 . He turned professional in 2009 – 10 and has spent the majority of his tenure with the Hurricanes in the team 's farm system with the Albany River Rats and Charlotte Checkers of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) . Internationally , Bowman has competed for the United States at the 2009 IIHF World U20 Championships . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bowman was born in Grand Rapids , Michigan , and was raised in Littleton , Colorado , after his family moved in the early 1990s . His father , Mark Bowman , owns a financial consulting company in Colorado . His younger brother , Collin , is also a hockey player and went on to also compete in the Western Hockey League with the Kelowna Rockets , Moose Jaw Warriors and Calgary Hitmen . While in Littleton , Bowman attended Deer Creek Middle School . As a Colorado Avalanche fan , he has listed Joe Sakic as a player he looked up to . In 2003 , he and his family moved once more to Vancouver , British Columbia to better his opportunities in hockey . He attended Vancouver Christian School while playing at the bantam level for the North Vancouver Winter Hawks . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 Bowman was selected eighth overall by the Spokane Chiefs in the 2004 WHL Bantam Draft . He debuted in four games with the Chiefs in 2004 – 05 , a season he spent primarily at the Junior B level with the Kimberley <unk> of the Kootenay International Junior Hockey League ( KIJHL ) . He recorded 29 goals and 59 points over 47 games with the <unk> to be named the Eddie Mountain Division 's rookie of the year . Bowman joined the Chiefs full @-@ time in 2005 – 06 and notched 17 goals and 34 points over 72 games ( 17th in WHL rookie scoring ) to be named the team 's rookie of the year . On a team basis , the Chiefs finished last in the Western Conference and failed to qualify for the playoffs . 
 Bowman entered the 2006 – 07 season listed as the ninth @-@ best WHL prospect in the NHL Central Scouting Bureau ( CSB ) ' s preliminary rankings of draft @-@ eligible players . He was invited to play in the CHL Top Prospects Game and was subsequently listed in the CSB 's midterm rankings as 44th among North American skaters . Bowman finished the season with an improved 24 goals and 43 points in 61 games . He played in his first WHL playoffs after the Chiefs ranked fourth in the U.S. Division . Playing in six post @-@ season games , Bowman recorded a team @-@ leading seven points ( two goals and five assists ) . The Chiefs were eliminated in the first round by the Everett Silvertips . Entering the 2007 NHL Entry Draft in the off @-@ season , he moved up to 36th among North American skaters in the NHL CSB 's final rankings . Bowman was selected 72nd overall by the Carolina Hurricanes . 
 Following his draft , Bowman participated in his first NHL training camp in September 2007 before being returned to Spokane to continue playing at the junior level . Playing in his third full WHL season , Bowman recorded a team @-@ leading 82 points in 66 games . His 42 goals tied for fourth in the league . Bowman added a team @-@ leading 20 points in 21 playoff games as the Chiefs captured the Ed Chynoweth Cup as WHL champions . The league title earned the Chiefs a berth in the 2008 Memorial Cup in Kitchener , Ontario . Bowman notched a hat trick in the opening game of the tournament , including the game @-@ tying goal late in the third period of a 5 – 4 overtime win over the Belleville Bulls . He went on to score in all four games of the tournament , including game @-@ winners against the Kitchener Rangers in the round @-@ robin and final . The Chiefs went undefeated in the tournament to capture the Memorial Cup as Canadian major junior champions , beating the Kitchener Rangers 4 – 1 in the final . With a team @-@ high eight points ( third in tournament scoring behind Justin Azevedo and Matt <unk> of the Rangers ) , including a tournament @-@ leading six goals , in four games , Bowman was named to the Memorial Cup All @-@ Star Team . 
 Following his Memorial Cup performance , the Hurricanes signed him to a three @-@ year , US $ 2 @.@ 06 million contract on July 31 , 2008 . Playing in his final season with the Chiefs in 2008 – 09 , Drayson was named an alternate captain to Justin McCrae along with Seth Compton and Jared Spurgeon . He was named WHL and CHL Player of the Week after recording 12 points in 3 games for the week ending on February 1 , 2009 . The next month , he earned his second WHL and CHL Player of the Week distinctions with an eight @-@ point effort in two games for the week ending on March 15 , 2009 . He finished the season with 47 goals , fourth in the league , and a junior career @-@ high 83 points to lead his team in scoring for the second consecutive year . He was named to the WHL West Second All @-@ Star Team along with goaltending teammate Dustin <unk> . Bowman and the Chiefs were not able to defend their WHL or CHL titles as they were eliminated in seven games in the second round of the WHL playoffs by the Vancouver Giants . Spokane 's elimination marked the end of Bowman 's junior career . He left the Chiefs fifth on the team 's all @-@ time goals scored list with 136 , 10 behind leader Pat <unk> . He had 114 assists for 250 points total over 269 games . 
 = = = Professional = = = 
 Upon the completion of Bowman 's final WHL season , he was called up by the Hurricanes to travel and practice with the team during their 2009 playoff season . Carolina advanced to the Eastern Conference Finals , where they were eliminated by the Pittsburgh Penguins in four games . The following season , he was assigned to the Hurricanes ' American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Albany River Rats . He scored his first professional goal in his AHL debut with Albany on October 3 , 2009 , in a 6 – 3 loss to the Manchester Monarchs . Midway through the season , he was called up by the Hurricanes and made his NHL debut on January 16 , 2010 . Bowman recorded one shot on goal in 10 minutes of ice time in a 5 – 3 loss to the Atlanta Thrashers . After being sent back down to Albany , he received another call @-@ up on March 24 in light of an injury to forward <unk> Ruutu . During that call @-@ up , he scored his first and second career NHL goals against goaltender Antero <unk> in the first period of an 8 – 5 win against the Tampa Bay Lightning on April 6 . The milestone occurred in his seventh NHL game . Bowman completed the 2009 – 10 NHL season with two goals in nine games , while averaging 12 minutes of ice time . Hurricanes head coach Paul Maurice heralded him as a player with " a good set of hands and a really good hockey IQ " during his first stint in the NHL . As Carolina failed to qualify for the 2010 playoffs , ranking 11th in the East , Bowman was reassigned to the River Rats for their 2010 playoff season . In the AHL , he finished the regular season with 32 points ( 17 goals and 15 assists ) over 56 games , tying for 31st among league rookies and 10th among River Rats players . Bowman added nine points ( three goals and six assists ) over eight games in the playoffs ( ranking fifth among rookies and tying for first in team scoring ) as the River Rats were eliminated in the second round by the Hershey Bears . 
 Bowman made the Hurricanes ' roster out of training camp in 2010 – 11 , but was returned to the AHL within a month . With the Hurricanes having changed their minor league affiliate , he joined a new team , the Charlotte Checkers . After recording 30 points ( 12 goals and 18 assists ) over 51 games with the Checkers ( 10th in team scoring ) , he was recalled on March 10 , 2011 . Spending the remainder of the season with the Hurricanes , he finished 2010 – 11 with one assist over 23 games , while averaging 10 minutes of ice time . Carolina failed to qualify for the playoffs , coming within three points of the eighth and final seed in the Eastern Conference . With his NHL season over , the Hurricanes returned him to the AHL , where the Checkers had qualified for the 2011 Calder Cup Playoffs . Bowman contributed 8 points ( 2 goals and 6 assists ) over 15 games as the Checkers were eliminated in the Conference Finals by the Binghamton Senators . 
 Bowman remained with Charlotte for the beginning of the 2011 – 12 season , failing to make the Hurricanes ' roster out of training camp . In November 2011 , he received a call @-@ up to Carolina that lasted five days . The following month , he was recalled again and recorded a two @-@ goal game against the Vancouver Canucks on December 15 , 2011 . The goals were his first in the NHL in over a year and eight months . After being reassigned , he received two more call ups before the end of the season . Bowman finished the season with 13 points over 37 NHL games in Carolina and 26 points over 42 AHL games in Charlotte . In the off @-@ season , he was tendered a qualifying offer from the Hurricanes in order to retain his restricted free agent status . 
 A free agent following his first full season in the NHL with the Hurricanes in the 2013 – 14 season , Bowman agreed to attend the Montreal Canadiens training camp on a try @-@ out contract on September 2 , 2014 . On October 2 Bowman agreed to a one @-@ year two way contract with the Montreal Canadiens . 
 Bowman was not re @-@ signed by the Canadiens and on October 12 , 2015 , without any NHL interest , Bowman signed a one year deal with the Colorado Eagles of the ECHL . After registering 3 assists in 3 games with the Eagles to start the 2015 – 16 season , Bowman was loaned to former club , the Charlotte Checkers of the AHL on October 22 , 2015 . Bowman played a further 16 games with the Checkers before he left the club to pursue an European career in agreeing to a contract for the remainder of the season in Germany with Düsseldorfer EG of the DEL on December 21 , 2015 . 
 = = International play = = 
 Bowman was named to the United States ' under @-@ 20 team for the 2009 World Junior Championships in Ottawa , Ontario . He was joined on the national team by Spokane Chiefs teammates Tyler Johnson and Mitchell Wahl . Playing against Germany in the first game of preliminaries , he scored twice and was named player of the game . Over six games at the tournament , Bowman totalled three goals and one assist , tying for fifth in team point @-@ scoring . After losing to Slovakia 5 – 3 in the quarterfinal , the United States beat the Czech Republic 3 – 2 in overtime of their placement game to rank fifth in the tournament . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = The Nice = 
 The Nice were an English progressive rock band active in the late 1960s . They blended rock , jazz and classical music and were keyboardist Keith Emerson 's first commercially successful band . 
 The group was formed in 1967 by Emerson , Lee Jackson , David O 'List and Ian Hague to back soul singer P. P. Arnold . After replacing Hague with Brian Davison , the group set out on their own , quickly developing a strong live following . The group 's sound was centred on Emerson 's Hammond organ showmanship and abuse of the instrument , and their radical rearrangements of classical music themes and Bob Dylan songs . 
 The band achieved commercial success with an instrumental rearrangement of Leonard Bernstein 's " America " , following which O 'List left the group . The remaining members carried on as a trio , releasing several albums , before Emerson decided to split the band in early 1970 to form Emerson , Lake & Palmer . The group briefly reformed in 2002 for a series of concerts . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 The Nice evolved from Gary Farr and the T @-@ Bones , which keyboardist Keith Emerson and bassist Keith " Lee " Jackson were both members of before the band dissolved in early 1967 . Emerson then briefly played with the VIPs , who toured the Star @-@ Club in Hamburg , and his playing style became influenced by the organist Don Shinn , including standing up to play the instrument and rocking it on stage . Meanwhile , P. P. Arnold , a performer who reached a higher level of popularity in the UK than her native US , was unhappy with her backing band , The Blue Jays , and wanted a replacement . Her driver suggested Emerson would be able to put together such a group . Emerson agreed , but only on the condition the band could perform on their own as a warm @-@ up act . Since it effectively meant getting two bands for the price of one , manager Andrew Loog Oldham readily agreed . Emerson recruited Jackson , drummer Ian Hague former Chris Farlowe & The Thunderbirds as well as a Mark Leeman Five member , and finally ex @-@ the Attack guitarist David O 'List , the latter by recommendation from journalist Chris Welch . The name came from Arnold saying , " Here comes the Naz " , which the group misheard as " the Nice " . 
 The band played its first gig in May 1967 , and had its first major break at the 7th National Jazz and Blues Festival in Windsor on 13 August . Oldham had managed to secure a separate set for the group in a side tent away from also accompanying Arnold on the main stage , where they gained attention . The next week , Welch wrote in the Melody Maker that " it was the first time I had seen a group actually in the act of winning its first following in quite dramatic circumstances . " When Arnold went back to her family in the US shortly afterwards , Oldham offered the group a contract of their own . Hague was not interested in the " progressive " direction the group wanted to go in , so he was replaced by former Mark Leeman Five and Habits drummer Brian Davison . 
 Now a band in their own right , the Nice expanded their gear , recruiting roadies <unk> Ward and Lemmy , the latter of whom provided Emerson with a Hitler Youth ceremonial dagger to stick into the keys on his Hammond organ . They spent the end of 1967 on a package tour with Jimi Hendrix , Pink Floyd , the Move and Amen Corner . The Floyd 's then leader , Syd Barrett , missed several gigs and O 'List had to stand in for him . The group 's first album was recorded throughout the autumn of 1967 , and in October of that year they recorded their first session for John Peel 's Top Gear . The album included classical and jazz influences including extracts from Leoš Janáček 's Sinfonietta and a rearrangement of Dave Brubeck 's " Blue Rondo a la Turk " renamed as " Rondo " , changing the time signature from the original 9 / 8 to 4 / 4 in the process . The group clashed with producer Oldham in the studio over the length of the track , but eventually won the argument and the full eight minute piece was included on the album . After the album was released , the group realised they had a conflict of interest with Oldham as manager and record company owner , so recruited sports journalist Tony Stratton @-@ Smith to take over management duties . 
 For their second single , the Nice created an arrangement of Leonard Bernstein 's " America " which Emerson described as the first ever instrumental protest song . The track used the main theme of the Bernstein piece ( from West Side Story ) but also included fragments of Dvořák 's New World Symphony . The single concludes with Arnold 's three @-@ year @-@ old son speaking the lines " America is pregnant with promise and anticipation , but is murdered by the hand of the inevitable . " The new arrangement was released under the title " America ( Second Amendment ) " as a pointed reference to the US Bill of Rights provision for the right to bear arms . In July 1968 , Immediate publicised the single with a controversial poster picturing the group members with small boys on their knees , with superimposed images of the faces of John F. Kennedy , Robert F. Kennedy and Martin Luther King on the children 's heads . A spokesman for the band said " Several record stores have refused to stock our current single .... the Nice feel if the posters are issued in United States they will do considerable harm " . During the tour that followed the release of their second album in July , the group spawned controversy when Emerson burned an American flag onstage during a performance of " America " at a charity event , Come Back Africa in London 's Royal Albert Hall . The group were subsequently banned from ever playing the venue again . 
 By summer 1968 , the group had become concerned about O 'List 's reliability and matters came to a head following a gig in Croydon 's Fairfield Hall in September . According to Ward , O 'List had an altercation with him in mid @-@ performance . Emerson subsequently called a band meeting with Jackson and Davison and stated flatly that O 'List should be sacked . They agreed , and immediately after their performance at The Ritz , Bournemouth in October , he was fired by Stratton @-@ Smith with the rest of the band present . O 'List , however , claims that he left the band voluntarily because he was upset at Stratton @-@ Smith 's decision to make Emerson the front man , saying " I left the band and waited for Keith to get in contact ... I should have gone straight to Keith , but I didn 't . " 
 = = = Reduction to a three piece = = = 
 The Nice briefly considered looking for a replacement , with Steve Howe trying out at an audition . Howe got on well with the rest of the band , but a week later had second thoughts and decided not to join . Emerson tried to learn guitar so he could cover some of O 'List 's old parts , but gave up after one gig . 
 The band 's second LP Ars Longa Vita Brevis featured an arrangement of the Intermezzo from the Karelia Suite by Jean Sibelius , which the band 's friend Roy Harper had recommended they covered , and the album 's second side was a suite which included an arrangement of a movement from J.S. Bach 's Brandenburg Concerto No. 3 . The group used an orchestra for the first time on some parts of the suite . The band were on the bill at the 1969 Isle of Wight Festival and briefly toured Ireland with Yes and the Bonzo Dog Doo @-@ Dah Band , which by all accounts was fraught with logistical problems . 
 The third album , titled Nice in the UK and Everything As Nice As Mother Makes It in the US , featured one side recorded live on their American tour and one side of studio material . As with previous albums , it included arrangements of classical material , in this case the Third Movement of Tchaikovsky 's Sixth Symphony ( Pathetique ) , and rearrangements of Bob Dylan 's " She Belongs to Me " and Tim Hardin 's " Hang on to a Dream " . 
 In 1969 , the band found time to contribute to other projects . Emerson performed as a session player for Rod Stewart and the Faces , while the whole group provided instrumental backing for the track " Hell 's Angels " on Harper 's 1970 album Flat Baroque and Berserk . Mid @-@ year , tour promoter Michael Emmerson asked the Nice to write some music for the Newcastle upon Tyne Arts Festival . The result was the Five Bridges suite . The group premièred the piece on 10 October 1969 at Newcastle City Hall . A complete version with an orchestra was performed at the Fairfield Hall , Croydon on 17 October , which was recorded for the album of the same name . The title refers to the city 's five bridges spanning the River Tyne , and Jackson 's lyrics refer to his Newcastle childhood and the St James ' Park football ground . 
 By late 1969 , Emerson thought the Nice had progressed as far as it could musically , and was particularly dissatisfied with Jackson 's limited vocal style . He asked Jack Bruce and Yes ' Chris Squire about forming a new band , but both turned Emerson down . While on tour in the US with King Crimson , Emerson held a meeting with Stratton @-@ Smith and declared " the Nice had outlived its usefulness " . By the end of the year , Emerson and Crimson 's Greg Lake had decided to form a band together . The group carried on touring into 1970 , but sometime early in the year , Emerson told Jackson that he would be leaving the band . Matters were not helped by Immediate Records filing for bankruptcy ; the band later said they received no royalties from the label while an active group . 
 In February 1970 , the group collaborated with the Los Angeles Philharmonic Orchestra , led by Zubin Mehta . This was broadcast in the following month as part of the " Switched @-@ On Symphony " program . Following standard television procedure of the day , the Nice 's contribution ( a version of " America " ) was recorded ahead of time and the band mimed for the cameras . 
 By March , the group had confirmed they would split , and a report on the band 's decision was printed in Melody Maker . The group played their last British concert on 22 March at the Fairfield Hall , Croydon , and after a short German tour the band broke up , playing their last gig on 30 March at the Berlin Sportpalast . 
 = = = Post @-@ Nice and reunion = = = 
 Emerson and Lake recruited Carl Palmer from Atomic Rooster and formed Emerson Lake & Palmer ( ELP ) . In 1971 , the posthumous Nice album Elegy was released . It included different versions of previously released tracks , two being studio versions and two live from the 1969 US tour . Emerson had no involvement with compiling the album , which was done by Jackson , Davison and Charisma Records . The album reached No. 5 in the UK . 
 Jackson formed Jackson Heights which released five albums between 1970 and 1973 . Emerson supported the band and became a fan . Davison formed " Every Which Way " which released an album in 1970 . Both Jackson and Davison formed Refugee with keyboardist Patrick Moraz in 1974 , but Moraz left the group after one album to replace Rick Wakeman in Yes . 
 After over three decades of inactivity , the Nice reformed in 2002 for a series of concerts . A three @-@ CD set <unk> was released , with the third CD being an interview with Emerson , Jackson and Davison . Dave <unk> guested on guitar at the concerts . Davison died on 15 April 2008 aged 65 in Horns Cross , Devon , from a brain tumour . Emerson died on 11 March 2016 in Santa Monica , California , of an apparently self @-@ inflicted gunshot wound to the head . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 The Nice were primarily a live band . Their stage performances were bold and violent , with Emerson incorporating feedback and distortion . He manhandled his Hammond L @-@ 100 organ , wrestling it and attacking it with daggers ( which he used to hold down keys and sustain notes during these escapades ) . Emerson 's playing was inspired by Jimi Hendrix , Billy Ritchie of Clouds , and Don Shinn as well as earlier figures such as pianist Jerry Lee Lewis . 
 The group 's early sound was geared more towards psychedelic rock with only occasional classical influences . Following O 'List 's departure , Emerson 's control over the band 's direction became greater , resulting in more complex music . The absence of a guitar in the band and Emerson 's redefining of the role of keyboard instruments in rock set the Nice apart from many of its contemporaries . He used a combination of Marshall Amplification and Leslie speakers in order to project a full sound to compensate for the lack of a guitarist . 
 Jackson never considered himself a great singer , partly because the group chose poor keys for his vocal range , but his bass playing , with heavy use of a plectrum , was a distinctive part of the band 's overall sound . He was influenced by Bob Dylan , whose songs were common currency at the time ; the Nice interpreted several of them , typically reducing them to three or four verses and featuring a long improvised middle section , such as " She Belongs to Me " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Nice were one of the pioneering progressive rock bands and their fusion of styles strongly influenced the movement into the 1970s . Their commercial success on Charisma Records was key to establishing the label , which went on to include several other progressive acts , including Genesis and Van der Graaf Generator . Genesis were fans of the Nice and " The Knife " from their album Trespass was directly inspired by the band . Though the Nice were not the first to combine a rock band and orchestra , they did inspire similar attempts by other groups , such as Pink Floyd 's Atom Heart Mother . 
 The group have often been compared to ELP , but there were important differences between them . Emerson 's showmanship was more important in the Nice , and he mostly used just Hammond organ live as opposed to a wider range of keyboards , including the Moog synthesizer , in ELP . John Peel , an early champion of the Nice , infamously called ELP " a waste of talent and electricity " . 
 = = Members = = 
 Keith Emerson – organ , piano , vocals ( 1967 – 1970 , 2002 ; born 2 November 1944 , Todmorden , Yorkshire – died 10 March 2016 ) 
 Keith " Lee " Jackson – bass , guitar , vocals ( 1967 – 1970 , 2002 ; born 8 January 1943 , Newcastle upon Tyne ) 
 David " Davy " O 'List – guitar , vocals ( 1967 – 1968 ; born 13 December 1948 , Chiswick , London ) 
 Ian Hague – drums , percussion ( 1967 ) 
 Brian " Blinky " Davison – drums , percussion ( 1967 – 1970 , 2002 ; born 25 May 1942 , Leicester , Leicestershire – died 15 April 2008 ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 The Thoughts of <unk> <unk> ( Immediate , 1967 ) 
 Ars Longa Vita Brevis ( Immediate , 1968 ) 
 Nice ( aka Everything As Nice As Mother Makes It ) ( Immediate , 1969 ) UK no . 3 
 Five Bridges ( Charisma , 1970 ) UK no . 2 , US no . 197 
 = = = Live albums = = = 
 Elegy ( Charisma , 1971 ) UK no . 5 
 America – The BBC Sessions ( Receiver , 1996 ) 
 The Swedish Radio Sessions ( late 1967 ) ( Sanctuary , 2001 ) 
 BBC Sessions ( Sanctuary , 2002 ) 
 <unk> ( Sanctuary , 2003 ) 
 Live at the Fillmore East December 1969 ( Virgin , 2009 ) 
 = = = Compilation albums = = = 
 Autumn ' 67 – Spring ' 68 ( Charisma , 1972 , UK ) , released as Autumn to Spring ( Charisma , 1973 , USA ) 
 Keith Emerson with The Nice ( Mercury / Polygram 1970 ) , material from Five Bridges and Elegy 
 Nice Hits Nice Bits ( BMG <unk> , 1999 ) 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " The Thoughts of <unk> <unk> " / " <unk> ( Angel of Death ) " ( Immediate IM 059 , November 1967 ) 
 " America " / " The Diamond Hard Blue Apples of the Moon " ( Immediate IM 068 , 21 June 1968 ; in India issued by Stateside ESS . 82 ) 
 " Brandenburger " / " Happy <unk> " ( Immediate IM 072 , 8 November 1968 ) 
 " Diary of an Empty Day " / " Hang on to a Dream " ( Immediate , 1969 ) 
 " Country Pie " / " One of Those People " ( Charisma , 1969 ) 
 = New Jersey Route 17 = 
 Route 17 is a state highway in Bergen County , New Jersey , United States , that provides a major route from the George Washington Bridge , Lincoln Tunnel and other northeast New Jersey points to the New York State Thruway at Suffern , New York . It runs 27 @.@ 20 mi ( 43 @.@ 77 km ) from Route 7 / County Route 507 in North Arlington north to the New York border along Interstate 287 in Mahwah , where New York State Route 17 continues into New York . Between Route 7 and Route 3 in Rutherford , Route 17 serves as a local road . From Route 3 north to the junction with U.S. Route 46 in Hasbrouck Heights , the road is a suburban arterial with jughandles . The portion of Route 17 , from US 46 to Interstate 287 near the state line in Mahwah , is a limited @-@ access road with all cross traffic handled by interchanges , and many driveways and side streets accessed from right @-@ in / right @-@ out ramps from the right lane . For three miles ( 5 km ) north of Route 4 , well over a hundred retail stores and several large shopping malls line the route in the borough of Paramus . The remainder of this portion of Route 17 features lighter suburban development . The northernmost portion of Route 17 in Mahwah runs concurrent with Interstate 287 to the New York border . 
 Prior to 1927 , the route was designated as Route 17N , which was to run from Newark to the New York state line . This route had followed various local streets , including the Franklin Turnpike north of Hackensack . In 1927 , Route 17N became Route 2 , which was designated along the portion of Route 17N between Route 7 in North Arlington to the New York border near Suffern , New York . This route was moved to a multilane divided highway alignment north of Rutherford by 1937 . Route 2 became Route 17 in 1942 to match the designation of New York State Route 17 for defense purposes during World War II . The entire Route 17 corridor was once planned to be a freeway until the 1960s and later plans to extend the route south of Route 3 to Interstate 280 in 1972 and to the New Jersey Turnpike in 1987 both failed . Over the years , the portion of Route 17 north of Route 3 has seen many improvements , including the widening of much of the road to six lanes and the removal of most at @-@ grade intersections in the 1950s as well as more recent improvements to the interchanges with Route 4 in Paramus in 1999 and Essex Street on the Lodi / Maywood border in 2008 . The route is currently undergoing improvements between Route 3 and U.S. Route 46 and is expected to see improvements from Williams Avenue in Hasbrouck Heights to south of Route 4 in Paramus . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 17 begins at an intersection with Route 7 and County Route 507 ( Belleville Turnpike ) on the border of Kearny , Hudson County and North Arlington , Bergen County . It heads north through North Arlington on Ridge Road , a two @-@ lane local street with speed limits of 25 to 35 mph ( 40 to 56 km / h ) that passes by businesses and the Holy Cross Cemetery on the east side of the road . It intersects County Route 26 ( <unk> Avenue ) and crosses into Lyndhurst at the Lincoln Avenue intersection . In Lyndhurst , Route 17 intersects County Route 28 ( Kingsland Avenue ) . At the intersection of County Route 30 ( Rutherford Avenue ) , which runs along the border of Lyndhurst and Rutherford , the route turns east onto 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) Rutherford Avenue to parallel the Route 3 freeway to the south and head for the edge of the New Jersey Meadowlands , widening to a four @-@ lane road at the intersection with Orient Way . Route 17 makes a curve to the south , crossing entirely into Lyndhurst , and makes a hairpin turn to the north , widening to a divided highway . The road then crosses into Rutherford and comes to the Route 3 interchange . 
 Past the Route 3 interchange , Route 17 continues north as a six @-@ lane divided highway with a 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) speed limit and intersections featuring jughandles . It passes through residential and commercial areas of Rutherford , intersecting County Route 32 ( Meadow Road ) before crossing into East Rutherford , where it intersects County Route <unk> ( Union Avenue ) before interchanging with State Route 120 and County Route 120 ( Paterson Plank Road ) . The route runs through Carlstadt , where it crosses into Wood @-@ Ridge . Route 17 comes to an interchange with County Route 36 ( <unk> Road ) before entering Hasbrouck Heights . With the exception of a short stretch in Rutherford with a median strip , this section of Route 17 is divided by a Jersey barrier . 
 In Hasbrouck Heights , the lanes split with the Bendix Diner located between the traffic lanes at the intersection of County Route 40 ( Williams Avenue ) , the last traffic light on Route 17 before the New York state line . At the interchange with U.S. Route 46 , which only features access to the eastbound direction of U.S. Route 46 , Route 17 drops to two lanes in each direction and continues north with the lanes merging back together as the road interchanges with County Route 55 ( Terrace Avenue ) at an interchange . The road enters Hackensack with the lanes splitting again for the long interchange with Interstate 80 . Along this strip , the road is again three lanes in each direction and includes an interchange with County Route 57 ( Summit Avenue ) , crossing into Lodi . The lanes rejoin upon splitting from Interstate 80 with a lane dropping in each direction at the County Route 56 ( Essex Street ) interchange on the Maywood border . Route 17 continues north as a congested road through commercial areas , crossing into Rochelle Park where the route interchanges with County Route 62 ( Passaic Street ) at mile marker 11 @.@ 46 before entering Paramus . 
 At the County Route 61 ( <unk> Avenue ) interchange , the road regains a third lane in each direction . Route 17 passes by Westfield Garden State Plaza on the west side of the road before coming to an interchange with Route 4 . Route 17 is flanked by businesses and shopping malls for most of its length in Paramus . Following Route 4 , the road interchanges with Century Road . Route 17 comes to a partial interchange with the Garden State Parkway ( exit 163 ) , with access limited to northbound @-@ to @-@ northbound and southbound @-@ to @-@ southbound movements between the two roads . North of the Garden State Parkway , Route 17 features interchanges for Midland Avenue , the Paramus Park shopping mall and an industrial park , and County Route 80 ( Ridgewood Avenue ) just north of the Fashion Center shopping mall . 
 Route 17 crosses into Ridgewood and interchanges with County Route 110 ( Linwood Avenue ) , where the penetration of businesses along the side of the road lessens dramatically . North of this point , the speed limit is 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) . In Ridgewood , the road interchanges with County Route 62 ( Paramus Road ) , crosses the Saddle River , and intersects a separate segment of County Route 62 ( Franklin Turnpike ) and West Saddle River Road . This intersection , along with other at @-@ grade intersections along this portion of Route 17 , is a right @-@ in / right @-@ out ( RIRO ) intersection with cross traffic blocked by a Jersey barrier . There is another RIRO intersection for County Route 112 ( Race Track Road ) on the Ho @-@ Ho @-@ <unk> border . Upon crossing into Ho @-@ Ho @-@ <unk> , the businesses stop along Route 17 and it comes to an interchange with County Route 502 ( Hollywood Avenue ) . The route enters <unk> and interchanges with County Route 77 ( Sheridan Avenue ) . It enters Saddle River , continuing north to an interchange with County Route 90 ( Allendale Avenue ) . 
 Route 17 enters Allendale , with businesses resuming along the road . It enters Upper Saddle River before running through Ramsey , where the road crosses back into Upper Saddle River . The route comes to an interchange with County Route 81 ( Lake Street / Crescent Avenue ) , where it crosses back into Ramsey . In Ramsey , Route 17 turns to the northwest and features a RIRO for County Route 83 ( <unk> Avenue ) , an interchange with County Route 507 ( Franklin Turnpike ) , and an interchange for Island Avenue / Spring Street . The route passes over New Jersey Transit ’ s Bergen County Line / Main Line near the Ramsey Route 17 train station and enters Mahwah . In Mahwah , Route 17 interchanges with County Route 85 ( Island Road ) and County Route 100 ( Ramapo Avenue ) . North of Ramapo Avenue , Route 17 features an interchange with U.S. Route 202 and crosses the Ramapo River . Route 17 interchanges with Stag Hill Road just before merging with six @-@ lane Interstate 287 , which it follows to the New York border , where the road continues into Hillburn , Rockland County as Interstate 287 and New York State Route 17 , intersecting Interstate 87 ( the New York State Thruway ) shortly after the state line . 
 = = History = = 
 Route 17N was defined in 1923 to run " from Newark , by way of Kearny , Rutherford , Hackensack , Ridgewood and Ramsey to the New York State Line " . However , only the road north of Route 10 ( Essex Street ) in Hackensack was shown on the 1925 New Jersey State Highway Department Official State Map , running north along existing roads - First Street and the Franklin Turnpike ( now partly called Passaic Street and Paramus Road ) - to the state line . The 1927 <unk> Trails Map shows the route running south to Newark , continuing south across Essex Street on <unk> Road , Terrace Avenue and Hackensack Street to East Rutherford , where it followed Meadow Road , Rutherford Avenue , Ridge Road , Kearny Avenue , 4th Street , and the Newark Turnpike to Newark . In 1924 , New York had numbered its state routes , and the extension of Route 17N north and west to Westfield , New York was numbered as New York State Route 17 , as shown in part on the <unk> Trails Map . 
 In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Route 17N received the Route 2 designation , and was defined to run from Route 7 in North Arlington to the New York border near Suffern , New York . By 1937 , the whole old road north of Rutherford was bypassed by a new four @-@ lane divided highway with the exception of the 1927 bridge over the Saddle River in Ridgewood , north of the Paramus Road interchange . This old alignment joins at Paramus Road and leaves just north of the bridge at Franklin Turnpike , which only has access to the southbound lanes through a RIRO intersection . A short @-@ lived spur of Route 2 , Route 2N , was defined in 1938 to run from Route 2 ( Ridge Road ) in Lyndhurst west along Kingsland Avenue and over the Passaic River on the Park Avenue Bridge into Nutley , where it would end at Union Avenue ( west of Route 7 ) . In 1930 , New York had renumbered its state routes ; the extension of Route 2 north and west into New York had remained New York State Route 17 . New Jersey had not assigned a Route 17 in the 1927 renumbering , and so in March 1942 , Route 2 was numbered Route 17 to match and provide a single number for military caravans during World War II . 
 Since at least 1936 , Route 17 ( then Route 2 ) was planned for upgrading to a freeway , not only north of U.S. Route 46 , but also south to the Newark area . The first plan for a freeway along the length of the route was halted due to World War II , and the second plan for a freeway in the 1960s was cancelled due to the disruption it was projected to cause to businesses and residents along its path . In 1972 , there were plans to extend Route 17 past Route 3 to Interstate 280 in Harrison . The plans for this five @-@ mile ( eight kilometer ) , $ 50 million extension were cancelled due to the defeat of a transportation bond that would have funded the proposed freeway . The interchange at Route 3 was built to allow for this southern extension . Another extension of Route 17 to the New Jersey Turnpike was brought up in 1987 , but was ultimately scrapped . 
 The road north of Route 3 was gradually rebuilt to higher standards between 1953 and 1960 ; most of this portion of Route 17 was upgraded to six lanes and most at @-@ grade intersections were removed north of Interstate 80 in Lodi . The northern 0 @.@ 39 mi ( 0 @.@ 63 km ) of Route 17 in Mahwah was incorporated into Interstate 287 in 1994 . The Route 4 interchange in Paramus was rebuilt at a cost of $ 120 million in 1999 , replacing the 1932 cloverleaf interchange by adding several flyover ramps . In 2008 , construction was completed at the interchange with Essex Street on the Lodi / Maywood border , which involved replacing the Essex Street bridge over Route 17 and improving the interchange ramps , at a cost of $ 68 million . On January 14 , 2008 , Governor Jon Corzine announced plans to reduce congestion and improve safety along the portion of Route 17 between Williams Avenue in Hasbrouck Heights to south of Route 4 in Paramus by making it a consistent six lanes . Also , a $ 14 @.@ 7 million effort , begun in September 2008 , is currently being undertaken to improve safety and reduce bottlenecks along the section of Route 17 between Route 3 and U.S. Route 46 . 
 Route 17 has been the object of several studies exploring a Bergen BRT , a bus rapid transit system that would potentially alleviate some traffic congestion and decrease automobile dependency . While funding has not been identified , the potential routes of the system have centered around the vicinity radiating from the malls of Paramus . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Bergen County . All exits are unnumbered . 
 = Yertle the Turtle and Other Stories = 
 Yertle the Turtle and Other Stories is a picture book collection by Theodor Seuss Geisel , published under his more commonly known pseudonym of Dr. Seuss . It was first released by Random House Books on April 12 , 1958 , and is written in Seuss 's trademark style , using a type of meter called anapestic tetrameter . Though it contains three short stories , it is mostly known for its first story , " Yertle the Turtle " , in which the eponymous Yertle , king of the pond , stands on his subjects in an attempt to reach higher than the moon — until the bottom turtle burps and he falls into the mud , ending his rule . 
 Though the book included " burp " , a word then considered to be relatively rude , it was a success upon publication , and has since sold over a million copies . In 2001 , it was listed at 125 on the Publishers Weekly list of the best @-@ selling children 's books of all time . 
 = = Plot overview = = 
 = = = “ Yertle the Turtle ” = = = 
 The eponymous story revolves around Yertle the Turtle , the king of the pond . Dissatisfied with the stone that serves as his throne , he commands the other turtles to stack themselves beneath him so that he can see farther and expand his kingdom . However , the stacked turtles are in pain and Mack , the turtle at the very bottom of the pile , is suffering the most . Mack asks Yertle for a respite , but Yertle just tells him to be quiet . Then Yertle decides to expand his kingdom and commands more and more turtles to add to his throne . Mack makes a second request for a respite because the increased weight is now causing extreme pain to the turtles at the bottom of the pile , as well as hunger . Again , Yertle yells at Mack to be quiet . Then Yertle notices the moon rising above him as the night approaches . Furious that something " dares to be higher than Yertle the King " , he decides to call for even more turtles in an attempt to rise above it . However , before he can give the command , Mack decides he has had enough . He burps , which takes away Yertle 's throne and tosses the turtle king off the turtle stack and into the mud , leaving him " King of the Mud " and freeing the others . 
 = = = “ Gertrude McFuzz ” = = = 
 The second story recounts the tale of the " girl @-@ bird " Gertrude McFuzz , who has one small , plain tail feather and envies Lolla Lee Lou , who has two feathers . She goes to her uncle , Doctor Dake , for something to make her tail grow . He tries to tell her that her tail is just right for her species , but she throws a tantrum . He gives in and he tells her where she can find berries that will make her tail grow . The first berry makes her tail exactly like Lolla Lee Lou 's , but greed overtakes her . Now wanting to surpass Lolla Lee Lou , she eats the entire vine , causing her tail to grow to an enormous size . However , the added weight of too many feathers does not allow her to fly , run or even walk . She panics by yelping repeatedly , while being stuck on the hill . Her uncle , who hears her painful yelps , sends for the rescue , and many other birds are forced to carry her home and pluck out her tail feathers , which takes a few weeks , causing her to be sore . Though she has only one feather left — as before — she now has " enough , because now she is smarter . " 
 = = = “ The Big Brag ” = = = 
 The third and final story tells of a rabbit and a bear , who both boast that they are the " best of the beasts " , because of the range of their hearing and smelling abilities , respectively . However , they are humbled by a worm who claims he can see all around the world — right back to his own hill , where he sees the rabbit and bear , whom he calls " the two biggest fools that have ever been seen " . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 A stack of turtles drawn similarly to those featured in " Yertle the Turtle " first appeared on March 20 , 1942 , in a cartoon for the New York City newspaper PM , where Seuss worked as an editorial cartoonist . The illustration shows two stacks of turtles forming the letter " V " on top of a large turtle labelled " <unk> Producers " , with a caption reading " You Can 't Build A Substantial V Out of Turtles ! " 
 Seuss has stated that the titular character Yertle represented Adolf Hitler , with Yertle 's despotic rule of the pond and takeover of the surrounding area parallel to Hitler 's regime in Germany and invasion of various parts of Europe . Though Seuss made a point of not beginning the writing of his stories with a moral in mind , stating that " kids can see a moral coming a mile off " , he was not against writing about issues ; he said " there 's an inherent moral in any story " and remarked that he was " subversive as hell " . " Yertle the Turtle " has variously been described as " autocratic rule overturned " , " a reaction against the fascism of World War II " , and " subversive of authoritarian rule " . 
 In 2003 , reporter John J. Miller also compared Yertle to the former Iraqi president Saddam Hussein , saying that " [ i ] ts final lines apply as much to Saddam Hussein as they once did to the European fascists " . 
 The last lines of " Yertle the Turtle " read : " And turtles , of course ... all the turtles are free / As turtles , and maybe , all creatures should be . " When questioned about why he wrote " maybe " rather than " surely " , Seuss replied that he didn 't want to sound " didactic or like a preacher on a platform " , and that he wanted the reader " to say ' surely ' in their minds instead of my having to say it . " 
 The use of the word " burp " — " plain little Mack did a plain little thing . He burped ! " — was also an issue before publication . According to Seuss , the publishers at Random House , including the president , had to meet to decide whether or not they could use " burp " because " nobody had ever burped before on the pages of a children 's book " . However , despite the publishers ' initial worries , it eventually proved to be a hit — in 2001 , Publishers Weekly reported that it was 125th on the list of best @-@ selling hardcover children 's books in the United States , at just over one million copies . 
 The book is dedicated to the Sagmaster family as a tribute to Joseph Sagmaster , who had introduced Seuss to his first wife , Helen Palmer , when they were both attending Oxford University . Sagmaster is quoted as saying that bringing the two together was " the happiest inspiration I 've ever had " . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 Although Yertle the Turtle and Other Stories has not been directly adapted , several characters from the book have appeared in other media . Yertle is a character in the 1996 – 1997 television series The <unk> World of Dr. Seuss , and in Stephen Flaherty 's Broadway musical Seussical , Yertle serves as a judge and Gertrude McFuzz acts as Horton 's love interest . The story was also turned into a dance number in the 1994 film In Search of Dr. Seuss . 
 Yertle the Turtle and Other Stories is a 1992 animation directed by Ray <unk> and narrated by John Lithgow ( later released and cropped to widescreen format on Blu @-@ Ray part of Who 's Who in the Dr. Seuss ? ) . 
 The Red Hot Chili Peppers adapted the story in the song " Yertle the Turtle " on their second album , Freaky Styley , released in 1985 . 
 = Kepler @-@ 6 = 
 Kepler @-@ 6 is a yellow giant situated in the constellation Cygnus . The star lies within the field of view of the Kepler Mission , which discovered it as part of a NASA @-@ led mission to discover Earth @-@ like planets . The star , which is slightly larger , more metal @-@ rich , slightly cooler , and more massive than the Sun , is orbited by at least one extrasolar planet , a Jupiter @-@ sized planet named Kepler @-@ 6b that orbits closely to its star . 
 = = Nomenclature and history = = 
 Kepler @-@ 6 was named for the Kepler Mission , a NASA project launched in 2009 that aims to discover Earth @-@ like planets that transit , or cross in front of , their home stars with respect to Earth . Unlike stars like the Sun or Sirius , Kepler @-@ 6 does not have a common and colloquial name . The discovery of Kepler @-@ 6b was announced by the Kepler team on January 4 , 2010 at the 215th meeting of the American Astronomical Society along with planets around Kepler @-@ 4 , Kepler @-@ 5 , Kepler @-@ 7 , and Kepler @-@ 8 . It was the third planet to be discovered by the Kepler spacecraft ; the first three planets to be verified by data from Kepler had been previously discovered . These three planets were used to test the accuracy of Kepler 's measurements . 
 The discovery of Kepler @-@ 6 was confirmed by follow @-@ up observations made using the Hobby Eberly and Smith telescopes in Texas ; the Keck 1 telescope in Hawaii ; the Hale and Shane telescopes in southern California ; the WIYN , MMT , and Tillinghast telescopes in Arizona ; and the Nordic Optical Telescope in the Canary Islands . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Kepler @-@ 6 is a star that is approximately 1 @.@ 209 Msun , or some five @-@ fourths the mass of the Sun . It is also wider than the sun , with a radius of 1 @.@ 391 Rsun , or seven @-@ fifths of that of the Sun . The star is approximately 3 @.@ 8 billion years old , and has an effective temperature of 5647 K ( 9 @,@ 705 ° F ) . In comparison , the Sun has a slightly warmer temperature of 5778 K. Kepler @-@ 6 has a metallicity of [ Fe / H ] = + 0 @.@ 34 , making it 2 @.@ 2 times more metallic than the Sun . On average , metal @-@ rich stars tend to be more likely to have planets and planetary systems . 
 The star , as seen from Earth , has an apparent magnitude of 13 @.@ 8 . It is not visible with the naked eye . In comparison , Pluto 's apparent magnitude at its brightest is slightly brighter , at 13 @.@ 65 . 
 = = Planetary system = = 
