 Kepler @-@ 6 has one confirmed extrasolar planet ; it is a gas giant named Kepler @-@ 6b . The planet is approximately <unk> MJ , or some two @-@ thirds the mass of planet Jupiter . It is also slightly more diffuse than Jupiter , with a radius of approximately 1 @.@ 323 RJ . Kepler @-@ 6b orbits at an average distance of <unk> AU from its star , and completes an orbit every 3 @.@ 234 days . The eccentricity of the planet 's orbit is assumed to be 0 , which is that of a circular orbit . 
 = 300 ( film ) = 
 300 is a 2006 American epic fantasy war film based on the 1998 comic series of the same name by Frank Miller and Lynn Varley . Both are fictionalized retellings of the Battle of Thermopylae within the Persian Wars . The film was directed by Zack Snyder , while Miller served as executive producer and consultant . It was filmed mostly with a super @-@ imposition chroma key technique , to help replicate the imagery of the original comic book . 
 The plot revolves around King Leonidas ( Gerard Butler ) , who leads 300 Spartans into battle against the Persian " god @-@ King " Xerxes ( Rodrigo Santoro ) and his invading army of more than 300 @,@ 000 soldiers . As the battle rages , Queen Gorgo ( Lena Headey ) attempts to rally support in Sparta for her husband . The story is framed by a voice @-@ over narrative by the Spartan soldier Dilios ( David Wenham ) . Through this narrative technique , various fantastical creatures are introduced , placing 300 within the genre of historical fantasy . 
 300 was released in both conventional and IMAX theaters in the United States on March 9 , 2007 , and on DVD , Blu @-@ ray Disc , and HD DVD on July 31 , 2007 . The film received mixed reviews , receiving acclaim for its original visuals and style , but criticism for favoring visuals over characterization and its depiction of the ancient Persians in Iran , a characterization which some had deemed racist ; however , the film was a box office success , grossing over $ 450 million , with the film 's opening being the 24th largest in box office history at the time . A sequel , 300 : Rise of an Empire , which is based on Miller 's unpublished graphic novel prequel Xerxes , was released on March 7 , 2014 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 479 BC , one year after the famed Battle of Thermopylae , Dilios , a hoplite in the Spartan Army , begins his story by depicting the life of Leonidas I from childhood to kingship via Spartan doctrine . Dilios 's story continues and Persian messengers arrive at the gates of Sparta demanding " earth and water " as a token of submission to King Xerxes ; the Spartans reply by killing and kicking the messengers into a well . Leonidas then visits the Ephors , proposing a strategy to drive back the numerically superior Persians through the Hot Gates ; his plan involves building a wall in order to funnel the Persians into a narrow pass between the rocks and the sea . The Ephors consult the Oracle , who decrees that Sparta will not go to war during the Carneia . As Leonidas angrily departs , a messenger from Xerxes appears , rewarding the Ephors for their covert support . 
 Although the Ephors have denied him permission to mobilize Sparta 's army , Leonidas gathers three hundred of his best soldiers in the guise of his personal bodyguard ; they are joined along the way by Arcadians . At Thermopylae , they construct the wall made up of stones and slain Persian scouts as mortar , angering the Persian Emissary . Stelios , an elite Spartan soldier , orders him to go back to the Persian lines and warn Xerxes after cutting off his whipping arm . Meanwhile , Leonidas encounters Ephialtes , a deformed Spartan whose parents fled Sparta to spare him certain infanticide . Ephialtes asks to redeem his father 's name by joining Leonidas ' army , warning him of a secret ( goat ) path the Persians could use to outflank and surround the Spartans . Though sympathetic , Leonidas rejects him since his deformity physically prevents him from holding his shield high enough ; potentially compromising the phalanx formation , and Ephialtes is enraged . 
 The battle begins soon after the Spartans ' refusal to lay down their weapons . Using the Hot Gates to their advantage , plus their superior fighting skills , the Spartans repel wave upon wave of the advancing Persian army . During a lull in the battle , Xerxes personally approaches Leonidas to persuade him to surrender , offering him wealth and power in exchange for his allegiance ; Leonidas declines and mocks Xerxes for the inferior quality of his fanatical warriors . In response , Xerxes sends in his elite guard , the Immortals , later that night . Despite some Spartans being killed , they heroically defeat the Immortals ( with slight help from the Arcadians ) . On the second day , Xerxes sends in new waves of armies from Asia and other Persian city @-@ states , including war elephants , to crush the Spartans once and for all , but to no avail . Meanwhile , Ephialtes defects to Xerxes to whom he reveals the secret path in exchange for wealth , luxury , and ( especially ) a uniform . The Arcadians retreat upon learning of Ephialtes ' betrayal , but the Spartans stay . Leonidas orders an injured but reluctant Dilios to return to Sparta and tell them of what has happened , a " tale of victory " . 
 In Sparta , Queen Gorgo tries to persuade the Spartan Council to send reinforcements to aid the 300 . Theron , a corrupt politician , claims that he " owns " the Council and threatens the Queen , who reluctantly submits to his sexual demands in return for his help . When Theron disgraces her in front of the Council , Gorgo kills him out of rage , revealing within his robe a bag of Xerxes ' gold . Marking his betrayal , the Council unanimously agrees to send reinforcements . On the third day , the Persians , led by Ephialtes , traverse the secret path , encircling the Spartans . Xerxes ' general again demands their surrender . Leonidas seemingly kneels in submission , allowing Stelios to leap over him and kill the general . A furious Xerxes orders his troops to attack . Leonidas rises and throws his spear at Xerxes ; barely missing him , the spear cuts across and wounds his face , proving the God @-@ King 's mortality . Leonidas and the remaining Spartans fight to the last man until they finally succumb to an arrow barrage . 
 Dilios , now back at Sparta , concludes his tale before the Council . Inspired by their King 's sacrifice , the Persians will now face a larger Greek army 40 @,@ 000 strong , led by 10 @,@ 000 Spartans . After one final speech commemorating the 300 , Dilios , now head of the Spartan Army , leads them into battle against the Persians across the fields of Plataea , ending the film . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Gerard Butler as Leonidas , King of Sparta . 
 David Wenham as Dilios , narrator and Spartan soldier . 
 Lena Headey as Queen Gorgo , Queen of Sparta ( Gorgo has a larger role in the film than she does in the comic book , where she only appears in the beginning ) . 
 Giovanni <unk> as Pleistarchus , son of Leonidas and Gorgo ( Pleistarchus does not feature in the comic book ) . 
 Dominic West as Theron , a fictional corrupt Spartan politician ( Theron is not featured in the comic book ) . 
 Vincent Regan as Captain Artemis , Leonidas ' loyal captain and friend . 
 Tom Wisdom as Astinos , Captain Artemis ' eldest son . In the film Astinos has a constant presence until he dies . In the comic book Astinos is only mentioned when he dies . 
 Andrew <unk> as <unk> , an Arcadian leader who joins forces with Leonidas . 
 Andrew Tiernan as Ephialtes , a deformed Spartan outcast and traitor . 
 Rodrigo Santoro as King Xerxes , King of Persia . 
 Stephen McHattie as The Loyalist , a loyal Spartan politician . 
 Michael Fassbender as Stelios , a young , spirited and highly skilled Spartan soldier . 
 Peter Mensah as a Persian messenger who gets kicked into the well by Leonidas . 
 Kelly Craig as Pythia , an Oracle to the Ephors . 
 Tyler <unk> as young Leonidas . 
 Robert Maillet as Über Immortal ( giant ) , a muscular and deranged Immortal who battles Leonidas during the Immortal fight . 
 Patrick <unk> as the Persian General who tries to get Leonidas to comply at the end of the battle . 
 Leon <unk> as Executioner , a hulking , clawed man who executes men who have displeased Xerxes . 
 Tyrone <unk> as the whip @-@ wielding Persian Emissary . 
 = = Production = = 
 Producer Gianni Nunnari was not the only person planning a film about the Battle of Thermopylae ; director Michael Mann already planned a film of the battle based on the book Gates of Fire . Nunnari discovered Frank Miller 's graphic novel 300 , which impressed him enough to acquire the film rights . 300 was jointly produced by Nunnari and Mark Canton , and Michael B. Gordon wrote the script . Director Zack Snyder was hired in June 2004 as he had attempted to make a film based on Miller 's novel before making his debut with the remake of Dawn of the Dead . Snyder then had screenwriter Kurt <unk> rewrite Gordon 's script for production and Frank Miller was retained as consultant and executive producer . 
 The film is a shot @-@ for @-@ shot adaptation of the comic book , similar to the film adaptation of Sin City . Snyder photocopied panels from the comic book , from which he planned the preceding and succeeding shots . " It was a fun process for me ... to have a frame as a goal to get to , " he said . Like the comic book , the adaptation also used the character Dilios as a narrator . Snyder used this narrative technique to show the audience that the surreal " Frank Miller world " of 300 was told from a subjective perspective . By using Dilios ' gift of storytelling , he was able to introduce fantasy elements into the film , explaining that " Dilios is a guy who knows how not to wreck a good story with truth . " Snyder also added the sub @-@ plot in which Queen Gorgo attempts to rally support for her husband . 
 Two months of pre @-@ production were required to create hundreds of shields , spears , and swords , some of which were recycled from Troy and Alexander . Creatures were designed by Jordu Schell , and an animatronic wolf and thirteen animatronic horses were created . The actors trained alongside the stuntmen , and even Snyder joined in . Upwards of 600 costumes were created for the film , as well as extensive prosthetics for various characters and the corpses of Persian soldiers . Shaun Smith and Mark Rappaport worked hand in hand with Snyder in pre @-@ production to design the look of the individual characters , and to produce the prosthetic makeup effects , props , weapons and dummy bodies required for the production . 
 300 entered active production on October 17 , 2005 , in Montreal , and was shot over the course of sixty days in chronological order with a budget of $ 60 million . Employing the digital backlot technique , Snyder shot at the now @-@ defunct <unk> Studios in Montreal using bluescreens . Butler said that while he did not feel constrained by Snyder 's direction , fidelity to the comic imposed certain limitations on his performance . Wenham said there were times when Snyder wanted to precisely capture iconic moments from the comic book , and other times when he gave actors freedom " to explore within the world and the confines that had been set . " Headey said of her experience with the bluescreens , " It 's very odd , and emotionally , there 's nothing to connect to apart from another actor . " Only one scene , in which horses travel across the countryside , was shot outdoors . The film was an intensely physical production , and Butler pulled an arm tendon and developed foot drop . 
 Post @-@ production was handled by Montreal 's Meteor Studios and <unk> Technologies filled in the bluescreen footage with more than 1 @,@ 500 visual effects shots . Visual effects supervisor Chris Watts and production designer Jim Bissell created a process dubbed " The Crush , " which allowed the Meteor artists to manipulate the colors by increasing the contrast of light and dark . Certain sequences were desaturated and tinted to establish different moods . <unk> St @-@ Pierre , who led the team of artists , described the effect : " Everything looks realistic , but it has a kind of a gritty illustrative feel . " Various computer programs , including Maya , RenderMan and <unk> , were used to create the " spraying blood . " The post @-@ production lasted for a year and was handled by a total of ten special effects companies . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 In July 2005 , composer Tyler Bates begun work on the film , describing the score as having " beautiful themes on the top and large choir , " but " tempered with some extreme heaviness . " The composer had scored for a test scene that the director wanted to show to Warner Bros. to illustrate the path of the project . Bates said that the score had " a lot of weight and intensity in the low end of the percussion " that Snyder found agreeable to the film . The score was recorded at Abbey Road Studios and features the vocals of Azam Ali . A standard edition and a special edition of the soundtrack containing 25 tracks was released on March 6 , 2007 , with the special edition containing a 16 @-@ page booklet and three two @-@ sided trading cards . 
 The score has caused some controversy in the film composer community , garnering criticism for its striking similarity to several other recent soundtracks , including James Horner and Gabriel Yared 's work for the film Troy . The heaviest borrowings are said to be from Elliot Goldenthal 's 1999 score for Titus . " Remember Us , " from 300 , is identical in parts to the " Finale " from Titus , and " Returns a King " is similar to the cue " <unk> Titus . " ( see copyright issues . ) On August 3 , 2007 , Warner Bros. Pictures acknowledged in an official statement : 
 ... a number of the music cues for the score of 300 were , without our knowledge or participation , derived from music composed by Academy Award winning composer Elliot Goldenthal for the motion picture Titus . Warner Bros. Pictures has great respect for Elliot , our longtime collaborator , and is pleased to have amicably resolved this matter . 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 The official 300 website was launched by Warner Bros. in December 2005 . The " conceptual art " and Zack Snyder 's production blog were the initial attractions of the site . Later , the website added video journals describing production details , including comic @-@ to @-@ screen shots and the creatures of 300 . In January 2007 , the studio launched a MySpace page for the film . The Art Institutes created a micro @-@ site to promote the film . 
 At Comic @-@ Con International in July 2006 , the 300 panel aired a promotional teaser of the film , which was positively received . Despite stringent security , the trailer was subsequently leaked on the Internet . Warner Bros. released the official trailer for 300 on October 4 , 2006 , and later on it made its debut on <unk> where it received considerable exposure . The background music used in the trailers was " Just Like You Imagined " by Nine Inch Nails . A second 300 trailer , which was attached to Apocalypto , was released in theaters on December 8 , 2006 , and online the day before . On January 22 , 2007 , an exclusive trailer for the film was broadcast during prime time television . The trailers have been credited with igniting interest in the film and contributing to its box @-@ office success . 
 In April 2006 , Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment announced its intention to make a PlayStation Portable game , 300 : March to Glory , based on the film . Collision Studios worked with Warner Bros. to capture the style of the film in the video game , which was released simultaneously with the film in the United States . The National Entertainment Collectibles Association produced a series of action figures based on the film , as well as replicas of weapons and armor . 
 Warner Bros. promoted 300 by sponsoring the Ultimate Fighting Championship 's light heavyweight champion Chuck Liddell , who made personal appearances and participated in other promotional activities . The studio also joined with the National Hockey League to produce a 30 @-@ second TV spot promoting the film in tandem with the Stanley Cup playoffs . 
 In August 2006 , Warner Bros. announced 300 's release date as March 16 , 2007 , but in October the release was moved forward to March 9 , 2007 . 300 was released on DVD , Blu @-@ ray Disc , and HD DVD on July 31 , 2007 , in Region 1 territories , in single @-@ disc and two @-@ disc editions . 300 was released in single @-@ disc and <unk> two @-@ disc editions on DVD , BD and HD DVD in Region 2 territories beginning August 2007 . On July 21 , 2009 , Warner Bros. released a new Blu @-@ ray Disc entitled 300 : The Complete Experience to coincide with the Blu @-@ ray Disc release of Watchmen . This new Blu @-@ ray Disc is encased in a 40 @-@ page <unk> and includes all the extras from the original release as well as some new ones . These features include a Picture @-@ in @-@ Picture feature entitled The Complete 300 : A Comprehensive Immersion , which enables the viewer to view the film in three different perspectives . This release also includes a digital copy . 
 On July 9 , 2007 , the American cable channel TNT bought the rights to broadcast the film from Warner Bros. TNT started airing the film in September 2009 . Sources say that the network paid between $ 17 million and just under $ 20 million for the broadcasting rights . TNT agreed to a three @-@ year deal instead of the more typical five @-@ year deal . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 300 was released in North America on March 9 , 2007 , in both conventional and IMAX theaters . It grossed $ 28 @,@ 106 @,@ 731 on its opening day and ended its North American opening weekend with $ 70 @,@ 885 @,@ 301 , breaking the record held by Ice Age : The Meltdown for the biggest opening weekend in the month of March and for a Spring release . Since then 300 's Spring release record was broken by Fast and Furious and 300 's March record was broken by Tim Burton 's Alice in Wonderland . 300 's opening weekend gross is the 24th highest in box office history , coming slightly below The Lost World : Jurassic Park but higher than Transformers . It was the third biggest opening for an R @-@ rated film ever , behind The Matrix Reloaded ( $ 91 @.@ 8 million ) and The Passion of the Christ ( $ 83 @.@ 8 million ) . The film also set a record for IMAX cinemas with a $ 3 @.@ 6 million opening weekend . The film grossed $ 456 @,@ 068 @,@ 181 worldwide . 
 300 opened two days earlier , on March 7 , 2007 , in Sparta , and across Greece on March 8 . Studio executives were surprised by the showing , which was twice what they had expected . They credited the film 's stylized violence , the strong female role of Queen Gorgo which attracted a large number of women , and a MySpace advertising blitz . Producer Mark Canton said , " MySpace had an enormous impact but it has transcended the limitations of the Internet or the graphic novel . Once you make a great movie , word can spread very quickly . " 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 = = = = Critical reception = = = = 
 Since its world premiere at the Berlin International Film Festival on February 14 , 2007 , in front of 1 @,@ 700 audience members , 300 has received generally mixed reviews . While it received a standing ovation at the public premiere , it was panned at a press screening hours earlier , where many attendees left during the showing and those who remained booed at the end . Critics are divided on the film . Rotten Tomatoes reports that 60 % of critics gave the film a positive review , based upon a sample of 225 , with an average score of 6 @.@ 1 out of 10 . Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , gave the film an average score of 52 based on 42 reviews . 
 Some of the most unfavorable reviews came from major American newspapers . A.O. Scott of The New York Times describes 300 as " about as violent as Apocalypto and twice as stupid , " while criticizing its color scheme and suggesting that its plot includes racist undertones ; Scott also poked fun at the buffed bodies of the actors portraying the Spartans , declaring that the Persian characters are " pioneers in the art of face @-@ piercing " , but that the Spartans had access to " superior health clubs and electrolysis facilities " . Kenneth Turan writes in the Los Angeles Times that " unless you love violence as much as a Spartan , Quentin Tarantino or a video @-@ game @-@ playing teenage boy , you will not be endlessly fascinated . " Roger Ebert , in his review , gave the film a two @-@ star rating , writing , " 300 has one @-@ dimensional caricatures who talk like professional wrestlers plugging their next feud . " Some critics employed at Greek newspapers have been particularly critical , such as film critic Robby <unk> , who said that moviegoers would be dazzled by the " digital action " but irritated by the " pompous interpretations and one @-@ dimensional characters . " 
 Variety 's Todd McCarthy describes the film as " visually arresting " although " bombastic " while Kirk Honeycutt , writing in The Hollywood Reporter , praises the " beauty of its topography , colors and forms . " Writing in the Chicago Sun Times , Richard Roeper acclaims 300 as " the Citizen Kane of cinematic graphic novels . " Empire gave the film 3 / 5 having a verdict of " Visually stunning , thoroughly belligerent and as shallow as a pygmy 's paddling pool , this is a whole heap of style tinged with just a smidgen of substance . " 300 was also warmly received by websites focusing on comics and video games . Comic Book Resources ' Mark Cronan found the film compelling , leaving him " with a feeling of power , from having been witness to something grand . " IGN 's Todd Gilchrist acclaimed Zack Snyder as a cinematic visionary and " a possible redeemer of modern moviemaking . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 At the MTV Movie Awards 2007 , 300 was nominated for Best Movie , Best Performance for Gerard Butler , Best Breakthrough Performance for Lena Headey , Best Villain for Rodrigo Santoro , and Best Fight for Leonidas battling " the Über Immortal " , but only won the award for Best Fight . 300 won both the Best Dramatic Film and Best Action Film honors in the 2006 – 2007 Golden Icon Awards presented by Travolta Family Entertainment . In December 2007 , 300 won IGN 's Movie of the Year 2007 , along with Best Comic Book Adaptation and King Leonidas as Favorite Character . The movie received 10 nominations for the 2008 Saturn Awards , winning the awards for Best Director and Best Action / Adventure / Thriller Film . In 2009 , National Review magazine ranked 300 number 5 on its 25 Best Conservative Movies of the Last 25 Years list . 
 = = = Historical accuracy = = = 
 Since few records about the actual martial arts used by the Spartans survive aside from accounts of formations and tactics , the fight choreography led by stunt coordinator and fight choreographer Damon Caro , was a synthesis of different weapon arts with Filipino martial arts as the base . This can be seen in the blade work and the signature use of the off hand by <unk> / Kali / Eskrima in the offensive use of the shields . The Spartans ' use of the narrow terrain , in those particular circumstances , is a military tactic known as " defeat in detail " . 
 Paul Cartledge , Professor of Greek History at Cambridge University , advised the filmmakers on the pronunciation of Greek names , and said they " made good use " of his published work on Sparta . He praises the film for its portrayal of " the Spartans ' heroic code " , and of " the key role played by women in backing up , indeed reinforcing , the male martial code of heroic honour " , while expressing reservations about its " ' West ' ( goodies ) vs ' East ' ( baddies ) polarization " . Cartledge writes that he enjoyed the film , although he found Leonidas ' description of the Athenians as " boy lovers " ironic , since the Spartans themselves incorporated institutional pederasty into their educational system . 
 Ephraim Lytle , assistant professor of Hellenistic History at the University of Toronto , said 300 selectively idealizes Spartan society in a " problematic and disturbing " fashion , as well as portraying the " hundred nations of the Persians " as monsters and non @-@ Spartan Greeks as weak . He suggests that the film 's moral universe would have seemed " as bizarre to ancient Greeks as it does to modern historians " . 
 Victor Davis Hanson , National Review columnist and former professor of Classical history at California State University , Fresno , who wrote the foreword to a 2007 re @-@ issue of the graphic novel , said the film demonstrates a specific affinity with the original material of Herodotus in that it captures the martial ethos of ancient Sparta and represents Thermopylae as a " clash of civilizations " . He remarks that Simonides , Aeschylus , and Herodotus viewed Thermopylae as a battle against " Eastern centralism and collective serfdom " , which opposed " the idea of the free citizen of an autonomous polis " . He also said the film portrays the battle in a " surreal " manner , and that the intent was to " entertain and shock first , and instruct second " . 
 Touraj <unk> , now Baskerville Professor of Iranian History and the Persian World at the University of California , Irvine , criticized the film 's use of classical sources , writing : 
 Some passages from the Classical authors Aeschylus , Diodorus , Herodotus and Plutarch are split over the movie to give it an authentic flavor . Aeschylus becomes a major source when the battle with the " monstrous human herd " of the Persians is narrated in the film . Diodorus ' statement about Greek valor to preserve their liberty is inserted in the film , but his mention of Persian valor is omitted . Herodotus ' fanciful numbers are used to populate the Persian army , and Plutarch 's discussion of Greek women , specifically Spartan women , is inserted wrongly in the dialogue between the " misogynist " Persian ambassador and the Spartan king . Classical sources are certainly used , but exactly in all the wrong places , or quite naively . The Athenians were fighting a sea battle during this . 
 Robert McHenry , former editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Encyclopædia Britannica and author of How to Know said the film " is an almost ineffably silly movie . Stills from the film could easily be used to promote Buns of Steel , or <unk> , or <unk> . It 's about the romanticizing of the Spartan ' ideal ' , a process that began even in ancient times , was promoted by the Romans , and has survived over time while less and less resembling the actual historical Sparta . " 
 The director of 300 , Zack Snyder , stated in an MTV interview that " the events are 90 percent accurate . It 's just in the visualization that it 's crazy .... I 've shown this movie to world @-@ class historians who have said it 's amazing . They can 't believe it 's as accurate as it is . " Nevertheless , he also said the film is " an opera , not a documentary . That 's what I say when people say it 's historically inaccurate " . He was also quoted in a BBC News story as saying that the film is , at its core " a fantasy film " . He also describes the film 's narrator , Dilios , as " a guy who knows how not to wreck a good story with truth " . 
 In an interview 300 writer Frank Miller said , " The inaccuracies , almost all of them , are intentional . I took those chest plates and leather skirts off of them for a reason . I wanted these guys to move and I wanted ' em to look good . I knocked their helmets off a fair amount , partly so you can recognize who the characters are . Spartans , in full regalia , were almost indistinguishable except at a very close angle . Another liberty I took was , they all had plumes , but I only gave a plume to Leonidas , to make him stand out and identify him as a king . I was looking for more an evocation than a history lesson . The best result I can hope for is that if the movie excites someone , they 'll go explore the histories themselves . Because the histories are endlessly fascinating . " 
 Dr. <unk> Farrokh in a paper entitled " The 300 Movie : Separating Fact from Fiction " notes that the film falsely portrays " the Greco @-@ Persian Wars in binary terms : the democratic , good , rational ' Us ' versus the tyrannical , evil and irrational , ' other ' of the ever @-@ nebulous ( if not exotic ) ' Persia ' " . He reminds the reader about three commonly accepted historical pieces of evidence that demonstrate the fundamental and essential contribution of the Achaemenid Empire to the creation of democracy and human rights . " The founder of the Achaemenid Empire , Cyrus the Great , was the world 's first world emperor to openly declare and guarantee the sanctity of human rights and individual freedom " , " Cyrus was a follower of the teachings of Zoroaster , the founder of one of the world 's oldest monotheistic religions " , and to put his own words in action " When Cyrus defeated King Nabonidus of Babylon , he officially declared the freedom of the Jews from their Babylonian captivity . This was the first time in history that a world power had guaranteed the survival of the Jewish people , religion , customs and culture . " 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 Before the release of 300 , Warner Bros. expressed concerns about the political aspects of the film 's theme . Snyder relates that there was " a huge sensitivity about East versus West with the studio . " Media speculation about a possible parallel between the Greco @-@ Persian conflict and current events began in an interview with Snyder that was conducted before the Berlin Film Festival . The interviewer remarked that " everyone is sure to be translating this [ film ] into contemporary politics . " Snyder replied that , while he was aware that people would read the film through the lens of current events , no parallels between the film and the modern world were intended . 
 Outside the current political parallels , some critics have raised more general questions about the film 's ideological orientation . The New York Post 's Kyle Smith wrote that the film would have pleased " Adolf 's boys , " and Slate 's Dana Stevens compares the film to The Eternal Jew , " as a textbook example of how race @-@ baiting fantasy and nationalist myth can serve as an incitement to total war . " Roger Moore , a critic for the Orlando Sentinel , relates 300 to Susan Sontag 's definition of " fascist art . " <unk> Nazionale , an Italian neoconservative political party formed from the collapse of the neo @-@ fascist party MSI , has used imagery from the work within candidate propaganda posters titled : " Defend your values , your civilization , your district " . 
 Newsday critic Gene Seymour , on the other hand , stated that such reactions are misguided , writing that " the movie 's just too darned silly to withstand any ideological theorizing . " Snyder himself dismissed ideological readings , suggesting that reviewers who critique " a graphic novel movie about a bunch of guys ... stomping the snot out of each other " using words like " ' <unk> , ' ' homophobic , ' ' homoerotic ' or ' racist ' " are " missing the point . " Snyder , however , also admitted to fashioning an effeminate villain specifically to play into the homophobia of young straight males . Slovenian critic Slavoj Žižek pointed out that the story represents " a poor , small country ( Greece ) invaded by the army of a much large [ r ] state ( Persia ) , " suggesting that the identification of the Spartans with a modern superpower is flawed . 
 The 300 writer Frank Miller said : " The Spartans were a paradoxical people . They were the biggest slave owners in Greece . But at the same time , Spartan women had an unusual level of rights . It 's a paradox that they were a bunch of people who in many ways were fascist , but they were the bulwark against the fall of democracy . The closest comparison you can draw in terms of our own military today is to think of the red @-@ caped Spartans as being like our special @-@ ops forces . They 're these almost superhuman characters with a tremendous warrior ethic , who were unquestionably the best fighters in Greece . I didn 't want to render Sparta in overly accurate terms , because ultimately I do want you to root for the Spartans . I couldn 't show them being quite as cruel as they were . I made them as cruel as I thought a modern audience could stand . " 
 = = = = Eugenics = = = = 
 Ephraim Lytle , assistant professor of Hellenistic history at the University of Toronto , commented : " Ephialtes , who betrays the Greeks , is likewise changed from a local Malian of sound body into a Spartan outcast , a grotesquely disfigured troll who by Spartan custom should have been left exposed as an infant to die . Leonidas points out that his hunched back means Ephialtes cannot lift his shield high enough to fight in the phalanx . This is a transparent defence of Spartan eugenics , and convenient given that infanticide could as easily have been precipitated by an ill @-@ omened birthmark . " 
 Michael M. <unk> , author of " ' With Your Shield , or on It ' : Disability Representation in 300 " in the Disability Studies Quarterly , said that the film 's portrayal of the hunchback and his story " is not mere <unk> : this is anti @-@ disability . " 
 Frank Miller – commenting on areas where he lessened the Spartan cruelty for narrative purposes – said : " I have King Leonidas very gently tell Ephialtes , the hunchback , that they can 't use him [ as a soldier ] , because of his deformity . It would be much more classically Spartan if Leonidas laughed and kicked him off the cliff . " 
 = = Depictions of Persians and Iran 's reaction = = 
 From its opening , 300 also attracted controversy over its portrayal of Persians . Officials of the Iranian government denounced the film . Some scenes in the film portray demon @-@ like and other fictional creatures as part of the Persian army , and the fictionalized portrayal of Persian King Xerxes I has been criticized as effeminate . Critics suggested that this was meant to stand in stark contrast to the sheer masculinity of the Spartan army . Steven Rea argued that the film 's Persians were a vehicle for an anachronistic cross @-@ section of Western stereotypes of Asian and African cultures . 
 The film 's portrayal of ancient Persians caused a particularly strong reaction in Iran . <unk> Moaveni of Time reported that Tehran was " outraged " following the film 's release . Moaveni identified two factors which may have contributed to the intense reaction : its release on the eve of Nowruz , the Persian New Year , and the common Iranian view of the Achaemenid Empire as " a particularly noble page in their history . " Various Iranian officials condemned the film . The Iranian Academy of the Arts submitted a formal complaint against the film to UNESCO , labelling it an attack on the historical identity of Iran . The Iranian mission to the U.N. protested the film in a press release , and Iranian embassies protested its screening in France , Thailand , Turkey , and Uzbekistan . The film was banned within Iran as " hurtful American propaganda " . Reviewers in the United States and elsewhere " noted the political overtones of the West @-@ against @-@ Iran story line and the way Persians are depicted as decadent , sexually flamboyant and evil in contrast to the noble Greeks " . With bootleg versions of the film already available in Tehran with the film 's international release and news of the film 's surprising success at the U.S. box office , it prompted widespread anger in Iran . <unk> Moaveni of Time reported , " All of Tehran was outraged . Everywhere I went yesterday , the talk vibrated with indignation over the film " . Newspapers in Iran featured headlines such as " Hollywood declares war on Iranians " and " 300 AGAINST 70 <unk> " ( Iran 's population ) . <unk> @-@ No , an independent Iranian newspaper , said that " [ t ] he film depicts Iranians as demons , without culture , feeling or humanity , who think of nothing except attacking other nations and killing people " . Four Iranian Members of Parliament have called for Muslim countries to ban the film , and a group of Iranian film makers submitted a letter of protest to UNESCO regarding the film 's alleged misrepresentation of Iranian history and culture . Iran 's cultural advisor to president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad has called the film an " American attempt for psychological warfare against Iran " . 
 Moaveni identified two factors which may have contributed to the intensity of Iranian indignation over the film . First , she describes the timing of the film 's release , on the eve of <unk> , the Persian New Year , as " inauspicious . " Second , Iranians tend to view the era depicted in the film as " a particularly noble page in their history " . Moaveni also suggests that " the box office success of 300 , compared with the relative flop of Alexander ( another spurious period epic dealing with Persians ) , is cause for considerable alarm , signaling ominous U.S. intentions " . 
 According to The Guardian , Iranian critics of 300 , ranging from bloggers to government officials , have described the movie " as a calculated attempt to demonise Iran at a time of intensifying U.S. pressure over the country 's nuclear programme " . An Iranian government spokesman described the film as " hostile behavior which is the result of cultural and psychological warfare " . Moaveni reported that the Iranians she interacted with were " adamant that the movie was secretly funded by the U.S. government to prepare Americans for going to war against Iran " . 
 Dana Stevens of Slate states , " If 300 , the new battle epic based on the graphic novel by Frank Miller and Lynn Varley , had been made in Germany in the mid @-@ 1930s , it would be studied today alongside The Eternal Jew as a textbook example of how race @-@ baiting fantasy and nationalist myth can serve as an incitement to total war . Since it 's a product of the post @-@ ideological , post @-@ Xbox 21st century , 300 will instead be talked about as a technical achievement , the next blip on the increasingly blurry line between movies and video games . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 300 has been spoofed in film , television , and other media , and spawned the " This is Sparta ! " internet meme . Skits based upon the film have appeared on Saturday Night Live and Robot Chicken , the latter of which mimicked the visual style of 300 in a parody set during the American Revolutionary War , titled " 1776 " . Other parodies include an episode of South Park named " D @-@ Yikes ! " , and " BOO ! " by Mad magazine in its September 2007 issue # 481 , written by Desmond Devlin and illustrated by Mort Drucker . 20th Century Fox released Meet the Spartans , a spoof directed by Jason Friedberg and Aaron Seltzer . Universal Pictures was planning a similar parody , titled National Lampoon 's 301 : The Legend of Awesomest Maximus Wallace Leonidas . 
 300 , particularly its pithy quotations , has been " adopted " by the student body of Michigan State University ( whose nickname is the Spartans ) , with chants of " Spartans , what is your profession ? " becoming common at sporting events starting after the film 's release , and Michigan State basketball head coach Tom Izzo dressed as Leonidas at one student event . Nate Ebner , a football player with the New England Patriots in the National Football League and formerly with the Ohio State Buckeyes , was nicknamed " Leonidas , " after the Greek warrior @-@ king hero of Sparta acted by Gerard Butler in the movie 300 , because of his intense workout regimen , and his beard . 
 = = Background = = 
 Frank Miller 's original graphic novel 300 was inspired by the film The 300 Spartans , which Frank Miller first saw at age 6 . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 In June 2008 , producers Mark Canton , Gianni Nunnari and Bernie Goldmann revealed that work had begun on a sequel to 300 , 300 : Rise of an Empire . Legendary Pictures had announced that Frank Miller started writing the follow @-@ up graphic novel , and Zack Snyder was interested in directing the adaptation , but moved on to develop and direct the Superman reboot Man of Steel . Noam Murro directed instead , while Zack Snyder produced . The film focused on the Athenian admiral , Themistocles , as portrayed by Australian actor Sullivan Stapleton . The sequel , 300 : Rise of an Empire , was released on March 7 , 2014 . 
 = Space Seed = 
 " Space Seed " is an episode of the American science fiction television series Star Trek . It is the 22nd episode of the first season and was first broadcast by NBC on February 16 , 1967 . " Space Seed " was written by Gene L. Coon and Carey Wilber and directed by Marc Daniels . Set in the 23rd century , the series follows the adventures of Captain James T. Kirk ( William Shatner ) and his crew aboard the Starfleet starship USS Enterprise . In this episode , the Enterprise crew encounter a sleeper ship holding selectively bred superpeople from Earth 's past . Their leader , Khan Noonien Singh ( Ricardo Montalbán ) , attempts to take control of Enterprise . The episode also guest stars Madlyn Rhue as Lt. Marla McGivers , who becomes romantically involved with Khan . 
 Wilber conceived the general plot for a different series , Captain Video and His Video Rangers , which featured humans from Ancient Greece who were preserved in cryogenic suspension and revived . The script changed numerous times during preproduction as producer Bob Justman felt that it would be too expensive to film . Eventually Gene L. Coon and series creator Gene Roddenberry also made alterations . These revisions include the marooning of the criminals at the end of the episode , and the change of the primary villain from a Nordic character to a Sikh . Roddenberry attempted to claim the primary writing credit for " Space Seed " , a request turned down by the Writers Guild of America . 
 Montalbán was the casting director 's first choice for Khan and described the role as " wonderful " . Despite being planned as an inexpensive bottle episode , the special sets and shots using starship miniatures caused the episode to go over budget . On first broadcast , the episode held second place in the ratings for the first half @-@ hour with 13 @.@ 12 million viewers , but during the second half it was pushed into third place . " Space Seed " has been named one of the best episodes of the series by Cinefantastique , IGN , and other publications . The 1982 film Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan serves as a sequel to this episode . Plot elements of the episode and The Wrath of Khan were also used in the 2013 film Star Trek Into Darkness , and references to it appear in episodes of Star Trek : Enterprise . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On stardate 3141 @.@ 9 , the Federation starship USS Enterprise finds the derelict SS Botany Bay floating in space . Botany Bay was launched from Earth in the 1990s . A landing party comprising Captain James T. Kirk ( William Shatner ) , Doctor Leonard McCoy ( DeForest Kelley ) , Chief Engineer Montgomery Scott ( James Doohan ) , and historian Lieutenant Marla McGivers ( Madlyn Rhue ) beams over to the freighter . The landing party finds a cargo of 84 humans , 72 of whom are alive in suspended animation after nearly 200 years . McGivers identifies the group 's leader . The occupant begins to revive , but Kirk brings him to Enterprise for a medical examination when his chamber fails . 
 Kirk has Botany Bay taken in tow by a tractor beam , and Enterprise sets course for Starbase 12 . In sickbay , the group 's leader awakens and attacks McCoy but , impressed by McCoy 's bravery , releases the doctor and introduces himself as " Khan " ( Ricardo Montalbán ) . Lt. McGivers marvels over Khan , a living relic from the 20th century , her field of interest . First Officer Spock ( Leonard Nimoy ) discovers that their guest is Khan Noonien Singh who , along with his people , are products of 20th @-@ century selective breeding designed to create perfect humans . The genetic superhumans instead became warlords and conquered more than a third of the planet , sparking the Eugenics Wars , Earth 's last major global conflict . Between eighty and ninety of the superhumans were unaccounted for at the end of the war ; Khan is listed as the most dangerous . 
 Khan is placed under guard in quarters . McGivers is sent to brief him on current events . Taking advantage of McGivers ' attraction towards him , Khan tells her he means to rule mankind again and needs her help to take over Enterprise . Reluctantly , she agrees , beaming Khan to Botany Bay , where he revives the rest of his superpeople . They return to Enterprise and assume control of the ship . Khan throws Kirk into a decompression tank , and threatens to slowly suffocate him unless Kirk 's command crew agree to follow Khan . Having a change of heart , McGivers frees Kirk from the chamber . Kirk and Spock vent anesthetic gas throughout the entire ship to disable Khan and his cohorts . Khan escapes the gas and heads to Engineering , where he attempts to destroy Enterprise , but Kirk confronts him and a brawl ensues . Though outmatched by Khan 's superior strength , Kirk uses a tool as a club to knock the superman unconscious . 
 Kirk holds a hearing to decide the fate of Khan and his followers . The captain decides that they should be exiled to Ceti Alpha V , a harsh world that Kirk believes would be a perfect place for Khan to start his kingdom . Khan claims he is up to the challenge of taming the world and accepts Kirk 's offer . Instead of a court @-@ martial for Lt. McGivers , Kirk allows her to go into exile with Khan . Spock notes that it would be interesting to see what Khan makes of Ceti Alpha V in 100 years . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Carey Wilber was hired to write a script for an episode of Star Trek . His idea was based on an episode he wrote for the television series Captain Video and His Video Rangers ( 1949 – 1955 ) . His work on that show featured Ancient @-@ Greek @-@ era humans transported in suspended animation through space , with the people of the future finding that they have mythological powers . For " Space Seed " , Wilber replaced these mythological powers with abilities that were enhanced due to genetic engineering . Wilber had briefly worked with Gene Roddenberry on the television series <unk> . His science fiction extended beyond Star Trek : he also wrote scripts for Lost in Space and The Time Tunnel around the same time . 
 In Wilber 's first proposal for the story that became " Space Seed " , dated August 29 , 1966 — shortly before the first episode of Star Trek aired — the villain was Harold Erickson , an ordinary criminal exiled into space . He sought to free his gang from Botany Bay , seize Enterprise , and become a pirate . Parts of the story were inspired by the use of penal colonies in the 18th century , and characterizations were based on descriptions from the series ' writer 's bible . As a result , several elements of the draft proposal differed from how the characters behaved in the actual series — for example , the draft includes a scene where Spock defeats Kirk at chess by cheating . Producer Gene L. Coon told Wilber that his work was the best outline he had seen during his time on Star Trek . Fellow producer Bob Justman was less enthusiastic ; he compared it negatively to Flash Gordon and Buck Rogers , and felt the concept would be too expensive to film . There were also concerns that an unsolicited script submitted by science fiction author Philip José Farmer resembled the proposed plot which , as Roddenberry had corresponded with Farmer , might lead to litigation . 
 NBC executives reviewed the plot for " Space Seed " and approved it , but Justman reassessed the outline , saying that it needed to be heavily revised . In September , Wilber was given a list of suggested changes including asking him to remove any mention of the setting , as the producers did not want to say how far in the future Star Trek was set , and to remove the chess scene . Wilber submitted a second draft , but Roddenberry still had problems with basic elements of the script . He did not believe common criminals would be fired into space as a solution and strongly disliked the notion of space pirates . The second draft introduced the idea that Kirk marooned Erickson and his crew on a new planet ; this remained in the final version . Wilber was not asked for a third draft ; Coon was tasked with the re @-@ write ; he submitted it on December 7 and updated it twice over the following five days . Wilber accepted Coon 's re @-@ writes , and left the staff after the submission of his second draft as his contractual obligations were complete . 
 Coon proposed that Erickson should be a rival to Kirk , a genetic superman who had once ruled part of Earth . Roddenberry and Justman were still unhappy with the script , and Roddenberry revised it once more a week before filming was due to begin , after Montalbán had been cast . In this draft the blond Nordic character of Erickson became closer to the version seen on screen . In Roddenberry and Coon 's script , the character was renamed <unk> Khan Noonien . The name <unk> Bahadur Singh was suggested by the DeForest Research company , who checked scripts for potential errors on behalf of the production company ; the Singh name was suggested in part because it was closer to actual Sikh names . Coon and Roddenberry settled on Khan Noonien Singh ; Roddenberry had an old Chinese friend named Noonien Wang that he had lost touch with , and hoped that Wang would see the episode and contact him . In the final draft , Roddenberry listed himself as the primary writer , Coon as co @-@ writer and Wilber was absent , but the Writers Guild of America turned down Roddenberry 's request to be credited ; Coon received the main credit ; Wilber was given co @-@ writer and " story @-@ by " credits . Wilber did not often watch his own work , and nearly thirty years later had never seen " Space Seed " . Coon was later credited as Lee Cronin for his part in production of the script . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Mexican actor Ricardo Montalbán was cast as the genetic superman Khan Noonian Singh , having been the first choice for the role . He had been suggested by casting director Joseph D <unk> , who was not looking to cast an actor of a particular ethnic background due to Roddenberry 's vision for the series ; Roddenberry wanted to show his perceived 23rd century values by not requiring any specific ethnicities when casting actors in guest roles . Montalbán had previously appeared in a television movie created by Roddenberry , The Secret Weapon of 117 ( also referred to as The Secret Defense of 117 ) , which was the writer 's first attempt to create science fiction on television and aired more than ten years before Star Trek . Montalbán called his role as Khan " wonderful " , saying that " it was well @-@ written , it had an interesting concept and I was delighted it was offered to me " . The main cast were enthusiastic about working with Montalbán ; DeForest Kelley later said " I enjoyed working with Ricardo the best . I was privileged . He is a marvelous actor . " 
 Madlyn Rhue , who portrayed Lt. Marla McGivers , had previously worked with Montalbán in an episode of Bonanza in 1960 as his on @-@ screen wife ; she later appeared with him in a 1982 episode of Fantasy Island . Montalbán and Rhue also appeared in separate episodes of Roddenberry 's previous NBC television series , The Lieutenant ( 1963 – 1964 ) . Main cast member George Takei did not appear in " Space Seed " ; the character of Hikaru Sulu was replaced by Blaisdell <unk> as Lt. Spinelli . It was the first of two appearances in Star Trek for <unk> , who would return in the episode " The Changeling " as Lt. Singh . John Winston appeared for the second time as Lt. Kyle , and would go on to make nine further episodic appearances in that role . Following positive feedback from the producers and the network regarding James Doohan , " Space Seed " was the first episode to feature a more prominent role for his character , Chief Engineer Montgomery Scott . 
 = = = Filming , costumes and post production = = = 
 Filming of " Space Seed " began December 15 , 1966 , and concluded on December 22 after six days of shooting . Roddenberry , Coon and Wilber 's rewrites resulted in a shooting script of nearly 60 pages and 120 scenes . Marc Daniels was hired to direct the episode ; he had previously worked on The Lieutenant . The first day 's filming coincided with the airing of the episode " Balance of Terror " , and Daniels allowed the cast and crew to go home early to watch it . The other five days ran to schedule , to the extent that there was an early finish on the final day of filming , allowing cast and crew time to return home to watch a repeat of the episode " What Are Little Girls Made Of ? " which had replaced " Arena " on that evening 's schedule . A scene filmed but later cut from the episode depicted a discussion between McGivers and Angela Martine ( Barbara <unk> ) , intended to show that McGivers was looking for a forceful man . Further scenes were trimmed after filming following input from NBC . For example , scenes shot on the Botany Bay were cut as executives felt the costumes worn by the newly awakened crew were too revealing . 
 The character of Khan required five costumes , more than any other guest star in the entire series . This meant that the staff working on costumes had less time to devote to any one costume . Montalbán 's athletic physique was such that when his measurements were passed to them , staff thought there had been a mistake . Costume designer William Ware Theiss found it challenging to produce the outfits in the time allotted , to make the materials seem suitably futuristic and to fit his own preferences in design . Two of Khan 's outfits re @-@ used previous costumes , while three were specifically created for Montalbán . The production built two new sets for the episode : the decompression chamber in sickbay , and the set on board Botany Bay . A <unk> from that set was later reused as an overhead unit in McCoy 's research lab , which appeared later in the series . 
 Post production on " Space Seed " began on December 23 , 1966 , and ran through February 5 the following year . The Westheimer Company produced the majority of effects in the episode , but the scenes of Enterprise and Botany Bay in space were produced by Film Effects of Hollywood who were not credited on screen for their work . Botany Bay utilized a design Matt Jefferies created prior to the USS Enterprise . It had been previously labeled " antique space freighter " , and was built by Film Effects of Hollywood . The creation of the ship miniature caused the episode to go over budget by more than $ 12 @,@ 000 ; " Space Seed " actually cost a total of $ 197 @,@ 262 against a budget of $ 180 @,@ 000 . By this point , the series was nearly $ 80 @,@ 000 over budget in total . The Botany Bay model was later re @-@ purposed as a freighter for the episode " The Ultimate Computer " . 
 The sound effects team borrowed effects and manipulated them in order to achieve the " painted sound " effect sought by Roddenberry . Although a number of sources were used , they attempted to avoid most science fiction television series as they wanted an authentic sound . The sound archive of the United States Air Force was used , although the photon torpedo sound was created from the 1953 film The War of the Worlds . " Space Seed " was awarded the Golden Reel for sound editing on television by the Motion Picture Sound Editors society . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 " Space Seed " was first broadcast in the United States on February 16 , 1967 , on NBC . A 12 @-@ city overnight Trendex report compiled by Nielsen ratings showed that during the first half @-@ hour , it held second place in the ratings behind Bewitched on ABC with 13 @.@ 12 million viewers compared to Bewitched 's 14 @.@ 44 million . The episode beat My Three Sons on CBS . During the second half @-@ hour it was pushed into third place in the ratings by the start of the Thursday Night Movie on CBS , the Western film One @-@ Eyed Jacks starring Marlon Brando , which received 35 @.@ 5 percent of the audience share compared to 28 percent for " Space Seed " . 
 A High Definition remastering of " Space Seed " , which introduced new special effects and starship exteriors as well as enhanced music and audio , was shown for the first time on November 18 , 2006 , in broadcast syndication . It was the eleventh remastered episode to be shown . This meant that the episode was made available to over 200 local stations across the United States with the rights to broadcast Star Trek , and depending on the station it was broadcast either on November 18 or 19 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 In 1967 , The Indiana Gazette described " Space Seed " as " a good piece of science fiction " . The Kokomo Tribune called it " imaginative " , and also said that the episode was " particularly interesting " for " its commentary on the scientific know @-@ how of the late 1990s " . 
 Later reviewers watched the episodes several decades after broadcast . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club gave the episode an ' A ' rating , noting its strong characters and the interplay between Kirk and Spock that emphasizes their friendship . Michelle Erica Green called the episode " legendary " in her review for TrekNation . She thought that Khan made the " perfect foil " for the trio of Kirk , Spock and McCoy and said that the episode was not dulled by later episodes and films based on " Space Seed " . In Mark Pickavance 's review at Den of Geek , he said that it remained an " obvious choice of great source material " to be followed up in a film . 
 The review by Eugene Myers and Torrie Atkinson on Tor.com criticized the attraction between McGivers and Khan , saying that it was " really uncomfortable to watch her immediate attraction to him and her easy acceptance of his abusive and controlling behaviour " . However , both praised the episode , Myers giving it a five out of six , and Atkinson a six out of six rating . Also at Tor.com , in Ryan Britt and Emily Asher @-@ Perrin 's list of the ten most under @-@ appreciated elements of Star Trek , they placed " Space Seed " at number three saying that " As an introductory story to what old school Star Trek was all about , ' Space Seed ' is perfect . It presents an original science fiction concept , grapples with notions of human technology and ingenuity creating a monster , and features Captain Kirk beating the crap out of someone with a piece of Styrofoam . What more could you want ? " 
 Entertainment Weekly named the episode the second best of the series , while IGN ranked " Space Seed " as the fourth best , praising the fist fight between Kirk and Khan . It appeared in the top ten episodes listed by Cinefantastique and was also included in a list of ten " must see " episodes on The A.V. Club . Reviewer Zack Handlen said that it " features a terrific performance from guest star Montalban , gives the franchise one of its greatest villains , and sets the stage for one of best science @-@ fiction adventure movies ever made . " 
 = = Home media release and other adaptations = = 
 The first adaptation of " Space Seed " was as a re @-@ working into a short story by author James Blish as part of the novelization Star Trek 2 . This book contained seven short stories , each based on an episode of The Original Series and was published in 1968 . The adaptation of " Space Seed " appeared as the final story in the book . The first home media release of " Space Seed " was on a single @-@ episode VHS cassette in 1982 by Paramount Home Video . It was one of the episodes of The Original Series published on Capacitance Electronic Disc , alongside " The Changeling " , released on November 1 , 1982 . A LaserDisc of the episode , alongside " Return of the <unk> " was released in 1985 . Further releases of all episodes of the series were made on VHS and Betamax . These releases reverted to a single episode tape as in the original 1982 version . 
 The episode was released on DVD paired with " A Taste of Armageddon " as part of the general release of the series in 2000 . There were no additional extras added to that entire series of releases , except the DVD containing " Turnabout Intruder " . " Space Seed " was later released within a DVD box set of the first season in 2004 ; all three seasons of The Original Series were released as full @-@ season box sets that year . The episode was included in the remastered season one release on DVD and Blu @-@ ray in 2009 . This release featured CGI remodels of Enterprise and other space scenes , including the Botany Bay . The most recent release is as part of the Star Trek : Origins collection on Blu @-@ ray , which was released in 2013 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Khan = = = 
 The events of " Space Seed " are followed up in the 1982 film Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan . Harve Bennett was hired to produce a sequel to Star Trek : The Motion Picture having never seen the television series ; he therefore watched every episode in preparation and latched onto Khan from " Space Seed " as the compelling villain he considered to be lacking from the first film . In resuming the role of Khan , Montalbán worried that fans would see him only as Mr. Roarke from Fantasy Island but felt that he managed to recapture the character after re @-@ watching " Space Seed " . The film set a record for the opening weekend gross of $ 14 @.@ 3 million , and went on to take $ 78 @.@ 9 million domestically within the United States , making it the sixth best @-@ selling film of the year . 
 The movie features errors in continuity when compared to " Space Seed " . Because of re @-@ casting , Khan 's followers appear not to have aged from their appearance in the episode and Khan recognises Pavel Chekov — the character did not join Star Trek until season two , after this episode took place . This latter error was described in Deborah Cartmell and Imelda <unk> 's book Adaptations : From Text to Screen , Screen to Text as the " gaff notorious throughout Star Trek fandom " . An explanation was presented in the novelization of The Wrath of Khan , which stated that Chekov was working on the night shift at the time . 
 A non @-@ canon novelization by Greg Cox was later released in 2005 to fill in the timeframe between " Space Seed " and the film , titled To Reign in Hell : The Exile of Khan Noonien Singh . This book expanded on Khan 's romance with McGivers , and the author wanted to " give her a spine " as he felt that she was not " the pride of Starfleet , and even less of a feminist role @-@ model " in her appearance in " Space Seed " . 
 Events of both " Space Seed " and The Wrath of Khan were also directly referenced in 2013 's Star Trek Into Darkness , in which Benedict Cumberbatch portrayed Khan . The film took $ 70 @.@ 1 million on the opening weekend , and $ 467 @.@ 3 million internationally throughout the cinematic release . As part of their line of licensed Star Trek comic books , IDW Publishing launched a five part mini @-@ series titled Star Trek : Khan which described the early part of Khan 's life and how the events in Star Trek Into Darkness diverged from those seen in " Space Seed " . One of the writers of the film , Roberto Orci , was the story consultant on the comic series . This series also explained how Khan changed physically in order to be represented by Cumberbatch in the film . A retro @-@ style film poster for " Space Seed " was created by Juan Ortiz in 2013 , released around the same as Star Trek Into Darkness . 
 The television series Star Trek : Enterprise makes several further references to the events first described in " Space Seed " . In " Twilight " , the survivors of the Xindi attack on Earth eventually resettle on Ceti Alpha – V. The development of Khan and his followers were said to have been through selective breeding in " Space Seed " . American sociologist William Sims Bainbridge said that this method would have been unable to create genetic supermen in such a short space of time and that today the less implausible method of genetic engineering ( directly changing the DNA code ) would be used . In fact , subsequent references to the creation of Khan and the other supermen , such as in the Star Trek : Deep Space Nine episode " Doctor Bashir , I Presume " , substituted genetic engineering . 
 = = = The Eugenics Wars = = = 
 The Eugenics Wars , first mentioned in " Space Seed " , are stated in the Star Trek Chronology by Michael and Denise Okuda as taking place between 1992 and 1996 . They considered it fortunate that these events did not come to pass in the real world , and noted that the development of the Botany Bay in 1996 as an instance of where " Star Trek 's technological predictions have missed by a significant margin . " The war itself has been referenced elsewhere in the Star Trek franchise . The first mention of the wars following " Space Seed " was in the Star Trek : The Animated Series episode " The Infinite Vulcan " , in which a cloned version of Dr. <unk> <unk> , a scientist from that era , clones Spock . Later , during the production of " Doctor Bashir , I Presume ? " , writer René Echevarria , seeking a secret past for Doctor Julian Bashir , noted that coverage of the issue of eugenics in Star Trek had been limited to Khan and his followers . Fellow writer Ronald D. Moore decided to link the background of Bashir to genetic engineering . However , " Encounter at Farpoint " and Star Trek First Contact confused matters by saying WWIII ( aka The Eugenics Wars ) had occurred in the 2050s . Furthermore , when Echevarria wrote that the Eugenics Wars took place 200 years before the Deep Space Nine episode " Doctor Bashir , I Presume ? " , he took the time interval directly from The Wrath of Khan , failing to factor in the additional century between the events of the The Original Series ( and its associated films ) . 
 Novelist Gary Cox first mentioned the events of the Eugenics Wars in his non @-@ canon novel Assignment : Eternity , which followed up on the events of the episode " Assignment : Earth " and included the characters of Gary Seven and Roberta Lincoln . In it , he mentioned that Seven and Lincoln were involved in overthrowing Khan during the Eugenics Wars . He had not intended to explore this any further , but he was prompted to do so by his editor at Pocket Books . He wrote a story , split into two books , about the specific events of the Eugenics Wars , entitled Star Trek : The Eugenics Wars : The Rise and Fall of Khan Noonien Singh . As the <unk> Wars were already meant to have taken place , he decided to describe them as being a massive conspiracy that was not discovered until generations had passed . He also felt that this approach would make the books consistent with the Star Trek : Voyager episode " Future 's End " in which the crewmembers travel in time to the same period of Earth 's history as the Eugenics Wars , but find no such wars taking place . A further version of the Eugenics Wars was presented in the Star Trek : Khan comic book mini @-@ series . 
 The Enterprise season four episodes " Borderland " , " Cold Station 12 " and " The Augments " showed a further group of genetic superpeople produced from embryos produced in the same era as Khan and his crew . This was a deliberate link by the producers of Enterprise to both " Space Seed " and The Wrath of Khan , and was one of several plots during the fourth season of the show to include elements of Star Trek : The Original Series in the hope that this would boost ratings . 
 = = Annotations = = 
 = Henry Wadsworth Longfellow = 
 Henry Wadsworth Longfellow ( February 27 , 1807 – March 24 , 1882 ) was an American poet and educator whose works include " Paul Revere 's Ride " , The Song of Hiawatha , and Evangeline . He was also the first American to translate Dante Alighieri 's Divine Comedy , and was one of the five Fireside Poets . 
 Longfellow was born in Portland , Maine , which was then a part of Massachusetts . He studied at Bowdoin College . After spending time in Europe he became a professor at Bowdoin and , later , at Harvard College . His first major poetry collections were Voices of the Night ( 1839 ) and Ballads and Other Poems ( 1841 ) . Longfellow retired from teaching in 1854 , to focus on his writing , living the remainder of his life in Cambridge , Massachusetts , in a former Revolutionary War headquarters of George Washington . His first wife Mary Potter died in 1835 , after a miscarriage . His second wife Frances Appleton died in 1861 , after sustaining burns when her dress caught fire . After her death , Longfellow had difficulty writing poetry for a time and focused on translating works from foreign languages . He died in 1882 . 
 Longfellow wrote many lyric poems known for their musicality and often presenting stories of mythology and legend . He became the most popular American poet of his day and also had success overseas . He has been criticized , however , for imitating European styles and writing specifically for the masses . 
 = = Life and work = = 
 = = = Early life and education = = = 
 Longfellow was born on February 27 , 1807 , to Stephen Longfellow and <unk> ( Wadsworth ) Longfellow in Portland , Maine , then a district of Massachusetts , and he grew up in what is now known as the Wadsworth @-@ Longfellow House . His father was a lawyer , and his maternal grandfather , Peleg Wadsworth , was a general in the American Revolutionary War and a Member of Congress . He was named after his mother 's brother Henry Wadsworth , a Navy lieutenant who had died three years earlier at the Battle of Tripoli . Longfellow was the second of eight children ; his siblings were Stephen ( 1805 ) , Elizabeth ( 1808 ) , Anne ( 1810 ) , Alexander ( 1814 ) , Mary ( 1816 ) , Ellen ( 1818 ) and Samuel ( 1819 ) . Longfellow was of entirely English ancestry , all of which had been in New England since the early 1600s . 
 Longfellow attended a dame school at the age of three and by age six was enrolled at the private Portland Academy . In his years there he earned a reputation as being very studious and became fluent in Latin . His mother encouraged his enthusiasm for reading and learning , introducing him to Robinson Crusoe and Don Quixote . He published his first poem , a patriotic and historical four @-@ stanza poem called " The Battle of Lovell 's Pond " , in the Portland Gazette on November 17 , 1820 . He stayed at the Portland Academy until the age of fourteen . He spent much of his summers as a child at his grandfather Peleg 's farm in the western Maine town of Hiram . 
 In the fall of 1822 , the 15 @-@ year @-@ old Longfellow enrolled at Bowdoin College in Brunswick , Maine , along with his brother Stephen . His grandfather was a founder of the college and his father was a trustee . There Longfellow met Nathaniel Hawthorne , who would later become his lifelong friend . He boarded with a clergyman for a time before rooming on the third floor of what is now Maine Hall in 1823 . He joined the <unk> Society , a group of students with Federalist leanings . In his senior year , Longfellow wrote to his father about his aspirations : 
 I will not disguise it in the least ... the fact is , I most eagerly aspire after future eminence in literature , my whole soul burns most ardently after it , and every earthly thought centres in it ... I am almost confident in believing , that if I can ever rise in the world it must be by the exercise of my talents in the wide field of literature . 
 He pursued his literary goals by submitting poetry and prose to various newspapers and magazines , partly due to encouragement from Professor Thomas Cogswell Upham . Between January 1824 and his graduation in 1825 , he published nearly 40 minor poems . About 24 of them appeared in the short @-@ lived Boston periodical The United States Literary Gazette . When Longfellow graduated from Bowdoin , he was ranked fourth in the class , and had been elected to Phi Beta Kappa . He gave the student commencement address . 
 = = = European tours and professorships = = = 
 After graduating in 1825 , he was offered a job as professor of modern languages at his alma mater . The story , possibly apocryphal , is that an influential trustee , Benjamin Orr , had been so impressed by Longfellow 's translation of Horace that he was hired under the condition that he travel to Europe to study French , Spanish , and Italian . Whatever the motivation , he began his tour of Europe in May 1826 aboard the ship Cadmus . His time abroad would last three years and cost his father $ 2 @,@ 604 @.@ 24 . He traveled to France , Spain , Italy , Germany , back to France , then England before returning to the United States in mid @-@ August 1829 . While overseas , he learned French , Spanish , Portuguese , and German , mostly without formal instruction . In Madrid , he spent time with Washington Irving and was particularly impressed by the author 's work ethic . Irving encouraged the young Longfellow to pursue writing . While in Spain , Longfellow was saddened to learn that his favorite sister , Elizabeth , had died of tuberculosis at the age of 20 that May while he was abroad . 
 On August 27 , 1829 , he wrote to the president of Bowdoin that he was turning down the professorship because he considered the $ 600 salary " disproportionate to the duties required " . The trustees raised his salary to $ 800 with an additional $ 100 to serve as the college 's librarian , a post which required one hour of work per day . During his years teaching at the college , he translated textbooks in French , Italian and Spanish ; his first published book was in 1833 , a translation of the poetry of medieval Spanish poet Jorge Manrique . He also published a travel book , Outre @-@ Mer : A Pilgrimage Beyond the Sea , first published in serial form before a book edition was released in 1835 . Shortly after the book 's publication , Longfellow attempted to join the literary circle in New York and asked George Pope Morris for an editorial role at one of Morris 's publications . Longfellow considered moving to New York after New York University considered offering him a newly created professorship of modern languages , though there would be no salary . The professorship was not created and Longfellow agreed to continue teaching at Bowdoin . It may have been joyless work . He wrote , " I hate the sight of pen , ink , and paper ... I do not believe that I was born for such a lot . I have aimed higher than this " . 
 On September 14 , 1831 , Longfellow married Mary Storer Potter , a childhood friend from Portland . The couple settled in Brunswick , though the two were not happy there . Longfellow published several nonfiction and fiction prose pieces inspired by Irving , including " The Indian Summer " and " The Bald Eagle " in 1833 . 
 In December 1834 , Longfellow received a letter from Josiah Quincy III , president of Harvard College , offering him the Smith Professorship of Modern Languages with the stipulation that he spend a year or so abroad . There , he further studied German as well as Dutch , Danish , Swedish , Finnish , and Icelandic . In October 1835 , during the trip , his wife Mary had a miscarriage about six months into her pregnancy . She did not recover and died after several weeks of illness at the age of 22 on November 29 , 1835 . Longfellow had her body embalmed immediately and placed in a lead coffin inside an oak coffin which was then shipped to Mount Auburn Cemetery near Boston . He was deeply saddened by her death , writing " One thought occupies me night and day ... She is dead — She is dead ! All day I am weary and sad " . Three years later , he was inspired to write the poem " Footsteps of Angels " about her . Several years later , he wrote the poem " Mezzo <unk> , " which expressed his personal struggles in his middle years . 
 When he returned to the United States in 1836 , Longfellow took up the professorship at Harvard . He was required to live in Cambridge to be close to the campus and , therefore , rented rooms at the Craigie House in the spring of 1837 , now preserved as the Longfellow House – Washington 's Headquarters National Historic Site . The home , built in 1759 , had once been the headquarters of George Washington during the Siege of Boston beginning in July 1775 . Elizabeth Craigie , widow of Andrew Craigie , owned the home and rented rooms on the second floor . Previous boarders also included Jared Sparks , Edward Everett , and Joseph Emerson Worcester . Longfellow began publishing his poetry , including the collection Voices of the Night in 1839 . The bulk of Voices of the Night , Longfellow 's debut book of poetry , was translations though he also included nine original poems and seven poems he had written as a teenager . Ballads and Other Poems was published shortly thereafter in 1841 and included " The Village Blacksmith " and " The Wreck of the Hesperus " , which were instantly popular . Longfellow also became part of the local social scene , creating a group of friends who called themselves the Five of Clubs . Members included Cornelius Conway Felton , George Stillman Hillard , and Charles Sumner , the latter of whom would become Longfellow 's closest friend over the next 30 years . As a professor , Longfellow was well liked , though he disliked being " constantly a playmate for boys " rather than " stretching out and grappling with men 's minds . " 
 = = = Courtship of Frances Appleton = = = 
 Longfellow met Boston industrialist Nathan Appleton and his family , including his son Thomas Gold Appleton , in the town of Thun , Switzerland . There , he began courting Appleton 's daughter , Frances " Fanny " Appleton . At first , the independent @-@ minded Appleton was not interested in marriage but Longfellow was determined . In July 1839 , he wrote to a friend : " [ V ] <unk> hangs doubtful . The lady says she will not ! I say she shall ! It is not pride , but the madness of passion " . His friend George Stillman Hillard encouraged Longfellow in the pursuit : " I delight to see you keeping up so stout a heart for the resolve to conquer is half the battle in love as well as war " . During the courtship , Longfellow frequently walked from Cambridge to the Appleton home in Beacon Hill in Boston by crossing the Boston Bridge . That bridge was replaced in 1906 by a new bridge which was later renamed the Longfellow Bridge . 
 In late 1839 , Longfellow published Hyperion , a book in prose inspired by his trips abroad and his unsuccessful courtship of Fanny Appleton . Amidst this , Longfellow fell into " periods of neurotic depression with moments of panic " and took a six @-@ month leave of absence from Harvard to attend a health spa in the former <unk> Benedictine Convent at Boppard in Germany . After returning , Longfellow published a play in 1842 , The Spanish Student , reflecting his memories from his time in Spain in the 1820s . There was some confusion over its original manuscript . After being printed in Graham 's Magazine , its editor Rufus Wilmot Griswold saved the manuscript from the trash . Longfellow was surprised to hear that it had been saved , unusual for a printing office , and asked to borrow it so that he could revise it , forgetting to return it to Griswold . The often vindictive Griswold wrote an angry letter in response . 
 A small collection , Poems on Slavery , was published in 1842 as Longfellow 's first public support of abolitionism . However , as Longfellow himself wrote , the poems were " so mild that even a <unk> might read them without losing his appetite for breakfast " . A critic for The Dial agreed , calling it " the thinnest of all Mr. Longfellow 's thin books ; spirited and polished like its forerunners ; but the topic would warrant a deeper tone " . The New England Anti @-@ Slavery Association , however , was satisfied with the collection enough to reprint it for further distribution . 
 On May 10 , 1843 , after seven years , Longfellow received a letter from Fanny Appleton agreeing to marry him and , too restless to take a carriage , walked 90 minutes to meet her at her house . They were soon married . Nathan Appleton bought the Craigie House as a wedding present to the pair . Longfellow lived there for the rest of his life . His love for Fanny is evident in the following lines from Longfellow 's only love poem , the sonnet " The Evening Star " , which he wrote in October 1845 : " O my beloved , my sweet Hesperus ! My morning and my evening star of love ! " He once attended a ball without her and noted , " The lights seemed dimmer , the music sadder , the flowers fewer , and the women less fair . " 
 He and Fanny had six children : Charles Appleton ( 1844 – 1893 ) , Ernest Wadsworth ( 1845 – 1921 ) , Fanny ( 1847 – 1848 ) , Alice Mary ( 1850 – 1928 ) , Edith ( 1853 – 1915 ) , and Anne Allegra ( 1855 – 1934 ) . Their second @-@ youngest daughter , Edith , married Richard Henry Dana III , son of the popular writer Richard Henry Dana , Jr . , author of Two Years Before the Mast . When the younger Fanny was born on April 7 , 1847 , Dr. Nathan Cooley Keep administered ether as the first obstetric anesthetic in the United States to Fanny Longfellow . A few months later , on November 1 , 1847 , the poem Evangeline was published for the first time . His literary income was increasing considerably : in 1840 , he had made $ 219 from his work but the year 1850 brought him $ 1 @,@ 900 . 
 On June 14 , 1853 , Longfellow held a farewell dinner party at his Cambridge home for his friend Nathaniel Hawthorne , who was preparing to move overseas . In 1854 , Longfellow retired from Harvard , devoting himself entirely to writing . He was awarded an honorary doctorate of laws from Harvard in 1859 . 
 = = = Death of Frances = = = 
 On July 9 , 1861 , a hot day , Fanny was putting locks of her children 's hair into an envelope and attempting to seal it with hot sealing wax while Longfellow took a nap . Her dress suddenly caught fire , though it is unclear exactly how ; it may have been burning wax or a lighted candle that fell on her dress . Longfellow , awakened from his nap , rushed to help her and threw a rug over her , though it was too small . He stifled the flames with his body as best he could , but she was already badly burned . Over a half a century later , Longfellow 's youngest daughter Annie explained the story differently , claiming that there had been no candle or wax but that the fire had started from a self @-@ lighting match that had fallen on the floor . In both versions of the story , however , Fanny was taken to her room to recover and a doctor was called . She was in and out of consciousness throughout the night and was administered ether . The next morning , July 10 , 1861 , she died shortly after 10 o 'clock after requesting a cup of coffee . Longfellow , in trying to save her , had burned himself badly enough for him to be unable to attend her funeral . His facial injuries led him to stop shaving , thereafter wearing the beard which became his trademark . 
 Devastated by her death , he never fully recovered and occasionally resorted to laudanum and ether to deal with it . He worried he would go insane and begged " not to be sent to an asylum " and noted that he was " inwardly bleeding to death " . He expressed his grief in the sonnet " The Cross of Snow " ( 1879 ) , which he wrote eighteen years later to commemorate her death : 
 Such is the cross I wear upon my breast 
 These eighteen years , through all the changing scenes 
 And seasons , changeless since the day she died . 
 = = = Later life and death = = = 
 Longfellow spent several years translating Dante Alighieri 's Divine Comedy . To aid him in perfecting the translation and reviewing proofs , he invited friends to weekly meetings every Wednesday starting in 1864 . The " Dante Club " , as it was called , regularly included William Dean Howells , James Russell Lowell , Charles Eliot Norton and other occasional guests . The full three @-@ volume translation was published in the spring of 1867 , though Longfellow would continue to revise it , and went through four printings in its first year . By 1868 , Longfellow 's annual income was over $ 48 @,@ 000 . In 1874 , Samuel Cutler Ward helped him sell the poem " The Hanging of the Crane " to the New York Ledger for $ 3 @,@ 000 ; it was the highest price ever paid for a poem . 
 During the 1860s , Longfellow supported abolitionism and especially hoped for reconciliation between the northern and southern states after the American Civil War . When his son was injured during the war , he wrote the poem " Christmas Bells " , later the basis of the carol I Heard the Bells on Christmas Day . He wrote in his journal in 1878 : " I have only one desire ; and that is for harmony , and a frank and honest understanding between North and South " . Longfellow , despite his aversion to public speaking , accepted an offer from Joshua Chamberlain to speak at his fiftieth reunion at Bowdoin College ; he read the poem " Morituri <unk> " so quietly that few could hear him . The next year , 1876 , he declined an offer to be nominated for the Board of Overseers at Harvard " for reasons very conclusive to my own mind " . 
 On August 22 , 1879 , a female admirer traveled to Longfellow 's house in Cambridge and , unaware to whom she was speaking , asked Longfellow : " Is this the house where Longfellow was born ? " Longfellow told her it was not . The visitor then asked if he had died here . " Not yet " , he replied . In March 1882 , Longfellow went to bed with severe stomach pain . He endured the pain for several days with the help of opium before he died surrounded by family on Friday , March 24 , 1882 . He had been suffering from peritonitis . At the time of his death , his estate was worth an estimated $ 356 @,@ 320 . He is buried with both of his wives at Mount Auburn Cemetery in Cambridge , Massachusetts . His last few years were spent translating the poetry of Michelangelo ; though Longfellow never considered it complete enough to be published during his lifetime , a posthumous edition was collected in 1883 . Scholars generally regard the work as autobiographical , reflecting the translator as an aging artist facing his impending death . 
 = = Writing = = 
 = = = Style = = = 
 Though much of his work is categorized as lyric poetry , Longfellow experimented with many forms , including hexameter and free verse . His published poetry shows great versatility , using anapestic and trochaic forms , blank verse , heroic couplets , ballads and sonnets . Typically , Longfellow would carefully consider the subject of his poetic ideas for a long time before deciding on the right metrical form for it . Much of his work is recognized for its melody @-@ like musicality . As he says , " what a writer asks of his reader is not so much to like as to listen " . 
 As a very private man , Longfellow did not often add autobiographical elements to his poetry . Two notable exceptions are dedicated to the death of members of his family . " Resignation " , written as a response to the death of his daughter Fanny in 1848 , does not use first @-@ person pronouns and is instead a generalized poem of mourning . The death of his second wife Frances , as biographer Charles Calhoun wrote , deeply affected Longfellow personally but " seemed not to touch his poetry , at least directly " . His memorial poem to her , a sonnet called " The Cross of Snow " , was not published in his lifetime . 
 Longfellow often used didacticism in his poetry , though he focused on it less in his later years . Much of his poetry imparts cultural and moral values , particularly focused on promoting life as being more than material pursuits . Longfellow also often used allegory in his work . In " Nature " , for example , death is depicted as bedtime for a cranky child . Many of the metaphors he used in his poetry as well as subject matter came from legends , mythology , and literature . He was inspired , for example , by Norse mythology for " The Skeleton in Armor " and by Finnish legends for The Song of Hiawatha . In fact , Longfellow rarely wrote on current subjects and seemed detached from contemporary American concerns . Even so , Longfellow , like many during this period , called for the development of high quality American literature . In Kavanagh , a character says : 
 We want a national literature commensurate with our mountains and rivers ... We want a national epic that shall correspond to the size of the country ... We want a national drama in which scope shall be given to our gigantic ideas and to the unparalleled activity of our people ... In a word , we want a national literature altogether shaggy and unshorn , that shall shake the earth , like a herd of buffaloes thundering over the prairies . 
 He was also important as a translator ; his translation of Dante became a required possession for those who wanted to be a part of high culture . He also encouraged and supported other translators . In 1845 , he published The Poets and Poetry of Europe , an 800 @-@ page compilation of translations made by other writers , including many by his friend and colleague Cornelius Conway Felton . Longfellow intended the anthology " to bring together , into a compact and convenient form , as large an amount as possible of those English translations which are scattered through many volumes , and are not accessible to the general reader " . In honor of Longfellow 's role with translations , Harvard established the Longfellow Institute in 1994 , dedicated to literature written in the United States in languages other than English . 
 In 1874 , Longfellow oversaw a 31 @-@ volume anthology called Poems of Places , which collected poems representing several geographical locations , including European , Asian , and Arabian countries . Emerson was disappointed and reportedly told Longfellow : " The world is expecting better things of you than this ... You are wasting time that should be bestowed upon original production " . In preparing the volume , Longfellow hired Katherine Sherwood Bonner as an amanuensis . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Longfellow 's early collections , Voices of the Night and Ballads and Other Poems , made him instantly popular . The New @-@ Yorker called him " one of the very few in our time who has successfully aimed in putting poetry to its best and sweetest uses " . The Southern Literary Messenger immediately put Longfellow " among the first of our American poets " . Poet John Greenleaf Whittier said that Longfellow 's poetry illustrated " the careful moulding by which art attains the graceful ease and chaste simplicity of nature " . Longfellow 's friend Oliver Wendell Holmes , Sr. wrote of him as " our chief singer " and one who " wins and warms ... <unk> , softens , cheers [ and ] calms the wildest woe and stays the bitterest tears ! " 
 The rapidity with which American readers embraced Longfellow was unparalleled in publishing history in the United States ; by 1874 , he was earning $ 3 @,@ 000 per poem . His popularity spread throughout Europe as well and his poetry was translated during his lifetime into Italian , French , German , and other languages . As scholar Bliss Perry later wrote , Longfellow was so highly praised that criticizing him was a criminal act like " carrying a rifle into a national park " . In the last two decades of his life , he often received requests for autographs from strangers , which he always sent . John Greenleaf Whittier suggested it was this massive correspondence that led to Longfellow 's death , writing : " My friend Longfellow was driven to death by these incessant demands " . 
 Contemporary writer Edgar Allan Poe wrote to Longfellow in May 1841 of his " fervent admiration which [ your ] genius has inspired in me " and later called him " unquestionably the best poet in America " . However , after Poe 's reputation as a critic increased , he publicly accused Longfellow of plagiarism in what has been since termed by Poe biographers as " The Longfellow War " . His assessment was that Longfellow was " a determined imitator and a dextrous adapter of the ideas of other people " , specifically Alfred , Lord Tennyson . His accusations may have been a publicity stunt to boost readership of the Broadway Journal , for which he was the editor at the time . Longfellow did not respond publicly , but , after Poe 's death , he wrote : " The harshness of his criticisms I have never attributed to anything but the irritation of a sensitive nature chafed by some indefinite sense of wrong " . 
 Margaret Fuller judged him " artificial and imitative " and lacking force . Poet Walt Whitman also considered Longfellow an imitator of European forms , though he praised his ability to reach a popular audience as " the <unk> of common themes – of the little songs of the masses " . He added , " Longfellow was no <unk> : never traveled new paths : of course never broke new paths . " Lewis Mumford said that Longfellow could be completely removed from the history of literature without much effect . Towards the end of his life , contemporaries considered him more of a children 's poet as many of his readers were children . A contemporary reviewer noted in 1848 that Longfellow was creating a " Goody two @-@ shoes kind of literature ... slipshod , sentimental stories told in the style of the nursery , beginning in nothing and ending in nothing " . A more modern critic said , " Who , except wretched schoolchildren , now reads Longfellow ? " A London critic in the London Quarterly Review , however , condemned all American poetry , saying , " with two or three exceptions , there is not a poet of mark in the whole union " but singled out Longfellow as one of those exceptions . As an editor of the Boston Evening Transcript wrote in 1846 , " Whatever the miserable envy of trashy criticism may write against Longfellow , one thing is most certain , no American poet is more read " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Longfellow was the most popular poet of his day . As a friend once wrote to him , " no other poet was so fully recognized in his lifetime " . Many of his works helped shape the American character and its legacy , particularly with the poem " Paul Revere 's Ride " . He was such an admired figure in the United States during his life that his 70th birthday in 1877 took on the air of a national holiday , with parades , speeches , and the reading of his poetry . 
 Over the years , Longfellow 's personality has become part of his reputation . He has been presented as a gentle , placid , poetic soul : an image perpetuated by his brother Samuel Longfellow , who wrote an early biography which specifically emphasized these points . As James Russell Lowell said , Longfellow had an " absolute sweetness , simplicity , and modesty " . At Longfellow 's funeral , his friend Ralph Waldo Emerson called him " a sweet and beautiful soul " . In reality , Longfellow 's life was much more difficult than was assumed . He suffered from neuralgia , which caused him constant pain , and he also had poor eyesight . He wrote to friend Charles Sumner : " I do not believe anyone can be perfectly well , who has a brain and a heart " . He had difficulty coping with the death of his second wife . Longfellow was very quiet , reserved , and private ; in later years , he was known for being unsocial and avoided leaving home . He had become one of the first American celebrities and was also popular in Europe . It was reported that 10 @,@ 000 copies of The Courtship of Miles Standish sold in London in a single day . Children adored him and , when the " spreading chestnut @-@ tree " mentioned in the poem " The Village Blacksmith " was cut down , the children of Cambridge had the tree converted into an armchair which they presented to the poet . In 1884 , Longfellow became the first non @-@ British writer for whom a commemorative sculpted bust was placed in Poet 's Corner of Westminster Abbey in London ; he remains the only American poet represented with a bust . In 1909 , a seated statue of Longfellow sculpted by William Couper was unveiled in Washington , D. C. 
 More recently , he was honored in March 2007 when the United States Postal Service issued a stamp commemorating him . A number of schools are named after him in various states as well . Neil Diamond 's 1974 hit song , " Longfellow Serenade " , is a reference to the poet . He is a protagonist in Matthew Pearl 's murder mystery The Dante Club ( 2003 ) . 
 Longfellow 's popularity rapidly declined , beginning shortly after his death and into the twentieth century as academics began to appreciate poets like Walt Whitman , Edwin Arlington Robinson , and Robert Frost . In the twentieth century , literary scholar Kermit Vanderbilt noted , " Increasingly rare is the scholar who braves ridicule to justify the art of Longfellow 's popular <unk> . " 20th @-@ century poet Lewis Putnam Turco concluded " Longfellow was minor and derivative in every way throughout his career ... nothing more than a hack imitator of the English Romantics . " 
 = = List of works = = 
 Outre @-@ Mer : A Pilgrimage Beyond the Sea ( Travelogue ) ( 1835 ) 
 Hyperion , a Romance ( 1839 ) 
 The Spanish Student . A Play in Three Acts ( 1843 ) 
 Evangeline : A Tale of Acadie ( epic poem ) ( 1847 ) 
 Kavanagh ( 1849 ) 
 The Golden Legend ( poem ) ( 1851 ) 
 The Song of Hiawatha ( epic poem ) ( 1855 ) 
 The New England Tragedies ( 1868 ) 
 The Divine Tragedy ( 1871 ) 
 Christus : A Mystery ( 1872 ) 
 Aftermath ( poem ) ( 1873 ) 
 The Arrow and the Song ( poem ) 
 Poetry collections 
 Voices of the Night ( 1839 ) 
 Ballads and Other Poems ( 1841 ) 
 Poems on Slavery ( 1842 ) 
 The Belfry of Bruges and Other Poems ( 1845 ) 
 The Seaside and the Fireside ( 1850 ) 
 The Poetical Works of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow Henry Wadsworth Longfellow ( London , 1852 ) , with illustrations by John Gilbert 
 The Courtship of Miles Standish and Other Poems ( 1858 ) 
 Tales of a Wayside Inn ( 1863 ) 
 Also included Birds of Passage ( 1863 ) 
 Household Poems ( 1865 ) 
 Flower @-@ de @-@ Luce ( 1867 ) 
 Three Books of Song ( 1872 ) 
 The Masque of Pandora and Other Poems ( 1875 ) 
 <unk> and Other Poems ( 1878 ) 
 Ultima Thule ( 1880 ) 
 In the Harbor ( 1882 ) 
 Michel Angelo : A Fragment ( incomplete ; published posthumously ) 
 Translations 
 <unk> de Don Jorge Manrique ( Translation from Spanish ) ( 1833 ) 
 Dante 's Divine Comedy ( Translation ) ( 1867 ) 
 Anthologies 
 Poets and Poetry of Europe ( Translations ) ( 1844 ) 
 The <unk> ( 1845 ) 
 Poems of Places ( 1874 ) 
 = Kid Klown in Crazy Chase = 
 Kid Klown in Crazy Chase ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> no <unk> <unk> ) is a platform video game developed and published by Kemco for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System . It was released in North America in September 1994 , Japan on October 21 , 1994 and in Europe in 1994 . The game features the Kid Klown , the player character who is tasked with rescuing the Princess Honey from the villain Black Jack . Players view gameplay from an isometric perspective as Kid Klown pursues a lit fuse in order to stop it from reaching a spade bomb . The game was re @-@ released for the Game Boy Advance and features 11 new levels , four mini @-@ games , and a multi @-@ player mode . The re @-@ release was released in Europe and North America in October 2002 , while a release in Japan was planned but ultimately canceled . It was met with mixed reception from critics , who found it to be inferior to other games of its type . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Players control the player character Kid Klown as he attempts to rescue Princess Honey from the villain Black Jack . The game 's graphics are presented in an isometric view as Kid Klown automatically moves down a path to thwart Black Jack 's plans of blowing up one of his spade bombs in each level . Various obstacles cause Kid Klown to slow down if they collide with him ; if Kid Klown does not make it to the bomb in time or if he is hit too many times , the level is lost . The game consists of 5 stages . In each stage , Kid Klown must find all 4 card suit orbs and stop the bomb to complete the level . At the end of each stage Kid Klown gets a key which in turn at the ending could be of use to unlock Honey 's <unk> if the player gets all 4 orbs in the very first turn , Kid Klown also gets a Honey heart . After the fifth stage Kid Klown must find the correct lock out of the 10 locks to unlock Honey 's Cage . 
 There are 3 endings to the game : 
 Good Ending : The player has collected all five Honey hearts and saved Honey from the cage . 
 Average Ending : The player saved Honey , but did not get all five Honey hearts . 
 Bad Ending : The player failed to save Honey . 
 In the Game Boy Advance re @-@ release , the developers added 11 new levels and four unlockable mini @-@ games , as well as a multi @-@ player mode . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Kid Klown in Crazy Chase was developed and published by Kemco for the Super NES and Game Boy Advance platforms . While the Super NES version was first released in Europe in 1994 , in North America in September 1994 , and in Japan on October 21 , 1994 , the Game Boy Advance re @-@ release was released in October 21 and 23 , 2002 in Europe and North America , respectively . The Game Boy Advance version was first revealed at E3 2001 , where Kemco commented that the current build was 60 % complete and would be released in Summer 2001 for Japan and November 2001 for North America . Both releases were delayed several times and the Japanese version ultimately canceled . Before release , it was featured at both E3 2002 and the 2002 Tokyo Game Show . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Kid Klown in Krazy Chase received mixed reception . It holds an aggregate score of 64 @.@ 17 % on Game Rankings based on three reviews . Author Andy Slaven wrote that the only problem with the game was its " strange " three @-@ quarter perspective . Nintendo Power gave it a 3 @.@ 375 out of 5 . Electronic Gaming Monthly gave it a 7 @.@ 6 out of 10 , summarizing that " this one requires a lot of skill and technique , but the various antics and animations ( especially on Kidd 's enemy ) are incredibly lifelike and make this one of the better games around . " IGN called the Super NES version overlooked and described it as a " zany " game that " boasts stellar colors and some really frantic animation " . Eurogamer 's Tom Bramwell described the video game J.J. & Jeff as a " poor man 's Plok / Kid Klown in Crazy Chase / Putty Quest / etc " . Edge compared Let 's Tap to Kid Klown due to the similar challenges found in Let 's Tap 's multi @-@ player mode . Nintendo Life 's Andrew Donaldson commented that while not a bad game , there 's no reason to play it due to a lack of levels and an abundance of games that do what it does better . 
 The Game Boy Advance version was met with similar reception . Nintendo Power gave it a 3 @.@ 2 out of 5 , lower than the Super NES version 's score . IGN noted that the Game Boy Advance version " gave both good and bad impressions about Kemco 's abilities to port SNES to the handheld " and that the multi @-@ player mode will get it its " dues " . They gave specific criticism to the early build of Crazy Chase due to the stiff controls and delayed jump . They also criticized the animation for being less fluid than the Super NES version 's . GamePro 's Fennec Fox called the Super NES game " semi @-@ obscure " , while fellow GamePro writer DJ Dinobot criticized the Game Boy Advance 's preview build for Crazy Chase for its controls were " harder to steer than a 1976 Pinto with a flat tire " . 
 = Checkers speech = 
 The Checkers speech or Fund speech was an address made on September 23 , 1952 , by the Republican candidate for vice president of the United States , California Senator Richard Nixon . Nixon had been accused of improprieties relating to a fund established by his backers to reimburse him for his political expenses . With his place on the Republican ticket in doubt , he flew to Los Angeles and delivered a half @-@ hour television address in which he defended himself , attacked his opponents , and urged the audience to contact the Republican National Committee ( RNC ) to tell it whether he should remain on the ticket . During the speech , he stated that regardless of what anyone said , he intended to keep one gift : a black @-@ and @-@ white dog who had been named Checkers by the Nixon children , thus giving the address its popular name . 
 Nixon , as he related in his address , came from a family of moderate means , and had spent much of his time after law school either in the military , campaigning for office , or serving in Congress . After his successful 1950 Senate campaign , Nixon 's backers continued to raise money to finance his political activities . These contributions went to reimburse him for travel costs , postage for political mailings which he did not have franked , and similar expenses . Such a fund was not illegal at the time , but as Nixon had made a point of attacking government corruption , it exposed him to charges he might be giving special favors to the contributors . 
 The press became aware of the fund in September 1952 , two months after Nixon 's selection as General Dwight D. Eisenhower 's running mate . Within a few days , the story grew until the controversy threatened Nixon 's place on the ticket . In an attempt to turn the tide of public opinion , Nixon broke off a whistle @-@ stop tour of the West Coast to fly to Los Angeles to make a television and radio broadcast to the nation ; the $ 75 @,@ 000 to buy the television time was raised by the RNC . The idea for the Checkers reference came from Franklin Roosevelt 's Fala speech — given eight years to the day before Nixon 's address — in which Roosevelt mocked Republican claims that he had sent a destroyer to fetch his dog , Fala , when the dog was supposedly left behind in the Aleutian Islands . 
 Nixon 's speech was seen or heard by about 60 million Americans , including the largest television audience to that time , and led to an outpouring of public support . A huge majority of the millions of telegrams and phone calls received by the RNC and other political offices supported Nixon . He was retained on the ticket , which then swept to victory weeks later in November 1952 . The Checkers speech was an early example of a politician using television to appeal directly to the electorate , but has since sometimes been mocked or denigrated . Checkers speech has come more generally to mean any emotional speech by a politician . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1950 , California Congressman Richard Nixon was elected to the Senate , defeating Representative Helen Gahagan Douglas . With the six @-@ year term secured , Nixon campaign officials discussed how to further his career . Campaign manager Murray Chotiner and campaign chairman Bernie Brennan proposed a year @-@ round campaign for the next six years , leading up to a re @-@ election bid in 1956 . Nixon 's Southern California campaign treasurer Dana Smith suggested what became known as " the Fund " , to be administered by himself , which would pay for Nixon 's political expenses . 
 As Smith wrote to one potential contributor , money donated to the Fund was to be used for : 
 Transportation and hotel expenses to cover trips to California more frequently than his mileage allowance permits . Payment of airmail and long @-@ distance phone charges above his allowance ... Preparation of material ... to send out to the people ... who have supported him ... <unk> expenses of his Christmas cards to the people who worked in his campaign or contributed financially ... paying for getting out material for radio broadcasts and television programs . ... and various other similar items . 
 As a senator , Nixon received an annual salary of $ 12 @,@ 500 ( about $ 150 @,@ 000 in 2009 dollars ) . While he received an expense allowance of over $ 75 @,@ 000 , an amount larger than that of most senators since California was one of the most populous states , the money went to pay his staff of 12 and to cover the cost of stationery , telephone service , telegrams , and other office expenses . It also paid for the one set of round @-@ trip airline tickets between Washington , D.C. , and California that Nixon was allowed to buy for himself and his family at taxpayer expense each Congressional session . 
 Nixon later characterized the attitude of his backers and aides as , " We want you to start campaigning right now for 1956 , and we think the way to do it is to have available the funds to make speeches , make trips to California , and so forth . " Contributors were drawn only from his early supporters , and contributions were limited to $ 1 @,@ 000 . Nixon was not to be informed of the names of contributors ; however , the fundraising letter stated that Nixon " will of course be very appreciative of your continuing interest " . By October 30 , 1951 , some $ 16 @,@ 000 had been raised , of which Nixon had spent approximately $ 12 @,@ 000 , principally from contributors in the Los Angeles area . The senator 's Christmas card expense for 1950 and 1951 totaled $ 4 @,@ 237 @.@ 54 . Despite the initial fundraising success , only $ 2 @,@ 200 could be raised from November 1951 to July 1952 , and an engraving bill was unpaid pending a hoped @-@ for contribution of $ 500 . 
 = = Fund crisis = = 
 In 1952 , the Republicans chose Dwight D. Eisenhower as their presidential candidate , who then selected Nixon as his running mate , while the Democrats nominated Illinois Governor Adlai Stevenson for president and Alabama Senator John Sparkman for vice president . The California delegation to the 1952 Republican National Convention , including Nixon , had been pledged to the state 's " favorite son " candidate , Governor Earl Warren , who hoped to gain the presidential nomination in a brokered convention . Warren failed in his attempt to gain the nomination , and his supporters alleged that Nixon had worked behind the scenes to nominate Eisenhower despite his pledge to support Warren , and accused him of political opportunism for accepting the vice presidential nomination . A disgruntled Warren supporter from Pasadena leaked the Fund story to several reporters . 
 Nixon had campaigned for public integrity in his time in the Senate , even calling for the resignation of his own party chairman , Guy Gabrielson , when the latter was implicated in a loan scandal . By using such " indignant rhetoric " , Nixon had " weakened his own position " when the Fund crisis erupted . 
 = = = Development of the story = = = 
 On September 14 , Nixon was asked about the Fund by reporter Peter Edson of the Newspaper Enterprise Association after the senator completed an appearance on Meet the Press . The candidate told Edson that the Fund was set up by his supporters to pay political expenses , explained that he had made no effort to find out the names of the donors , and referred Edson to Smith for further information . Edson , and other reporters , did contact Smith , who answered questions about the Fund . Three days later , Nixon 's campaign train , the " Dick Nixon Special " , left Pomona , California , on a whistle @-@ stop campaign tour of the West Coast and Rocky Mountain states . 
 Edson 's column on the 18th , which included lengthy quotes by Smith on the supposed safeguards in the Fund , was later called by Nixon , " fair and objective " . However , Leo Katcher of the New York Post interviewed Smith and wrote a story under the headline " Secret Rich Men 's Trust Fund Keeps Nixon in Style Far Beyond His Salary " and referred to the Fund donors as a " millionaires ' club " . Nixon later praised Katcher 's younger brother Edward , also a reporter , for his objectivity , but told him , " your brother Leo is a son of a bitch " . 
 When the Dick Nixon Special arrived in Bakersfield , California , that day , the candidate , still oblivious to the developing furor , made a speech promoting the Republican ticket , and backing local congressman Thomas H. <unk> . After the speech , Republican activist Keith <unk> showed Nixon the Post story , which had been picked up by United Press under the headline " Nixon Scandal Fund " . According to <unk> , the senator collapsed into his seat in shock , and needed the help of Murray Chotiner , who was again Nixon 's campaign manager , and Congressman Patrick J. <unk> ( a Nixon confidant who had succeeded him in the House of Representatives ) to return to his compartment . 
 Democratic National Committee Chairman Stephen A. Mitchell called for Nixon 's resignation from the ticket , saying that " Senator Nixon knows that [ the Fund ] is morally wrong . General Eisenhower knows that it is morally wrong . The American people know that it is morally wrong . " On the other hand , Republican Senator Karl Mundt called the story " a filthy maneuver by left @-@ wingers , fellow travelers , and former communists " . Nixon issued a written statement explaining that the fund was to pay political expenses , in lieu of charging them to the taxpayer . Newspapers printed increasingly lurid accounts of the Fund and its beneficiary . The Sacramento Bee termed Nixon " the pet protégé of a special interest group of rich southern Californians ... their front man , if not , indeed , their lobbyist . " The Pasadena Star @-@ News , meanwhile , reported that one contributor had been appealed to on the grounds that the Nixon family needed a larger home and could not afford a maid . 
 The train reached Marysville , California , on the morning of September 19 , and Nixon gave a speech from the rear platform . As the train pulled out , while he remained on the rear platform , someone in the crowd yelled , " What about the $ 16 @,@ 000 ? " ( the amount then thought to have been contributed to the Fund ) . The candidate had the train stopped , and responded that he had been told that if he continued on his political course , " crooks and communists " would smear him . He told the crowd that the Fund had saved the taxpayer money , since it paid for matters that could have been paid for through his Senate expense allowance . He promised to throw the " crooks and communists " out of Washington . 
 Eisenhower was on his own train , the Look Ahead , Neighbor , stumping through Missouri , and on the morning of the 19th , his campaign staff made him aware of the gathering storm . Eisenhower publicly called upon Nixon to release all documents relating to the Fund , somewhat to the dismay of Chotiner , who wondered , " What more does the general require than the senator 's word ? " Eisenhower aides contacted the senior Republican senator from California , William Knowland , and persuaded him to fly from Hawaii to join the Eisenhower train and be available as a potential replacement running mate . 
 By this time , Nixon campaign headquarters was receiving a flood of messages , calling on the senator to resign from the ticket . When Eisenhower 's train stopped for the candidate to make speeches , he faced protesters with signs reading " Donate Here to Help Poor Richard Nixon " . The influential Washington Post and New York Herald @-@ Tribune both called for Nixon to leave the ticket , facts which Chotiner did not tell his candidate ; Nixon learned them from a questioning reporter . Over 100 newspapers would <unk> about the Fund on the morning of September 20 , opinion running two to one against Nixon . As his train stopped in Eugene , Oregon , Nixon was met with protestors signs referencing his wife : " Pat , What Are You Going to Do With the <unk> Money ? " and " No Mink Coats for Nixon — Just Cold Cash " . He angrily responded with a phrase which would be echoed in the Checkers speech . After stating that there were no mink coats for the Nixons , the candidate said that he was " proud of the fact that Pat Nixon wears a good Republican cloth coat , and she 's going to continue to . " 
 Politicians from both parties opined on the propriety of the Fund and on what Nixon should do , most in accord with their political affiliation . Democratic presidential candidate Stevenson , though , publicly reserved judgment , leading Chotiner to suspect " that Stevenson is afraid of something here . I bet he has something to hide . " 
 = = = Idea for a speech = = = 
 On September 20 , Republican National Committee official Bob Humphreys first suggested that Nixon give a televised speech to the nation to explain his position . RNC chairman and future Postmaster General Arthur Summerfield thought well of the idea , but was concerned about the expense . That evening , Nixon conferred with his aides , who unanimously urged him not to resign from the ticket . Humphreys called Chotiner at Nixon 's hotel in Portland , Oregon that evening , and the campaign manager realized that the broadcast was the best opportunity for the candidate to make his case . Humphreys suggested Nixon appear on Meet the Press , but Chotiner rejected the suggestion , insisting that his candidate have complete control of the broadcast " without interruption by possibly unfriendly press questions " . Humphreys mentioned that Summerfield was concerned about the cost of a television broadcast , but Chotiner noted that the cost of reprinting all campaign materials to reflect a change on the ticket would be far more than that of a telecast . 
 The avalanche of editorial opinion continued the following day , Sunday , September 21 , but Eisenhower continued to withhold judgment . The general considered asking retired Supreme Court Justice Owen Roberts to evaluate the legality of the Fund , but time constraints ruled him out . Eisenhower decided to ask the Los Angeles law firm Gibson , Dunn & <unk> for a legal opinion , while asking the accounting firm Price Waterhouse to audit the Fund 's records . Nixon , meanwhile , was encouraged by a supportive telegram from his mother and discouraged by one from former Minnesota governor Harold Stassen urging him to resign from the ticket . New York Governor Thomas E. Dewey , a Nixon supporter , called to tell the senator that most Eisenhower aides favored his removal , and that if Nixon made the telecast , he should call for people to write to express their opinions . Dewey added that if the response was not strongly pro @-@ Nixon , the senator should leave the ticket . 
 Nixon finally got a call from Eisenhower at 10 pm , Pacific time , Sunday night . Eisenhower expressed a reluctance to see him leave the ticket , and felt that he should have a chance to make his case to the American people . Nixon enquired if the general would be able to make a decision on whether to keep him as the running mate immediately after the broadcast , and when Eisenhower equivocated , he angrily burst out : " General , there comes a time in matters like this when you 've either got to shit or get off the pot . " Eisenhower replied that it might take three or four days to gauge public reaction . 
 = = = Preparation and setting = = = 
 Through the night to the morning of September 22 , Eisenhower and Nixon aides arranged the speech . The RNC worked to raise the $ 75 @,@ 000 needed to buy the half hour of television time , while the Eisenhower staff secured sixty NBC stations to telecast the speech , with radio coverage from CBS and Mutual . The Nixon staff initially advocated a half hour that evening , Monday , September 22 , to follow the immensely popular I Love Lucy show , but when the candidate indicated he could not be ready that soon , settled for 6 : 30 pm Tuesday night , 9 : 30 pm in the East , following the almost equally popular Texaco Star Theater , starring Milton Berle . The campaign arranged to use the El Capitan Theatre , in Hollywood , where several variety shows were then filmed , since its lighting was superior to that of NBC Studios . Nixon told the press that he would be addressing the nation on television , but refused to take any questions about what he might say . 
 On Monday morning , Nixon flew to Los Angeles , making notes for his speech aboard the plane . He jotted down the line he had said in Eugene regarding his wife 's coat . He made notes concerning the family finances , upsetting Pat Nixon , who asked why people had to know their financial details . The senator responded that people in politics live in a fishbowl . He recalled the Fala speech , in which Franklin Roosevelt had sarcastically responded to Republican claims he had sent a destroyer to fetch his dog , Fala , and remembered the dog his children had recently received : A Texas traveling salesman named Lou Carrol had read a report that Pat Nixon said her children Tricia and Julie " longed " for a dog , and his own dog , an American Cocker Spaniel , had just had a litter . After a telegram exchange , he crated the puppy and shipped it by rail to the Nixons , and six @-@ year @-@ old Tricia Nixon named the dog " Checkers " . Nixon decided that including the anecdote evoking FDR would needle his enemies and delight his friends . 
 When the plane reached Los Angeles , Nixon secluded himself in a suite in The Ambassador Hotel , letting no one except his wife , Chotiner , and attorney and adviser William P. Rogers have any hint what he was planning . He called two professors he knew at his alma mater , Whittier College , seeking appropriate Abraham Lincoln quotes . They called back with two suggestions , one of which he used . Unwilling to have his message filtered , the candidate adamantly refused to provide the media with any advance text of his speech , convinced that it would reduce the size of his audience . Without any hard information on what would be said during the speech , rumors flew through the media . UPI reported that Nixon would resign from the ticket well before the scheduled time for the speech . On the evening of the 22nd , the media broke the story that Democratic nominee Adlai Stevenson had a similar fund , as Chotiner had predicted . The Stevenson information had been leaked by Bob Humphreys at the RNC , but as he later ruefully noted , " Nobody paid much attention to it . " 
 The morning of the 23rd , the day of the speech , brought the reports from the lawyers , who opined that it was legal for a senator to accept expense reimbursements , and from the accountants , who stated that there was no evidence of misappropriation of money . The Fund was to be dissolved , and gifts accepted since Nixon 's nomination were to be accounted for as campaign contributions . Despite the reports , Eisenhower had second thoughts about relying on the success of the speech . He told an aide to call Governor Dewey , who was to call Nixon and instruct him to close his speech with his resignation from the ticket . Believing they had resolved the situation at last , Eisenhower and his staff had a relaxed dinner and began to prepare for his own speech that evening , before 15 @,@ 000 Republican supporters in Cleveland . 
 At 4 : 30 pm Pacific Time , Nixon , Chotiner , and Rogers were discussing where the public should be told to send their responses to the speech , when a Dewey aide telephoned for Nixon . Reluctantly , suspecting the reason for the call , Chotiner brought Nixon to the phone to speak with the New York governor . Dewey told Nixon that Eisenhower 's aides were unanimous that Nixon resign , though Dewey did not agree , and that Nixon was to so state at the end of his telecast . Nixon asked what the general wanted him to do . Dewey hedged , stating that he had not spoken with the presidential candidate himself , but that the word had come from such close aides to Eisenhower that the demand had to represent the general 's view . The candidate replied that it was very late for him to change his remarks ; Dewey assured him he need not do so , but simply add at the end his resignation from the ticket and his insistence that Eisenhower accept it . The governor suggested he even announce his resignation from the Senate and his intent to run in the special election which would follow — the two @-@ time losing presidential candidate was sure Nixon would be returned with a huge majority , thus vindicating him . Nixon remained silent for some time , and when Dewey asked him what he would do , the senator told him that he did not know , and if Eisenhower 's aides wanted to find out , they could watch just like everyone else . Before slamming down the receiver , Nixon added , " And tell them I know something about politics , too ! " 
 Nixon , somewhat dazed by the conversation with Dewey , dressed for the speech and reviewed his notes . Chotiner came into the senator 's room , and told him that if he was forced off the ticket , Chotiner would call a huge press conference and reveal all the maneuvering that had led to Nixon 's departure ; Chotiner added that the resulting furor would mean nothing to either of the two men , since they would be through with politics anyway . Nixon later stated that Chotiner 's promise broke the tension and gave him a needed lift . Senator and Mrs. Nixon and his staff journeyed to the El Capitan , where they were met by a cheering group of Young Republicans on the sidewalk outside , including future White House Chief of Staff H.R. Haldeman . In Cleveland , General and Mamie Eisenhower , with the general 's aides , prepared to watch the speech on television in the manager 's office above the Cleveland Public Auditorium , where the presidential candidate was to speak . 
 = = Delivering the address = = 
 The El Capitan Theatre , at Nixon 's insistence , was entirely deserted . Press members were confined to a nearby room , where they could watch on television ; stenographers were standing by at the Ambassador to ensure an accurate transcript of Nixon 's remarks for the press , who would be facing deadlines in the East . Chotiner and Rogers would watch from behind a screen in the theatre ; Pat Nixon , wearing a dress knitted by supporters , would sit on stage a few feet from her husband . The chosen set was a " GI bedroom den " with a desk , two chairs , and bookshelves . The senator usually preferred to work from a memorized text , but would work from notes for this speech to make the talk sound more spontaneous . Nixon spent some time practicing movements for the cameramen and finally went into the dressing room with his wife for a few minutes of solitude . He told her that he did not think he could go through with it , but she reassured him . 
 = = = Introduction and office expenses = = = 
 The speech opened with Nixon sitting at the desk . He began , " My fellow Americans , I come before you tonight as a candidate for the Vice Presidency , and as a man whose honesty and integrity has ( sic ) been questioned . " The senator indicated that he would not follow the example of the Truman Administration and ignore charges , and that the best response to a smear " is to tell the truth " . 
 The candidate mentioned the $ 18 @,@ 000 Fund , and that he was accused of taking money from a group of his supporters . After stating that the Fund was wrong if he had profited from it , if it had been conducted in secret , or if the contributors received special favors , the senator continued , 
 Not one cent of the $ 18 @,@ 000 or any other money of that type ever went to me for my personal use . Every penny of it was used to pay for political expenses that I did not think should be charged to the taxpayers of the United States . It was not a secret fund . As a matter of fact , when I was on Meet the Press , some of you may have seen it last Sunday — Peter Edson came up to me after the program and he said , " Dick , what about this fund we hear about ? " And I said , " Well , there 's no secret about it . Go out and see Dana Smith , who was the administrator of the fund . " 
 Nixon stated that no contributor to the fund got any service that an ordinary constituent would not have received , and then anticipated the skeptical questions , " Well , what did you use the fund for , Senator ? Why did you have to have it ? " In response to his rhetorical question , he explained salary and office allowances for senators . He went through different ways that political expenses could be met . One way was to be rich , but the senator stated that he was not rich . Another way was to put one 's spouse on the Congressional office payroll , as , he stated , his Democratic rival , Senator John Sparkman , had done . Nixon did not feel comfortable doing that himself with so many deserving stenographers in Washington needing work , though Pat Nixon was a " wonderful stenographer " and sometimes helped out in the office as a volunteer . At this point , the camera turned from Nixon for the first time to reveal Pat Nixon sitting alongside the desk . The senator indicated he could not continue his law practice , as some Congressmen did , due to the distance to California , and in any event he felt that practicing law while a lawmaker was a conflict of interest . Thus , he indicated , he had found that the best way to pay for political expenses not within his means was to allow contributors to do so . Nixon proffered the legal and accounting opinions as proof of his statements . 
 = = = Family finances , coat and dog = = = 
 Nixon , continuing to ask skeptical rhetorical questions , indicated that some might feel that even with the opinions , he might have found some way to personally benefit . In response to his own question , the senator detailed his background and financial situation , beginning with his birth in Yorba Linda , and the family grocery store in which the Nixon boys helped out . He alluded to his work in college and law school , his service record , and stated that at the end of the war , he and Pat Nixon had $ 10 @,@ 000 in savings , all of it patriotically in government bonds . The candidate gave the dollar amounts of small inheritances that the Nixons had received from relatives , before turning to their life in Washington : 
 We lived rather modestly . For four years we lived in an apartment in <unk> , in Alexandria , Virginia . The rent was $ 80 a month . And we saved for the time that we could buy a house . Now , that was what we took in . What did we do with this money ? What do we have today to show for it ? This will surprise you , because it is so little , I suppose , as standards generally go , of people in public life . 
 As the senator discussed their finances , the telecast again showed Pat Nixon , <unk> watching her husband . Pat Nixon later stated that her rapt gaze was because she did not know exactly what he would say , and wanted to hear . Nixon detailed their assets and liabilities : the mortgaged home in Washington ; the similarly mortgaged home in California , then occupied by his parents . The loans from his parents and from Riggs Bank . The borrowed @-@ against life insurance policy on the senator ; no insurance on his wife or children . The two @-@ year @-@ old Oldsmobile and the family furniture , and that he and his wife owned no stocks or bonds . 
 Well , that 's about it . That 's what we have and that 's what we owe . It isn 't very much but Pat and I have the satisfaction that every dime that we 've got is honestly ours . I should say this — that Pat doesn 't have a mink coat . But she does have a respectable Republican cloth coat . And I always tell her that she 'd look good in anything . 
 While the senator made these points , Murray Chotiner " let out shouts of glee " in his screened booth . As Chotiner exulted , Nixon moved ahead with the lines " that would give the speech its name , make it famous , and notorious " : 
 One other thing I probably should tell you because if we don 't they 'll probably be saying this about me too , we did get something — a gift — after the election . A man down in Texas heard Pat on the radio mention the fact that our two youngsters would like to have a dog . And , believe it or not , the day before we left on this campaign trip we got a message from Union Station in Baltimore saying they had a package for us . We went down to get it . You know what it was ? 
 It was a little cocker spaniel dog in a crate that he 'd sent all the way from Texas . Black and white spotted . And our little girl — Tricia , the 6 @-@ year @-@ old — named it Checkers . And you know , the kids , like all kids , love the dog and I just want to say this right now , that regardless of what they say about it , we 're gonna keep it . 
 Nixon expressed pleasure that Stevenson , whom he termed a man who inherited wealth from his father , could run for president . But people " of modest means " must also get a chance , and the candidate recited the quotation attributed to Lincoln : " Remember Abraham Lincoln , you remember what he said : ' God must have loved the common people — He made so many of them . ' " 
 = = = Attack on Democrats ; request for public to write = = = 
 Nixon then called for Stevenson to give a full accounting of his own fund , and a full list of the donors . He also called for Senator Sparkman , who , as Nixon repeated , had put his wife on the payroll , to state fully any outside income he might have had . " Because , folks , remember , a man that 's to be President of the United States , a man that 's to be Vice President of the United States must have the confidence of all the people . And that 's why I 'm doing what I 'm doing , and that 's why I suggest that Mr. Stevenson and Mr. Sparkman since they are under attack should do what I am doing . " As the senator made this point , Eisenhower , sitting in the Cleveland office , slammed his pencil down , realizing that he would not be allowed to be the only major party candidate whose finances would evade scrutiny . Eisenhower had benefited from a favorable Act of Congress allowing the income from his bestselling memoirs to be considered capital gains . 
 Nixon warned that other smears would be made against him , and many of the same commentators who were attacking him now had also attacked him for his role in the Alger Hiss case , for which he made no apologies . He then rose to his feet , came out from behind the desk , and continued : 
 And as far as this is concerned , I intend to continue the fight . Why do I feel so deeply ? Why do I feel that in spite of the smears , the misunderstandings , the necessity for a man to come up here and bare his soul as I have ? Why is it necessary for me to continue this fight ? And I want to tell you why . Because , you see , I love my country . And I think my country is in danger . And I think that the only man that can save America at this time is the man that 's running for President on my ticket — Dwight Eisenhower . 
 You say , " Why do I think it 's in danger ? " and I say look at the record . Seven years of the Truman @-@ Acheson Administration and what 's happened ? Six hundred million people lost to the Communists , and a war in Korea in which we have lost 117 @,@ 000 American casualties . 
 The senator alleged that Stevenson had downplayed the threat of communism , and was thus unfit to be president . He affirmed that Eisenhower was the only man fit to lead the country in ridding the government of corruption and communism . Reading parts of a letter from the wife of a serviceman fighting in Korea , who , despite her financial woes , had scraped together $ 10 to donate to the campaign , Nixon promised that he would never cash that check . 
 With less than three minutes left in the allotted time , Nixon finally addressed the question : Would he stay or would he go ? He indicated that he did not think he should go . " Let me say this : I don 't believe that I ought to quit because I 'm not a quitter . And , incidentally , Pat 's not a quitter . After all , her name was Patricia Ryan and she was born on St. Patrick 's Day , and you know the Irish never quit . " 
 Seizing on the fact that the Republican National Convention had routinely given the RNC the power to fill vacancies on the ticket , Nixon evaded Eisenhower 's power as the general again slammed his pencil down , this time breaking it : 
 I am submitting to the Republican National Committee tonight through this television broadcast the decision which it is theirs to make . Let them decide whether my position on the ticket will help or hurt . And I am going to ask you to help them decide . Wire and write the Republican National Committee whether you think I should stay on or whether I should get off . And whatever their decision is , I will abide by it . 
 But just let me say this last word . Regardless of what happens I 'm going to continue this fight . I 'm going to campaign up and down America until we drive the crooks and the Communists and those that defend them out of Washington . 
 Advancing towards the camera , the candidate completed the speech by praising Eisenhower , " He 's a great man . And a vote for Eisenhower is a vote for what 's good for America . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Candidates and public = = = 
 Nixon was initially convinced that the speech was a failure . Despite the congratulations of Rogers and Chotiner , and the fact that one of the cameramen had tears running down his face , he reproved himself for not mentioning the address of the Republican National Committee . Though the Young Republicans continued their applause as the Nixon party left the theatre , the candidate fixed on an Irish setter running alongside his car as it pulled away from the curb . " Well , we made a hit in the dog world anyway . " Despite the senator 's despair , his wife was convinced that her husband had vindicated himself . Over sixty million Americans had watched or listened to the speech , including the largest television audience up to that point . 
 Nixon had left the Ambassador with the lobby quiet ; he returned to a mob scene , and the candidate was soon surrounded by well @-@ wishers congratulating him . The party was able to get through to his suite , and after a few minutes of tense quiet , calls and telegrams began to pour in " from everywhere " praising the speech and urging him to remain on the ticket — but no word came from Eisenhower in Cleveland . 
 In Cleveland , as the speech concluded , General Eisenhower turned to RNC Chairman Summerfield , " Well , Arthur , you sure got your money 's worth . " Mamie Eisenhower was in tears , and the general told her that Nixon was a completely honest man . The 15 @,@ 000 supporters waiting for Eisenhower to speak had heard the Checkers speech over the hall 's public address system , and when Congressman George H. Bender took the microphone and asked the crowd , " Are you in favor of Nixon ? " , pandemonium ensued . As the crowd below chanted , " We want Nixon ! " , Eisenhower quickly revised his speech . 
 Both Eisenhower 's speech to the excited crowd and telegram to his running mate were noncommittal . The general applauded his running mate for his speech , but stated that the two had to meet face to face before a final decision could be made . While Eisenhower affirmed that the RNC had the power to elect a replacement candidate , Eisenhower indicated that the committee would , most likely , be guided by his wishes . Eisenhower asked Nixon to meet with him in person in Wheeling , West Virginia , where the general 's campaign was next scheduled to go . Eisenhower 's telegram was delayed in transmission and lost among the flood being sent to Nixon 's suite , and the latter learned of his running mate 's position from a wire service report . 
 When he heard of Eisenhower 's posture , Nixon 's happiness at what he had finally been convinced was a tour de force turned to fury , and he stated that if the speech did not satisfy the general , nothing he could do would . He called in his secretary , Rose Mary Woods , and dictated a telegram to the RNC resigning from the ticket . As Woods left the room with her notes , Chotiner stopped her , took the sheet , and ripped it up . While Chotiner understood Nixon 's rage , he felt that the resignation was premature . The campaign manager urged Nixon simply to allow the public wave of support to pressure Eisenhower . He suggested that instead of going to Wheeling as Eisenhower had requested , that they resume the train tour in Missoula , Montana . Nixon sent Eisenhower a curt acknowledgment of his telegram , and a suggestion that they meet the following week in Washington , D.C. Chotiner then called Summerfield , telling him that Nixon felt he had been abused enough , and would not meet with Eisenhower until Summerfield was able to promise , on his word of honor , that the senator would be confirmed as nominee at that meeting . " Dick is not going to be placed in the position of a little boy going somewhere to beg for forgiveness . " 
 Just before the Nixon party left for the airport , Nixon friend and journalist Bert Andrews managed to reach him by phone . Andrews told the senator that he should go to Wheeling ; that public reaction had already foreordained the outcome . He advised Nixon that he should accede to Eisenhower 's desire to make the inevitable decision in his own way , advice Nixon acknowledged " had the ring of truth " . Nonetheless , the Nixon party flew to Missoula . 
 By this time , the first wave of what would eventually be more than four million letters , telegrams , postcards , and phone calls had flooded into RNC headquarters and other political offices . While a later study found that only about 7 percent of these communications addressed any substantive issue , they still ran 75 to one in favor of Nixon . Nixon skeptics joined in ; both Stassen and Dewey sent congratulatory telegrams . Many letters included contributions to help pay for the cost of the broadcast ; the RNC eventually recouped four @-@ fifths of the $ 75 @,@ 000 cost . Newspaper switchboards were jammed with calls from people seeking the RNC 's address , while Western Union was caught off guard by Nixon 's request that listeners wire the RNC , and had no extra help on hand . Checkers herself received enough dog food to last a year , and hundreds of collars , leashes , and toys . 
 Politicians generally reacted along party lines , with Senator Mundt stating , " Nixon 's speech is complete vindication against one of the most vicious smears in American history . " Democratic Senator Clinton Anderson of New Mexico stated , " I wish he had talked about the 18 @,@ 000 bucks — not the puppy dog ... Suppose someone sets up a fund to buy my meals . I could say I didn 't get one red cent of the money . " 
 On the morning of September 24 , Summerfield and Humphreys called Nixon at his Missoula hotel . After securing his agreement to fly to Wheeling if Eisenhower agreed to Chotiner 's terms , the two reached Eisenhower and campaign leader New Hampshire Governor Sherman Adams in Portsmouth , Ohio , en route to Wheeling , and briefed them on the conversation with Nixon and on the flood of communications from the public . The general and governor agreed that Nixon could come to Wheeling with the assurance he would remain on the ticket . After making speeches in Missoula and at a stop in Denver , and after Eisenhower made his own speech announcing that his running mate had been the victim of an " attempted smear " , Nixon arrived in Wheeling late in the day on the 24th . Eisenhower came to the airport to meet the plane , and hurried up the steps to greet the Nixons when the door was opened . 
 The candidates waved at the crowd of 3 @,@ 000 which had come to meet the plane , and rode together , with Nixon in place of honor , to a rally at City Island Stadium as Eisenhower chatted to Nixon as if the crisis had never occurred . At the stadium , Eisenhower introduced Nixon as a " colleague " who had been subject to " a vicious and unprincipled attack " but who had " vindicated himself " and who " stood higher than ever before " . The presidential candidate finished by reading two telegrams , one from Nixon 's mother assuring the general of her son 's integrity , and the second from Summerfield stating that the RNC had voted unanimously to retain Nixon on the ticket . Nixon then spoke , telling the crowd that this was one of two moments when he was most proud to be an American ; the other had been at the victory parade in New York in 1945 , when he had seen General Eisenhower go by . He called the Wheeling rally " the greatest moment of my life " . 
 = = = Media reaction = = = 
 Editorial reaction to the address was divided . The New York Times , which had criticized Nixon , and had even run stories with claims that he was under criminal investigation for the Fund , praised Nixon 's " composure and assurance " . The New York Journal American gushed , " He was in our opinion , simply magnificent . We know of no other way to say it . " The Pittsburgh Press called the address " an extraordinary speech " . The Mobile Register stated that the Fund crisis " confronted [ Nixon ] with an unsought opportunity which he made the most of . " 
 However , some newspapers disagreed . The Baltimore Sun noted that Nixon " did not deal in any way with the underlying question of propriety " , while the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch called the address " a carefully contrived soap opera " . Columnist Walter Lippmann called the wave of support for Nixon " disturbing ... with all the magnification of modern electronics , simply mob law " ; discussing the speech with a dinner guest , he said , " That must be the most demeaning experience my country has ever had to bear . " Columnist Thomas Stokes criticized Eisenhower for equivocating on the question of his running mate until " the young man himself — the accused — had to step in and take over . And how he took over ! " Through his presidency , Eisenhower would continue to be accused of being indecisive . 
 Nixon refused to answer further questions about the Fund , and attention turned to Stevenson 's fund , especially as its details became clear . Governor Stevenson 's fund , which proved to total $ 146 @,@ 000 , had been used for such expenditures as Christmas gifts to reporters , dues for private clubs , and to hire an orchestra for a dance his son was hosting . Taking a leaf from Nixon 's book , the Democrats refused to answer questions about the governor 's fund . Both parties were eager to bury the matter , and the story died . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 With The New York Times finding that Nixon 's performance had given the Republican ticket " a shot in the arm " , Eisenhower and Nixon swept to victory in November , with the Republicans narrowly taking both Houses of Congress . According to Nixon biographer Conrad Black , the speech earned Nixon supporters throughout Middle America which he would keep through the rest of his life , and who would continue to defend him after his death . Critics , however , would later see the address as the " ultimate expression " of the controversial politician 's " phoniness . " Nixon biographer Stephen Ambrose stated that part of the audience considered the address " one of the most sickening , disgusting , maudlin performances ever experienced . " In their analysis of the speech published just before Nixon 's election as president in 1968 , Robert S. Cathcart and Edward A. Schwarz suggested that while Nixon " met the accusation head @-@ on and accomplished his immediate goals successfully , he ultimately created an image which led to a decline in his political career . " 
 The address was an unprecedented demonstration of the power of television to galvanize large segments of the American people to act in a political campaign . However , the onslaught of negative media attention leading up to the address " left its scars " on Nixon , and the future president never returned to the easy relationship with the press that he had enjoyed during his congressional career . His oft @-@ stated view that the media was the enemy came to play a part in his downfall . 
 Nixon celebrated the anniversary of the speech each year . The future president disliked the fact that the address soon became popularly known as the " Checkers speech . " In his 1962 book , Six Crises ( the Fund crisis being one of the six ) , he would object to the term , " as though the mention of my dog was the only thing that saved my political career . " Nixon preferred to call the address " the Fund speech , " and made it required reading for his speechwriters . As time passed , the Checkers speech became denigrated , and Nixon biographer Earl Mazo suggested that much of the attitude of " I don 't like Nixon , but I don 't know why , " which contributed to the failure of his 1960 presidential run , can be traced to the Checkers speech . Other commentators suggested that had he not made the Checkers speech , Nixon might have won in 1960 . Nixon retorted that without the Checkers speech , he would not have been around to run in 1960 . 
 Checkers died in 1964 and was buried in Wantagh , New York , at Long Island 's <unk> @-@ A @-@ Wee Pet Cemetery . William Safire has described the adoption of " Checkers speech " as an idiom , used to refer to any emotionally charged speech by a politician . 
 Despite the many criticisms of the speech in later years , Hal <unk> ( who wrote a book about Nixon 's rhetoric ) suggests that Nixon succeeded at the time because of his use of narrative , spinning a story which resonated with the public : 
 [ The American people ] could identify with the materials of the story — the low @-@ cost apartment , the struggle with the mortgage payment , the parental loans , the lack of life insurance on the wife and children , and even the wife 's cloth coat . By reputation , Nixon was a political fighter and also a family man , and the public admired the father who would not give back the family dog " regardless of what they said about it . " 
 = SMS Mainz = 
 SMS Mainz was a Kolberg class light cruiser of the German Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) during the First World War . She had three sister ships , SMS Kolberg , Cöln , and Augsburg . She was built by the AG Vulcan shipyard in Stettin ; her hull was laid down in 1908 and she was launched in January 1909 . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet in October 1909 . She was armed with a main battery of twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 45 guns and had a top speed of 25 @.@ 5 kn ( 47 @.@ 2 km / h ; 29 @.@ 3 mph ) . 
 After her commissioning , she served with the II Scouting Group , part of the reconnaissance forces of the High Seas Fleet . She was assigned to patrols off the island of Heligoland at the outbreak of World War I in early August 1914 . At the Battle of Heligoland Bight on 28 August 1914 , the German patrol forces were attacked by superior British forces , including five battlecruisers and several light cruisers . Mainz was initially stationed in support of the forces on the patrol line . She attempted to reinforce the beleaguered German forces , and encountered a much stronger force of British cruisers and destroyers . They scored several damaging hits with gunfire and a torpedo that disabled Mainz and prompted her commander to abandon ship . The British rescued 348 men from the crew before the ship rolled over and sank . Eighty @-@ nine men were killed in the battle , including her commanding officer . 
 = = Design = = 
 Mainz was ordered under the contract name Ersatz Jagd and was laid down in 1907 at the AG Vulcan shipyard in Stettin . She was launched on 23 January 1909 and christened by the mayor of Mainz , Karl Emil <unk> , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 1 October 1909 . The ship was 130 @.@ 5 meters ( 428 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 14 m ( 46 ft ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 58 m ( 18 @.@ 3 ft ) forward . She displaced 4 @,@ 915 t ( 4 @,@ 837 long tons ; 5 @,@ 418 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two sets of AEG @-@ Curtiss steam turbines driving two 3 @.@ 45 @-@ meter ( 11 @.@ 3 ft ) propellers . They were designed to give 19 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 14 @,@ 000 kW ) . These were powered by fifteen coal @-@ fired Marine water @-@ tube boilers . These gave the ship a top speed of 26 knots ( 48 km / h ; 30 mph ) . Mainz carried 1 @,@ 010 t ( 990 long tons ; 1 @,@ 110 short tons ) of coal that gave her a range of approximately 3 @,@ 630 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 720 km ; 4 @,@ 180 mi ) at 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) . Mainz had a crew of eighteen officers and 349 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 45 guns in single pedestal mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , eight were located amidships , four on either side , and two were side by side aft . She also carried four 5 @.@ 2 cm SK L / 55 anti @-@ aircraft guns . She was also equipped with a pair of 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes submerged in the hull . She could also carry 100 mines . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the deck was covered with up to 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick armor plate . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After her commissioning in 1909 , Mainz served with the reconnaissance forces of the German fleet . Her first commander was Fregattenkapitän ( commander ) Friedrich <unk> , the uncle of Ernst Lindemann ; he held the command until January 1910 . She was assigned to the II Scouting Group , which screened for the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group . After the outbreak of World War I at the beginning of August 1914 , she and several other cruisers were tasked with patrol duties in the Heligoland Bight . The cruisers were divided with the torpedo boat flotillas , and assigned to rotate through nightly patrols into the North Sea . As part of this operation , Mainz conducted a patrol on the night of 16 August with the VIII Torpedo @-@ boat Flotilla , without incident . 
 At the same time , British submarines began reconnoitering the German patrol lines . On 23 August , several British commanders submitted a plan to attack the patrol line with the light cruisers and destroyers of the Harwich Force , commanded by Commodore Reginald Tyrwhitt . These ships would be supported by submarines and Vice Admiral David Beatty 's battlecruisers and associated light forces . The plan was approved and set for 28 August . The British forces began to leave port on the evening of 26 August , beginning with the submarines assigned to the operation . Most of the surface forces went to sea early on the following morning ; the 7th Cruiser Squadron , which had been added to provide further support to the Harwich Force , left port later in the day . 
 On the morning of 28 August , Mainz was at anchor in the mouth of the Ems ; her sister Cöln , the flagship of Rear Admiral Leberecht Maass was re @-@ coaling in Wilhelmshaven , Ariadne lay in the entrance to the Weser . These three cruisers were assigned to support the cruisers Stettin and Frauenlob , and the aviso Hela , which were stationed on the patrol line that morning . At 07 : 57 , the Harwich Force encountered the outer German torpedo boats , which fled back to the German cruisers . In the ensuing Battle of Heligoland Bight , Stettin engaged the British force first , and was quickly reinforced by Frauenlob . At 09 : 47 , Mainz was ordered to steam out behind the British to cut off their line of retreat . She got under way by 10 : 00 , and operated in conjunction with a floatplane used for reconnaissance . 
 At around 12 : 30 , Mainz encountered the British cruiser Arethusa and several destroyers . The ships engaged each other for the next forty @-@ five minutes . Fifteen minutes into the engagement , three British cruisers appeared ; Mainz broke off the engagement and attempted to escape from the superior British forces . The pursuing British cruisers scored several hits , but by 12 : 55 , Mainz had escaped under cover of a dense smoke screen . Another British cruiser , Fearless , and six destroyers , appeared on Mainz 's port side , however , and attacked the fleeing German ship . Mainz quickly scored hits on the destroyers Laurel , Liberty and Laertes ; Laurel was damaged and forced to withdraw and Laertes was disabled by a salvo that hit her engine room . 
 A shell from one of the British cruisers hit Mainz at around 13 : 00 , which jammed her rudder at ten degrees to starboard . Her crew shut off the port engine in an attempt to correct the ship 's course , but she continued to turn to starboard . By 13 : 20 , the majority of the ship 's guns had been disabled and the ship 's superstructure had been shot to pieces . Her center and aft funnel collapsed after suffering several hits . A torpedo from the destroyer Lydiard then hit the ship on her port side , amidships ; this prompted the ship 's commander to order the crew to abandon the stricken cruiser . He then left the conning tower with the navigation officer , both of whom were immediately killed by a shell hit . The ship 's communication system was out of service , and so the order to abandon ship did not reach the entire crew . The ship 's executive officer then reached the bridge , and reiterated the order to abandon the crippled ship at 13 : 35 . 
 Mainz was by now completely disabled . Her engines were stopped and her guns had ceased firing . Shortly before 14 : 00 , Lurcher came alongside and took off the wounded German sailors . At 14 : 10 , Mainz rolled over to port and quickly sank at the position 53 ° 58 ' N and 6 ° 42 ' E ; the survivors now in the water gave three cheers for their ship . The British rescued 348 survivors ; 89 men , including the ship 's commander , were killed in the battle . Among the survivors was Oberleutnant zur See ( Sub @-@ Lieutenant ) Wolfgang von Tirpitz , the son of Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz , the architect of the German fleet . Winston Churchill , then the First Lord of the Admiralty , informed Tirpitz via the US embassy in Berlin that his son survived the battle . In the course of the engagement , the British sank two more German cruisers : Mainz 's sister Cöln and Ariadne , with minimal losses to themselves . 
 = = Wreck = = 
 In August 2015 , members of the Dutch sport @-@ diving club <unk> <unk> dove on the wreck of the Mainz and retrieved a variety of prosaic artifacts , including a sextant and the engine telegraph . Their actions provoked criticism from German sources , who noted that the wreck was a war grave containing the remains of 89 crew members and thus should not be disturbed . The German Federal Police were investigating the incident . 
 = Zero Escape : Virtue 's Last Reward = 
 Zero Escape : Virtue 's Last Reward is a visual novel adventure game developed by Chunsoft . Released in 2012 for the Nintendo 3DS and PlayStation Vita , it is the second installment in the Zero Escape series , and the sequel to the 2009 game Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors . 
 The story follows the player character Sigma , a man who is abducted and forced along with eight other individuals to play the Nonary Game , which puts its participants in a life @-@ or @-@ death situation . As the story progresses , the characters begin to unravel the secrets behind the Nonary Game , as well as its true purpose . The gameplay alternates between two types of sections : Escape sections , where the player completes puzzles in escape @-@ the @-@ room scenarios ; and Novel sections , where the player reads the game 's narrative and makes decisions that influence the story , making it branch into twenty @-@ four different endings . 
 Development for the game began as a result of Nine Hours , Nine Person , Nine Doors 's unexpected commercial success in North America . Game director Kotaro Uchikoshi wrote the script , which was then localized by Aksys Games and Rising Star Games for North America and Europe respectively . It received positive reviews from critics , who praised the story and characters , but were divided in their opinions of the Escape sections . Virtue 's Last Reward was a <unk> failure in Japan , where it sold less than 16 @,@ 000 copies by year 's end ; this led to the temporary cancellation of its sequel . Development on the sequel was eventually resumed , and Zero Time Dilemma was released in 2016 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Virtue 's Last Reward is a visual novel adventure game in which the player assumes the role of a man named Sigma . The gameplay is divided into two types of sections : Novel and Escape . In Novel sections , the player progresses through the storyline and converses with non @-@ playable characters . These sections require little interaction from the player other than reading the dialogue and other text that appears on the screen . During Novel sections , the player will sometimes be presented with decision options that affect the course of the game . One recurring decision option is a prisoner 's dilemma type of choice where the player must choose to " ally " or " betray " the character or pair of characters they are pitted against , with different results depending on what choices the two parties picked . 
 In between Novel sections are Escape sections , which occur when the player finds themselves in a room from which they need to find a means of escape . These are presented from a first @-@ person perspective , with the player being able to move between different predetermined positions in each room . To escape , the player is tasked with finding various items and solving puzzles , reminiscent of escape @-@ the @-@ room games . At some points , the player may need to combine objects with each other to create the necessary tool to complete a puzzle . The puzzles include various brain teasers , such as Lights Out and sliding puzzles . In each Escape room , a safe can be found , which can be opened with two passwords . One of these passwords gives the player the key needed to escape from the room , while the other grants access to a hidden folder that provides the player with additional backstory or other supplementary information . The player receives hints to the puzzle solutions from the game 's characters ; additional and more direct hints are received if the player sets the puzzle 's difficulty level from " hard " to " easy " . 
 The player is given access to a flowchart that allows them to immediately revisit or " jump " to any previously completed Novel or Escape section without replaying the game from the beginning . This allows the player to transition to an earlier branching point in the story and choose a different option that causes the story to progress in another direction . For example , the player can jump to a previous decision and ally with their opponent instead of betraying them , and vice versa . While there are 24 endings available , many endings are inaccessible initially and must be unlocked by experiencing events or learning information in other plotlines . For example , if a particular plotline cannot progress because a required password is unknown , the player must jump to other plotlines and find it before returning to the original one . The player is thus required to jump often between the alternate plotlines in order to advance the game towards the ultimate ending . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Characters and setting = = = 
 Similar to its predecessor , Virtue 's Last Reward features nine main characters who are kidnapped by an unknown individual called Zero . The player @-@ controlled Sigma is joined by Phi , a girl with a " no @-@ nonsense attitude " ; Dio , a rude and insensitive man ; Tenmyouji , an elderly man ; Quark , an energetic child ; Luna , a kind and quiet woman ; Clover , an unpredictable girl who also appeared in Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors ; Alice , a powerful and focused woman ; and K , a man who wears an irremovable , full @-@ body suit of armor . Along with the nine participants , Zero III , an artificial intelligence who appears in the form of a CGI rabbit , controls the Nonary Game . Zero III is nicknamed " Zero Jr . " by the participants to distinguish the entity from the human Zero , who is in turn nicknamed " Zero Sr. " Aside from Sigma , each character is fully voice acted in both Japanese and English . 
 The game is set in an abandoned warehouse @-@ like facility , containing a number of different rooms filled with puzzles , where Zero forces the characters to participate in the Nonary Game . The characters are affixed with bracelets that display a point value that is initially set at three . During the game they participate in rounds of the Ambidex Game , in which they have to choose to " ally " or " betray " the other characters . The choices made affect the players ' bracelet points : if two opponents both choose " ally " , each individual gains two points ; if the two opponents both choose " betray " , no change occurs ; and if one opponent chooses " betray " while the other chooses " ally " , the opponent who chose " betray " gains three points while the other opponent loses two points . Participants who gain at least nine points are able to escape , while those who reach zero points are executed . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 In 2028 , Sigma is abducted and placed inside an elevator with Phi . Zero III appears on a monitor and informs them that they are participating in the Nonary Game and that they must escape the elevator before it falls . Upon escaping , they find themselves in a warehouse @-@ like facility with Dio , Quark , Tenmyouji , Luna , Alice , K , and Clover . Zero III informs the group that nine individual bracelet points are necessary to escape the facility , and points can only be earned by participating in the Ambidex Game . 
 At this point , the story begins branching into different timelines that can be experienced in any order , depending on the choices made by the player . While completing the first set of puzzle rooms , the participants learn of a pandemic caused by Radical @-@ 6 , a virus that slows down its victims ' cognition and drives them to suicide . Although dependent on a given timeline , the characters either discover the murdered body of an old woman or antimatter bombs . Additionally , the pasts of the other players are explored : Luna is a humanoid robot , tasked with maintaining the Nonary Game ; Tenmyouji willingly joined the game , together with his adopted grandson Quark , after being promised a chance to find a certain woman ; Alice and Clover are Department of Defense secret agents tasked with stopping the religious cult Free the Soul ; and Dio is a member of Free the Soul . Dio had murdered the old woman and took her place in the game so as to plant the bombs . In the timeline leading to the game 's ultimate ending , Sigma defuses the bombs , while Dio is restrained and incapacitated . 
 The remaining participants proceed to the next set of puzzle rooms . As Sigma , Phi , and Tenmyouji complete their room , they uncover a holographic message of the old woman , the same woman Tenmyouji has been looking for , Akane Kurashiki . Akane and Zero Sr. had developed the AB project , a project that encompassed the Nonary Game and the Ambidex Game , to train Sigma and Phi to transport their consciousnesses through time . This occurs shortly thereafter , and this time , they subdue Dio before he can kill Akane . Akane explains that the game 's dangerous elements were necessary to speed up one 's brain to transport one 's consciousness through time , and each participant was infected with Radical @-@ 6 to amplify this increase . The Nonary Game was designed so Sigma and Phi could experience multiple timelines and retain what they learn in each one . Sigma and Phi 's consciousnesses are then returned to the present , where they find everyone has cooperated to acquire enough points to escape . 
 The group leaves the facility and emerges in a desert landscape on the Moon . The year is 2074 and most of humanity was killed by Radical @-@ 6 after it was unleashed by Free the Soul from a Mars mission test site in 2028 . They re @-@ enter the facility and discover a cold sleep pod . K explains that he grew up in the facility with Zero Sr. and Akane , and each person was brought to the facility to recreate the events that the two had previously experienced . Clover , Alice , and Phi were abducted in 2028 and placed in cold sleep until the Nonary Game began . The pod opens to reveal a clone of Sigma , and then K reveals he is actually Akane in disguise . Depending on whether or not Dio murdered Akane in a given timeline , either Sigma 's clone or Akane was occupying K 's armor , a quantum superposition . 
 Akane explains that Sigma , after his abduction in 2028 , had his consciousness transported into his elder self 's body in 2074 , while his elder self 's consciousness was transported into the younger Sigma 's body in 2028 . This was the goal of the AB project , to make it possible for the elder Sigma to prevent the Radical @-@ 6 outbreak in 2028 with his future knowledge ; Dio sought to prevent this goal . Akane makes Phi and Sigma 's consciousnesses jump to 2029 , after the outbreak . Sigma , as Zero Sr. , spends the next 45 years developing the AB project together with Akane , while Phi is kept in cold sleep . Sigma also creates a clone of himself as a spare , in case his own body gets damaged . When they again arrive at 2074 , Sigma and Phi jump back to 2028 to infiltrate the Mars mission test site . 
 = = Development = = 
 Virtue 's Last Reward was developed by Chunsoft and directed by Kotaro Uchikoshi , who had previously led the production of Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors . While his original intention was to make Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors a stand @-@ alone title , its unexpected commercial success in North America prompted him to continue the series . In order to cut down on costs , Uchikoshi asked Chunsoft if he could develop Virtue 's Last Reward and its eventual sequel simultaneously , as both games would use the same engine and digital assets ; Chunsoft agreed to his proposal , and green @-@ lit production . 
 Development of Virtue 's Last Reward began on the Nintendo DS ; however , during the early stages of production , the Nintendo 3DS and PlayStation Vita were announced . The development team at Chunsoft wanted to utilize the three @-@ dimensional ( 3D ) features of the newer systems , and thus , moved production of the game to the Nintendo 3DS and PlayStation Vita . As neither system had been released yet , the team was under the assumption that the 3D features would require 3D character models . Uchikoshi remarked that designing 3D character models proved to be a challenge for Chunsoft due to company 's inexperience with 3D effects . 
 = = = Story and themes = = = 
 Virtue 's Last Reward marked a tonal shift from the suspense present within Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors , to a more relaxed and exploration @-@ heavy atmosphere . Uchikoshi stated that the results of a Japanese survey indicated that players who did not purchase Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors thought it looked scary ; he " didn 't have a choice but to tone it down " for Virtue 's Last Reward as directed by Chunsoft . Uchikoshi worked alongside a sub @-@ writer , who helped to identify problems present within the story . 
 When writing the script , Uchikoshi began by writing a basic story . One of the new additions to the story was the Ambidex Game , which was intended to have philosophical significance , as the logical decision made in it hurts the characters both on a group level and on a personal one . He then designed the characters he felt were necessary to the story . He aimed to create a balanced cast of supporting characters , in terms of genders , personalities , and ages represented . While designing the characters ' personalities , he used the Enneagram of Personality as a reference . It was important to him to create a mystery behind them , to make players curious about who the characters are and what their pasts were like . Another important element was the use of misdirection : By deliberately making certain characters seem like bad people , he would get players to focus on them more , making it more difficult for them to see who the " real bad guy " is . He decided to not give Sigma a strong personality , in order to make it easier for players to empathize with him . Because the Moon was one of the game 's major themes , the character Zero III appears as a rabbit - a reference to the moon rabbit in Japanese folklore . 
 Some changes were made to the initial plot of Virtue 's Last Reward . During one scene , Dio handcuffs Clover and Tenmyouji to a sink , which prevents them from participation in the Nonary Game ( the punishment for not participating is death ) . Originally , Dio was meant to " do something even more messed up " to Clover , but the president of Chunsoft opposed this scene for " ethical reasons " , after which it was changed . In addition , the game originally ended with humanity dying out , at which point a character would go back in time and change the past so that the future would be saved . Uchikoshi later felt this ending was inappropriate following the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami , so it was changed to be more positive . Uchikoshi also considered including several scientific and philosophical theories / experiments that eventually were left out . These scrapped ideas included Monty Hall problem ( a brain teaser based on probability ) and <unk> delusion ( a mental disorder in which someone believes that a person they know has been replaced with an identical @-@ looking impostor ) . 
 = = = Localization = = = 
 As with Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors , Aksys Games localized Virtue 's Last Reward for its North American release . Nobara Nakayama translated the game 's text from Japanese to English , which was then localized by editor Ben Bateman . Bateman later stated that overcoming various translation issues was one of the hardest aspects of editing Virtue 's Last Reward . Although Uchikoshi had written the game with the English language audience in mind , which avoided several plot @-@ related translation problems , a few jokes did not translate properly and had to be changed during localization . Additionally , there were two characters who " talked like animals " in the Japanese version of the game : Zero III , who added " <unk> " to the end of its sentences , which is the first half of <unk> ( the Japanese word for " rabbit " ) ; and Sigma , who added " <unk> " ( the Japanese onomatopoeia for the sound cats make ) to the end of his sentences whenever he talked about cats . Bateman solved this by writing rabbit and cat themed puns . Another challenge for Bateman was keeping track of the story moments from each branching path . It was important to know whether information regarding each character had been revealed yet to the player , as this would ultimately affect the word choice and attitude of each line of dialogue . 
 For voice casting , the localization team was sent a list of people who might fit the roles , along with short reels for each actor . Once the actors had been chosen , Bateman wrote the voice direction , which were short blurbs the voice actors saw next to the line they were supposed to say , so they would know how to perform it . While the North American version of the game allows the user to select either Japanese or English audio tracks , the European version , which was released by Rising Star Games , only features the Japanese audio track . 
 = = Release = = 
 To promote the game , Chunsoft released an original video animation in December 2011 , which Aksys Games later dubbed in English . It was created by the Japanese animation studio Gonzo , and serves as an introduction to the game , showcasing the characters as well as the basic Ambidex Game rules . In addition to the video animation , a Flash game was produced and made available on the official Japanese Virtue 's Last Reward website . The gameplay of the untitled Flash game has the player attempt to open a metal door by quickly clicking on it . As the door begins to open , Clover is revealed on the other side , and the player begins clicking on her breasts . Richard Eisenbeis of Kotaku was perplexed by the Flash game , stating that : " as it is pretty much the antithesis of everything presented in Virtue 's Last Reward , I truly wonder how this flash game is supposed to convince anyone to play the full title . Perhaps it 's just due to a [ public relations ] department following the old adage : ' sex sells ' . " 
 Virtue 's Last Reward was released in Japan on February 16 , 2012 . In its first week of release , the Nintendo 3DS version sold 9 @,@ 307 copies while the PlayStation Vita version sold 6 @,@ 538 copies . The game was then released in North America on October 23 , 2012 , and in Europe on November 23 , 2012 ; this was the first Zero Escape game to be released in Europe . People who pre @-@ ordered the North American version of the game through Amazon.com received a replica of the bracelet that the characters wear ; a similar pre @-@ order bonus had been given out for Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors . The bracelets could later be purchased through the Aksys Games store , with all proceeds going to the American Red Cross and Hurricane Sandy relief . In July 2016 , Aksys Games announced that ports for other platforms were in progress . 
 Shortly after the game 's release , players discovered a game @-@ breaking glitch in the North American Nintendo 3DS version : saving the game in specific Escape sections would corrupt the saved game 's data , forcing the player to restart the game from the beginning . In response , Aksys Games recommended that players avoid saving during Escape sections . By 2013 , Aksys Games announced that the glitch had been patched in the Nintendo eShop version ; some players , however , continued to report that the glitch still existed . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Virtue 's Last Reward received positive reviews from critics . The aggregate @-@ review website Metacritic rated the Nintendo 3DS version 88 / 100 , and the PlayStation Vita version 84 / 100 , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 Heidi Kemps of GameSpot praised the story , stating that the plot expertly mixed elements of horror , drama , and science fiction . Edge described the story as " a page @-@ turner with flashes of real intelligence " , but noted that it lacked the shock value of Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors . Kimberly Wallace of Game Informer thought that the plot twists came at the perfect moments . Tony Ponce of Destructoid echoed these remarks , but felt that the ending featured too many plot twists , and the revelations were more confusing than <unk> . John McCarroll of RPGFan thought that dialogue was humorous , saddening , and harrowing all at the same time . In contrast , Austin Boosinger of Adventure Gamers was heavily critical of the dialogue , calling it one of the slowest and most overwritten adventure games ever made . 
 Bob Mackey of 1UP.com wrote that Virtue 's Last Reward did not have to work hard to make the player care about the characters . Martin Robinson of Eurogamer appreciated that the cast was believable and <unk> each character was powered by real emotion . Boosinger commented that the characters were not well written , and that there was little reason to care about them until their backstories were revealed . Lucas M. Thomas of IGN stated that the English voice acting was " among the best performances I 've ever heard in any game , period " . Kemps commended the voice acting for being a pleasure to listen to even after playing the game for thirty hours . Mike Manson of Nintendo Life similarly praised the Japanese voice acting . 
 Edge felt that the Escape sections were satisfying to solve , and that they did not impede on the story progression for too long . Wallace thought that solving the puzzles provided a sense of accomplishment that few games could replicate . Kemps commented that the user interface was improved from Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors . Boosinger thought the puzzles were dull and uninspired in their variety , but appreciated their connections to the scientific and mathematical themes presented in the game . Robison felt that puzzles were not fun to solve , and that the menus were cumbersome to navigate . <unk> L. Patterson of Electronic Gaming Monthly was disappointed by the limited camera movement in the Escape sections . Several reviewers noted that the controls for both the Nintendo 3DS and the PlayStation Vita were awkward and oversensitive . 
 Many reviewers praised the flowchart for not forcing the player to replay previously completed sections or restart the game from the beginning . Bob Mackey of 1UP.com thought that the flowchart was also useful for keeping track of important story moments from each timeline . However , Boosinger and Edge both criticized the flowchart , as they felt it removed the tension of making the wrong decision . McCarroll felt that many of the environments looked similar , and that they were often colorless . Thomas thought that the 3D visuals were " beautifully " rendered , and that they were much better than those of its predecessor . Patterson remarked that while she was initially skeptical of the visuals from gameplay screenshots , her opinion changed after playing the game . Manson thought that the character models fit well with the realistic environments , but noted that there was a limited amount of character animations . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Virtue 's Last Reward received some awards from gaming publications , including : Handheld Game of the Year from GameSpot , Best 3DS / DS Story from IGN , Best Handheld Exclusive from Game Informer , as well as Best Story and Best Graphic Adventure from RPGFan . The game also received nominations for : Best Narrative at the 13th Annual Game Developers Choice Awards , and Game of the Year from Kotaku , Pocket Gamer , and GameSpot . Gamasutra , Game Developer , 1UP.com , and Amazon.com placed Virtue 's Last Reward within their non @-@ ranked lists of the Best Games of 2012 , while RPGFan listed it as one of the thirty essential role @-@ playing video games from the years 2010 to 2015 . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 In December 2012 , Uchikoshi mentioned details of a third Zero Escape game , and by June 2013 , he had finished planning the story . However , less than a year later , it was announced that the project was put on hold indefinitely in response to the series ' poor commercial reception in Japan . Uchikoshi examined the possibility of financing the development through the use of crowdfunding on a website like Kickstarter , but felt that the idea would not be persuasive enough for it to meet the goal ; he also sought out opportunities with executives and investors . The series ' fandom created Operation Bluebird , an online campaign to raise awareness of the series and support the game 's development , in response to its hiatus . 
 In March 2015 , Aksys Games launched the website <unk> , which only consisted of a countdown timer . Fans of the series began speculating that the number fonts on the countdown timer resembled the fonts from Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors 's cover art , which led some to believe that the countdown timer would end with an announcement regarding the third Zero Escape game . The countdown ended in July , which coincided with the 2015 Anime Expo . During the Expo , Aksys Games held a panel at which they announced the continued development of the game . It was released in June 2016 , under the new name Zero Time Dilemma . 
 = Family Guy = 
 Family Guy is an American adult animated sitcom created by Seth MacFarlane for the Fox Broadcasting Company . The series centers on the Griffins , a family consisting of parents Peter and Lois ; their children Meg , Chris , and Stewie ; and their anthropomorphic pet dog Brian . The show is set in the fictional city of Quahog , Rhode Island , and exhibits much of its humor in the form of cutaway gags that often lampoon American culture . 
 The family was conceived by MacFarlane after developing two animated films , The Life of Larry and Larry & Steve . MacFarlane redesigned the films ' protagonist , Larry , and his dog , Steve , and renamed them Peter and Brian , respectively . MacFarlane pitched a seven @-@ minute pilot to Fox in 1998 , and the show was greenlit and began production . Shortly after the third season of Family Guy had aired in 2002 , Fox canceled the series , with one episode left unaired . Adult Swim burned off the episode in 2003 , finishing the series ' original run . However , favorable DVD sales and high ratings for syndicated reruns on Adult Swim convinced the network to renew the show in 2004 for a fourth season , which began airing on May 1 , 2005 . 
 Family Guy has been nominated for 12 Primetime Emmy Awards and 11 Annie Awards , and has won three of each . In 2009 , it was nominated for an Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Comedy Series , the first time an animated series was nominated for the award since The Flintstones in 1961 . Family Guy has also received criticism , including unfavorable comparisons to The Simpsons . 
 Many tie @-@ in media have been released , including Stewie Griffin : The Untold Story , a straight @-@ to @-@ DVD special released in 2005 ; Family Guy : Live in Vegas , a soundtrack @-@ DVD combo released in 2005 , featuring music from the show as well as original music created by MacFarlane and Walter Murphy ; a video game and pinball machine , released in 2006 and 2007 , respectively ; since 2005 , six books published by Harper Adult based on the Family Guy universe ; and Laugh It Up , Fuzzball : The Family Guy Trilogy ( 2010 ) , a series of parodies of the original Star Wars trilogy . In 2008 , MacFarlane confirmed that the cast was interested in producing a feature film and that he was working on a story for a film adaptation . 
 A spin @-@ off series , The Cleveland Show , featuring Cleveland Brown , aired from September 27 , 2009 , to May 19 , 2013 . " The Simpsons Guy " , a crossover episode with The Simpsons , aired on September 28 , 2014 . Family Guy is a joint production by Fuzzy Door Productions and 20th Century Fox Television and syndicated by 20th Television . In 2013 , TV Guide ranked Family Guy the ninth Greatest TV Cartoon of All Time . 
 As of May 15 , 2016 , Family Guy was renewed for a fifteenth season . 
 = = Premise = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The show revolves around the adventures of the Griffin family , consisting of father Peter Griffin , a bumbling yet well @-@ intentioned blue @-@ collar worker ; Lois , a stay @-@ at @-@ home mother and piano teacher who is a member of the wealthy Pewterschmidt family ; Meg , their awkward teenage daughter who is constantly ridiculed and ignored by the family ; Chris , their teenage son , who is overweight , unintelligent and a younger version of his father in many respects ; and Stewie , their diabolical infant son of ambiguous sexual orientation who has adult mannerisms and uses stereotypical <unk> phrases . Living with the family is their witty , smoking , martini @-@ swilling , sarcastic , English @-@ speaking anthropomorphic dog Brian , though he is still considered a pet in many respects . 
 Recurring characters appear alongside the Griffin family . These include the family 's neighbors : sex @-@ crazed airline pilot bachelor Quagmire ; African American deli owner Cleveland and his wife Loretta ( later Donna ) ; paraplegic police officer Joe , his wife Bonnie and their baby daughter Susie ; neurotic Jewish pharmacist Mort , his wife Muriel , and their geeky and annoying son Neil ; and elderly child molester Herbert . TV news anchors Tom Tucker and Diane Simmons , Asian reporter Tricia Takanawa , and <unk> @-@ Weather meteorologist Ollie Williams also make frequent appearances . Actors Adam West and James Woods guest star as themselves in various episodes . 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The primary setting of Family Guy is Quahog ( / <unk> / [ <unk> ko @-@ hog or <unk> @-@ hog ] ) , a fictional district of Providence , Rhode Island that was founded by Peter 's ancestor Griffin Peterson . MacFarlane resided in Providence during his time as a student at Rhode Island School of Design , and the show contains distinct Rhode Island landmarks similar to real @-@ world locations . MacFarlane often borrows the names of Rhode Island locations and icons such as Pawtucket and Buddy Cianci for use in the show . MacFarlane , in an interview with a news program on WNAC @-@ TV , Channel 64 in Providence , stated that the town is modeled after Cranston , Rhode Island . 
 = = Development = = 
 MacFarlane initially conceived Family Guy in 1995 while studying animation at the Rhode Island School of Design ( RISD ) . During college , he created his thesis film entitled The Life of Larry , which was submitted by his professor at RISD to Hanna @-@ Barbera . MacFarlane was hired by the company . In 1996 MacFarlane created a sequel to The Life of Larry entitled Larry and Steve , which featured a middle @-@ aged character named Larry and an intellectual dog , Steve ; the short was broadcast in 1997 as one of Cartoon Network 's World Premiere Toons . 
 Executives at Fox saw the Larry shorts and contracted MacFarlane to create a series , entitled Family Guy , based on the characters . Fox proposed MacFarlane complete a 15 @-@ minute short , and gave him a budget of $ 50 @,@ 000 . Several aspects of Family Guy were inspired by the Larry shorts . While working on the series , the characters of Larry and his dog Steve slowly evolved into Peter and Brian . MacFarlane stated that the difference between The Life of Larry and Family Guy was that " Life of Larry was shown primarily in my dorm room and Family Guy was shown after the Super Bowl . " After the pilot aired , the series was given the green light . MacFarlane drew inspiration from several sitcoms such as The Simpsons and All in the Family . Premises were drawn from several 1980s Saturday morning cartoons he watched as a child , such as The Fonz and the Happy Days Gang and Rubik , the Amazing Cube . 
 The Griffin family first appeared on the demo that MacFarlane pitched to Fox on May 15 , 1998 . Family Guy was originally planned to start out as short movies for the sketch show MADtv , but the plan changed because MADtv 's budget was not large enough to support animation production . MacFarlane noted that he then wanted to pitch it to Fox , as he thought that that was the place to create a prime @-@ time animation show . Family Guy was originally pitched to Fox in the same year as King of the Hill , but the show was not bought until years later , when King of the Hill became successful . Fox ordered 13 episodes of Family Guy to air in midseason after MacFarlane impressed executives with a seven @-@ minute demo . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Executive producers = = = 
 MacFarlane has served as an executive producer during the show 's entire history , and also functions as a creative consultant . The first executive producers were David Zuckerman , <unk> Aries , David Pritchard , and Mike Wolf . Family Guy has had many executive producers in its history , including Daniel Palladino , Kara Vallow , and Danny Smith . David A. Goodman joined the show as a co @-@ executive producer in season three , and eventually became an executive producer . Alex Borstein , who voices Lois , worked as an executive and supervising producer for the fourth and fifth seasons . A more involved position on the show is the show runner , who acts as head writer and manages the show 's production for an entire season . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The first team of writers assembled for the show consisted of Chris Sheridan , Danny Smith , Gary Janetti , Ricky Blitt , Neil Goldman , Garrett Donovan , Matt Weitzman , and Mike Barker . The writing process of Family Guy generally starts with 14 writers that take turns writing the scripts ; when a script is finished it is given to the rest of the writers to read . These scripts generally include cutaway gags . Various gags are pitched to MacFarlane and the rest of the staff , and those deemed funniest are included in the episode . MacFarlane has explained that normally it takes 10 months to produce an episode because the show uses hand @-@ drawn animation . The show rarely comments on current events for this reason . The show 's initial writers had never written for an animated show ; and most came from live @-@ action sitcoms . 
 MacFarlane explains that he is a fan of 1930s and 1940s radio programs , particularly the radio thriller anthology " Suspense " , which led him to give early episodes ominous titles like " Death Has a Shadow " and " Mind Over Murder " . MacFarlane explained that the team dropped the naming convention after individual episodes became hard to identify , and the novelty wore off . For the first few months of production , the writers shared one office , lent to them by the King of the Hill production crew . 
 Credited with 18 episodes , Steve Callaghan is the most prolific writer on Family Guy staff . Many of the writers that have left the show have gone on to create or produce other successful series . Neil Goldman and Garrett Donovan co @-@ wrote 13 episodes for the NBC sitcom Scrubs during their eight @-@ year run on the show , while also serving as co @-@ producers and working their way up to executive producers . Mike Barker and Matt Weitzman left the show and went on to create the long @-@ running and still ongoing adult animated series American Dad ! MacFarlane is also a co @-@ creator of American Dad ! On November 4 , 2013 , it was announced that Barker had departed American Dad ! during its run as well , after 10 seasons of serving as producer and co @-@ showrunner over the series . 
 During the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike , official production of the show halted for most of December 2007 and for various periods afterward . Fox continued producing episodes without MacFarlane 's final approval , which he termed " a colossal dick move " in an interview with Variety . Though MacFarlane refused to work on the show , his contract under Fox required him to contribute to any episodes it would subsequently produce . Production officially resumed after the end of the strike , with regularly airing episodes recommencing on February 17 , 2008 . According to MacFarlane , in 2009 , it costs about $ 2 million to make an episode of Family Guy . 
 = = = Early history and cancellation = = = 
 Family Guy officially premiered after Fox 's broadcast of Super Bowl XXXIII on January 31 , 1999 , with " Death Has a Shadow " . The show debuted to 22 million viewers , and immediately generated controversy regarding its adult content . The show returned on April 11 , 1999 , with " I Never Met the Dead Man " . Family Guy garnered decent ratings in Fox 's 8 : 30 pm slot on Sunday , scheduled between The Simpsons and The X @-@ Files . At the end of its first season , the show ranked at # 33 in the Nielsen ratings , with 12 @.@ 8 million households tuning in . The show launched its second season in a new time slot , Thursday at 9 pm , on September 23 , 1999 . Family Guy was pitted against NBC 's Frasier , and the series ' ratings declined sharply . Subsequently , Fox removed Family Guy from its schedule , and began airing episodes irregularly . The show returned on March 7 , 2000 , at 8 : 30 pm on Tuesdays , where it was constantly beaten in the ratings by ABC 's then @-@ new breakout hit Who Wants to Be a Millionaire , coming in at # 114 in the Nielsen ratings with 6 @.@ 32 million households tuning in . Fox announced that the show had been canceled in May 2000 , at the end of the second season . However , following a last @-@ minute reprieve , on July 24 , 2000 , Fox ordered 13 additional episodes of Family Guy to form a third season . 
 The show returned November 8 , 2001 , once again in a tough time slot : Thursday nights at 8 : 00 pm ET ; this slot brought it into competition with Survivor and Friends ( a situation that was later referenced in Stewie Griffin : The Untold Story ) . During its second and third seasons , Fox frequently moved the show around to different days and time slots with little or no notice and , consequently , the show 's ratings suffered . Upon Fox 's annual unveiling of its 2002 fall line @-@ up on May 15 , 2002 , Family Guy was absent . Fox announced that the show had been officially canceled shortly thereafter . 
 = = = Cult success and revival = = = 
 Fox attempted to sell the rights for reruns of the show , but it was difficult to find networks that were interested ; Cartoon Network eventually bought the rights , " [ ... ] basically for free " , according to the president of 20th Century Fox Television . Family Guy premiered in reruns on Adult Swim on April 20 , 2003 , and immediately became the block 's top @-@ rated program , dominating late @-@ night viewing in its time period versus cable and broadcast competition , and boosting viewership by 239 % . The complete first and second seasons were released on DVD the same week the show premiered on Adult Swim , and the show became a cult phenomenon , selling 400 @,@ 000 copies within one month . Sales of the DVD set reached 2 @.@ 2 million copies , becoming the best @-@ selling television DVD of 2003 and the second @-@ highest @-@ selling television DVD ever , behind the first season of Comedy Central 's Chappelle 's Show . The third @-@ season DVD release also sold more than a million copies . The show 's popularity in DVD sales and reruns rekindled Fox 's interest , and , on May 20 , 2004 , Fox ordered 35 new episodes of Family Guy , marking the first revival of a television show based on DVD sales . 
 " North by North Quahog " , which premiered May 1 , 2005 , was the first episode to be broadcast after the show 's hiatus . It was written by MacFarlane and directed by Peter Shin . MacFarlane believed the show 's three @-@ year hiatus was beneficial because animated shows do not normally have hiatuses , and towards the end of their seasons , " ... you see a lot more sex jokes and [ bodily function ] jokes and signs of a fatigued staff that their brains are just fried " . With " North by North Quahog " , the writing staff tried to keep the show " [ ... ] exactly as it was " before its cancellation , and " None of us had any desire to make it look any slicker " . The episode was watched by 11 @.@ 85 million viewers , the show 's highest ratings since the airing of the first season episode " Brian : Portrait of a Dog " . 
 = = = Lawsuits = = = 
 In March 2007 comedian Carol Burnett filed a $ 6 million lawsuit against 20th Century @-@ Fox , claiming that her charwoman cartoon character had been portrayed on the show without her permission . She stated it was a trademark infringement , and that Fox violated her publicity rights . On June 4 , 2007 , United States District Judge Dean D. Pregerson rejected the lawsuit , stating that the parody was protected under the First Amendment , citing Hustler Magazine v. Falwell as a precedent . 
 On October 3 , 2007 , Bourne Co . Music Publishers filed a lawsuit accusing the show of infringing its copyright on the song " When You Wish Upon a Star " , through a parody song entitled " I Need a Jew " appearing in the episode " When You Wish Upon a Weinstein " . Bourne Co . , the sole United States copyright owner of the song , alleged the parody pairs a " thinly veiled " copy of its music with antisemitic lyrics . Named in the suit were 20th Century Fox Film Corp. , Fox Broadcasting Co . , Cartoon Network , MacFarlane and Murphy ; the suit sought to stop the program 's distribution and asked for unspecified damages . Bourne argued that " I Need a Jew " uses the copyrighted melody of " When You Wish Upon a Star " without commenting on that song , and that it was therefore not a First Amendment @-@ protected parody per the ruling in Campbell v. Acuff @-@ Rose Music , Inc . On March 16 , 2009 , United States District Judge Deborah Batts held that Family Guy did not infringe on Bourne 's copyright when it transformed the song for comical use in an episode . 
 In December 2007 , Family Guy was again accused of copyright infringement when actor Art Metrano filed a lawsuit regarding a scene in Stewie Griffin : The Untold Story , in which Jesus performs Metrano 's signature " magic " act involving absurd " faux " magical hand gestures while humming the distinctive tune " Fine and Dandy " . 20th Century Fox , MacFarlane , Callaghan and Borstein were all named in the suit . In July 2009 a federal district court judge rejected Fox 's motion to dismiss , saying that the first three fair use factors involved — " purpose and character of the use " , " nature of the infringed work " and " amount and substantiality of the taking " — counted in Metrano 's favor , while the fourth — " economic impact " — had to await more fact @-@ finding . In denying the dismissal , the court held that the reference in the scene made light of Jesus and his followers — not Metrano or his act . The case was settled out of court in 2010 with undisclosed terms . 
 = = = Voice cast = = = 
 Seth MacFarlane voices three of the show 's main characters : Peter Griffin , Brian Griffin , and Stewie Griffin . Since MacFarlane had a strong vision for these characters , he chose to voice them himself , believing it would be easier than for someone else to attempt it . MacFarlane drew inspiration for the voice of Peter from a security guard he overheard talking while attending the Rhode Island School of Design . Stewie 's voice was based on the voice of English actor Rex Harrison , especially his performance in the 1964 musical drama film My Fair Lady . MacFarlane uses his regular speaking voice when playing Brian . MacFarlane also provides the voices for various other recurring and one @-@ time @-@ only characters , most prominently those of the Griffins ' neighbor Glenn Quagmire , news anchor Tom Tucker , and Lois ' father , Carter Pewterschmidt . 
 Alex Borstein voices Peter 's wife Lois Griffin , Asian correspondent Tricia Takanawa , Loretta Brown , and Lois ' mother , Barbara Pewterschmidt . Borstein was asked to provide a voice for the pilot while she was working on MADtv . She had not met MacFarlane or seen any of his artwork , and said it was " really sight unseen " . At the time , Borstein was performing in a stage show in Los Angeles . She played a redheaded mother whose voice she had based on one of her cousins . 
 Seth Green primarily voices Chris Griffin and Neil Goldman . Green stated that he did an impression of the character Buffalo Bill from the thriller film The Silence of the Lambs during his audition . 
 Mila Kunis and Lacey Chabert have both voiced Meg Griffin . Chabert left the series because of time conflicts with schoolwork and her role on Party of Five . When Kunis auditioned for the role , she was called back by MacFarlane , who instructed her to speak slower . He then told her to come back another time and enunciate more . Once she claimed that she had it under control , MacFarlane hired her . 
 Mike Henry voices Cleveland Brown , Herbert , Bruce the Performance Artist , Consuela and the <unk> @-@ up Deaf Guy . Henry met MacFarlane at the Rhode Island School of Design , and kept in touch with him after they graduated . A few years later , MacFarlane contacted him about being part of the show ; he agreed and came on as a writer and voice actor . During the show 's first four seasons , he was credited as a guest star , but beginning with season five 's " Prick Up Your Ears " , he has been credited as a main cast member . 
 Other recurring cast members include Adam West as the eponymous Mayor Adam West ; Jennifer Tilly as Bonnie Swanson ; John G. Brennan as Mort Goldman and Horace the bartender ; Carlos Alazraqui as Jonathan Weed ; Adam Carolla and Norm Macdonald as Death ; Lori Alan as Diane Simmons ; and Phil LaMarr as Ollie Williams and the judge . Fellow cartoonist Butch Hartman has made guest voice appearances in many episodes as various characters . Also , writer Danny Smith voices various recurring characters , such as Ernie the Giant Chicken . Alex Breckenridge also appears as many various characters . 
 Episodes often feature guest voices from a wide range of professions , including actors , athletes , authors , bands , musicians , and scientists . Many guest voices star as themselves . Leslie Uggams was the first to appear as herself , in the fourth episode of the first season , " Mind Over Murder " . The episode " Not All Dogs Go to Heaven " guest starred the entire cast of Star Trek : The Next Generation , including Patrick Stewart , Jonathan Frakes , Brent Spiner , LeVar Burton , Gates McFadden , Michael Dorn , Wil Wheaton , Marina Sirtis , and even Denise Crosby ( season 1 as Tasha Yar ) , playing themselves ; this is the episode with the most guest stars of the seventh season . 
 = = Hallmarks = = 
 = = = " Road to " episodes = = = 
 The " Road to " episodes are a series of hallmark travel episodes . They are a parody of the seven Road to ... comedy films starring Bing Crosby and Bob Hope . These episodes have always involved Stewie and Brian in some foreign , supernatural or science @-@ fiction location , unrelated to the show 's normal location in Quahog . The first , entitled " Road to Rhode Island " , aired on May 30 , 2000 , during the second season . The episodes are known for featuring elaborate musical numbers , similar to the Road films . The episodes contain several trademarks , including a special version of the opening sequence , custom musical cues and musical numbers , and parodies of science fiction and fantasy films . 
 The original idea for the " Road to " episodes came from MacFarlane , as he is a fan of the films of Crosby , Hope and Lamour . The first episode was directed by Dan Povenmire , who would direct the rest of the " Road to " episodes until the episode " Road to Rupert " , at which point he had left the show to create Phineas and Ferb . Series regular Greg Colton then took over Povenmire 's role as director of the " Road to " episodes . 
 The " Road to " episodes are generally considered by critics and fans to be some of the greatest in the series , thanks to the developing relationship between Stewie and Brian , and the strong plotlines of the episodes themselves . 
 = = = Humor = = = 
 Family Guy uses the filmmaking technique of cutaways , which occur in the majority of Family Guy episodes . Emphasis is often placed on gags which make reference to current events and / or modern cultural icons . 
 Early episodes based much of their comedy on Stewie 's " super villain " antics , such as his constant plans for total world domination , his evil experiments , plans and inventions to get rid of things he dislikes , and his constant attempts at matricide . As the series progressed , the writers and MacFarlane agreed that his personality and the jokes were starting to feel dated , so they began writing him with a different personality . Family Guy often includes self @-@ referential humor . The most common form is jokes about Fox Broadcasting , and occasions where the characters break the fourth wall by addressing the audience . For example , in " North by North Quahog " , the first episode that aired after the show 's revival , included Peter telling the family that they had been cancelled because Fox had to make room in their schedule for shows like Dark Angel , Titus , Undeclared , Action , That ' 80s Show , <unk> , Fastlane , Andy Richter Controls the Universe , Skin , Girls Club , Cracking Up , The Pitts , Firefly , Get Real , <unk> , Wanda at Large , Costello , The Lone Gunmen , A Minute with Stan Hooper , Normal , Ohio , Pasadena , Harsh Realm , Keen Eddie , The $ treet , The American Embassy , Cedric the Entertainer Presents , The Tick , Luis , and Greg the Bunny . Lois asks whether there is any hope , to which Peter replies that if all these shows are canceled they might have a chance ; the shows were indeed canceled during Family Guy 's hiatus . 
 The show uses catchphrases , and most of the primary and secondary characters have them . Notable expressions include Quagmire 's " <unk> giggity goo " , Peter 's " Freakin ' sweet " , and Joe 's " Bring it on ! " The use of many of these catchphrases declined in later seasons . The episode " Big Man on Hippocampus " mocks catchphrase @-@ based humor : when Peter , who has forgotten everything about his life , is introduced to Meg , he exclaims " D 'oh ! " , to which Lois replies , " No , Peter , that 's not your catchphrase . " 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Catherine <unk> of National Review Online described it as a " nasty but extremely funny " cartoon . Caryn James of The New York Times called it a show with an " outrageously satirical family " that " includes plenty of comic possibilities and parodies " . The Sydney Morning Herald named Family Guy the " Show of the Week " on April 21 , 2009 , hailing it a " pop culture @-@ heavy masterpiece " . Frazier Moore from The Seattle Times called it an " endless craving for humor about bodily emissions " . He thought it was " breathtakingly smart " and said a " blend of the ingenious with the raw helps account for its much broader appeal " . He summarized it as " rude , crude and deliciously wrong " . The New Yorker 's Nancy Franklin said that Family Guy is becoming one of the best animated shows ; she commented on its ribaldry and popularity . The show has become a hit on Hulu ; it is the second @-@ highest viewed show after Saturday Night Live . IGN called Family Guy a great show , and commented that it has gotten better since its revival . They stated that they cannot imagine another half @-@ hour sitcom that provides as many laughs as Family Guy . Empire praised the show and its writers for creating really hilarious moments with unlikely material . They commented that one of the reasons they love the show is because nothing is sacred — it makes jokes and gags of almost everything . Robin Pierson of The TV Critic praised the series as " a different kind of animated comedy which clearly sets out to do jokes which other cartoons can 't do . " Family Guy has proven popular in the United Kingdom , regularly obtaining between 700 @,@ 000 and 1 million viewers for re @-@ runs on BBC Three . 
 The series has attracted many celebrities . Robert Downey , Jr. telephoned the show production staff and asked if he could produce or assist in an episode 's creation , as his son is a fan of the show ; the producers subsequently created a character for Downey . Lauren Conrad met MacFarlane while recording a Laguna Beach clip for the episode " Prick Up Your Ears " ( season 5 , 2006 ) . She has watched Family Guy for years and considers Stewie her favorite character . Commenting on his appearance in the episode " Big Man on Hippocampus " ( season 8 , 2010 ) , actor Dwayne Johnson stated that he was a " big fan " of Family Guy . Johnson befriended MacFarlane after he had a minor role in Johnson 's 2010 film Tooth Fairy . R & B singer Rihanna has admitted to being a fan of Family Guy , as has pop singer Britney Spears ; she tries to imitate Stewie 's English accent . Spears , who was mocked for her personal problems in the South Park episode " Britney 's New Look " in 2008 , offered to appear in a cameo to hit back at the similar animated show , but MacFarlane declined , stating that he did not want to start a feud with the series . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Family Guy and its cast have been nominated for thirteen Emmy Awards , with five wins . MacFarlane won the Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance award for his performance as Stewie ; Murphy and MacFarlane won the Outstanding Music and Lyrics award for the song " You Got a Lot to See " from the episode " Brian Wallows and Peter 's Swallows " ; Steven Fonti won the Outstanding Individual Achievement in Animation award for his storyboard work in the episode " No Chris Left Behind " ; and Greg Colton won the Outstanding Individual Achievement in Animation award for his storyboard work in the episode " Road to the Multiverse " . The show was nominated for eleven Annie Awards , and won three times , twice in 2006 and once in 2008 . In 2009 it was nominated for an Emmy for Outstanding Comedy Series , becoming the first animated program to be nominated in this category since The Flintstones in 1961 . The Simpsons was almost nominated in 1993 , but voters were hesitant to pit cartoons against live action programs . The show was nominated for a Grammy in 2011 . Family Guy has been nominated and has won various other awards , including the Teen Choice Awards and the People 's Choice Awards . In the 1,000th issue of Entertainment Weekly , Brian Griffin was selected as the dog for " The Perfect TV Family " . Wizard Magazine rated Stewie the 95th @-@ greatest villain of all time . British newspaper The Times rated Family Guy as the 45th @-@ best American show in 2009 . IGN ranked Family Guy at number seven in the " Top 100 Animated Series " and number six in the " Top 25 Primetime Animated Series of All Time " . Empire named it the twelfth @-@ greatest TV show of all time . In 2005 viewers of the UK television channel Channel 4 voted Family Guy at number 5 on their list of the 100 Greatest Cartoons . Brian was awarded the 2009 Stoner of the Year award by High Times for the episode " 420 " , marking the first time an animated character received the honor . In 2007 TV Guide ranked Family Guy number 15 in their list of top cult shows ever . Family Guy has garnered six Golden Reel Awards nominations , winning three times . In 2013 , TV Guide ranked Family Guy the ninth Greatest TV Cartoon of All Time . 
 = = = Criticism and controversy = = = 
 One of the initial critics to give the show negative reviews was Ken Tucker from Entertainment Weekly ; he called it " The Simpsons as conceived by a singularly sophomoric mind that lacks any reference point beyond other TV shows " . The Parents Television Council ( PTC ) , a conservative , non @-@ profit watchdog , has attacked the series since its premiere and has branded various episodes as " Worst TV Show of the Week " . In May 2000 the PTC launched a letter @-@ writing campaign to the Fox network in an effort to persuade the network to cancel the show . The PTC has placed the show on their annual lists of " Worst Prime @-@ Time Shows for Family Viewing " in 2000 , 2005 , and 2006 . The Federal Communications Commission has received multiple petitions requesting that the show be blocked from broadcasting on indecency grounds . Tucker and the PTC have both accused the show of portraying religion negatively , and of being racist . Because of the PTC , some advertisers have canceled their contracts after reviewing the content of the episodes , claiming it to be unsuitable . Critics have compared the show 's humor and characters with those of The Simpsons . 
 Various episodes of the show have generated controversy . In " 420 " ( season seven , 2009 ) Brian decides to start a campaign to legalize cannabis in Quahog ; the Venezuelan government reacted negatively to the episode and banned Family Guy from airing on their local networks , which generally syndicate American programming . Venezuelan justice minister Tareck El <unk> , citing the promotion of the use of cannabis , stated that any cable stations that did not stop airing the series would be fined ; the government showed a clip which featured Brian and Stewie singing the praises of marijuana as a demonstration of how the United States supports cannabis use . In " Extra Large Medium " ( season eight , 2010 ) a character named Ellen ( who has Down syndrome ) states that her mother is the former Governor of Alaska , which strongly implies that her mother is Sarah Palin , the only woman to have served in the office of governor in the state . Sarah Palin , the mother of a special @-@ needs child , criticized the episode in an appearance on The O 'Reilly Factor , calling those who made the show " cruel , cold @-@ hearted people . " 
 = = Broadcast = = 
 Family Guy premiered in Australia on April 9 , 1999 on the Seven Network , in 2000 on <unk> , and on 7mate on September 27 , 2010 . In Canada , the series started airing January 31 , 1999 on Global and September 1 , 2003 on Teletoon . The show aired on Global until 2015 . Beginning in the 2015 – 16 season , it started to air on City instead . In the past the show was also syndicated on <unk> ( now <unk> ) and on Adult Swim from July 4 , 2012 . The show also airs in Ireland on 3e , and in New Zealand on Four . 
 In the United Kingdom , Family Guy premiered in September 1999 , originally on Channel 4 and Sky One . In January 2005 , FX ( now Fox ) began broadcasting the show . From October 2005 , BBC Two started screening Family Guy before switching to BBC Three on September 2006 . In March 2015 , it was announced that season 14 of Family Guy and all of MacFarlane 's other cartoons will transfer to ITV2 , premiering on February 29 , 2016 , while the BBC would continue to hold the rights until 2017 for older episodes . 
 = = Other media = = 
 = = = Comic books = = = 
 A comic book based on the Family Guy universe is being produced . Published by Titan Comics , it will be edited by Steve White and illustrated by Anthony Williams and S. L. Gallant . The writing and the illustrations will be supervised by the show 's producers . The comics will consist of a main story , a short story , and a gag strip . The first comic book was released on July 27 , 2011 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Family Guy : It Takes a Village Idiot , and I Married One was written by executive story editor Chevapravatdumrong and actress Alex Borstein . The book was first published on 8 May 2007 . The book is a biographical monologue by Lois Griffin discussing her memories of growing up and to her attempted run for mayor in the town of Quahog . Though the book primarily consists of a loose narrative monologue by Lois , it is also interspersed with sections from other characters such as Peter Griffin . The book covers events featured in the Family Guy episode " It Takes a Village Idiot , and I Married One " , with which it shares a title . 
 It was published in the United Kingdom in 2007 by Orion Books . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 As promotion for the show , and , as Newman described , " [ to ] expand interest in the show beyond its diehard fans " , Fox organized four Family Guy Live ! performances , which featured cast members reading old episodes aloud . The cast also performed musical numbers from the Family Guy : Live in Vegas comedy album . The stage shows were an extension of a performance by the cast during the 2004 Montreal Comedy Festival . The Family Guy Live ! performances , which took place in Los Angeles and New York , sold out and were attended by around 1 @,@ 200 people each . 
 In 2007 , at the 59th Annual Primetime Emmy Awards , MacFarlane performed ( as the digitally inserted Stewie and Brian ) the ceremony 's opening number . He performed a song insulting modern television to the tune of the song " The Fellas At The Freakin ' <unk> " performed in the episode PTV . The song insulted TV shows such as Two and a Half Men , Desperate Housewives , and Scrubs , as well as the final scene of The Sopranos . 
 In 2009 , a special televised performance show aired entitled Family Guy Presents Seth & Alex 's Almost Live Comedy Show , in which voice actors Alex Borstein and MacFarlane performed songs from the show , as well as a parody of Lady Gaga 's song " Poker Face " in the voice of Marlee Matlin , who appeared on stage as a guest during the performance . Some new animated gags also appeared in the show . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 On July 22 , 2007 , in an interview with The Hollywood Reporter , MacFarlane announced that he may start working on a feature film , although " nothing 's official . " In TV Week on July 18 , 2008 , MacFarlane confirmed plans to produce a theatrically released Family Guy feature film sometime " within the next year . " He came up with an idea for the story , " something that you could not do on the show , which [ to him ] is the only reason to do a movie . " He later went to say he imagines the film to be " an old @-@ style musical with dialogue " similar to The Sound of Music , saying that he would " really be trying to capture , musically , that feel . " On October 13 , 2011 , Seth MacFarlane confirmed that a deal for a Family Guy film had been made , and that it would be written by himself and series co @-@ producer Ricky Blitt . 
 On November 30 , 2012 , MacFarlane confirmed plans to produce a Family Guy film . The project was put on hold while MacFarlane worked on Ted 2 . 
 = = = Spin @-@ off = = = 
 MacFarlane co @-@ created — alongside Mike Henry and Richard Appel — the Family Guy spin @-@ off The Cleveland Show , which premiered September 27 , 2009 . They began discussing the project in 2007 . Appel and Henry served as the show 's executive producers and showrunners , handling the day @-@ to @-@ day operations , with limited involvement from MacFarlane . Henry and Appel conceived the show as " more of a family show , a sweeter show " than Family Guy . The first season consisted of 22 episodes , and the show was picked up by Fox for a second season , which consisted of 13 episodes . The announcement was made on May 3 , 2009 , before the first season began . It was extended to a full second season . Appel signed a new three @-@ year , seven @-@ figure deal with Fox to continue serving as showrunner on The Cleveland Show in 2010 . Fox chairman Gary Newman commented : " What is special about him is his incredible leadership ability . " The show follows the Family Guy character Cleveland Brown , who is voiced by Henry , as he leaves the town of Quahog and moves with his son to start his own adventure . 
 Fox canceled The Cleveland Show on May 13 , 2013 , roughly a week before the May 19 conclusion of its fourth season . On July 16 , 2013 , MacFarlane confirmed an upcoming twelfth season episode of Family Guy centering on Cleveland 's return to Quahog . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 The Family Guy Video Game ! is a 2006 action game released by 2K Games and developed by High Voltage Software . The game received mixed reviews , averaging 50 % favorable reviews for the PlayStation 2 version , 51 % for the PlayStation Portable version , and 53 % for the Xbox version , according to review aggregator Metacritic . The game received praise for its humor , but was criticized for its short playtime and " uninteresting gameplay " . On November 2 , 2009 , IGN journalist Ryan Langley reported the production of a Family Guy @-@ based party game for the Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 , and Wii . He cited the LinkedIn profiles of former HB Studios developer Chris <unk> and Invisible Entertainment co @-@ owner Ron Doucet , which stated that the individuals had worked on the game . MacFarlane recorded exclusive material of Peter 's voice and other Family Guy characters for a 2007 pinball machine of the show by Stern Pinball . A game called Family Guy Online was announced . 
 Family Guy : Back to the Multiverse , which is centered around the episode " Road to the Multiverse " , was released on November 20 , 2012 . 
 Family Guy : The Quest for Stuff launched on iOS and Android on April 10 , 2014 . 
 = = = <unk> with other animated series = = = 
 An event known as " Night of the Hurricane " depicts a hurricane hitting the hometowns of MacFarlane 's sitcoms Family Guy , American Dad ! and The Cleveland Show , culminating in a stand @-@ off among the three fathers of each family . 
 It was announced that a special episode of Family Guy featuring an official crossover with The Simpsons would premiere in 2014 . At San Diego Comic Con a 5 @-@ minute preview was shown . The episode is titled The Simpsons Guy and aired September 28 , 2014 . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 As of 2009 , six books have been released about the Family Guy universe , all published by HarperCollins since 2005 . The first , Family Guy : Stewie 's Guide to World Domination ( ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 06 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 ) by Steve Callahan , was released in April 26 , 2005 . Written in the style of a graphic novel , the plot follows Stewie 's plans to rule the world . Other books include Family Guy : It Takes a Village Idiot , and I Married One ( ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 ) , which covers the events of the episode " It Takes a Village Idiot , and I Married One " ; and Family Guy and Philosophy : A Cure for the Petarded ( ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 4051 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 ) , a collection of 17 essays exploring the connections between the series and historical philosophers . A book written from Brian 's point of view ( written by Andrew Goldberg ) was published in 2006 , called Brian Griffin 's Guide to Booze , Broads and the Lost Art of Being a Man . 
 Family Guy has been commercially successful in the home market . The show was the first to be resurrected because of high DVD sales . The first volume , covering the show 's first two seasons , sold 1 @.@ 67 million units , topping TV DVD sales in 2003 , while the second volume sold another million units . Volumes six and seven debuted at fifth place in United States DVD sales ; volume seven was the highest @-@ selling television DVD , selling 171 @,@ 000 units by June 21 , 2009 . Family Guy Presents Blue Harvest , the DVD featuring the Star Wars special " Blue Harvest " , was released on January 15 , 2008 , and premiered at the top of United States DVD sales . The DVD was the first Family Guy DVD to include a digital copy for download to the iPod . In 2004 , the first series of Family Guy toy figurines was released by Mezco Toyz ; each member of the Griffin family had their own toy , with the exception of Stewie , of whom two different figures were made . Over the course of two years , four more series of toy figures were released , with various forms of Peter . In 2008 , the character Peter appeared in advertisements for Subway Restaurants , promoting the restaurant 's massive feast sandwich . 
 = A Canticle for Leibowitz = 
 A Canticle for Leibowitz is a post @-@ apocalyptic science fiction novel by American writer Walter M. Miller , Jr . , first published in 1960 . Set in a Catholic monastery in the desert of the Southwestern United States after a devastating nuclear war , the story spans thousands of years as civilization rebuilds itself . The monks of the fictional Albertian Order of Leibowitz take up the mission of preserving the surviving remnants of man 's scientific knowledge until the day the outside world is again ready for it . 
 A Canticle for Leibowitz is based on three short stories Miller contributed to The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction . It is the only novel published by the author during his lifetime . Considered one of the classics of science fiction , it has never been out of print and has seen over 25 reprints and editions . Appealing to mainstream and genre critics and readers alike , it won the 1961 Hugo Award for best science fiction novel . 
 Inspired by the author 's participation in the Allied bombing of the monastery at Monte Cassino during World War II , the novel is considered a masterpiece by literary critics . It has been compared favorably with the works of Evelyn Waugh , Graham Greene , and Walker Percy , and its themes of religion , recurrence , and church versus state have generated a significant body of scholarly research . Miller 's follow @-@ up work , Saint Leibowitz and the Wild Horse Woman , was published posthumously in 1997 . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Walter Miller was a prolific writer of science fiction short stories ; by 1955 he had published over 30 stories in such magazines as Astounding Science Fiction , Amazing Stories , and Fantastic Adventures . Significant themes of his stories included loss of scientific knowledge or " socio @-@ technological regression and its presumed antithesis , continued technological advance " , its preservation through oral transmission , the guardianship of archives by priests , and " that side of [ human ] behavior which can only be termed religious . " These thematic elements , combined with the growing subgenre of the " post @-@ disaster " story and Miller 's own World War II experiences , set the stage for the short story that would become the opening section of A Canticle for Leibowitz . 
 During World War II , Miller served as part of a bomber crew that participated in the destruction of the ancient Roman Catholic monastery at Monte Cassino , Italy founded by St. Benedict in the 6th century . This experience impressed him enough to write , a decade later , the short story " A Canticle for Leibowitz " about an order of monks whose abbey springs from the destroyed world around it . The story , which would evolve into " Fiat Homo " — the first part of the novel — was published in the April 1955 edition of The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction ( F & SF ) . Although not originally intended as a serialization , the saga continued in " And the Light Is Risen " , which was published in August 1956 ( also in F & SF ) . That work would later grow into " Fiat Lux " . It was while writing the third " novelette " , " The Last Canticle " , for magazine publication in February of the following year that Miller realized he was really completing a novel : " Only after I had written the first two and was working on the third did it dawn on me that this isn 't three novelettes , it 's a novel . And I converted it . " 
 The publication of the three Canticle stories , along with Miller 's " The Lineman " , in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction marked a significant evolution in the writer 's craft . Under the editorship of Anthony Boucher , F & SF possessed a reputation for publishing works with " careful writing and characterization . " Walker Percy considered the magazine " high @-@ class sci @-@ fi pulp " . The appearance of these stories in the magazine is indicative of the direction Miller 's writing had taken toward " ' human ' stories , less crowded with incident , more concerned with values . " 
 For the novelization , Miller did not simply collate the three short stories . He changed the title and the names of some characters , added new characters , changed the nature and prominence of existing characters , and added Latin passages . These revisions affected the religious and recurrence themes of the story , resulting in " decided improvements " over the magazine versions . 
 The Latin phrases in the novel related to Roman Catholic Church practices , rituals and official communications . Susan Olsen writes that Miller did not include the Latin phrases just to " add dignity " to the work , but to emphasize its religious themes , making it consonant with the tradition of Judeo @-@ Christian writings . 
 Changing the name of the abbot of the first part from " Father Juan " to " Abbot Arkos " strengthened the cyclical / recurrence motif , since the name of the first abbot encountered , " Arkos " , begins with the first letter of the Latin alphabet and the name of the last abbot , " Zerchi " , begins with the last letter . Miller also expanded scenes , increasing their importance : for instance , the initial encounter between Brother Francis and Abbot Arkos in " Fiat Homo " grew from two pages in the short story to eight pages in the novel . Abbot Arkos was shown to possess doubts and uncertainty , unlike the dogmatism of Father Juan . 
 Miller also used the adaptation process to add a significant layer of complexity to the story . Walker Percy recognized this dimension of the novel , which he compared to a " cipher , a coded message , a book in a strange language . " David Seed deemed the novel " charged with half @-@ concealed meaning , " an intricacy that seems to have been added as Miller was revising the stories for publication as a novel . Decoding messages such as this is an important activity in Miller 's works , both in A Canticle for Leibowitz and his short stories . For example , in the original version of " Fiat Homo " Miller limits his " wordplay " to an explicit symbolism involving the letter " V " and Brother Francis 's " Voice / Vocation " during Francis 's encounter with the wandering pilgrim . In the novel , however , " Miller reserves such <unk> cross @-@ references to the more intellectual analysts and builds a comedy of incomprehension around Francis . " 
 Miller 's extensive experience in writing for science fiction magazines contributed to his achievement with A Canticle for Leibowitz . His strengths were with the medium lengths of the short story , novelette , and short novel , where he effectively combined character , action , and import . The success of this full @-@ length novel rests on its tripartite structure : each section is " short novel size , with counterpoint , motifs , and allusions making up for the lack of more ordinary means of continuity . " 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 The novel was published by J. B. Lippincott & Co. as a hardcover in 1960 ( although the copyright is 1959 ) , and demand for the book was sufficient to prompt two reprints within the first year . In 1961 it was awarded the Hugo Award for Best Novel by The World Science Fiction Convention . Since then A Canticle for Leibowitz has had new editions and reprints issued in paperback and hardcover more than 40 times , and has never been out of print . It regularly appears on " best of " lists and has been recognized three times with Locus Poll Awards for best all @-@ time science fiction novel . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 A Canticle for Leibowitz opens 600 years after 20th century civilization has been destroyed by a global nuclear war , known as the " Flame Deluge " . The text reveals that as a result of the war there was a violent backlash against the culture of advanced knowledge and technology that had led to the development of nuclear weapons . During this backlash , called the " Simplification , " anyone of learning , and eventually anyone who could even read , was likely to be killed by rampaging mobs , who proudly took on the name of " <unk> " . <unk> became almost universal , and books were destroyed en masse . 
 Isaac Edward Leibowitz had been a Jewish electrical engineer working for the United States military . Surviving the war , he converted to Roman Catholicism and founded a monastic order , the " Albertian Order of Leibowitz " , dedicated to preserving knowledge by hiding books , smuggling them to safety ( <unk> ) , memorizing , and copying them . The Order 's abbey is located in the American southwestern desert , near the military base where Leibowitz had worked before the war , on an old road that may have been " a portion of the shortest route from the Great Salt Lake to Old El Paso . " Leibowitz was eventually betrayed and martyred . Later beatified by the Roman Catholic Church , he became a candidate for sainthood . 
 Centuries after his death , the abbey is still preserving the " Memorabilia " , the collected writings that have survived the Flame Deluge and the Simplification , in the hope that they will help future generations reclaim forgotten science . 
 The story is structured in three parts titled : " Fiat Homo " , " Fiat Lux " , and " Fiat Voluntas Tua " . The parts are separated by periods of six centuries each . 
 = = = " Fiat Homo " ( Let There Be Man ) = = = 
 In the 26th century , a 17 @-@ year @-@ old novice named Brother Francis Gerard is on a vigil in the desert . While searching for a rock to complete a shelter , Brother Francis encounters a Wanderer , apparently looking for the abbey , who inscribes Hebrew on a rock that appears the perfect fit for the shelter . When Brother Francis removes the rock , he discovers the entrance to an ancient fallout shelter containing " relics " , such as handwritten notes on crumbling memo pads bearing cryptic texts resembling a 20th @-@ century shopping list . He soon realizes that these notes appear to have been written by Leibowitz , his order 's founder . The discovery of the ancient documents causes an uproar at the monastery , as the other monks speculate that the relics once belonged to Leibowitz . Brother Francis ' account of the Wanderer , who ultimately never turned up at the abbey , is also greatly embellished by the other monks amid rumours that he was an apparition of Leibowitz himself ; Francis strenuously denies the embellishments , but equally persistently refuses to deny that the encounter occurred , despite the lack of other witnesses . Abbot Arkos , the head of the monastery , worries that the discovery of so many potentially holy relics in such a short period may cause delays in Leibowitz 's canonization process . Francis is banished back to the desert to complete his vigil and defuse the sensationalism . 
 Many years later , the abbey is visited by <unk> <unk> ( God 's Advocate ) and <unk> ( the Devil 's Advocate ) , the Church 's investigators in the case for Leibowitz 's sainthood . Leibowitz is eventually canonized as Saint Leibowitz – based partly on the evidence Francis discovered in the shelter – and Brother Francis is sent to New Rome to represent the Order at the canonization Mass . He takes the documents found in the shelter and an illumination of one of the documents on which he has spent years working , as a gift to the Pope . 
 En route , he is robbed and his illumination taken . Francis completes the journey to New Rome and is granted an audience with the Pope , who was modeled after Pope John XXIII . Francis presents the Pope with the remaining documents , and the Pope comforts Francis by giving him gold with which to ransom back the illumination ; however , Francis is killed during his return trip by a group of " The Pope 's Children " ( an affectionate name for the people who have been so severely affected by the genetic mutation caused by radiation that they are subhuman in both intelligence and capacity for reason ) , receiving an arrow in the face . The Wanderer discovers and buries Francis 's body . ( The book then focuses on the vultures who were denied their meal ; they fly over the Great Plains and find much food near the Red River until a city @-@ state , based in Texarkana , rises ) . 
 = = = " Fiat Lux " ( Let There Be Light ) = = = 
 In <unk> , the Albertian Order of St. Leibowitz is still preserving the half @-@ understood knowledge from before the Flame Deluge and the subsequent Age of Simplification . The new Dark Age is ending , however , and a new Renaissance is beginning . Thon Taddeo <unk> , a highly regarded secular scholar , is sent by his cousin Hannegan , Mayor of Texarkana , to the abbey . Thon Taddeo , frequently compared to Galileo , is interested in the Order 's preserved collection of Memorabilia . 
 At the abbey , Brother <unk> , a talented engineer , has just finished work on a " generator of electrical essences " , a treadmill @-@ powered electrical generator that powers an arc lamp . He gives credit for the generator to work done by Thon Taddeo . After arriving at the monastery , Thon Taddeo , by studying the Memorabilia , makes several major " discoveries " , and asks the abbot to allow the Memorabilia to be removed to Texarkana . The Abbot Dom Paulo refuses , stating he can continue his research at the abbey . Before departing , the Thon comments that it could take decades to finish analyzing the Memorabilia . 
 Meanwhile , Hannegan makes an alliance with the kingdom of Laredo and the neighboring , relatively civilized city @-@ states against the threat of attack from the nomadic warriors . Hannegan , however , is manipulating the regional politics to effectively neutralize all of his enemies , leaving him in control of the entire region . Monsignor Apollo , the papal nuncio to Hannegan 's court , sends word to New Rome that Hannegan intends to attack the empire of Denver next , and that he intends to use the abbey as a base of operations from which to conduct the campaign . For his actions , Apollo is executed , and Hannegan initiates a church schism , declaring loyalty to the Pope to be punishable by death . The Church excommunicates Hannegan . 
 = = = " Fiat Voluntas Tua " ( Let Thy Will Be Done ) = = = 
 It is the year <unk> , and mankind has nuclear energy and weapons again , as well as starships and extra @-@ solar colonies . Two world superpowers , the Asian Coalition and the Atlantic Confederacy , have been embroiled in a cold war for 50 years . The <unk> Order 's mission of preserving the Memorabilia has expanded to the preservation of all knowledge . 
 Rumors that both sides are assembling nuclear weapons in space and that a nuclear weapon has been detonated increase public and international tensions . At the abbey , the current abbot , Dom <unk> Zerchi , recommends to New Rome that the Church reactivate the Quo Peregrinatur <unk> Pastor <unk> ( " Whither Wanders the Flock , the Shepherd is with Them " ) contingency plans involving " certain vehicles " the Church has had since <unk> . A " nuclear incident " occurs in the Asian Coalition city of Itu Wan : an underground nuclear explosion has destroyed the city , and the Atlantic Confederacy counters by firing a " warning shot " over the South Pacific . 
 New Rome tells Zerchi to proceed with Quo Peregrinatur and plan for departure within three days . He appoints Brother Joshua as mission leader , telling him that this is an emergency plan for perpetuating the Church on the colony planets in the event of a nuclear war on Earth . The Order 's Memorabilia will also accompany the mission . That night the Atlantic Confederacy launches an assault against Asian Coalition space platforms . The Asian Coalition responds by using a nuclear weapon against the Confederacy capital city of Texarkana . A ten @-@ day cease @-@ fire is issued by the World Court . Brother Joshua and the space @-@ trained monks and priests depart on a secret , chartered flight for New Rome , hoping to leave Earth on the starship before the cease @-@ fire ends . 
 During the cease @-@ fire , the abbey offers shelter to refugees fleeing the regions affected by fallout , which results in a battle of wills over euthanasia between the abbot and a doctor from a government emergency response camp . The war resumes and a nuclear explosion occurs near the abbey . Abbot Zerchi tries to flee to safety , bringing with him the abbey 's ciborium containing consecrated hosts , but it is too late . He is trapped by the falling walls of the abbey and finds himself lying under tons of rock and bones as the abbey 's ancient crypts disgorge their contents . Among them is a skull with an arrow 's shaft protruding from its forehead ( presumably that of Brother Francis Gerard from the first section of the book ) . 
 As he lies dying under the abbey 's rubble , Zerchi is startled to encounter Mrs <unk> / Rachel , a <unk> tomato peddler and mutant . However , Mrs. <unk> has been rendered unconscious by the explosion , and may be dying herself . As Zerchi tries to conditionally baptize Rachel , she refuses , and instead takes the ciborium and administers the Eucharist to him . It is implied that she is , like the Virgin Mary , Eve and Jesus , exempt from original sin , and may even be the Second Coming of Christ to begin a new cycle on Earth . Zerchi soon dies , having witnessed an apparent miracle . 
 After the Abbot 's death , the scene flashes to Joshua and the Quo Peregrinatur crew launching as the nuclear explosions begin . Joshua , the last crew member to board the starship , knocks the dirt from his sandals ( a reference to Mt . 10 : 14 , If anyone will not welcome you or listen to your words , leave that home or town and shake the dust off your feet ) , murmuring " Sic transit mundus " ( " Thus passes the world " ) . As a coda , there is a final vignette depicting the ecological aspects of the war : seabirds and fish succumb to the poisonous fallout , and a shark evades death only through moving to particularly deep water , where , it is noted , the shark was " very hungry that season . " 
 = = Major themes = = 
 = = = Recurrence and cyclical history = = = 
 Scholars and critics have noted the theme of cyclic history or recurrence in Miller 's works , epitomized in A Canticle for Leibowitz . David Seed , in discussing the treatment of nuclear holocaust in science fiction in his book American Science Fiction and the Cold War : Literature and Film ( 1992 ) , states , " it was left to Walter M. Miller 's A Canticle for Leibowitz to show recurrence taking place in a narrative spanning centuries . " David N. Samuelson , whose 1969 doctoral dissertation on Canticle is considered the " best overall discussion of the book " , calls the " cyclical theme of technological progress and regress ... the foundation @-@ stone on which A Canticle for Leibowitz is built . " 
 A Canticle for Leibowitz 's circular structure – and the cyclical history it presents – support a number of thematic and structural elements which unify its three sections . Although the novel 's events take place in a fictional future , the three parts allegorically represent crucial phases of Western history . The first section , " Fiat Homo " , depicts a Church preserving civilization , a counterpart to the " Age of Faith " after the Fall of Rome . The action of the second part , " Fiat Lux " , focuses on a renaissance of " secular learning " , echoing the " divergences of Church and State and of science and faith " . " Fiat Voluntas Tua " , the final part , is the analog of contemporary civilization , with its " technological marvels , its obsessions with material , worldly power , and its accelerating neglect of faith and the spirit . " 
 In her analysis of Miller 's fiction , Rose Secrest connects this theme directly to one of Miller 's earlier short fiction works , quoting a passage from " The Ties that Bind " , published in the May 1954 edition of If magazine : " All societies go through three phases .... First there is the struggle to integrate in a hostile environment . Then , after integration , comes an explosive expansion of the culture @-@ conquest .... Then a withering of the mother culture , and the rebellious rise of young cultures . " 
 = = = Church versus state = = = 
 The third part , " Fiat Voluntas Tua " , includes a debate between future Church and state stances on abortion and euthanasia , a thematic issue representative of the larger conflict between Church and state . Literary critic Edward Ducharme claimed that " Miller 's narrative continually returns to the conflicts between the scientist 's search for truth and the state 's power . " 
 = = Literary significance and reception = = 
 Initial response to the novel was mixed , but it drew responses from newspapers and magazines normally inattentive to science fiction . A Canticle for Leibowitz was reviewed in such notable publications as Time , The New Yorker , the New York Times Book Review , and The Spectator . While The New Yorker was negative – calling Miller a " dull , ashy writer guilty of heavy @-@ weight irony " – The Spectator 's was mixed . Also unimpressed , Time said , " Miller proves himself chillingly effective at communicating a kind of post @-@ human lunar landscape of disaster , " but dubbed it intellectually lightweight . The New York Times Book Review , however , was solid in its praise – Martin Levin hailed A Canticle for Leibowitz as an " ingenious fantasy " . The Chicago Tribune gave the book unusual exposure outside the genre in a front page review in the Chicago Tribune Magazine of Books , reviewer Edmund Fuller calling the book " an extraordinary novel " . Genre reviewer Floyd C. Gale praised its " many passages of remarkable power . " A decade later , Time re @-@ characterized its opinion of the book , calling it " an extraordinary novel even by literary standards , [ which ] has flourished by word of mouth for a dozen years . " 
 Sales of the hardcover publication were significant enough to justify two additional reprints of the book within the first year , and the novel was recognized with a Hugo Award by science fiction and fantasy fans as the best science fiction novel of 1960 . 
 In the years since , praise for the work has been consistently high . It is considered a " science @-@ fiction classic ... [ and ] is arguably the best novel written about nuclear apocalypse , surpassing more popularly known books like On the Beach " . A Canticle for Leibowitz has also generated a significant body of literary criticism , including numerous literature journal articles , books and college courses . Acknowledging its serialization roots , literary critic David N. Samuelson writes that A Canticle for Leibowitz " may be the one universally acknowledged literary masterpiece to emerge from magazine SF . " Fellow critic David Cowart places the novel in the realm of works by Evelyn Waugh , Graham Greene , and Walker Percy , in 1975 stating it " stands for many readers as the best novel ever written in the genre . " Percy , a National Book Award recipient , declared Canticle " a mystery : it 's as if everything came together by some felicitous chance , then fell apart into normal negative entropy . I 'm as mystified as ever and hold Canticle in even higher esteem . " Scholars and critics have explored the many themes encompassed in the novel , frequently focusing on its motifs of religion , recurrence , and church versus state . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 A 15 @-@ part full @-@ cast abridged serial of the novel was adapted for radio by John Reeves and broadcast in 1981 by National Public Radio ( NPR ) . Directed by Karl Schmidt , it was produced by Karl Schmidt and Marv <unk> . Carol Cowan narrated the production . 
 In 1993 the BBC broadcast a 90 @-@ minute dramatisation of the first two books , " Fiat Homo " and " Fiat Lux , " with Andrew Price as Brother Francis and Michael McKenzie as Dom Paulo . The adaptation was by Donald Campbell and it was directed by Hamish Wilson . 
 A 2012 adaptation of " Fiat Homo , Part One Of A Canticle For Leibowitz " read by Nigel Lindsay , abridged by Nick McCarty and produced by Philippa <unk> for BBC Radio 4 Extra was broadcast in five 30 minute parts . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 Toward the end of his life , Miller wrote another installment of the Abbey of Saint Leibowitz saga , Saint Leibowitz and the Wild Horse Woman . A full @-@ length novel ( 455 pages ) significantly longer than its predecessor , it is set in AD <unk> , seventy years after the events of " Fiat Lux " but several centuries before " Fiat Voluntas Tua . " Suffering from writer 's block and fearful the new work would go unfinished , Miller arranged with author Terry Bisson to complete it . According to Bisson , all he did was go in and tie up the loose ends Miller had left . The novel tells the story of Brother <unk> St. George of the <unk> abbey who , unlike Brother Francis , wants to be released from his holy vows and leave the abbey . In addition to recounting his travels as Cardinal <unk> 's personal secretary , the book describes the political situation in the 33rd century as Church and empire ( <unk> ) vie for power . Miller died before the novel 's publication . 
 Saint Leibowitz and the Wild Horse Woman has been called " Walter Miller 's other novel . " Reviewer Steven H. Silver points out that this " ... is not to say that Saint Leibowitz and the Wild Horse Woman does not deserve to be read . It is a fantastic novel , only suffering in comparison to Miller 's earlier work . " 
 = George Scratchley Brown = 
 George Scratchley Brown ( 17 August 1918 – 5 December 1978 ) was a United States Air Force general who served as the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . In this capacity , he served as the senior military adviser to the President of the United States , the National Security Council and the Secretary of Defense . Through the commanders of the unified and specified commands , he was also responsible for executing the decisions of the National Command Authorities regarding worldwide readiness and employment of combat forces of the United States Army , Navy , Air Force and Marine Corps . 
 = = Early life = = 
 George Scratchley Brown was born in Montclair , New Jersey , on 17 August 1918 , the son of <unk> Kaye Brown , an Army officer who had graduated with the West Point class of 1913 , and his wife Francis Katherine née Scratchley . As an Army brat , Brown lived in a succession of different towns and military bases . He was an Eagle Scout , and played on the American football varsity team as a freshman at Fort Brown , Texas . He later was a fullback during his junior and senior years at Immaculata High School in Fort Leavenworth , Kansas , and was an all @-@ league in the Catholic high school interstate league . 
 Both Brown and his younger brother Tim set their sights on attending West Point , but their father advised taking a year of college first . Therefore , after graduating from high school in 1936 , Brown enrolled in engineering at the University of Missouri where he joined Sigma Alpha Epsilon . A fine horseman , he played polo . He also enlisted in the 128th Field Artillery Battalion of the Missouri National Guard , rising to the rank of corporal . His father was able to secure a congressional appointment to the United States Military Academy from Kansas for him , and Brown entered on 1 July 1937 . 
 At West Point , Brown was roommates with John Norton , future US Army lieutenant general . Brown once again played polo , and was captain of the team in his senior year , when the West Point team lost in the final to Princeton University . In that year he was also cadet captain and regimental adjutant . He would have liked to have joined the cavalry on graduation like his father , but his standing as 342nd in his class was too low for an appointment to the cavalry . Instead , he was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the infantry on graduation on 11 June 1941 . However , he volunteered for Air Corps training . At West Point he met Alice ( Skip ) Colhoun . An Army brat like himself , Alice met George at a party her father had thrown for the sons of the graduates of the class of 1913 . George and Alice dated for over a year , and were married in 1942 . Their marriage produced three children , two boys and a girl . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Brown commenced his basic flight training in Fairchild PT @-@ 19s at Pine Bluff , Arkansas on 20 August 1941 . He then went to Randolph Field , Texas , for the second phase of his training . The third and final phase was completed at Kelly Field , Texas , where he received his pilot 's wings on 7 March 1942 . He officially transferred to the Air Corps on 4 April , and was promoted to first lieutenant on 18 June . His first assignment after flight training was at Barksdale Field , Louisiana , where , as a member of the 344th Bombardment Squadron of the 93d Bombardment Group , he flew Consolidated B @-@ 24 Liberator . Moving with the organization to Fort Myers , Florida , he flew both antisubmarine patrol and conventional bomber training aircraft . 
 In August 1942 he flew with the 93d Bombardment Group to England , where it became the first B @-@ 24 group to join the Eighth Air Force . He served in various positions with the group , including commander of the 329th Bombardment Squadron , group operations officer and group executive officer . He was promoted to captain on 20 October , major on 13 February 1943 , and lieutenant colonel on 27 August 1943 . High casualties and the rapid expansion of the Air Force paved the way for fast promotion , which Brown 's superiors felt was deserved due to his outstanding performance in combat and leadership skills . Perhaps no one was as surprised at his rapid advance in rank as his father , now a brigadier general , who was serving in North Africa at the time Brown arrived there with the 93d Bombardment Group when it was temporarily detached from the Eighth Air Force . The elder Brown wanted to know " What 's a young <unk> like you doing as a colonel ? ! " 
 It was as executive officer that he took part in Operation Tidal Wave , the low @-@ level bombing raid against oil refineries at Ploieşti , Romania , on 1 August 1943 . The 93d Bombardment Group was the second of five B @-@ 24 groups that raided Ploieşti from a temporary base at Benghazi , Libya . It flew directly into heavy defenses to attack three of the six target refineries . The lead plane , flown by the group commander , Lieutenant Colonel Addison Baker , was shot down . Brown took over the command of the battered 93d and led it through the attack on the target and the journey back to Benghazi . He received the Distinguished Service Cross for his actions on that mission . For his services in combat in the skies over Europe , he was also awarded the Silver Star , two Distinguished Flying Crosses , three Air Medals , the French Croix de guerre with palm and the British Distinguished Flying Cross . 
 Brown was appointed assistant operations officer , 2d Air Division on 8 April 1944 . He was promoted to colonel on 1 October 1944 . Having completed the required 25 missions , he was rotated back to the United States on 9 November 1944 . Alice was shocked to discover " that guy of mine had in fact requested another overseas assignment . He was so gung ho that he had come home , checked on me , and without my knowing it , put in to go back for another tour . " However , the Air Force turned down the request . On 27 January 1945 , Brown became Deputy Assistant Chief of Staff A @-@ 3 with the Air Training Command at Fort Worth , Texas . 
 = = Cold War = = 
 In February 1946 , Brown was posted to the Operations Division of the Air Training Command at Barksdale Field , Louisiana , where he served under Major General Alvin C. Kincaid and his Assistant Chief of Staff for Operations , Brigadier General Thomas C. Darcy . For the first time , Brown received a mediocre effectiveness report . In December 1946 he joined Headquarters Air Defense Command at Mitchel Field , New York , as assistant to Air Chief of Staff , Operations , and later as chief of its ROTC branch . On 1 July 1947 he became assistant deputy for operations . 
 Brown became commander of the 62d Troop Carrier Group at McChord Air Force Base , Washington , on 17 July 1950 . This group operated Douglas C @-@ 124 Globemaster II and Fairchild C @-@ 119 Flying Boxcar aircraft between the West Coast and Japan . With the outbreak of the Korean War in June 1950 , this mission acquired great importance . In July 1951 he assumed command of the 56th Fighter Interceptor Wing at Selfridge Air Force Base , Michigan , part of the Air Defense Command , although he had never flown fighters before . He learned to fly the Lockheed T @-@ 33 Shooting Star , North American F @-@ 86 Sabre and Lockheed F @-@ 94 Starfire . On 1 January 1952 Brown became Assistant Director of Operations of the Fifth Air Force in South Korea . He became Director on 15 July 1952 . 
 Brown returned to the United States where he assumed command of the <unk> Pilot Training Wing at Williams Air Force Base , Arizona , on 6 June 1953 . He entered the National War College in August 1956 . It was the first and only service school he attended after graduating from West Point . After graduation in June 1957 , he served as executive to the Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force , General Thomas D. White . Brown was promoted to brigadier general in August 1959 . He was selected to be military assistant to the Deputy Secretary of Defense , Thomas S. Gates Jr . , and then to the new Secretary of Defense , Robert MacNamara , with the rank of major general . 
 Brown became commander of the Eastern Transport Air Force at McGuire Air Force Base , New Jersey , in August 1963 . In September 1964 , he was selected to organize and command Joint Task Force 2 , a Joint Chiefs of Staff unit formed at Sandia Base , New Mexico , to the test weapon systems of all the military services in order to avoid wasteful duplication of effort . It was staffed by personnel of all three services . In May 1966 he became the Assistant to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , General Earle G. Wheeler , on the recommendation of his predecessor in the role , Lieutenant General Andrew <unk> . Brown was promoted to the same rank on 1 August 1966 . The preoccupation of the Joint Chiefs at this time was the Vietnam War , but he was also involved in the handling of the Pueblo crisis . 
 On 1 August 1968 , Brown assumed command of the Seventh Air Force and also became deputy commander for air operations , U.S. Military Assistance Command Vietnam , with the rank of general . As Seventh Air Force Commander , he was responsible for all Air Force combat air strike , air support and air defense operations in Southeast Asia . In his MACV position , he advised on all matters pertaining to tactical air support and coordinated the Republic of Vietnam and United States air operations in the MACV area of responsibility . According to <unk> , Brown and MACV commander General Creighton Abrams " were like two brothers " . General George F. Keegan felt that : 
 [ Brown 's ] relationship with General Abrams was the finest between a ground theater commander and his air subordinate that I have seen since 1941 . There was complete trust , rapport , an end to gamesmanship between one service and another . It was clear from the outset that Abrams understood finally that in George Brown he had a personal friend whose life and resources were wholly committed to fulfilling the theater job and responsibility that Abrams had upon his shoulders . 
 Brown 's tour of Vietnam ended in September 1970 , and he became Commander , Air Force Systems Command , with headquarters at Andrews Air Force Base , Maryland . This job involved handling a number of troublesome projects , including the F @-@ 111 . 
 = = Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and later life = = 
 On the recommendation of the Secretary of the Air Force , Robert Seamans , President Richard Nixon appointed Brown to be Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force , effective 1 August 1973 . When the Arab @-@ Israeli War of 1973 broke out in October 1973 , Brown realized that the Israeli Air Force would quickly run short of consumables like bombs and ammunition . Without waiting for approval from the Secretary of Defense , he ordered two squadrons of F @-@ 4 Phantoms with Electronic Counter Measures capability be delivered to Israel , along with 100 @,@ 000 tons of bombs and ammunition . Keegan believed that without Brown , " the supplies would never have reached Israel . " 
 However , he did not remain Chief of Staff for long . He was appointed Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff effective 1 July 1974 . As Chairman , Brown was responsible for the handling of the Turkish invasion of Cyprus in 1974 , and the Mayaguez incident , the final act of the war in Vietnam in 1975 . He also dealt with the 1976 shootings and Axe Murder Incident in the Korean Demilitarized Zone , and oversaw the Panama Canal Treaty in 1977 . 
 During his term as Chairman , Brown commented on two occasions – firstly to a Duke University audience in October 1974 , and then to a French reporter in 1976 – that Israel was becoming a burden to The Pentagon and that he believed the reason for continual military aid was due to Jews having control over America 's banks , newspapers and elected officials . His exact words were : 
 It 's so strong you wouldn 't believe now . We have the Israelis coming to us for equipment . We say we can 't possibly get the Congress to support that . They say , ' Don 't worry about the Congress . We will take care of the Congress . ' Now this is somebody from another country , but they can do it . They own , you know , the banks in this country , the newspapers . Just look at where the Jewish money is . 
 Brown 's comments at Duke and subsequent reprimand by President Gerald Ford were reported on the front page of The Washington Post on 13 and 14 November 1974 . There was speculation that Brown would be asked to resign , or at least not be nominated for a second two @-@ year term ; but he was renominated and went on to serve under the new president , Jimmy Carter . 
 Brown was known for the directness of his speech , which sometimes offended those around him . Asked to comment in an interview for Newsweek on his opinion of the British Armed Forces , Brown replied , " They 're no longer a world power . All they 've got are generals , admirals and bands . " Reaction in Britain was mixed . Some , like Lord Allenby condemned Brown 's remarks , while others , like Lord Monckton acknowledged the truth of the remarks . Brown also said that Israel was a " burden " to the United States , and predicted that Iran would become an important military power in the Middle East . 
 Brown was diagnosed with prostate cancer and retired due to ill health on 21 June 1978 . He died at the Malcolm Grow Air Force Hospital at Andrews Air Force Base , Maryland , on 5 December 1978 , and was buried in Arlington National Cemetery , not far from Creighton Abrams . He was survived by his wife and three children . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 = U.S. Route 202 in Delaware = 
 U.S. Route 202 ( US 202 ) is a US Highway running from New Castle , Delaware northeast to Bangor , Maine . The southernmost section of the route in the U.S. state of Delaware passes through northern New Castle County . It runs from its southern terminus at a cloverleaf interchange with US 13 / US 40 near the Wilmington Airport north to the Pennsylvania border in Brandywine Hundred . The route passes the airport concurrent with Delaware Route 141 ( DE 141 ) before coming to an interchange with Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) . At this point , US 202 heads northeast along with I @-@ 95 through Wilmington . Just north of Wilmington , US 202 splits from I @-@ 95 by running north on Concord Pike through the suburban Brandywine Hundred area to the Pennsylvania border . 
 The Concord Pike was originally chartered as the Wilmington and Great Valley Turnpike in 1811 , a turnpike that was to connect Wilmington to Great Valley , Pennsylvania . The Concord Pike between US 13 in Wilmington and the Pennsylvania border became a part of US 122 in 1926 . By 1936 , US 122 was renumbered to US 202 and the road was realigned to head southwest and end at US 13 in downtown Wilmington . In the 1950s , the Concord Pike north of Wilmington was widened into a divided highway . By 1954 , US 202 was realigned to follow US 13 northbound and Washington Street southbound through downtown Wilmington and by 1959 was also extended south along US 13 to end at I @-@ 295 / US 40 in Farnhurst . In 1970 , US 202 was truncated to the I @-@ 95 interchange north of Wilmington . DE 202 was designated along Concord Avenue in 1981 . US 202 was extended to its current terminus in 1984 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 US 202 begins at a cloverleaf interchange with US 13 / US 40 east of the Wilmington Airport , with the road continuing south toward New Castle as DE 141 . From the southern terminus , US 202 heads north @-@ northwest concurrent with DE 141 on four @-@ lane divided Basin Road , passing between Wilmington Airport to the west and residential neighborhoods in Wilmington Manor to the east . The road passes between the Delaware Air National Guard 's New Castle Air National Guard Base to the west and commercial establishments to the east , coming to an intersection with the northern terminus of DE 37 . Past this intersection , the median of US 202 / DE 141 widens as the road intersects Airport Road and becomes a freeway . The road comes to an interchange with I @-@ 95 and the southern terminus of I @-@ 295 . 
 Here , US 202 splits from DE 141 and heads to the east along I @-@ 95 , an eight @-@ lane freeway with a wide median . I @-@ 295 splits off to the east before the freeway curves northeast and interchanges with the southern terminus of I @-@ 495 . Following this , I @-@ 95 / US 202 becomes a six @-@ lane freeway and heads through marshland , crossing the Christina River . The freeway comes to a bridge over Norfolk Southern 's Shellpot Branch , with Amtrak 's Northeast Corridor running a short distance to the northwest . The road enters Wilmington and curves to the north , passing to the west of Frawley Stadium , which is home of the Wilmington Blue Rocks baseball team . I @-@ 95 / US 202 continues towards downtown Wilmington and crosses onto a viaduct , passing over the Northeast Corridor and coming to an interchange that provides access to the downtown area by way of DE 4 and DE 48 . 
 At this point , the four @-@ lane freeway continues northeast , with one @-@ way northbound North Adams Street to the east and one @-@ way southbound North Jackson Street to the west serving as frontage roads . I @-@ 95 / US 202 continues through residential areas to the west of downtown Wilmington , passing over DE 9 , with a southbound exit . Farther northeast , the freeway heads into an alignment below street level and comes to an interchange with DE 52 . Past this interchange , the road continues north and crosses Brandywine Creek , heading through Brandywine Park , which is a part of the Wilmington State Parks complex . The freeway curves northeast again and passes under CSX 's Philadelphia Subdivision before reaching an interchange with the northern terminus of DE 202 at the northern edge of Wilmington , at which point US 202 splits from I @-@ 95 . 
 Upon splitting from I @-@ 95 , US 202 heads north on the six @-@ lane divided Concord Pike into the Brandywine Hundred area , passing Alapocas Run State Park and coming to an interchange with the northern terminus of DE 141 and the southern terminus of DE 261 . Past this interchange , the road enters Fairfax and passes between AstraZeneca 's North American headquarters to the west and businesses to the east . The route continues through commercial areas , heading into Talleyville . At this point , the median of the road widens at the intersection with Garden of Eden Road / Silverside Road . The median narrows again as the road runs curves to the north @-@ northeast . US 202 passes to the west of the Widener University School of Law and the Concord Mall before it reaches an intersection with DE 92 east of First State National Historical Park . Past this intersection , the route runs between business parks to the west and the Brandywine Town Center shopping center to the east . The road narrows to four lanes as it passes farm fields and homes . US 202 reaches the Pennsylvania border , where it continues into that state as Wilmington West Chester Pike . 
 US 202 in Delaware has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 102 @,@ 035 vehicles at the south end of Wilmington along the I @-@ 95 concurrency to a low of 30 @,@ 807 vehicles at the intersection with Augustine Cut @-@ Off between I @-@ 95 and DE 141 / DE 261 . The portion of US 202 in Delaware from the south end of the I @-@ 95 concurrency to the Pennsylvania border is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 The Wilmington and Great Valley Turnpike Company was chartered on January 23 , 1811 to build a turnpike running north from Wilmington along the Concord road , continuing to West Chester and Great Valley in Pennsylvania . Construction on the turnpike progressed throughout the 1810s . The Wilmington and Great Valley Turnpike was known in Delaware as the Concord Pike . The Concord Pike was taken over by New Castle County in 1911 , at which point the tolls were removed . A portion of the Concord Pike near Talleyville was incorporated into the state highway system by 1920 , with the remainder of the road proposed to become a state highway . By 1924 , the Concord Pike between Blue Ball and Talleyville was a state highway , with the remainder remaining a county road . A year later , what is now US 202 along Basin Road was completed as a state highway . When the US Highway System was established in 1926 , US 122 was designated to follow the Concord Pike between US 13 ( Philadelphia Pike ) in Wilmington and the Pennsylvania border , heading north into that state and continuing to US 22 at Whitehouse , New Jersey . On July 1 , 1935 , the portion of the route between Talleyville and the Pennsylvania border was taken over by the state . 
 By 1936 , US 122 was redesignated US 202 . Also at this time , US 202 was realigned in Wilmington to head southwest from Concord Avenue onto Baynard Boulevard , splitting into a one @-@ way pair following Washington Street southbound and West Street northbound as it passed through downtown Wilmington . In this area , US 202 turned east onto Front Street to end at US 13 . In 1941 , the portion of US 202 along Baynard Boulevard and from Talleyville to the Pennsylvania state line was reconstructed . 
 In 1953 , the portion of US 202 along the Concord Pike between the Wilmington border and Murphy Road was widened into a four @-@ lane divided highway . In September 1953 , construction began to widen the portion of US 202 between Murphy Road and Talleyville into a four @-@ lane divided highway . This widening was completed in October 1954 . In 1955 , recommendations were made to widen US 202 between Talleyville and the Pennsylvania border . The divided highway was extended north from Talleyville to the Pennsylvania border in 1957 . 
 By 1954 , US 202 was moved onto a new one @-@ way pair through downtown Wilmington , with the southbound direction splitting from Concord Avenue to follow Baynard Boulevard to Washington Street and the northbound direction following US 13 on one @-@ way Walnut Street and two @-@ way Market Street before heading north onto Concord Avenue . US 202 was extended south along US 13 from downtown Wilmington to an interchange with I @-@ 295 / US 40 in Farnhurst by 1959 . By 1966 , the portion of I @-@ 95 that currently carries US 202 was completed between DE 141 and downtown Wilmington . I @-@ 95 was completed between downtown Wilmington and the Concord Pike in 1969 . 
 In 1970 , the southern terminus of US 202 was truncated to the interchange with I @-@ 95 north of Wilmington . By 1981 , DE 202 was designated along Concord Avenue between US 13 Bus. and I @-@ 95 , extending south from the southern terminus of US 202 . US 202 was extended south to its current terminus at US 13 / US 40 near the Wilmington Airport in 1984 , following I @-@ 95 through Wilmington before heading south along DE 141 . 
 In 1992 , plans were made to build an interchange with DE 141 and DE 261 north of I @-@ 95 ; however , plans for the proposed interchange were placed on hold two years later . In 2000 , the portion of US 202 between I @-@ 95 and DE 141 ( Powder Mill Road ) was improved , with the alignment shifted to eliminate a few curves , the intersections at DE 261 and DE 141 improved , and a southbound transit lane added . In the 2000s , the Blue Ball Construction Project built an interchange at DE 261 that also relocated the northern terminus of DE 141 from the Powder Mill Road intersection further north . The project took place between 2002 and 2007 and cost $ 123 million . 
 In December 2011 , a project began to improve the interchange between I @-@ 95 and US 202 / DE 202 in order to reduce congestion . The project widened the ramp between northbound I @-@ 95 and northbound US 202 to two lanes , the ramp between southbound US 202 and southbound I @-@ 95 was extended to modern standards , and the ramp between southbound I @-@ 95 and southbound DE 202 was relocated from a cloverleaf loop to a directional ramp that intersects DE 202 at a signalized intersection . In addition , the interchange ramps were repaved and bridges were rehabilitated . The project was finished in July 2015 , months behind schedule due to the closure of I @-@ 495 in 2014 . On August 7 , 2015 , a dedication ceremony to mark the completion of the project was held , with Governor Jack Markell , Senator Tom Carper , and DelDOT secretary Jennifer Cohan in attendance . The project , which cost over $ 33 million , was 80 @-@ percent funded by the federal government . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in New Castle County . 
 = Norris Bradbury = 
 Norris Edwin Bradbury ( 30 May 1909 – 20 August 1997 ) , was an American physicist who served as Director of the Los Alamos National Laboratory for 25 years from 1945 to 1970 . He succeeded Robert Oppenheimer , who personally chose Bradbury for the position of director after working closely with him on the Manhattan Project during World War II . Bradbury was in charge of the final assembly of " the Gadget " , detonated in July 1945 for the Trinity test . 
 Bradbury took charge at Los Alamos at a difficult time . Staff were leaving in droves , living conditions were poor and there was a possibility that the laboratory would close . He managed to persuade enough staff to stay , and got the University of California to renew the contract to manage the laboratory . He pushed continued development of nuclear weapons , transforming them from laboratory devices to production models . Numerous improvements made them safer , more reliable and easier to store and handle , and made more efficient use of scarce fissionable materiel . 
 In the 1950s Bradbury oversaw the development of thermonuclear weapons , although a falling out with Edward Teller over the priority given to their development led to the creation of a rival nuclear weapons laboratory , the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory . In later years , he branched out , constructing the Los Alamos Meson Physics Facility to develop the laboratory 's role in nuclear science , and during the Space Race of the 1960s , the laboratory developed the Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application ( NERVA ) . The Bradbury Science Museum is named in his honor . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Norris Bradbury was born in Santa Barbara , California , on 30 May 1909 , one of four children of Edwin Pearly and his wife Elvira née Clausen . One sister died as an infant , and the family adopted twins Bobby and Betty , both of whom served in the United States Marine Corps during World War II . Bradbury was educated at Hollywood High School and Chaffey High School in Ontario , California , graduating at the age of 16 . He then attended Pomona College in Claremont , California , from which he graduated summa cum laude with a Bachelor of Arts ( BA ) in chemistry in 1929 . This earned him membership of the Phi Beta Kappa Society . At Pomona , he met Lois Platt , an English Literature major who was the sister of his college room mate . They were married in 1933 , and had three sons , James , John , and David . 
 Bradbury became interested in physics , and did graduate work at the University of California , Berkeley , where he was a teaching fellow from 1929 to 1931 , and then a Whiting Foundation fellow from 1931 to 1932 . He submitted a PhD thesis on Studies on the mobility of gaseous ions under the supervision of Leonard B. Loeb , and was awarded a National Research Council fellowship . 
 As well as supervising Bradbury 's thesis , Loeb , who had served as a naval reservist during World War I , encouraged Bradbury to apply for a commission as a naval reservist . Bradbury 's commission as an ensign was signed by Lieutenant Commander Chester W. Nimitz , who was the head of the Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps at Berkeley at the time . 
 After two years at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Bradbury became an assistant professor of physics at Stanford University in 1935 , rising to become an associate professor in 1938 , and a full professor in 1943 . He became an expert on the electrical conductivity of gases , the properties of ions , and the behavior of atmospheric electricity , publishing in journals including the Physical Review , Journal of Applied Physics , Journal of Chemical Physics , and the Journal of Atmospheric Electricity and Terrestrial Magnetism . He invented the Bradbury @-@ Nielsen shutter , a type of electrical ion gate , widely used in mass spectrometry in both time @-@ of @-@ flight mass spectrometers and ion mobility spectrometers . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Bradbury was called up for service in World War II in early 1941 , although the Navy allowed him to stay at Stanford until the end of the academic year . He was then sent to the Naval Proving Ground at Dahlgren , Virginia , to work on external ballistics . Already working at Dahlgren were Loeb and Commander Deak Parsons . 
 In June 1944 , Bradbury received orders from Parsons , who was now the Deputy Director of the Manhattan Project 's Los Alamos Laboratory , to report to Albuquerque , New Mexico . Parsons explained that he needed Bradbury to work on the explosive lenses required by an implosion @-@ type nuclear weapon . Bradbury was less than enthusiastic about the prospect , but he was a naval officer , and ultimately agreed to go . 
 At Los Alamos , Bradbury became head of E @-@ 5 , the Implosion Experimentation Group , which put him in charge of the implosion field test program . In August , the laboratory 's director , Robert Oppenheimer , implemented a sweeping reorganisation . E @-@ 5 became part of George Kistiakowsky 's new Explosives Division ( X Division ) , and was renumbered X @-@ 1 . At this point , Bradbury was leading some of the most critical work at the laboratory , as it struggled with the jets that spoiled the perfect spherical shape desired for the implosion process . These were examined with a combination of magnetic , X @-@ ray and RaLa techniques . 
 In March 1945 , Oppenheimer created Project Alberta under Parsons to carry out the Manhattan Project 's ultimate mission : the preparation and delivery of nuclear weapons in combat . Bradbury was transferred to Project Alberta to head the Fat Man assembly group . In July 1945 , Bradbury supervised the preparation of " the Gadget " , as the bomb was known , at the Trinity nuclear test . " For me to say " , Bradbury later recalled , " I had any deep emotional thoughts about Trinity ... I didn 't . I was just damned pleased that it went off . " 
 = = Director of Los Alamos = = 
 Oppenheimer submitted his resignation as Director of the Los Alamos Laboratory , but remained until a successor could be found . The Director of the Manhattan Project , Major General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , wanted someone with both a solid academic background and a high standing within the project . Oppenheimer recommended Bradbury . This was agreeable to Groves , who liked the fact that as a naval officer Bradbury was both a military man and a scientist . Bradbury accepted the offer on a six @-@ month trial basis . 
 Parsons arranged for Bradbury to be quickly discharged from the Navy , which awarded him the Legion of Merit for his wartime services . He remained in the Naval Reserve , though , ultimately retiring in 1961 with the rank of captain . On 16 October 1945 , there was a ceremony at Los Alamos at which Groves presented the laboratory with the Army @-@ Navy " E " Award , and presented Oppenheimer with a certificate of appreciation . Bradbury became the laboratory 's second director the following day . 
 The first months of Bradbury 's directorship were particularly difficult . He had hoped that Atomic Energy Act of 1946 would be quickly passed by Congress and the wartime Manhattan Project would be superseded by a new , permanent organization . It soon became clear that this would take more than six months . President Harry S. Truman did not sign the act creating the Atomic Energy Commission into law until 1 August 1946 , and it did not become active until 1 January 1947 . In the meantime , Groves ' legal authority to act was limited . 
 Most of the scientists at Los Alamos were eager to return to their laboratories and universities , and by February 1946 all of the wartime division heads had left , but a talented core remained . Darol Froman became head of Robert Bacher 's G division , now renamed M Division . Eric Jette became responsible for Chemistry and Metallurgy , John H. Manley for Physics , George Placzek for Theory , Max Roy for Explosives , and Roger Wagner for Ordnance . The number of personnel at Los Alamos plummeted from its wartime peak of over 3 @,@ 000 to around 1 @,@ 000 , but many were still living in temporary wartime accommodation . To make matters worse , the water pipe to Los Alamos froze and the water had to be supplied by tanker trucks . Despite the reduced staff , Bradbury still had to provide support for Operation Crossroads , the nuclear tests in the Pacific . 
 Bradbury pushed continued development of nuclear weapons to take them from laboratory devices to production models . There were numerous improvements that could make them more safe , reliable and easy to store and handle , and make more efficient use of scarce fissionable materiel . While Bradbury gave priority to improved fission weapons , research still continued on " Alarm Clock " , a boosted nuclear weapon , and the " Super " , a thermonuclear weapons design . The new fission designs were tested during Operation Sandstone in 1948 . The Mark 4 nuclear bomb became the first nuclear weapon to be mass @-@ produced on an assembly line . 
 As the future became more certain , Bradbury began looking for a new site for the laboratory away from the crowded town center . In 1948 , Bradbury submitted a proposal to the Atomic Energy Commission for a new $ 107 million facility on the South Mesa , linked to the town by a new bridge over the canyon . 
 All this time , Bradbury remained nominally a professor in absentia at Stanford . The Los Alamos Laboratory was nominally run under a wartime contract with the University of California , but a clause in the contract allowed the University to terminate the contract three months after the end of the war . The university duly served notice , but Bradbury managed to get it rescinded , and in 1948 the contract was renewed . In 1951 , he became a professor at the University of California . 
 By 1951 , the laboratory had come up with the Teller @-@ Ulam design , and thermonuclear tests were conducted during Operation Greenhouse . Tensions between Bradbury and Edward Teller over the degree of priority given to thermonuclear weapons development led to the creation of a second nuclear weapons laboratory , the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory . 
 In later years , Bradbury branched out , constructing the Los Alamos Meson Physics Facility to develop the laboratory 's role in nuclear science . During the Space Race of the 1960s , the laboratory worked on Project Rover , developing the Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application ( NERVA ) . The laboratory demonstrated the feasibility and value of nuclear rocket propulsion . 
 For many years , Bradbury was responsible for much of the administration of the town of Los Alamos . The town established impressive health and education facilities . Eventually the new technical area was built outside the town , and on 18 February 1957 the security gates were taken down . Finally , the town became an incorporated community and the director 's civic responsibilities ended . 
 In 1966 , Bradbury was awarded the Department of Defense Medal for Distinguished Public Service for " exceptionally meritorious civilian service to the Armed Forces and the United States of America in a position of great responsibility as director , Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory " . His citation went on to say that " The outstanding international reputation of the Los Alamos Laboratory is directly attributable to his exceptional leadership . The United States is indebted to Dr. Bradbury and his laboratory , to a very large degree , for our present nuclear capability . " He also received the Enrico Fermi Award in 1970 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Bradbury retired as director of Los Alamos Laboratory in 1970 . His successor , Harold Agnew , invited him to become a senior consultant , but Bradbury declined the offer , although he did serve as a consultant for other government agencies , including the National Academy of Sciences , and as a member of the boards of the Los Alamos Medical Center , the First National Bank of Santa Fe , the Los Alamos YMCA and the Santa Fe Neurological Society . 
 In 1969 the Governor of New Mexico , David Cargo , appointed Bradbury as a regent of the University of New Mexico , but this was a turbulent time for the university . In response to the Kent State Shootings in May 1970 , students and antiwar activist Jane Fonda marched on the home of Ferrel Heady , the President of the University of New Mexico . When he refused to meet with them , the students called a strike . Classes were cancelled , rallies were held and students occupied the Student Union Building . Cargo called in the New Mexico National Guard to remove them , and eleven people were bayoneted . Cargo 's successor , Bruce King , replaced Bradbury and another regent . 
 In the mid @-@ 1990s , Bradbury accidentally hit his leg while chopping firewood . Gangrene set in , and his right leg was amputated below the knee . It spread to his left leg , and part of his left foot was amputated , leaving him in a wheelchair . The disease eventually proved fatal , and he died on 20 August 1997 . He was survived by his wife Lois , who died in January 1998 , and his three sons . A funeral service was held in Los Alamos , and he was buried at Guaje Pines Cemetery in Los Alamos . 
 = Regioni @-@ class cruiser = 
 The Regioni class was a group of six protected cruisers built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) in the late 1880s through the early 1900s . The class comprised Umbria , Lombardia , Etruria , Liguria , Elba , and Puglia , all of which were named for regions of Italy with the exception of Elba , which was named for the island . The class is sometimes referred as the Umbria class , for the first ship to be laid down . The ships , built by four different shipyards , varied slightly in their size , speed , and armament , but all could steam at about 18 kn ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) and their main armament consisted of four 15 @-@ centimeter ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns and six 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) guns . 
 The ships served in a variety of roles throughout their careers , including scouts for the main fleet , colonial cruisers , and representatives of Italy at major foreign events . Elba observed the Russo @-@ Japanese War , including the Battle of Chemulpo Bay in 1904 , where she picked up Russian survivors . Lombardia was converted into a depot ship for submarines in 1906 . Elba and Liguria were equipped with observation balloons in 1907 – 1908 . In 1910 , Umbria was sold to Haiti and renamed Consul Gostrück , though she quickly sank under the care of her inexperienced crew . The remaining ships , except for Lombardia , took part in the Italo @-@ Turkish War in 1911 – 12 , where they provided gunfire support to Italian troops , bombarded Ottoman ports , and instituted a blockade in the Red Sea . 
 By World War I , most of the ships had been withdrawn to secondary roles , with Elba having been converted into a seaplane tender . Puglia was the only member of the class to take an active role , based out of Durazzo . Etruria was deliberately blown up by the Regia Marina as a deception operation against Austria @-@ Hungary . The remaining ships were broken up for scrap in the early 1920s , though the bow section of Puglia was preserved at the Vittoriale degli italiani museum . 
 = = Design = = 
 The design for the Regioni class , sometimes referred to as the Umbria class after the lead ship , was prepared by the naval architect Edoardo Masdea , and it was the first protected cruiser designed in Italy . All previous ships of the type had been designed in Britain , or in the case of the Etna class , enlarged copies of the British @-@ designed Giovanni Bausan . As a first attempt , the ships of the Regioni class proved to be a disappointment , owing to their slow speed and insufficient armor protection . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 All six ships varied slightly in their dimensions . The ships were 80 to 83 @.@ 2 meters ( 262 to 273 ft ) long at the waterline and 88 @.@ 25 m ( 289 @.@ 5 ft ) long overall . They had a beam of 12 @.@ 03 to 12 @.@ 72 m ( 39 @.@ 5 to 41 @.@ 7 ft ) and a draft of 4 @.@ 67 to 5 @.@ 35 m ( 15 @.@ 3 to 17 @.@ 6 ft ) . The ships displaced 2 @,@ 245 to 2 @,@ 689 metric tons ( 2 @,@ 210 to 2 @,@ 647 long tons ; 2 @,@ 475 to 2 @,@ 964 short tons ) normally and 2 @,@ 411 to 3 @,@ 110 t ( 2 @,@ 373 to 3 @,@ 061 long tons ; 2 @,@ 658 to 3 @,@ 428 short tons ) at full load . The ships were originally designed with a fore and aft sailing rig , though this was quickly removed . Instead , they were fitted with two pole masts equipped with spotting tops . They had a crew of between 213 @-@ 78 . 
 = = = Machinery = = = 
 The ships ' propulsion system consisted of a pair of horizontal triple @-@ expansion engines , with steam supplied by four cylindrical water @-@ tube boilers . The boilers were trunked into a pair of funnels on the centerline . On her speed trials , Umbria reached a maximum of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) at 7 @,@ 400 indicated horsepower ( 5 @,@ 500 kW ) . Lombardia made 18 @.@ 4 kn ( 34 @.@ 1 km / h ; 21 @.@ 2 mph ) at 6 @,@ 010 ihp ( 4 @,@ 480 kW ) , while Etruria reached 18 @.@ 3 kn ( 33 @.@ 9 km / h ; 21 @.@ 1 mph ) at 7 @,@ 018 ihp ( 5 @,@ 233 kW ) . Liguria made 18 @.@ 1 kn ( 33 @.@ 5 km / h ; 20 @.@ 8 mph ) at 5 @,@ 536 ihp ( 4 @,@ 128 kW ) and Elba , the slowest member of the class , made 17 @.@ 9 kn ( 33 @.@ 2 km / h ; 20 @.@ 6 mph ) at 7 @,@ 471 ihp ( 5 @,@ 571 kW ) Puglia was by far the fastest , capable of steaming at a speed of 20 kn ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . The ships had a cruising radius of about 2 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 900 km ; 2 @,@ 400 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 All six ships were armed with a main battery of four 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) L / 40 guns mounted singly , with two side by side forward and two side by side aft . Six 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) L / 40 guns were placed between them , with three on each broadside . The ships ' light armament varied . All of the ships save Lombardia were equipped with eight 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) guns , which had an additional two of these guns . Umbria was also equipped with one 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) gun and nine 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns , while Puglia had eight of the 37 mm guns and Elba had six of them . Liguria and Etruria only had two 37 mm guns , and Lombardia had none . All six ships had a pair of machine guns and two 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes . 
 The ships all had their armament repeatedly revised throughout their careers . By 1905 , each ship had had two of the 15 cm guns replaced with two additional 12 cm guns , and their secondary battery was standardized at eight 57 mm guns and eight 37 mm guns , with the exception of Puglia , which had six and two guns , respectively . Puglia had also had her two torpedo tubes removed by this point . In 1914 , Liguria had all of her 15 cm guns removed , along with six of the 37 mm guns . Her armament was reduced further in 1917 when she was refitted as a minelayer ; at this point , she mounted only six 12 cm guns and two 37 mm guns . Starting in 1915 , Etruria and Lombardia were equipped with only six 12 cm guns , six 57 mm guns for Etruria and eight for Lombardia , two 37 mm guns , and their torpedo tubes . At the same time , Elba was rearmed with six 12 cm guns , two 37 cm guns , and one machine gun ; she retained her torpedo tubes . 
 The first five ships were protected by a 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick deck , and their conning tower had 50 mm thick sides . Puglia had a deck that was only 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) thick , though she had the same thickness of armor on her conning tower . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 The ships of the Regioni class served in a variety of roles throughout their careers . Their first decade in service was marked by frequent deployments abroad , interspersed between stints in the main Italian fleet , where they served as scouts for the battleships . In 1895 , Etruria and much of the main fleet visited Germany for the opening ceremonies for the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal . Lombardia was stationed in South America in 1896 , when an outbreak of yellow fever killed half of her crew while she was in Rio de Janeiro . In 1897 , Umbria and Liguria were assigned to the Cruiser Squadron of the main fleet . Lombardia was deployed to China in 1901 , where she replaced Elba , and to Italian Somaliland in 1903 . There , she briefly skirmished with Somali rebels . 
 Elba was present in Korea during the Russo @-@ Japanese War , which took place primarily in neighboring Manchuria . She witnessed the Battle of Chemulpo Bay in February 1904 and rescued Russian survivors along with British and French cruisers . In 1905 , Umbria represented Italy at the Lewis and Clark Centennial Exposition in Portland , Oregon . Lombardia was converted into a depot ship for submarines in 1906 – 08 . Etruria visited the United States twice for major events , the Jamestown Exposition in 1907 and the Hudson @-@ Fulton Celebration in 1909 . Elba and Liguria were modified to operate an observation balloon to assist in spotting naval mines , which could be more easily seen from the air . In December 1910 , Umbria was sold to the Haitian Navy and renamed Consul Gostrück , though she sank shortly after the transfer due to her new crew 's inexperience . 
 All of the remaining ships participated in the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 1912 , with the exception of Lombardia which was stationed in the Adriatic . Etruria and Liguria took part in the assault on Benghazi and thereafter provided gunfire support to Italian forces in North Africa . Puglia was stationed in East Africa for the duration of the war , and frequently bombarded Ottoman ports . These included a diversionary attack that helped the cruiser Piemonte and two destroyers sink or force aground a flotilla of seven Ottoman gunboats in the Battle of Kunfuda Bay . In January 1912 Liguria and Elba joined the fleet in the Red Sea , where they imposed a blockade on Ottoman ports in the region , coupled with frequent bombardments of Ottoman positions . 
 In 1914 Elba was converted into the first dedicated seaplane tender in the Italian fleet . She was nevertheless too small to be of real use , and she remained in service for only two years . Puglia was the only ship of the class to take an active role in the First World War ; in 1915 , while patrolling off Durazzo she briefly encountered the Austro @-@ Hungarian cruiser SMS Novara , which retreated before either ship could open fire . She covered the withdrawal of elements of the Serbian Army from Durazzo and shelled the pursuing Austro @-@ Hungarian Army . Etruria was deliberately blown up in Livorno on 13 August 1918 to fool Austria @-@ Hungary into believing its espionage network , which had been thoroughly compromised , was still operational . Elba was sold for scrapping in January 1920 , followed by her sister Lombardia in July . That month , Puglia became involved in the civil unrest in Split , and the ship 's captain and another sailor were murdered by a group of Croat nationalists . Liguria was sold in May 1921 and broken up . The Navy sold Puglia in March 1923 , but while she was being dismantled Benito Mussolini donated her bow section to the Vittoriale degli italiani museum . 
 = Greatest Hits ( Lost ) = 
 " Greatest Hits " is the 21st episode of the third season of Lost and 70th episode of the series . It was written by co @-@ executive producers Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz and directed by supervising producer Stephen Williams . The episode first aired on May 16 , 2007 , on ABC in the United States and on CTV in Canada . " Greatest Hits " was viewed by 12 million Americans and was well received by critics . Lost 's editors received a Golden Reel Award nomination . 
 The episode takes place on December 22 , 2004 , 92 days after the crash of Oceanic Airlines Flight 815 . A group of survivors prepare for an upcoming raid on their camp by the " Others " , while the rest prepare to contact a nearby freighter . Charlie Pace ( played by Dominic Monaghan ) recounts the five greatest moments of his life , which are depicted in flashbacks , as he prepares to fulfill Desmond Hume 's ( Henry Ian Cusick ) premonitions of his death . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Others ' leader Ben Linus ( Michael Emerson ) orders ten of the Others to go to the survivors ' camp to kidnap any pregnant women that night — a night earlier than was scheduled . Ben 's adopted daughter Alex ( Tania Raymonde ) persuades her boyfriend Karl ( Blake Bashoff ) to canoe to the survivors ' beach to warn them . The survivors ' leader Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) plans to kill the ambushing Others with dynamite retrieved by island resident Danielle Rousseau ( Mira Furlan ) . Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) , Jin Kwon ( Daniel Dae Kim ) and Bernard Nadler ( Sam Anderson ) are selected to stay behind to shoot the dynamite @-@ rigged tents when the Others arrive . 
 Desmond tells Charlie about his latest premonition : Charlie 's girlfriend Claire Littleton ( Emilie de Ravin ) and her baby Aaron will escape the island via helicopter if Charlie flips a switch in a Dharma Initiative station and drowns . Sayid tells Jack that he may be able to communicate with the freighter roughly 130 kilometres offshore . He can use the satellite phone of Naomi Dorrit ( Marsha Thomason ) , a woman working with those on the boat , once he goes to the radio tower to disable Rousseau 's distress signal . Juliet Burke ( Elizabeth Mitchell ) informs Sayid that this will not work because the underwater " Looking Glass " is blocking outgoing transmissions . Sayid realizes that a cable he found seventy days before connects to this station and that they will need someone to go on a probable suicide mission there , and Charlie volunteers . 
 Naomi tells Charlie that his band Drive Shaft released a successful greatest hits album after the crash of Flight 815 . Flashbacks show Charlie 's " greatest hits " of his life in descending order , which Charlie writes down and gives them to Desmond for Claire . 
 The first time that he heard his band 's breakout song on the radio . 
 When his father , Simon ( John Henry Canavan ) , taught him how to swim at Butlins . 
 The time when his brother Liam ( Neil Hopkins ) gave him their grandfather <unk> Stratton 's " DS " ring , for which Drive Shaft is named , as a Christmas present . 
 When Charlie saved a woman ( he didn 't know it was Nadia ) from being mugged and was called a hero . 
 The night following the crash , when he met Claire . 
 Before paddling out to the Looking Glass with Desmond , Charlie assures Claire that he will be fine , kisses her goodbye and leaves his ring in Aaron 's crib . Once Desmond and Charlie arrive over the station , Charlie knocks Desmond out with an oar and dives into the water . After diving underwater and entering the station , two Others named Greta ( Lana Parrilla ) and Bonnie ( Tracy Middendorf ) appear with guns aimed at Charlie . 
 = = Production = = 
 Most of the island scenes were filmed from April 9 , 2007 to April 12 . A detailed episode synopsis was uploaded online before the episode aired and Disney investigated the leak . The name of the Dharma station in the episode is an allusion to Lewis Carroll 's novel Through the Looking @-@ Glass . Dominic Monaghan was inspired by Leonardo DiCaprio 's underwater performance in Titanic and opened his mouth briefly underwater to appear under greater duress . 
 This episode began the resolution of the story arc about Desmond 's prophecy regarding Charlie 's inevitable death , which began earlier in the season and would ultimately end in the finale . The storyline was conceived while producing the latter part of the second season when the writers were brainstorming ideas for a new storyline for Charlie . While Desmond could have had flashes of the future about anyone , Charlie was chosen over a less significant character so that the story would have higher stakes . Additionally , the writers decided that it would be a great way to bring out the heroic side of Charlie , with Charlie being the only character to die willingly . Despite the problems in Charlie 's life , the writers believed that Charlie always was a good person and wanted to show that with the happiest moments of the character 's life . Monaghan thought that " Greatest Hits " was made " to allow the audience to sit with [ his character 's fate ] long enough to prepare themselves for what was going to happen [ in the finale ] " . 
 " Greatest Hits " marked the first appearance for married couple Rose and Bernard since the late second season and fans welcomed the recurring characters ' return . The writers cited the actors ' other projects as a reason for their absence . Additionally , it was feared that fans would complain if they appeared , when many actors with star billing had received limited screentime in the early third season . The writers also commented that they do not want to have the couple on the show if they are just going to be standing in the background ; they want to have Rose and Bernard in the show with interesting storylines . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Greatest Hits " brought in an average of 12 @.@ 32 million American viewers , making Lost the fifteenth most watched series of the week ; this was consistent with previous Lost episodes in the same timeslot . The first half was viewed by 11 @.@ 9 million , and the audience increased to 12 @.@ 8 million in the second half . The episode received a 5 @.@ 2 / 14 in the key adults 18 – 49 demographic , placing it as the top @-@ rated scripted program for the night . In Canada , " Greatest Hits " was seen by 875 @,@ 000 people , ranking twenty @-@ seventh for the week . In the United Kingdom , the episode attracted 1 @.@ 21 million viewers , and was the second most watched program of the week on the non @-@ terrestrial channels , beaten only by Katie & Peter : The Next Chapter . In Australia , Lost was the fifty @-@ first most viewed show of the week , bringing in 1 @.@ 001 million viewers . 
 Patrick Day of the Los Angeles Times thought that " as far as penultimate set @-@ up @-@ to @-@ the @-@ big @-@ finale episodes go , ' Greatest Hits ' was above par in more than one way . " Day celebrated the return of Jack " from Mt . Boring " , the use of drums in Michael Giacchino 's musical score and the return of Rose and Bernard . Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly wrote that Monaghan " turned in his best performance yet on Lost " and described the final scene as " breathtaking " with " a stunningly realized , Emmy @-@ worthy triumph of F / X. " Kristin Veitch of E ! also enjoyed Monaghan 's acting and called the episode a " perfect example " of the series ' high quality . Charlie McCollum of the San Jose Mercury News described the latter episodes of the third season as " an absolute thrill ride " . Chris Carabott of IGN rated the episode as an 8 @.@ 5 / 10 , commending the character development of Jack and Charlie , and the acting skills of Emerson , who portrays Ben . Lulu Bates of Television Without Pity graded the episode as an " A – " . Erin Martell of AOL 's TV Squad rated " Greatest Hits " as a 6 / 7 , saying that it succeeded in building momentum for the season finale , but pointed out the plot inconsistency regarding Charlie 's ( in ) ability to swim . Scott Juba of The Trades decided that " Greatest Hits " was the best episode of the third season , saying that the flashbacks " evok [ e ] the type of identifiable human emotions that drives the success of Lost . The true genius of the show lies not in its plot twists or mysteries but rather in its ability to make the audience invested in the characters by evoking themes that almost anyone can identify with . " Jon Lachonis of BuddyTV noted that the episode was " wildly successful " in turning Charlie into a likeable and relatable character . 
 This episode was submitted for consideration for Outstanding Directing and Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series for the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards . This episode was nominated for the Golden Reel Award in the Best Sound Editing in Television : Short Form – Dialogue and Automated Dialogue Replacement category . 
 = HMS Northumberland ( 1866 ) = 
 HMS Northumberland was the last of the three Minotaur @-@ class armoured frigates built for the Royal Navy during the 1860s . She had a different armour scheme and heavier armament than her sister ships , and was generally regarded as a half @-@ sister to the other ships of the class . The ship spent her career with the Channel Fleet and occasionally served as a flagship . Northumberland was placed in reserve in 1890 and became a training ship in 1898 . She was converted into a coal hulk in 1909 and sold in 1927 , although the ship was not scrapped until 1935 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Minotaur @-@ class armoured frigates were essentially enlarged versions of the ironclad HMS Achilles with heavier armament , armour , and more powerful engines . They retained the broadside ironclad layout of their predecessor , but their sides were fully armoured to protect the 50 guns they were designed to carry . Their plough @-@ shaped ram was also more prominent than that of Achilles . 
 Northumberland was 400 feet 4 inches ( 122 @.@ 0 m ) long between perpendiculars and had a beam of 58 feet 5 inches ( 17 @.@ 8 m ) and a draught of 27 feet 9 inches ( 8 @.@ 5 m ) . The ship displaced 10 @,@ 584 long tons ( 10 @,@ 754 t ) and had a tonnage of 6 @,@ 621 tons burthen . Her hull was subdivided by 15 watertight transverse bulkheads and had a double bottom underneath the engine and boiler rooms . The ship was considered " a steady gun platform , able to maintain her speed in a seaway and satisfactory in manoeuvre " . She was authorized a crew of 705 officers and enlisted men , but actually carried 800 men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Northumberland had a two @-@ cylinder trunk steam engine , made by John Penn and Sons , driving a single propeller using steam provided by 10 rectangular fire @-@ tube boilers . It produced a total of 6 @,@ 558 indicated horsepower ( 4 @,@ 890 kW ) during the ship 's sea trials on 15 September 1868 and Northumberland had a maximum speed of 14 @.@ 1 knots ( 26 @.@ 1 km / h ; 16 @.@ 2 mph ) . The ships normally carried 750 long tons ( 760 t ) of coal , but had a maximum capacity of 1 @,@ 400 long tons ( 1 @,@ 400 t ) , enough to steam 2 @,@ 825 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 232 km ; 3 @,@ 251 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 Originally designed with three masts , Northumberland was fitted with five masts until her 1875 – 79 refit when two were removed and she was re @-@ rigged as a barque . Northumberland only made 7 knots ( 13 km / h ; 8 @.@ 1 mph ) under sail , mainly because the ship 's propeller could only be disconnected and not hoisted up into the stern of the ship to reduce drag , the worst speed of any ironclad of her era . Admiral George A. Ballard described the Minotaur @-@ class ships as " the dullest performers under canvas of the whole masted fleet of their day , and no ships ever carried so much dress to so little purpose . " 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Unlike her half @-@ sisters , Northumberland was armed with a mix of seven @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) , eight @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) , and nine @-@ inch ( 229 mm ) rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns . All 4 nine @-@ inch and 18 eight @-@ inch were mounted on the main deck while 4 eight @-@ inch guns were fitted on the upper deck as chase guns . Both seven @-@ inch guns were mounted in the stern on the main deck , also as chase guns . 
 The nine @-@ inch gun was credited with the ability to penetrate 11 @.@ 3 inches ( 287 mm ) of wrought iron armour at the muzzle . The eight @-@ inch gun could penetrate 9 @.@ 6 @-@ inch ( 244 mm ) of armour and the seven @-@ inch gun could penetrate 7 @.@ 7 inches ( 196 mm ) . 
 Northumberland was partially rearmed in 1875 with an armament of 7 nine @-@ inch guns , 4 on the main deck , 2 forward chase guns and 1 rear chase gun . Two eight @-@ inch guns replaced the seven @-@ <unk> on the main deck at the stern ; the other 18 eight @-@ inch guns remained where they were . In 1886 two six inches ( 152 mm ) breech @-@ loading guns replaced two eight @-@ inch guns . Six quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 @-@ mm ) guns , 10 QF 3 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns , and six machine guns were later added . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 Unlike her half @-@ sisters , the entire side of Northumberland 's hull was not covered with wrought iron armour . To compensate for the additional weight of her armament , only her battery was protected above the main deck . The ship was fitted with a complete waterline armour belt that tapered from 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) at the ends to 5 @.@ 5 inches ( 140 mm ) amidships . The armour extended 5 feet 9 inches ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) below the waterline . The sides of the battery were 184 @.@ 5 feet ( 56 @.@ 2 m ) long and it was protected by 5 @.@ 5 @-@ inch armour on all sides , including transverse bulkheads fore and aft of the guns . The two forward chase guns on the upper deck were also protected by armoured bulkheads , but the stern chase guns on that same deck were entirely unprotected . The armour was backed by 10 inches ( 254 mm ) of teak . The ship also had a conning tower protected by 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch armour plates . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Northumberland , named after the ceremonial county , was ordered on 2 September 1861 from the Millwall Ironworks . She was laid down on 10 October 1861 at its shipyard in Millwall , London . She was altered while on the building slip after Sir Edward Reed succeeded Isaac Watts as Chief Constructor . Unlike her half @-@ sisters , the ship spent five years on the stocks before she was ready to be launched , partially due to frequent changes in design , although Northumberland was much closer to completion . The additional weight caused her stick for an hour on the slipway before she slid halfway down with her stern only supported by air , threatening to buckle the ship . Efforts by hydraulic jacks and tugboats failed to get her into the water on the next spring tide failed , but the use of pontoons on 17 April 1866 proved successful . Her builders went into bankruptcy while the ship was being launched and the liquidators seized Northumberland as a company asset once she was in the water . Eight months passed before the Admiralty could take possession and begin fitting out the ship . She was commissioned in October 1868 and completed on 8 October for a cost a total of £ 444 @,@ 256 . 
 The ship 's first posting was to the Channel Fleet , where she remained until 1873 . Her first captain , Roderick Dew , had all of her yards painted black so that she could be visually distinguished from her half @-@ sisters , whose yards were white . During this time she helped her half @-@ sister Agincourt tow a floating drydock from England to Madeira where it would be picked up by Warrior and Black Prince and taken to Bermuda . The ships departed the Nore on 23 June 1869 , loaded down with 500 long tons ( 510 t ) of coal stowed in bags on their gun decks , and transferred the floating dock 11 days later after an uneventful voyage . She was anchored at Funchal , Madeira , on Christmas Day 1872 , when a storm parted her anchor chain and the ship drifted onto the ram bow of the ironclad Hercules . Northumberland was seriously damaged below the waterline , with one compartment flooded , though she was able to steam to Malta for repairs . 
 While her half @-@ sister Minotaur , normally flagship of the Channel Fleet , was refitting in 1873 – 75 , Agincourt , normally the flagship of the fleet second @-@ in @-@ command , replaced her as flagship and Northumberland became flagship of the second @-@ in @-@ command until Minotaur 's return to duty . She served as the flagship for Rear Admirals George Hancock and Lord John Hay . Northumberland received her own refit and rearmament from 1875 – 79 and rejoined the Channel Fleet upon its completion . The ship was paid off in 1885 for another refit and became the flagship of Vice Admirals Sir William Hewett and John Baird , successive commanders of the Channel Fleet , upon her completion in 1887 . 
 Northumberland was assigned to the 1st Reserve Squadron at the Isle of Portland in 1890 – 91 and then at Devonport from 1891 – 98 . She was hulked in 1898 as a stokers ' training ship at the Nore and renamed Acheron . From 1909 – 27 the ship served as a coal hulk at Invergordon , renamed <unk> in 1909 and then <unk> in 1926 . The ship was sold in 1927 , but was then resold and renamed as <unk> for service at Dakar until she was scrapped in 1935 . 
 = = Relics = = 
 Two large 1870s half @-@ scale models of the ship are at the Museum of London Docklands . 
