 = The Satanic Bible = 
 The Satanic Bible is a collection of essays , observations , and rituals published by Anton LaVey in 1969 . It contains the core principles of Satanism , and is considered the foundation of its philosophy and dogma . It has been described as the most important document to influence contemporary Satanism . Though The Satanic Bible is not considered to be sacred scripture in the way the Christian Bible is to Christianity , LaVeyan Satanists regard it as an authoritative text as it is a contemporary text that has attained for them scriptural status . It extols the virtues of exploring one 's own nature and instincts . Believers have been described as " atheistic Satanists " because they believe that God is not an external entity , but rather something that each person creates as a projection of his or her own personality — a benevolent and stabilizing force in his or her life . There have been thirty printings of The Satanic Bible , through which it has sold over a million copies . 
 The Satanic Bible is composed of four books : The Book of Satan , The Book of Lucifer , The Book of Belial , and The Book of Leviathan . The Book of Satan challenges the Ten Commandments and the Golden Rule , and promotes <unk> . The Book of Lucifer holds most of the philosophy in The Satanic Bible , with twelve chapters discussing topics such as indulgence , love , hate , and sex . LaVey also uses the book to dispel rumors surrounding the religion . In The Book of Belial , LaVey details rituals and magic . He discusses the required mindset and focus for performing a ritual , and provides instructions for three rituals : those for sex , compassion , or destruction . The Book of Leviathan provides four invocations for Satan , lust , compassion , and destruction . It also lists the nineteen Enochian Keys ( adapted from John Dee 's Enochian keys ) , provided in both Enochian and translated to English . 
 There have been both positive and negative reactions to The Satanic Bible . It has been described as " razor @-@ sharp " and " influential " . Criticism of The Satanic Bible stems both from qualms over LaVey 's writing and disapproval of the content itself . LaVey has been criticized for plagiarizing sections , and accusations have been made that his philosophies are largely borrowed . The Satanic Bible has been heavily condemned as dangerous , particularly to adolescents . Attempts have been made to ban the book in schools , public libraries , and prisons , though these attempts are somewhat rare . 
 = = History = = 
 There are multiple stories of the birth of The Satanic Bible . In the introduction to the 2005 – present edition , High Priest Peter H. Gilmore describes LaVey as having compiled The Satanic Bible on his own from monographs he had written about the Church of Satan and its rituals . Gilmore lists a number of people who influenced LaVey 's writings : Ayn Rand , Friedrich Nietzsche , H. L. Mencken , the members of the carnival with whom LaVey had supposedly worked in his youth , P. T. Barnum , Mark Twain , John Milton , and Lord Byron . 
 LaVey 's estranged daughter Zeena Schreck , in an exposé about both her father 's religion and past , attributes the birth of The Satanic Bible to a suggestion by Peter Mayer , a publisher for Avon . According to Schreck , Mayer proposed that LaVey author a Satanic bible to draw from the popularity of the 1968 horror film Rosemary 's Baby , which had caused a recent rise in public interest in both Satanism and other occult practices . Schreck states that , aided by Diane Hegarty , LaVey compiled a number of writings he had already been distributing : an introduction to Satanism , a number of short essays , a guide to ritual magic , and articles he had previously published in The Cloven Hoof , a Church of Satan newsletter . 
 Either to meet length requirements set by the publisher or out of agreement with the ideas , LaVey and Hegarty borrowed heavily from writings by other authors . These included a social Darwinist book published in 1890 entitled Might Is Right by Ragnar Redbeard , as well as Dee 's Enochian keys from Aleister Crowley 's The Equinox , modified to replace references to Christianity with those to Satan . Some accuse LaVey of paraphrasing the Nine Satanic Statements from Rand 's Atlas Shrugged without acknowledgement , though others maintain that LaVey was simply drawing inspiration from the novel . LaVey later affirmed the connection with Rand 's ideas by stating that LaVeyan Satanism was " just Ayn Rand 's philosophy , with ceremony and ritual added " . 
 = = = Publication history = = = 
 Originally published in paperback by Avon in 1969 , The Satanic Bible has had thirty printings and has never gone out of print . A hardcover edition was published by University Books that same year but has now been out of print for decades . In 2015 , William Morrow published a new hardcover edition of the book combined in a single volume with its companion work , The Satanic Rituals , and marketed under a special arrangement by Rabid Crow Arts and Graphics . The main content has not changed throughout the editions , although the dedication was removed after several printings and the introduction has changed several times . The Sigil of Baphomet has been printed on the cover since the original publication . The Satanic Bible has sold over one million copies since its initial release . It has also been translated into Danish , Swedish , Spanish , Finnish and Turkish . 
 = = Content = = 
 = = = Dedication = = = 
 Though it is no longer included in current printings of The Satanic Bible , early printings included an extensive dedication to various people whom LaVey recognized as influences . LaVey 's primary dedication was to Bernardino <unk> ( misprinted as " <unk> " ) , Karl Haushofer , Grigori Rasputin , Basil Zaharoff , Alessandro Cagliostro , Barnabas , Ragnar Redbeard , William Mortensen , Hans Brick , Max Reinhardt , Orrin <unk> , Fritz Lang , Friedrich Nietzsche , W. C. Fields , P. T. Barnum , Hans Poelzig , Reginald Marsh , Wilhelm Reich , and Mark Twain . The secondary dedication named Howard Hughes , James Moody , Marcello Truzzi , Adrian ‐ Claude Frazier , Marilyn Monroe , Wesley Mather , William Lindsay Gresham , Hugo <unk> , Jayne Mansfield , Frederick <unk> , C. Huntley , Nathanael West , Horatio Alger , Jr . , Robert E. Howard , George Orwell , H. P. Lovecraft , Tuesday Weld , H. G. Wells , Sister Marie Koven , Harry Houdini , <unk> ( LaVey 's pet lion ) , and the Nine Unknown Men from The Nine Unknown . 
 = = = Introductions = = = 
 Throughout the various printings of The Satanic Bible , it has included introductions by various authors . The first edition ( in print from 1969 to 1972 ) included an excerpt from an article by Burton H. Wolfe , an investigative journalist and biographer of LaVey , entitled " The Church that <unk> Satan " . Wolfe provides an extensive biography of LaVey and a history of the Church of Satan . He mentions Rosemary 's Baby as contributing to the popularity of Satanism , though he does not claim LaVeyan Satanism to have directly influenced its creation . From 1972 until 1976 , the introduction to The Satanic Bible was a piece by Michael A. Aquino , who later went on to found the Temple of Set with a number of members of the Church of Satan . He gives a detailed analysis of the Satanic philosophies , and dispels myths about LaVeyan Satanism . He explains that it is not " devil worship " , and that LaVeyan Satanists in fact reject the worship of external gods completely . He too provides a brief background on LaVey , explaining how LaVey brought some of the knowledge he had acquired while working with the circus to his religion . Wolfe again wrote the introduction for the 1976 to 2005 editions of The Satanic Bible . It included some of the same content as the 1969 version , with an expanded biography of LaVey and more information on the various conflicts between other religions and LaVeyan Satanism . Since 2005 , The Satanic Bible has contained an introduction written by Gilmore , High Priest of the Church of Satan . In this introduction , he discusses his discovery of LaVeyan Satanism and his relationship with LaVey . He then goes on to provide a detailed biography of LaVey and addresses allegations that LaVey falsified much of the story of his own past . The introduction also provides a history of The Satanic Bible itself , as well as that of two other books by LaVey : The Satanic Witch and The Satanic Rituals . 
 = = = Preface = = = 
 LaVey explains his reasons for writing The Satanic Bible in a short preface . He speaks skeptically about volumes written by other authors on the subject of magic , dismissing them as " nothing more than sanctimonious fraud " and " volumes of hoary misinformation and false prophecy . " He complains that other authors do no more than confuse the subject . He mocks those who spend large amounts of money on attempts to follow rituals and learn about the magic shared in other occult books . He also notes that many of the existing writings on Satanic magic and ideology were created by " right @-@ hand path " authors . He tells that The Satanic Bible contains both truth and fantasy , and declares , " What you see may not always please you , but you will see ! " 
 = = = Prologue = = = 
 The prologue to The Satanic Bible begins by discussing the concept of gods , good and evil , and human nature . It includes the Nine Satanic Statements : 
 Satan represents indulgence , instead of abstinence ! 
 Satan represents vital existence , instead of spiritual pipe dreams ! 
 Satan represents undefiled wisdom , instead of hypocritical self @-@ deceit ! 
 Satan represents kindness to those who deserve it , instead of love wasted on <unk> ! 
 Satan represents vengeance , instead of turning the other cheek ! 
 Satan represents responsibility to the responsible , instead of concern for psychic vampires ! 
 Satan represents man as just another animal , sometimes better , more often worse than those that walk on all @-@ fours , who , because of his " divine spiritual and intellectual development , " has become the most vicious animal of all ! 
 Satan represents all of the so @-@ called sins , as they all lead to physical , mental , or emotional gratification ! 
 Satan has been the best friend the church has ever had , as he has kept it in business all these years ! 
 The Nine Satanic Statements outline the basic ideology of LaVeyan Satanism , and have become some of the guiding principles of LaVeyan Satanism . They also served as a template for later publications by LaVey , such as his 1987 " Nine Satanic Sins " . Ayn Rand 's influence on LaVeyan Satanism is apparent in the Nine Satanic Statements , leading some , namely Nikolas Schreck , to assert that the Statements are simply unacknowledged paraphrase of Rand 's thoughts . These accusations have been disproved , however . 
 = = = The Book of Satan = = = 
 Much of the first book of The Satanic Bible is taken from parts of Redbeard 's Might Is Right , edited to remove the racism , anti @-@ Semitism , and misogyny present in the original version . It challenges both the Ten Commandments and the Golden Rule , advocating instead a tooth @-@ for @-@ tooth philosophy . LaVey , through Redbeard , strongly advocates social Darwinism , saying , " Death to the weakling , wealth to the strong ! " Humans are identified as <unk> predatory , and " lust and carnal desire " are singled out as part of humans ' intrinsic nature . The Book of Satan suggests a hedonistic outlook , saying , " I break away from all conventions that do not lead to my earthly happiness . " Indulgence is endorsed , and readers are encouraged to make the most of their lives . It criticizes both law and religious principles , instead suggesting doing only what makes one happy and successful . LaVey continues to denounce other religions , and he rails against what he considers to be arbitrary definitions of " good " and " evil " . Religion is criticized as a man @-@ made construct , and the reader is urged to question everything and destroy any lies that he or she uncovers . Long @-@ standing lies that are believed to be irrefutable truths are identified as the most dangerous . The last part of The Book of Satan is an adaptation of the Christian Beatitudes , changed to reflect the principles of LaVeyan Satanism . 
 = = = The Book of Lucifer = = = 
 The Book of Lucifer contains the majority of the philosophy of The Satanic Bible . It details how Christianity has taught that God is good and Satan is evil , and presents an alternate view . It describes that the concept of Satan , used synonymously with " God " , is different for each LaVeyan Satanist , but that to all it represents a good and steadying force in his or her life . Believers have been called " atheistic Satanists " because of this lack of belief in external gods , but others identify as <unk> . Satan is seen to LaVeyan Satanists not as " an anthropomorphic being with cloven hooves , a barbed tail , and horns " , but as a force of nature that has only been described as evil by other religions . Satan is viewed as a metaphor or a symbol , not as a being to be worshipped . 
 LaVey rejects the idea of prayer , instead urging Satanists to take action to fix a situation instead of asking for a solution . The seven deadly sins are advocated , on the basis that they all lead to personal pleasure . He says that Satanism is a form of " controlled selfishness " , in the sense that doing something to help another will in turn make one happy . The Golden Rule is again mentioned , and LaVey suggests altering it from " Do unto others as you would have them do unto you " to " Do unto others as they do unto you " so that if someone is treated poorly , he or she can respond viciously . The Book of Lucifer also contains a list of " The Four Crown Princes of Hell " ( Satan , Lucifer , Belial , and Leviathan ) and of seventy @-@ seven " Infernal Names " , representations of Satan from various cultures and religions . They are the names that , according to LaVey , are most useful in Satanic rituals . 
 The Book of Lucifer contains a long chapter titled " Satanic Sex " , discussing Satanism 's view on sexual activity as well as misconceptions surrounding these views . He denies the belief that sex is the most important element in LaVeyan Satanism , and that participation in orgies or other promiscuous behavior is forced . He explains that sexual freedom is encouraged , but only in the sense that believers should be free to explore their own sexualities as they please , without harming others . Along with the rumors regarding Satanic views on sex , LaVey also addresses those about animal and human sacrifice . He explains that the only time a LaVeyan Satanist would perform a human sacrifice would be to accomplish two goals : to " release the magician 's wrath " as he or she performed a curse , and to kill someone who deserved to die . He considers the action of hurting another person a request to be destroyed , and explains that the Satanist is morally required to grant this request in the form of a curse . LaVey also says that a Satanist would never sacrifice a baby or an animal , as they are pure carnal beings and considered to be sacred . In The Book of Lucifer , LaVey outlines LaVeyan Satanism 's views on death . He explains that one who has lived a full life will dread death , and that this is the way it should be . He also does not agree with the idea of reincarnation . He encourages a strong will to live , comparing it to animals ' instincts to fight viciously for their lives . Suicide is discouraged except in cases of euthanasia , where it would end extreme suffering . Because the Satanist is considered his or her own god , birthdays are celebrated as the most important holidays . Following one 's birthday in importance are Walpurgisnacht and Halloween . <unk> and equinoxes are also celebrated . 
 = = = The Book of Belial = = = 
 The third book of The Satanic Bible describes rituals and magic . According to Joshua Gunn , these are adapted from books of ritual magic such as Crowley 's Magick : Elementary Theory . The Satanic Rituals , published by LaVey in 1972 , outlines the rituals more precisely , and contains the entire text of the Black Mass . LaVey begins The Book of Belial by defining magic as " The change in situations or events in accordance with one 's will , which would , using normally accepted methods , be unchangeable . " He explains that some of the rituals are simply applied psychology or science , but that some contain parts with no scientific basis . 
 LaVey explains that , in order to control a person , one must first attract his or her attention . He gives three qualities that can be employed for this purpose : sex appeal , sentiment ( cuteness or innocence ) , and wonder . He also advocates the use of odor . In the Book of Belial , he discusses three types of rituals : those for sex , compassion , and destruction . Sex rituals work to entice another person ; compassion rituals work to improve health , intelligence , success , and so on ; destruction rituals work to destroy another person . LaVey advocates finding others with whom to practice Satanic rituals in order to reaffirm one 's faith and avoid antisocial behavior . He particularly advocates group participation for destruction rituals , as compassion and sex rituals are more private in nature . LaVey goes on to list the key components to successful ritual : desire , timing , imagery , direction , and " The Balance Factor " ( awareness of one 's own limitations ) . Details for the various Satanic rituals are explained in The Book of Belial , and lists of necessary objects ( such as clothing , altars , and the symbol of Baphomet ) are given . 
 = = = The Book of Leviathan = = = 
 The final book of The Satanic Bible emphasizes the importance of spoken word and emotion to effective magic . An " Invocation to Satan " as well as three invocations for the three types of ritual are given . The " Invocation to Satan " commands the dark forces to grant power to the summoner , and lists the Infernal names for use in the invocation . The " Invocation employed towards the conjuration of lust " is used for attracting the attentions of another . Both male and female versions of the invocation are provided . The " Invocation employed towards the conjuration of destruction " commands the dark forces to destroy the subject of the invocation . The " Invocation employed towards the conjuration of compassion " requests protection , health , strength , and the destruction of anything ailing the subject of the invocation . The rest of The Book of Leviathan is composed of the Enochian Keys , which LaVey adapted from Dee 's original work . They are given in Enochian and also translated into English . LaVey provides a brief introduction that credits Dee and explains some of the history behind the Enochian Keys and language . He maintains that the translations provided are an " <unk> " of the translations performed by the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn in the 1800s , but others accuse LaVey of simply changing references to Christianity with those to Satan . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = God and Satan = = = 
 The Satanic Bible often uses the terms " God " and " Satan " interchangeably , except when referring to the concepts of these as viewed by other religions . LaVey also occasionally uses the term " God " to refer to other religions ' views of God , and " Satan " or synonyms to refer to the idea of god as interpreted by LaVeyan Satanism , as when he writes , " When all religious faith in lies has waned , it is because man has become closer to himself and farther from ' God ' ; closer to the ' Devil . ' " Throughout The Satanic Bible , the LaVeyan Satanist 's view of god is described as the Satanist 's true " self " — a projection of his or her own personality — not an external deity . Satan is used as a representation of personal liberty and individualism . Satan is also used as a metaphor for the ideas connected with the early Christian view of Satan or the serpent : wise , defiant , questioning , and free @-@ thinking . LaVey discusses this extensively in The Book of Lucifer , explaining that the gods worshipped by other religions are also projections of man 's true self . He argues that man 's unwillingness to accept his own ego has caused him to <unk> these gods so as to avoid the feeling of narcissism that would accompany self @-@ worship . 
 If man insists on externalizing his true self in the form of " God , " then why fear his true self , in fearing " God , " — why praise his true self in praising " God , " — why remain externalized from " God " in order to engage in ritual and religious ceremony in his name ? 
 Man needs ritual and dogma , but no law states that an externalized god is necessary in order to engage in ritual and ceremony performed in a god 's name ! Could it be that when he closes the gap between himself and his " God " he sees the demon of pride creeping forth — that very embodiment of Lucifer appearing in his midst ? 
 Though at some points LaVey refers to Satan as a physical being , this is intended to encourage the Satanist 's " rational self @-@ interest . " 
 = = = Science = = = 
 Many of the ideas in The Satanic Bible are shaped around a secular , scientific view of the world . However , some of these ideas continue beyond present @-@ day secularism by implying that various occult forces are not supernatural , but rather thus far undiscovered by science . These forces are said to be manipulable by the practitioner of LaVeyan Satanism , a trait of the religion that has been compared with Christian Science and Scientology . 
 James Lewis argues that scientific themes are so prevalent in The Satanic Bible because LaVey was appealing to the authority of science to legitimize LaVeyan Satanism as a religion . 
 = = = Human nature and Social Darwinism = = = 
 Social Darwinism and the concept of " human nature " are ideas that are prevalent throughout The Satanic Bible . LaVey describes Satanism as " a religion based on the universal traits of man , " and humans are described throughout as inherently carnal and animalistic . Each of the seven deadly sins is described as part of human 's natural instinct , and are thus advocated . Social Darwinism is particularly noticeable in The Book of Satan , where LaVey uses portions of Redbeard 's Might Is Right , though it also appears throughout in references to man 's inherent strength and instinct for self @-@ preservation . LaVeyan Satanism has been described as " <unk> of Machiavellian self @-@ interest " because of many of these themes . 
 = = Influence = = 
 The Satanic Bible is recognized as one of the key texts of modern Satanism . The Church of Satan requires that people accept " LaVey 's principles " before becoming members of the church . Many other Satanist groups and individual Satanists who are not part of the Church of Satan also recognize LaVey 's work as influential . Many Satanists attribute their conversions or discoveries of Satanism to The Satanic Bible , with 20 % of respondents to a survey by James Lewis mentioning The Satanic Bible directly as influencing their conversion . In Gilmore 's introduction , he lists a number of novels and films supposedly influenced by The Satanic Bible and LaVeyan Satanism . These include novels Rosemary 's Baby by Ira Levin and Our Lady of Darkness by Fritz Leiber , as well as films such as Rosemary 's Baby , The Devil 's Rain , The Car , and Dr. Dracula . Others have lauded The Satanic Bible as heavily influential on metal and rock bands such as Black Sabbath , Venom , King Diamond , and Marilyn Manson . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Richard Metzger describes The Satanic Bible as " a razor @-@ sharp , no @-@ bullshit primer in natural and supernatural law . " David G. Bromley calls it " iconoclastic " and " the best @-@ known and most influential statement of Satanic theology . " Eugene V. Gallagher says that Satanists use LaVey 's writings " as lenses through which they view themselves , their group , and the cosmos . " He also states : " With a clear @-@ eyed appreciation of true human nature , a love of ritual and pageantry , and a flair for mockery , LaVey 's Satanic Bible promulgated a gospel of self @-@ indulgence that , he argued , anyone who dispassionately considered the facts would embrace . " The philosophy it presents has been described as " strident libertarianism " and " an obvious distillation of ideas common among members of the United States counter @-@ culture in the 1960s . " Joshua Gunn argues that the significance of The Satanic Bible as an occult item owes to its status as a " totem or a fetishized object in popular culture " , not the philosophy contained within . He argues that many erroneously categorize the content of The Satanic Bible as evil and depraved from the minimalist , dark cover design ( composed of a purple Sigil of Baphomet and white text on the front , and a photo of LaVey superimposed over the Sigil of Baphomet on the back ) , the verbose , overblown style of the text , and the presence of the word " Satan " in the title . Contrary to this belief , he says , the philosophy presented by LaVey is " neither offensive nor surprising . " 
 Zeena Schreck has criticized The Satanic Bible as a financial endeavor suggested by Avon publisher , Mayer . She maintains that it contains large amounts of falsified information about LaVey 's past , and that much of the book is plagiarized from Redbeard 's Might Is Right , Dee 's Enochian Keys , and Rand 's Atlas Shrugged . Chris Mathews , in Modern Satanism : Anatomy of a Radical Subculture , describes The Satanic Bible as " hastily prepared " and cynical . Both Mathews and a 1971 article in Newsweek compare the ideologies presented in The Satanic Bible to Nazism : containing " unremitting focus on social elitism , appeals to force , and scorn for egalitarian principles " . Israel Regardie criticized LaVey 's alteration of the Enochian Keys in The Book of Leviathan as stupid and of lower quality than the original Keys . 
 The Satanic Bible has also received a large amount of criticism from people and organizations who find its content to be dangerous . Much of this criticism came during the period of " Satanic panic , " when Satanic ritual abuse was feared to be epidemic . Much of this media coverage , however , has been denounced as " uncritical and sensationalized . " Tom Harpur condemns the book as " blasphemous " and " socially seditious , " and blames it for causing an increase in gruesome violence , ritual abuse , and other obscene acts . Critics have also accused The Satanic Bible of encouraging violence and murder , particularly in young people considered to be impressionable . Dawn Perlmutter criticizes it for providing adolescents with bad messages and messages that can be easily misinterpreted . Possession of The Satanic Bible has been used by some studies to identify adolescents who are antisocial , and some warn that possession of the book is a warning sign of emotional issues . The Council on Mind Abuse took a very negative view of The Satanic Bible . Former Executive Director Rob Tucker warned parents to look for The Satanic Bible in their children 's bedrooms , saying , " You have to help the child fight this obsession like any other addiction " and " It 's like giving drugs to a kid who is already on the edge . " Attempts to ban the book from schools and public libraries have been made in various places around the world , and bans or limitations on the book in prisons have been repeatedly challenged in court . However , opposition to The Satanic Bible has rarely led to its removal ; these bans are rare . The book was banned in South Africa from 1973 to 1993 . 
 = Over the Edge ( 1999 ) = 
 Over the Edge ( 1999 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) and presented by MCI 's 1 @-@ 800 @-@ COLLECT , which took place on May 23 , 1999 , at Kemper Arena in Kansas City , Missouri , United States . It was the first event not to be promoted under the " In Your House " series of pay @-@ per @-@ views , which typically occurred in months not occupied by the WWF 's biggest events ( Royal Rumble , WrestleMania , King of the Ring , SummerSlam , and Survivor Series ) . 
 Owen Hart was scheduled to face The Godfather for the WWF Intercontinental Championship during the event . Wrestling under his Blue Blazer gimmick , Hart was to make a superhero @-@ like ring entrance , which would have seen him descend from the arena rafters into the ring . He was , however , released prematurely when the harness line malfunctioned , and fell more than 70 feet ( 21 m ) into the ring and died . Criticism later arose over the WWF 's decision to continue the show after Hart 's accident . In court , his widow Martha , children , and parents sued the organization , contending that poor planning of the dangerous stunt caused Owen 's death . WWF settled the case out of court , paying US $ 18 million to his widow , children , and parents . Due to the accident and controversy surrounding the event the Over the Edge name was retired . The event was also not released for home video viewing until the launch of the WWE Network in 2014 . 
 In the main event , The Undertaker defeated Steve Austin in a singles match ( with Vince McMahon and Shane McMahon as the guest referees ) to win the WWF Championship . Of the six scheduled bouts on the undercard , two received more promotion than the others . The first was a singles match , in which The Rock defeated Triple H. The other was an eight @-@ man elimination tag team match , which featured The Union 's ( Mankind , Ken Shamrock , Test , and the Big Show ) victory over the Corporate Ministry ( Viscera , the Big Boss Man , and the Acolytes ( Bradshaw and Faarooq ) ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 Over the Edge was the culmination of various scripted plots and storylines . Before the event , several WWF professional wrestling matches and stories were played out on WWF programming : Raw is War , SmackDown ! , and Sunday Night Heat . These narratives created feuds between various wrestlers , casting them as villains and heroes . 
 The main narrative for Over the Edge continued the events that unfolded at Backlash , WWF 's previous pay @-@ per @-@ view event , held on April 25 , 1999 . There , The Undertaker abducted Stephanie McMahon , the daughter of chairman Vince McMahon . The Undertaker 's price for Stephanie 's return was control over the wrestling organization . His plans were thwarted , however , by the WWF Champion , Steve Austin , who rescued Stephanie and denied The Undertaker his ransom . This plot development set up a feud between the two wrestlers , which would be settled in a standard singles match for the Championship at Over the Edge , in which both Vince and his son Shane , who had aligned himself with The Undertaker , would serve as the guest referee . Originally Shane had named himself the sole referee of the match , but WWF commissioner Shawn Michaels made Vince the co @-@ referee in order to level the playing field . WWF further built up the rivalry between The Undertaker and Austin by having them attack each other on WWF programming , before their showdown . On May 3 , 1999 , The Undertaker threw Austin off the stage , and two weeks later , the WWF Champion was handcuffed by his title 's challenger to a crucifix , which was raised above the ring . 
 Another feud created for Over the Edge involved Triple H and The Rock , who would meet each other in a standard singles match at the event . Triple H had interfered in one of The Rock 's matches , and later threw him off the stage . The script called for The Rock to portray an injury to his arm that required him to wear a plaster cast . Shane , acting his role as co @-@ owner of WWF and ally of Triple H , further aggrieved The Rock by forbidding him to wear the cast for Over the Edge . 
 The pay @-@ per @-@ view event featured the buildup of a rivalry among two stables , groups of at least three wrestlers . The two groups were the Corporate Ministry and the Union . The Corporate Ministry was formed when the Corporation merged with the Ministry of Darkness ; the Corporate Ministry consisted of Viscera , the Big Boss Man , and the Acolytes ( Bradshaw and Faarooq ) . Throughout the month of May , the Ministry was involved in matches with Mankind , Ken Shamrock , the Big Show , and Test , and in retaliation , the four wrestlers formed the Union stable . The WWF continued to enhance the feud over several weeks , which included a brawl among all eight wrestlers on May 10 , 1999 . The evolving plot led to the promotion of an eight @-@ man elimination tag team match between both groups at Over the Edge . In this bout , the team that eliminated all of its opponents would win . 
 Other feuds that received less promotion and culminated into matches at Over the Edge include Billy Gunn versus Road Dogg and the Blue Blazer versus WWF Intercontinental Champion The Godfather for the title in standard singles bouts . Mark Henry and D 'Lo Brown versus WWF Tag Team Champions Kane and X @-@ Pac in a tag team match for the championship , Hardcore Holly versus Al Snow in a Hardcore singles match for the Hardcore Title , and a mixed tag team match involving Val Venis and Nicole Bass versus Jeff Jarrett and Debra were also advertised . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the event began and aired live on pay @-@ per @-@ view , an episode of Sunday Night Heat aired live on the USA Network . In a standard match , Meat defeated Brian Christopher , while the Hardy Boyz ( Matt and Jeff ) defeated Goldust and the Blue Meanie in a tag team match . In the final contest , Vince McMahon and Mideon fought in a singles match that ended in " No Contest " , when the Corporate Ministry attacked Vince and broke his ankle in order to prevent him from refereeing the main event match . 
 = = = Miscellaneous = = = 
 Jim Ross and Jerry " The King " Lawler were the English commentators for the event , while Carlos Cabrera and Hugo Savinovich were the Spanish commentators . Howard Finkel acted as the ring announcer . The referees included Tim White , Mike Chioda , and Teddy Long . Other officials include Vince McMahon , Pat Patterson , and Gerald Brisco . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 After Sunday Night Heat , the pay @-@ per @-@ view began with a tag team match , in which the WWF Tag Team Champions Kane and X @-@ Pac defended against Mark Henry and D 'Lo Brown . During the match , Henry lifted X @-@ Pac and rammed his back against the steel ring post at ringside . Afterward , Brown and Henry simultaneously attacked X @-@ Pac , which led Kane to launch himself from the top turnbuckle onto Brown and Henry . After the competitors reentered the ring , Kane performed a chokeslam on Henry , lifting him by the throat and slamming him down . Kane then pinned Henry to retain the WWF Tag Team Title . Next was the hardcore singles bout — a match allowing no disqualifications or countouts . WWF Hardcore Champion Al Snow defended against Hardcore Holly . Holly and Snow began their bout in the ring but were scripted to move their brawl into the arena stands . From there , they proceeded to the backstage area , and into the concession stands before returning to the ring . The fight was decided when Snow lifted Holly onto his shoulders and threw him through a wooden table . Successfully covering and pinning Holly , Snow retained the WWF Hardcore Title . 
 The next scheduled match was a singles match for the WWF Intercontinental Title between The Godfather ( champion ) and the Blue Blazer . As Hart descended into the ring on a safety harness , the equipment gave way , and he fell . Emergency medical technicians ( EMTs ) rushed him to the hospital , but he was pronounced dead on arrival . The show was halted for 15 minutes before it continued with the next match . The fourth scheduled contest was the Mixed tag team match that featured Val Venis and Nicole Bass facing Jeff Jarrett and Debra . At one point , Jarrett gained possession of a guitar and attempted to hit Bass with it , but Venis took the guitar away and lifted Jarrett from behind to drop him onto the mat ; he then pinned Jarrett . In the fourth match of the evening , Billy Gunn defeated his former tag team partner Road Dogg , after hitting him with the time keeper 's hammer . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The fifth match was the eight @-@ man elimination tag @-@ team match between The Union and the Corporate Ministry . Test was eliminated by pinfall after Bradshaw performed a high @-@ impact forearm attack " Clothesline from Hell " on him . Bradshaw was then eliminated by submission as a result of Ken Shamrock 's ankle lock . Afterwards , Shamrock was eliminated via disqualification as a result of attacking the referee . Then , Faarooq was eliminated by pinfall after the Big Show executed a chokeslam on him . Only one member of each team remained after Viscera and the Big Show failed to return to the ring within ten seconds , and were counted out as a result . The Union won the match after Mankind forced Boss Man to submit with the Mandible claw . It was at this point that the viewers at home were told by Jim Ross that Owen Hart had died . The final match on the undercard was a standard match that featured Triple H and The Rock . Continuing the storyline of The Rock 's injured arm , Triple H was scripted to target and attack The Rock 's arm . Towards the final moments of the bout , Triple H asked Chyna , his valet , to retrieve a folding chair . The referee , however , took it away from him , which led to an argument between Triple H and the referee ; the mishap prompted Triple H to push the referee down . The referee disqualified Triple H for this action ; thus , The Rock won the match . After the match , Mankind ran in to save The Rock from Triple H and Chyna . 
 The main event was a singles match in which WWF Champion Steve Austin defended against the Undertaker . Originally , Shane and Vince McMahon were supposed to be the guest referees , but due to storyline purposes , Pat Patterson , an accomplice of Vince McMahon , replaced Vince , who had had his ankle broken earlier in the event , in order to prevent Shane from helping The Undertaker . Patterson , however , was unable to officiate the entire match after the Undertaker executed a chokeslam on him . The Undertaker and Austin wrestled inconclusively until Austin hit The Undertaker on the head with a folding chair . As Austin went to cover the Undertaker , Gerald Brisco , another accomplice of Vince , came down to the ring to replace Patterson and officiated the unsuccessful pinfall attempt by Austin . Like his partner Patterson , Brisco was unable to officiate the entire match after the Undertaker attacked him . Vince then came down to the ring as another referee replacement , but when Austin forcefully pulled the Undertaker 's head over his shoulders to perform a stunner , Shane prevented him from performing a three count . As Vince and Shane argued , Austin got up and confronted Vince at which point Shane shoved Vince into Austin , who fell into a roll @-@ up by The Undertaker and then performed a fast count to give him the victory and the WWF Title . 
 = = Owen Hart accident = = 
 When Owen Hart was to challenge The Godfather for the WWF Intercontinental Champion 's title , he was performing as the Blue Blazer . The character was a superhero gimmick that parodied various wrestlers . At Over the Edge , Hart was to emulate World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) wrestler Sting 's ( Steve Borden ) ring entrance by descending from the arena rafters into the ring . The entrance was successfully tested on the November 15 , 1998 , episode of Sunday Night Heat ; however , during his descent at Over the Edge , a cable disengaged from the safety vest he wore , and he fell more than 70 feet ( 21 m ) from the rafters into the ring . As he fell , his chest landed on one of the ring 's padded turnbuckles . The accident was not viewed by television viewers . A pre @-@ recorded interview video was shown at the start of Hart 's descent , and when the broadcast returned live , the cameras quickly turned away from the ring to the audience . Soon afterward , Jim Ross , one of the commentators of the event , informed pay @-@ per @-@ view viewers that Hart had fallen from the rafters , that the incident was " not a part of the entertainment " and that it was " a real situation " . EMTs came down to the ring and gave Hart CPR , but he showed no response to the treatment . Bringing Hart out on a gurney , the EMTs boarded the heavily injured wrestler into an ambulance and took him to a nearby hospital in Kansas City . 
 After the incident , the event was halted for 15 minutes , until Vince McMahon and other WWF Corporate officials made the decision to continue the event . Hart 's coworkers , professional wrestlers and other miscellaneous workers , appeared somber after Hart 's fall as they continued to do their jobs . An hour after the event restarted , Ross informed pay @-@ per @-@ view viewers that Hart had died at the age of 34 at a nearby hospital . The fans in attendance were not told any information about what had happened to Hart , and they did not hear the announcement of his death . 
 " Ladies and gentlemen , earlier tonight here in Kansas City , tragedy befell the World Wrestling Federation and all of us . Owen Hart was set to make an entrance from the ceiling , and he fell from the ceiling . I have the unfortunate responsibility to let everyone know that Owen Hart has died . Owen Hart has tragically died from that accident here tonight . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the event , in response to Owen Hart 's death , the WWF canceled the encore presentation of Over the Edge via pay @-@ per @-@ view , and they also canceled four live events in Canada and one in Illinois . Information about Over the Edge from the WWF ( now named the WWE ) is sparse because the event was never released on VHS or DVD due to Hart 's death . In 2014 , the event was shown in an edited form on the WWE Network . On May 24 , 1999 , the day following this event , a tribute to Hart was held on Raw is War in St. Louis , which the WWF called Raw is Owen . For this show , all storylines and rivalries were stopped , and wrestlers were given the option to wrestle or not . The show also featured interviews and testimonies from his coworkers and highlights of his professional wrestling career . Hart 's funeral service was held on May 31 , 1999 , in Calgary , Alberta , Canada , and it was attended by family members , friends , and over 300 wrestlers who were acquainted with him . Following the funeral , Hart was buried in Calgary 's Queens Park Cemetery later that day . Three weeks after the event , his widow , children , and parents sued the WWF for causing Owen 's death with a poorly planned stunt ; they claimed that the harness system was defective . After the court case had extended one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years , a settlement was reached on November 2 , 2000 , when the WWF agreed to pay his widow , children , and parents US $ 18 million . The manufacturer of the harness system had also been named as a defendant in the case but was dismissed from the case after the settlement was reached . 
 After Over the Edge , The Rock was scripted into a feud with the Undertaker over his WWF Championship . The evolving feud culminated into a standard match at King of the Ring , the WWF 's June pay @-@ per @-@ view event , after The Rock defeated The Undertaker and Triple H in a standard match involving three wrestlers ( also called a triple threat match ) , to earn a WWF Championship match against the Undertaker . At King of the Ring , the Undertaker defeated The Rock to retain his title . After Steve Austin lost his WWF Title , he engaged in a rivalry with Vince and Shane McMahon in retaliation for their interference during his match at Over the Edge . Austin lost the match at King of the Ring , and his 50 % control in the WWF ( kayfabe ) , but before that he scheduled himself in a standard match against the Undertaker for his title on June 28 . Austin won the match and the title . Eventually , the WWF developed a feud with Austin , Mankind , and Triple H over the WWF title , which led to a match at SummerSlam , the WWF 's August pay @-@ per @-@ view event . There , Mankind won the WWF title . Owen Hart ( as his " Blue Blazer " alter @-@ ego ) was booked to win the Intercontinental Title from The Godfather at Over the Edge . Hart 's tag team partner and good friend Jeff Jarrett would win the title a week later on Raw , using Hart 's signature " Sharpshooter " finisher and shouting " Owen Hart ! " upon being handed the belt . 
 = = = Reactions = = = 
 Vince McMahon and the World Wrestling Federation received strong criticism for designing the stunt and allowing the event to continue after Owen Hart 's fall . In his weekly column for the Calgary Sun — a major newspaper in Hart 's hometown — on May 31 , 1999 , Bret Hart blamed McMahon for his brother 's death . He " question [ ed ] if this was really necessary " and said , " Shame on you , Vince McMahon . " He also claimed that the tribute show " reeked of disrespect , " stating , " Yes , the so @-@ called tribute where afterward wrestlers point to their crotches and say : ' Suck it ! ' It makes me nauseous . " Other members of the Hart family also blamed McMahon for Owen 's death , claiming that the accident was the inevitable outcome of " an obsession for ratings and revenues . " While in Calgary for Owen 's funeral , wrestler Hulk Hogan stated , " Hopefully something good will happen . Wrestling 's gotten ... way too over the top " . In reference to McMahon , he added , " I hope he learns a lesson from this horrible accident " . Ralph Klein , Alberta 's premier at the time , expressed a hope that Hart 's death would lead to changes in wrestling , stating , " Maybe the various federations will rethink the gimmickry . " 
 Calgary Sun columnist Eric Francis called McMahon 's decision to continue the event " sick , disrespectful and wrong . But what else would you expect from the WWF ? " He added , " if there 's any justice in this world , McMahon will pay dearly for what his organization has done to further pain the Harts " . Some fans were also upset with the decision to carry on with the show . One man , who left the event with his children upon hearing that Hart had died , claimed , " It was disgusting .... For kids to see that , for this to be so @-@ called family entertainment , for them to just carry on as if nothing had happened , is just sad . " Martha Hart , Owen 's wife , refused to criticize McMahon publicly in the immediate aftermath of her husband 's death . She said that McMahon " absolutely should be there " at the funeral . She also stated , " I 'm a very forgiving person and I 'm not bitter or angry , but there will be a day of reckoning " . Commenting on the WWF 's decision to continue the show after her husband 's death , Martha stated , " After he lost his fight for life they just scooped him up and ordered the next match out . Where 's the humanity ? Would he have wanted the show to go on ? Absolutely not . " 
 The WWF received some support from people who felt that the company did the right thing by continuing the event . Vince Russo , a WWF script writer at the time , pointed to the fact that Brian Pillman , a family friend of the Harts and a member of The Hart Foundation died shortly before the Badd Blood : In Your House pay @-@ per @-@ view on which he was scheduled to perform in 1997 . After learning of Pillman 's death , Hart went ahead with his match on the show . Russo claimed that this showed that " the night he passed away I 'm sure Owen would have wanted the same thing . " Vince McMahon refused to comment on Hart 's death until he felt sufficient time had passed . When asked if he felt responsible for the accident , he replied , " I have a lot to say and I will say it . I promise you that . But this is not the time to do it .... Give me a few days . Give me to the end of the week . Then we 'll talk . " The day after Over the Edge , the WWF published a message in the Calgary Sun , stating , " We do not have much information as to how it happened and will not know until an investigation is completed . We are all shaken , and to say Owen will be missed is to fall short of a way to fully explain what he meant to us . " Although the WWF had no information , they reported that " Our thoughts and prayers go out to the entire Hart family . We have to be strong for Owen ; he was an extraordinary human being and consummate performer and knows that the highest tribute that we can pay is to go on entertaining the fans he loved so much . " 
 = = Results = = 
 = Mississippi Highway 9W = 
 Mississippi Highway 9W ( MS 9W ) is a 20 @.@ 3 @-@ mile ( 32 @.@ 7 km ) long state highway located in northern Mississippi . The southern terminus of the route is at MS 9 north of Bruce in Calhoun County while the northern terminus is at MS 7 south of Oxford in Lafayette County . The route is a two @-@ lane undivided road its entire length and passes through rural areas of woods and farms . Along the way , MS 9W intersects MS 315 in Paris . MS 9W was designated to follow its current alignment in 1956 and was fully paved from a gravel road by 1960 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MS 9W begins at an intersection with MS 9 to the north of Bruce in Calhoun County . The route heads northwest on a two @-@ lane undivided road through a mix of woods and farmlands with a few homes . The road turns to the north and reaches the community of Banner , where the road crosses two County Roads : CR 275 and CR 267 . MS 9W enters a dense forest as it curves northwest again and heads into more agricultural fields , coming to a junction with CR 284 . After crossing into Lafayette County , the route reaches the community of Paris and intersects the eastern terminus of MS 315 as well as CR 428 . After this intersection , MS 9W passes through several more miles of forests , intersecting CR 371 before reaching its terminus at MS 7 to the south of Oxford . MS 9W is legally defined in Mississippi Code § 65 @-@ 3 @-@ 3 . 
 = = History = = 
 MS 9W was designated in 1956 for a gravel road connecting MS 9 north of Bruce to MS 7 south of Oxford . By 1960 , the entire route was paved . Since then , the route has not undergone any alignment changes . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Gojira ( band ) = 
 Gojira is a French heavy metal band from Bayonne . The band was known as Godzilla until 2001 . Gojira is composed of vocalist and rhythm guitarist Joe Duplantier , his brother Mario Duplantier on drums , lead guitarist Christian Andreu , and Jean @-@ Michel Labadie on bass . They have released six studio albums and three live DVDs . They are known for their environmentally @-@ themed lyrics and have gone from " utmost obscurity " to being mentioned regularly " amongst the genre 's leading new millennium upstarts " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years and Terra Incognita ( 1996 − 2002 ) = = = 
 Gojira was formed in 1996 by Joe and Mario Duplantier , Christian Andreu , and Alexandre Cornillon in their hometown of <unk> . Gojira 's music combines elements of death metal , groove metal , thrash metal and progressive metal . The band started touring and recording under the name Godzilla and released their demos Victim , Possessed , Saturate and Wisdom Comes in 1996 , 1997 , 1999 and 2000 , respectively . After touring , supporting Cannibal Corpse , Edge of Sanity , Impaled Nazarene and supporting Immortal in September 1999 , legal problems forced Godzilla to change their name . They changed their name to Gojira , the <unk> spelling of the fictional monster Godzilla . Their debut album Terra Incognita was released under the new name in 2001 . 
 = = = The Link and From Mars to Sirius ( 2003 − 2007 ) = = = 
 The band released their second studio album in 2003 , The Link ( reissued in 2007 with remastered audio and new booklet artwork ) . After the success of the first two albums and their live performances they made a DVD in Bordeaux produced by Gabriel Editions . Since 19 May 2004 , The Link Alive has been on sale in France . In 2005 , Gojira decided to sign with French @-@ based Listenable Records to help give them exposure outside France with the album From Mars to Sirius . 
 Gojira was featured on Children of Bodom 's US tour in late 2006 , joining Amon Amarth and Sanctity as the openers . Furthermore , Gojira supported Trivium on the UK dates of their European tour in 2007 with Sanctity and Annihilator . Later they supported Lamb of God on their 2007 American tour along with Trivium and Machine Head . In late 2007 they took part in the Radio Rebellion Tour , featuring co @-@ headliners Behemoth and Job for a Cowboy , as well as Beneath the Massacre . In October 2007 , Listenable Records re @-@ released Gojira 's 1997 demo Possessed as a limited edition . 
 = = = The Way of All Flesh ( 2008 − 2011 ) = = = 
 The Way of All Flesh was released on 13 October in Europe via Listenable Records and 14 October in North America through Prosthetic Records in 2008 . On 25 July 2008 , the band announced the track listing and revealed the final cover art for the record . Joe Duplantier stated about the album : " This record is a lot darker — like , a lot darker , I would say . The music is darker and more violent . " The album will be " more intense , more brutal , and more melodic " than its predecessor . " That 's the theme — it 's about death itself , " he explained . " It 's also about the immortality of the soul . That 's the main subject for us " . Randy Blythe from the American band Lamb of God appeared as a guest vocalist on the song " Adoration for None " The album took four months to write and record , and three months to mix . On 17 March 2009 , the band 's first North American headlining tour was announced . Opening bands were The Chariot and Car Bomb . Gojira accompanied Metallica on their tour 14 September – 18 October , performing before Lamb of God . Gojira entered a Los Angeles , California @-@ area studio in early November 2010 , with producer Logan Mader to begin recording a new non @-@ profit four @-@ song EP , the proceeds from which will benefit Sea Shepherd , an anti @-@ whaling organization . According to Joe Duplantier , the EP will feature guest appearances from the international metal scene . " Of Blood And Salt " will feature Devin Townsend and Fredrik Thordendal . The other tracks will feature Randy Blythe , Anders Fridén , Jonas <unk> and Max Cavalera . As a preview of their Sea Shepherd EP , Gojira released the song " Of Blood And Salt " in May 2011 , featuring Devin Townsend as a guest vocalist and a guest guitar solo performed by Fredrik Thordendal . As of 2016 , the EP has yet to see a release , as the hard drive it was on crashed . 
 = = = L 'Enfant Sauvage and Magma ( 2012 − present ) = = = 
 They were acquired by Roadrunner Records and released L 'Enfant Sauvage on 4 April 2012 on that label . The title translates to " The Wild Child . " The album features 11 tracks , and was released on 26 June 2012 . The title song " L 'Enfant Sauvage " was released as a single along with a video to support it followed by a release of the song " Liquid Fire " as a free download on Gojira 's official website . The album was released 26 June 2012 through Roadrunner Records . On March 11 , 2014 , Gojira released a Live CD / DVD / Picture book Les Enfants Sauvages , which was recorded at Brixton Academy London in March 2013 . 
 In November 2014 the band began constructing a recording studio in Queens , New York City . That same month , Mario Duplantier moved to New York . 
 In an interview conducted in February 2015 with AMH TV , Mario Duplantier stated that the band is working on a new album . Further speaking with AMH TV , he went on to say that " We spent two months ... composing new stuff , composing new songs . And we feel very optimistic about the future . We 're already enjoying a lot of the new stuff . We want to make the strongest album we can do . I mean , all the bands say they try to make the strongest album , but this time , I think we will really do it . " 
 On 4 January 2016 , the band posted a video on their YouTube page announcing the new album would be out in spring . 
 That same month , Rolling Stone named the album their sixth @-@ most anticipated album of 2016 . 
 In April 2015 the band finished the construction of their New York recording studio , ' Silver Cord Studio ' . However , ten days into recording there , Joe and Mario Duplantier learned that their mother had fallen very ill and so the band put the recording session on hold . Their mother later died , and this experience had a profound influence on the recording process . 
 On 13 April 2016 , the band released a thirty @-@ second video teaser confirming that the album will be titled Magma and will be released June 17 , 2016 through Roadrunner Records . They followed this with the release of the first song from Magma , titled " Stranded " , on 22 April . The single 's music video was directed by Vincent <unk> . On 20 May 2016 , a second song , " Silvera " , was released , accompanied by a music video directed by Drew Cox . 
 Magma was officially released on June 17 , 2016 through Roadrunner Records to " universal critical acclaim " . The album marked a change in style for the band , with Joe Duplantier experimenting with clean vocals , and with Mario commenting that " this time , we just felt all together that we wanted something straight to the point more . We wanted to change the dynamic . " The band will tour North America with Tesseract from mid @-@ July through October 2016 in support of the album . In 2016 , the band will tour the United Kingdom with Alter Bridge , Volbeat , and Like a Storm . 
 = = Side projects = = 
 Joe Duplantier was invited by the founding brothers of influential Brazilian band Sepultura , Max and Igor Cavalera , to join their new band Cavalera Conspiracy as a bassist . The album Inflikted was released in March 2008 and a tour followed in mid @-@ 2008 . Also , the Duplantier brothers formed an avant @-@ garde metal band called <unk> in 1998 , starring Stéphane <unk> , who appears in The Link Alive DVD 's short show called " Thang & Tanguy " . Their first release was a demo album called <unk> . It was released in 1998 . Two albums followed : Tous aux <unk> in 2001 and a live CD called <unk> en Concert in 2004 . 
 = = Musical style and lyrical themes = = 
 Gojira 's sound is not easily classifiable as they blend several styles . Genres that have been associated with Gojira are technical death metal , progressive metal , groove metal and thrash metal . Gojira has been influenced by heavy metal artists such as Slayer , Sepultura , Death , Morbid Angel , Meshuggah , Tool , Metallica , Pantera , and Neurosis . 
 Gojira plays a technical and rhythmic style of heavy metal with precision drumming along with blast beats , unusual rhythm patterns , and start @-@ and @-@ stop riffs . Gojira has also been known to incorporate textured atmospheric elements and instrumental songs into their music . Gojira songs have progressive and uncommon song structures , rarely using the standard verse , chorus , verse <unk> vocal style is varied , ranging from the screamed style often employed in extreme metal , with the death growl style predominantly used in death metal , in addition to clean vocals and higher screams . At times , death metal growls and clean vocals are mixed to create an aggressive but melodic effect . 
 Gojira 's lyrics tackle themes of life , death , rebirth , spirituality , and nature . In particular , their 2005 album From Mars to Sirius is a concept album tackling environmental issues as well as broader themes of life , death , and rebirth . 
 The members of the band were raised in Bayonne , a city on the south west coast of France ( Pyrénées @-@ Atlantiques / French Basque Country ) . The surrounding scenic countryside and rugged coastline inspired Gojira 's interest in nature and the earth . Gojira uses its lyrics to spread its spiritual beliefs and concerns for the environment . They also cooperate with Sea Shepherd Conservation Society to protect marine animals , especially dolphins , whales and sharks . Members from Sea Shepherd Conservation Society are allowed to run a merchandise booth at Gojira gigs . In addition , Gojira is working on the Sea Shepherd EP with well @-@ known musicians from the metal scene , including Devin Townsend . All proceeds from the project will go to the organization , though as of June 2016 the current status of this project is unknown . 
 = = Band members = = 
 Members 
 Joe Duplantier − lead vocals , rhythm guitar ( 1996 – present ) 
 Mario Duplantier − drums , percussion ( 1996 – present ) 
 Christian Andreu − lead guitar ( 1996 – present ) 
 Jean @-@ Michel Labadie − bass ( 2001 – present ) 
 Past members 
 Alexandre Cornillon − bass ( 1996 – 2001 ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Terra Incognita ( 2001 ) 
 The Link ( 2003 ) 
 From Mars to Sirius ( 2005 ) 
 The Way of All Flesh ( 2008 ) 
 L 'Enfant Sauvage ( 2012 ) 
 Magma ( 2016 ) 
 = Lucas North = 
 Lucas North , formerly known as John Bateman , is a fictional character from the BBC espionage television series Spooks ( known in the United States as " MI5 " ) , which follows the exploits of Section D , a counter @-@ terrorism division of MI5 . North is portrayed by British actor Richard Armitage . The character is introduced in Spooks ' seventh series as the former head of Section D , who was captured and imprisoned during an operation in Russia . He returns to the UK after eight years and is eventually reinstated into MI5 . He is described as having once been the best in his field , and he is now trying to regain his former brilliance . 
 Lucas North is a main character in the seventh , eighth , and ninth series ; the ninth series reveals that Lucas " isn 't who you think he is . " Following the creation of the character by the show 's writers , Armitage was chosen early in the casting process , since the producers believed he could carry the mystery of the character . A tentative viewer of Spooks , he was approached for the role following the completion of the second series of Robin Hood , in which he portrayed series regular Sir Guy of Gisbourne . After agreeing to appear in Spooks , Armitage learned how to speak fluent Russian and lost a stone in weight in order to fit the description of his character . 
 With regard to the show 's notorious habit of killing off major characters , Armitage said he had no preference as to Lucas ' possible exit . He has performed his own stunts on the series , which have included a waterboarding scene , although the character becomes less physical in the ninth series . The Lucas North character and his portrayal by Armitage met with unanimous praise from cast , crew , and reviewers . 
 = = Role in Spooks = = 
 = = = Character arc = = = 
 Born John Bateman , the character later known as Lucas North was raised in rural Cumbria , where his father was a Methodist minister . During his time at Leeds University he lived with Maya Lahan ( Laila Rouass ) . While enrolled at Leeds he visited Dakar , Senegal , where he engaged in shipping cannabis to Hamburg in exchange for money . When he was caught the authorities took the shipment and his money , stranding him in Dakar . To gain enough money to get back to the UK , he worked in a casino . While working there John Bateman was approached by Vaughn Edwards ( Iain Glen ) , who persuaded him to deliver packages for him . One of the packages delivered by Bateman was a bomb that exploded at a British Embassy , killing 17 people . To escape the country Bateman killed a friend of his named Lucas North . North had just made it past the first battery of tests for admission to MI5 . Bateman assumed North 's identity and left Maya behind . Bateman / North would later suppress these memories , believing that Vaughn was solely responsible for the bombing and for his friend 's death . He would later join MI5 in place of the real Lucas North and become head of Section D. He was also once married to Elizabeta Starkova ( Paloma Baeza ) . During an operation in Russia , Lucas North was captured and imprisoned for eight years , during which time he was often subjected to torture . 
 In the seventh series , Harry Pearce ( Peter Firth ) is able to secure Lucas ' release from prison in exchange for a Russian spy imprisoned in the UK . However , Arkady Kachimov ( Stuart Wilson ) coerces Lucas to work against MI5 , to assist Russia in launching a cyber attack against the UK . In the first episode , Lucas aids section chief Adam Carter ( Rupert Penry @-@ Jones ) in rescuing a kidnapped soldier and preventing the bombing of a Remembrance Day memorial service ; the rescue results in Adam 's death . In the second episode , the team begins to suspect Lucas of working for the Russians , but he later reveals that he is actually trying to stop Arkady and the attack ; the team succeeds in stopping the attack and apprehends Arkady . Following Adam 's death , Lucas is reassigned as Senior Case Officer , and handles Adam 's assets . In the third episode , Lucas recalls being tortured and asked for details of " Sugar Horse " , a top secret MI5 operation involving the recruitment of Russians who move into top positions in the Russian government . In the penultimate episode , Harry orders Lucas to Moscow to uncover the identity of a Federal Security Service ( FSB ) mole in MI5 who is sabotaging Sugar Horse and framing Harry . There , Lucas discovers that Connie James ( Gemma Jones ) is the mole . In the season finale , Section D learns that operation " Tiresias " , the Russian equivalent of Sugar Horse , is going to detonate a nuclear bomb in London . Lucas and Ros Myers ( Hermione Norris ) save Connie from the authorities in order to enlist her help in stopping the attack . After finding the bomb , Connie disarms it , Lucas asks her who sold him out to the Russians and she admits it was her with her final words but she dies in the process as the bomb goes off seconds later . 
 In the fourth episode of the eighth series , Oleg Darshavin , who had been one of Lucas 's interrogators in Russia , approaches him for help in stopping a planned bombing by Sudanese extremists ; Lucas takes the case despite Harry 's suspicion that he developed Stockholm syndrome during his captivity . Harry 's suspicions are solidified when Lucas goes off @-@ piste , but ultimately , Lucas is able to bring Darshavin in and takes him into FSB custody after uncovering his involvement in the plot , while Ros stops the bomb . During the same series , Lucas conducts an affair with CIA liaison Sarah Caufield ( Genevieve O 'Reilly ) , who is later revealed to be an operative of " Nightingale " , a multinational shadow organisation bent on a New World Order . When he discovers this and confronts Sarah about her involvement , she flees . She returns in the series eight finale , and before she is assassinated , she reveals that Nightingale is attempting to provoke a nuclear war between India and Pakistan . In the end , Lucas and Ros go to a hotel rigged to explode , set up by Nightingale , to save Pakistan President Mudasser and Home Secretary Andrew Lawrence before the building explodes ; Lucas rescues Mudasser , who calls off the impending war , but Ros is killed in the explosion before she can get Lawrence to safety . 
 In the ninth series , Harry reinstates Lucas as chief of Section D ; this makes Lucas responsible for the integration of two new team members into the section , Beth Bailey ( Sophia Myles ) and Dimitri Levendis ( Max Brown ) . Vaughn returns and hands Lucas a briefcase with possessions from his life before MI5 , including photographs of him and Maya Lahan . When he visits her , however , she is so shocked at his reappearance and angry over his letting her believe him dead that at first she wants nothing to do with him . Later , Vaughn promises to leave Lucas alone in exchange for an MI5 file on " Albany " ; Lucas eventually hands him what he believes is the file . Believing he is free from Vaughn , Lucas persuades Maya to restart their relationship . However , it is revealed the file was not Albany , though it leads to the location of the actual file . Vaughn forces Lucas to find the file , which is in the possession of former Section D member Malcolm Wynn @-@ Jones ( Hugh Simon ) . After convincing Malcolm to give him the file , Lucas hands it over to Vaughn , but it is soon discovered that this file , too , is a fake , and Malcolm has abandoned the house where he and Lucas had met . To force Lucas to continue seeking the file hand Vaughn kidnaps Maya . By this time , Harry Pierce has discovered that Lucas is not who he claims to be . Arrested and questioned , Lucas admits his true identity and his past , but convinces Harry to save Maya . A mortally wounded Vaughn is able to " wake up " Lucas ' true persona , who he was before MI5 . Believing Harry may not honour the deal they have worked out , Lucas intends to leave the country after getting his hands on the Albany file . The file is revealed to contain directions for building a genetic weapon that Vaughn has agreed to sell to the Chinese . After Lucas acquires the real file from Harry in exchange for team member Ruth Evershed , whom he has kidnapped , Maya is killed while he is trying to escape with her . He delivers the file to the Chinese agents anyway and intends to kill Harry for revenge . During their roof @-@ top confrontation , Lucas learns that Albany is an elaborate deception ; the genetic weapon is unworkable . Lucas then forces Harry to turn around , as if he is about to execute him . Instead , Lucas throws himself from the roof , to his death . 
 = = = Characteristics and relationships = = = 
 Lucas North appears to be a person divided between who he was prior to his incarceration and who he has become since . Richard Armitage has described Lucas as " very ambiguous , but quite open with everybody " and " a bit of a double @-@ edged sword , so he 's not completely white . He 's a bit of a dark horse . " He is also described as having " no knowledge of how damaged he is emotionally , until memories start to work their way to the surface . " Following his release from prison , glimpses of him adjusting to the outside world — such as a scene in episode two in which Lucas lies on the floor rather than in a bed in order to sleep — reveal to the audience how much he is struggling , though he keeps it hidden from his teammates . Lucas also fights very hard to be accepted and to regain Harry 's trust , but he does not always play by the rules . In the series seven finale , Lucas admits to having blamed Harry for his ordeal . However , in series nine , Lucas also believed he deserved being tortured , as penance for bombing the British Embassy in Dakar . 
 Lucas is an admirer of English poet and painter William Blake ; Elizabeta reveals that Lucas ' admiration of Blake is based on their common distrust of systems . Lucas decorates his flat with some of Blake 's paintings , and has a chest tattoo resembling The Ancient of Days , one of Blake 's watercolour paintings . Though no longer married to Elizabeta , he maintains strong feelings towards her throughout the first half of series seven . 
 The eighth series sees the return of Oleg Darshavin , one of Lucas 's former interrogators during his imprisonment . During his interrogations , Lucas had developed Stockholm syndrome , and his interrogator had managed to deconstruct him almost to the point of being turned and wanting to die . Lucas also becomes involved with CIA liaison officer Sarah Caufield . The initial power struggle between them ends up in a " torrid love affair , " which is monitored by the team . When Ruth Evershed ( Nicola Walker ) returns in the series , Lucas " really takes control of her position " , in a similar manner to Harry and Ros 's actions during Lucas 's return . Armitage described Lucas 's friendship with Ros as a " good combo " ; while Lucas likes to play the " maverick " with " all guns blazing " Ros would " slip around the back and silently slit a throat . " 
 Following Ros 's death in the series eight finale , Lucas " sees the team 's been slightly shattered by it " and responds by " trying to pull the team together and aiming to be a strong figure for Harry . " The ninth series reveals a dark secret in Lucas 's past that will lead to the " ultimate betrayal . " Armitage revealed that Lucas " isn 't quite who you think he is . " It sees the introduction of a character named Maya , played by Laila Rouass , who is Lucas 's old flame and possible first love ; she is involved in Lucas 's secret . Lucas states that Maya means more to him than his job and reputation . Vaughn would use Maya as a way of controlling him . Armitage also revealed Lucas goes off the radar " quite a lot this series " and behaves " quite strangely . " 
 = = Conceptual history = = 
 = = = Creation and casting = = = 
 The character of Lucas North and his background was first revealed in March 2008 , shortly after filming the seventh series began . The producers wanted to create a new character to be a part of the team . They came up with a " new heroic figure " that they wanted to " put as much distance between [ the ] previous hero , " Adam Carter . The producers focused on Richard Armitage early into the casting suggestions , because they felt he could carry the mystery of Lucas North . Writer Neil Cross felt that Armitage would bring the entire tortured history of North on screen . 
 The producers approached Armitage in November 2007 , following the completion of the second series of Robin Hood , for which he played the regular part of Sir Guy of Gisbourne . Though interested in appearing on Spooks , he was initially somewhat worried and hesitant to join the series , citing replacing Rupert Penry @-@ Jones , which he thought was a " tall order , " and fears of bringing the series down . He agreed to appear on the series upon reading the rough outline of the script . He and the producers discussed about the potential and direction for the character , as well as where he would fit in the world of Spooks . A tentative viewer of the Spooks , he spent two days catching up on the series before starting . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 To research for his role , Armitage read novels from authors including John le Carré , Frederick Forsyth and Robert Ludlum . He tried to inspire his acting style for Lucas by Jason Bourne , a character created by Ludlum . He also lost a stone in weight in order to keep with the description that Lucas is malnourished , but also had to keep physically fit in order to perform a fight sequence during his first week of filming . Since Lucas is a fluent Russian speaker , Armitage had to learn it phonetically , which he found " pretty impossible . " He originally tried to learn it from a disc , but found it too basic and had since moved on to a language coach . 
 Though interested , yet frustrated about the writing style and not knowing what is going to happen next , upon starting , Armitage was told by co @-@ star Peter Firth to learn to run with it , as well as learn the lines and political jargon quickly . He also thought the scripts are " quite a workout for the brain . " Armitage was also coached on his " serious face " and the " Spooks lean " by Rupert Penry @-@ Jones . The numerous tattoos on Lucas 's torso were actually transfers planted on Armitage , and took a couple of hours to apply . However , he was often told not to move much , as they could rub off quite easily . Armitage was also one of only two actors , along with Hermione Norris , who plays Ros Myers , who went to Moscow , Russia in the series ' first overseas shoot in August 2008 . 
 When questioned regarding Spooks 's notoriety of killing off main characters , and the chances of Lucas meeting his demise , Armitage stated ; 
 Armitage believes that when it is Lucas 's turn to leave the series , he would " leave in style , " and has no preference how he would exit , whether " sending Lucas to Manchester or severing his head , " he believes the producers would owe him a " brilliant exit . " In an interview with Lorraine Kelly on GMTV on May 2010 , Armitage revealed that in the ninth series , " [ Lucas ] is not who you thought he was . He 's not who I thought he was . " He admitted to being surprised at the development while reading the script . With the series theme being " deception " , Armitage felt that playing another side of Lucas was " interesting , " " quite exciting to play " and like " working in reverse because we 've already established his background and then we 've had to go and establish a much deeper background . " Writers Jonathan Brackley and Sam Vincent ( both head writers of the ninth series , having written five of the episodes ) made the decision about Lucas ' story @-@ arc in the series during the initial meetings with the producers . Throughout the process of developing Lucas ' arc , they worked through " a <unk> different versions . " For example , in the series finale , they considered that Lucas would release the Albany weapon on the Grid . Both writers admitted that they were " not @-@ half " concerned with possible negative reactions from fans of both Armitage and the character . In September 2011 , co @-@ star Peter Firth confirmed Lucas was killed off in the ninth series finale . He stated that the character " was always going to die . " At some point the producers considered having Harry shoot him at the top of the building where he would fall to his death . However , this changed to have Lucas just jumping off the building instead . 
 = = = Stunt work and on @-@ screen violence = = = 
 Armitage performs his own stunts . When performing fight scenes , they would be choreographed carefully so Armitage could take part rather than a stunt double . For series eight , Armitage performed a fight scene in a swimming pool , which he thought was " fun , " but also thought it was difficult as it was " like acting and punching in slow motion . " In another sequence , he injured a stuntman with a hospital trolley . He was only given a short lesson on how to handle firearms , since he was already accustomed to using them whilst working on Ultimate Force . While discussing the shootout at the end of series seven , Armitage noted that he is " not a violent person but when you put a gun in somebody 's hands [ ... ] it 's like a little animal comes out of you that wants to fire the gun again . " 
 In a flashback sequence in one of his early episodes , Lucas is subjected to waterboarding , a method of psychological torture . In order to ensure the authenticity of the sequence , Armitage was himself subjected to the actual torture while shooting . He agreed to perform the sequence after he was convinced by consultants for the FSB and CIA . Armitage was only subjected to it for a short time , and was filmed in slow motion to make it appear he was on for longer . The ambient temperature of the room was also raised to make him as comfortable as possible . However , after the sequence was shot , Armitage changed his opinion entirely , stating ; " I only lasted five to ten seconds , and the sound of my voice crying out to stop isn 't me acting . " Armitage shot more interrogation scenes during production of the eighth series , but only some were added into the episodes . He was " less physical " in the ninth series . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The reaction towards the character and Armitage 's portrayal were met with unanimous praise . In a viewer poll on their favourite character played by Armitage on <unk> , Lucas North was voted third behind Sir Guy of Gisbourne , and winner John Thornton in North and South . Spooks producer Katie Swinden described Armitage 's addition as " fantastic " , as he " has that dark and brooding quality which make him perfect for the role . " Co @-@ star Hermione Norris thought Lucas was a " really fantastic character " and has brought " a completely different vibe and quality " to the series . 
 John Beresford of TV Scoop thought the acting of the cast in the beginning of the seventh series , including Armitage 's was " pitch perfect " , and noted he " looks and sounds like he 's been here all along , already , and having only seen him briefly in Robin Hood I 've been quite astonished by how good he is in this . " Sky TV described Lucas North 's character as a " refreshing change " for the series . The Bromsgrove Advertiser noted that Armitage " certainly has the looks needed for the part " with " classic leading man presence , " and while comparing past main actors of the series , Matthew Macfadyen and Rupert Penry @-@ Jones , the author believed that " the eye candy quota is being kept high . " Leigh Holmwood of The Guardian reacted positively towards the introduction of Lucas after Adam 's departure , believing the change has " more than made amends . " David Blackwell of Enterline Media liked Lucas " better than Adam Carter or Tom Quinn " and felt that his " dark and conflicted persona adds to the story and makes him a more interesting character than Adam or Tom ever were . " Blackwell also believed that Armitage 's portrayal gives the character " real intensity and mystery . " In the ninth series Metro 's Lewis Bazley believed that Lucas " continues to give a violent , powder @-@ keg edge to proceedings – thank heaven for small mercies as his continual scowl never convinces in comparison with his predecessors Matthew <unk> and Rupert Penry @-@ Jones . " 
 Critics reacted positively towards Lucas ' development in the ninth series . Metro 's Keith Watson said that the scene had a " touch of Don Draper about it , " one of the factors that " Spooks has still got its hooks in . " Catherine Gee of The Daily Telegraph reflected on the " dramatically provided " twist , stated " just as we were finally beginning to trust him . " Vicky Frost of The Guardian stated that Spooks was " looking a bit lacklustre , " but now " seems to have raised its game " because of several developments for series nine , including the closing scenes involving Lucas and Vaughn , and his relationship with Dimitri Levendis . The Daily Mail Weekend Magazine stated " will he really turn out to be a bad guy ? It wouldn 't be the first time , " mirroring Armitage 's statement that " baddies are always the most fun to play . " 
 = WWE 2K = 
 WWE 2K is a series that has more than 20 of those professional wrestling video games that are currently developed by Visual Concepts and Yuke 's , and it was later published by 2K Sports . These series of games are based on the professional wrestling promotion WWE , which features the professional wrestling match types , storylines , and playable characters based on WWE programming . The series was originally named SmackDown ! , after it has garnered from the WWE 's own SmackDown television program . The first release in the series was WWF SmackDown ! in March 2000 , which along with these subsequent titles , remained exclusive to Sony 's PlayStation consoles . After the brand extension , the series was retitled SmackDown ! vs. Raw in 2004 , to indicate the Raw brand was also featured . Within a few years , the series had expanded to a yearly release cycle for various seventh @-@ generation consoles as well as mobile devices . Yuke 's had also released the games in Japan under the name of Exciting Pro Wrestling . However , after SmackDown ! vs. Raw 2006 , THQ took over as the Japanese publisher and the Japanese releases adopted the western name . The series was later renamed as just simply WWE , starting from 2011 and 2012 . 
 After THQ 's dissolution in January 2013 , it was reported that the publishing rights for the WWE video game series were acquired by Take @-@ Two Interactive . Take @-@ Two confirmed the acquisition in February , saying that it would also retain the services of Yuke 's and the THQ staff that worked on the WWE series . WWE 2K14 is the first game to be released under the 2K brand . 
 Reception to the series ' games has overall been favorable , and WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2009 was rated 31st and 28th ( Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 , respectively ) in IGN 's " Top 100 Games " list . It is among the best @-@ selling video game franchises , with 60 million copies shipped as of 2013 . 
 = = WWE games series = = 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The first game in the series , WWF SmackDown ! had a clear cut system for moves such as combining an arrow key with the circle button for grappling and moves and combining an arrow key with the X button for striking moves . Most of the later games , from WWF SmackDown ! 2 : Know Your Role to WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2006 used the aforementioned control scheme . When WWE SmackDown vs Raw 2007 was released , new game mechanics were introduced , in which a new control scheme altered the grappling system of the game , called " Ultimate Control moves . " Unlike the previous games , where the player pressed two buttons to perform a grapple or an attack , players were able to place their opponents into a grapple position and then choose to perform a move by moving the directional buttons of their system 's controller . For example , the player could place their opponent in a suplex grappling position and then either perform a normal suplex or an inverted suplex slam . Before the release of WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2008 , in order for players to force a superstar to submit , they had to tap buttons to move a marker towards the end of the meter labeled " Submit " , and the only way for opponents to escape was for them to move the meter towards " Escape " . Included with the release of WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2008 was a new submission system , in which the player had to move the analog sticks of their system 's controller in different directions to force the opponent to submit , while the opponent could do the same to escape the submission hold . 
 Every game in the SmackDown vs. Raw series used to have the amount of damage inflicted to the player 's chosen superstar , measured with a meter on the HUD , where a design of a male figure presented the damage . As a move was performed against a superstar , the affected area of the body flashed — the more damage that is done to that specific body part , the more likely it is for the superstar to submit . Colors were used to represent the amount of damage done to a specific body area ; yellow represented minimal damage , orange represented moderate damage , and red represented maximum damage . This was however taken out of WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2010 . Now the only way to tell how damaged the opponent is to watch their physical body actions that indicate how hurt they are . The more damage inflicted to opponents , the more likely it is for them to lose the match . There are four ways to win a match in every game : by pinfall , submission , knockout , countout ; alternatively , the match could end in a draw . With the introduction of an on @-@ screen referee in WWF SmackDown ! Just Bring It , the ability to win by disqualification was also included . 
 Included with the release of WWE SmackDown ! vs. Raw was the option of fighting " dirty " or " clean " . When players select " dirty " , the superstar is booed by the audience in the game ; conversely , the " clean " superstar is cheered by the audience . With the " dirty " or " clean " option comes the inclusion of performing a special maneuver when playing . Players using a " dirty " superstar must direct their superstar into building up their " dirty " meter by performing " dirty " tactics , such as attacking the referee or taking the pad off the ring 's turnbuckle . Unlike performing dirty tactics , " clean " superstars build their meters by performing " clean " tactics , such as an aerial <unk> or performing a taunt . When " dirty " superstars ' meters build up , they are able to perform a signature low blow ; likewise , " clean " superstars can perform their signature move at double its normal damage . 
 With the release of WWE SmackDown ! vs. Raw 2006 was the inclusion of a stamina system , which was a measure of the superstars ' stamina . The stamina system was measured by a meter on the HUD ; the meter decreased when performing a variety of moves . The meter increases , however , when the player does nothing with the superstar or holds down a selected button that increased the stamina , which varied depending on the player 's system . When the superstar 's stamina was low , the wrestler reacted by moving slower when performing moves , walking , and running . If the meter decreased completely , the superstar fell to the ground until the meter increased . This system is disabled by default since WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2008 . 
 The weak / strong grapple system from the past games was removed from WWE ' 12 onwards . Characters now perform different moves based on their opponent 's current physical state . Players now have a window of opportunity to attack while still in a downed state and can also interrupt moves and Royal Rumble eliminations with attacks . Similarly , the pinning meter from the past games has been reworked to make it more difficult to kick out as a wrestler takes more damage . The game 's artificial intelligence has also been adjusted to prevent players from overusing the same move . In addition , the ability to store finishing moves has returned . " Dynamic Comebacks " gives players on the verge of losing the opportunity to successfully hit a combination of moves to gain two finishing moves . New " wake up taunts " bring a downed opponent to their feet for a finishing move ( such as Randy Orton pounding on the ground before his RKO finishing maneuver ) . Players also have the ability to target specific limbs during matches and perform submissions through a " Breaking Point " submission minigame . OMG ! moments were introduced to WWE ' 13 . These are moves than can be performed in certain situations with certain superstars when a finisher is obtained . An example of this is Mark Henry <unk> the Big Show , making the ring break and the match stop . Better weight detection was implemented to WWE ' 13 , so the smaller Rey Mysterio can ’ t body slam the 500 pound Big Show . In fact , super heavyweights like Mark Henry or Show now have different frames to better capture their enormous size . Pinning is now not only influenced by damage , but the power of the move that was previously executed . In WWE ' 13 alongside selecting arenas , characters and the number of finishing moves available at the start of a match ( a new option , which can range from 0 to Infinite ) , players will be able to adjust a setting called ‘ Match Experience ’ . Three settings - “ Quick ” , “ Normal ” and “ Epic ” - will affect the overall pacing of a fight , independent of AI difficulty . Factors such as momentum , damage , enemy aggressiveness and even kick out and reversal rates will be affected . 
 To overhaul the gameplay of the series , 2K15 features five times the animation data of WWE 2K14 , containing over fifty days work of motion capture by the WWE superstars . Over four times the amount of dialogue for commentary was recorded . The general gameplay of the game too has been revised , with the wrestlers being divided once more into classes , as was present in the Smackdown vs. Raw series . This creates what is known as " in ring psychology " was the classes ( brawlers , giants , <unk> and high @-@ flyers ) all provide different and unique sensations within the game to provide more diverse mechanics . In addition , the game 's overall core mechanics have been fundamentally altered . 
 WWE 2K16 introduces Working Holds , which allows the player to go through a collar @-@ elbow tie @-@ up situation in order to either damage the opponent or regain stamina to reverse the tide in the match . Dirty Pins now come in various animations and also A.I. for the referee is improved ; for example , they break up collar @-@ elbow tie @-@ ups when the wrestlers are holding each other at the corner for too long . The Reversal Limit system was introduced to prevent players from reversing throughout the match , they come as minor and major ones depending on the class of the wrestler / diva . This method can be toggled on / off in the Options section . 
 = = = Story modes = = = 
 In the WWE SmackDown vs. Raw series , the player was able to choose a " superstar " from a roster and compete in an arcade @-@ like feature called season mode . In season mode , players direct their superstars through different career obstacles through a year of WWE programming to gain respect with other superstars and popularity among the fans . Like superstars from WWE , the superstars in the WWE SmackDown vs. Raw series season mode are involved in storylines that affect their career mode in some way . Beginning with the release of WWE SmackDown ! Shut Your Mouth , the WWE Brand Extension has been included in season mode , and superstars are exclusive to one brand of WWE . A result of this feature is that the player 's superstar may only wrestle superstars and compete for championships from the same brand on which he is a part of . In season mode , the player 's superstar has the ability to earn and wrestle for a variety of championships based on actual WWE Championships . When superstars win championships , their respect and popularity increase , which also increases their involvement in main event matches . As the superstar 's respect and popularity increases through the year of WWE programming , it becomes more likely for the player to achieve the main goal in season mode , which is to earn a World Heavyweight Championship or WWE Championship match at WrestleMania , the WWE 's flagship pay @-@ per @-@ view event and the final stage in season mode . After the final stage , season modes begins again with the same superstar chosen before , though the player has the option of switching superstars . The superstar is then a part of the WWE Draft Lottery and is assigned to a brand . 
 Season mode was replaced with Road to WrestleMania in WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2009 , and remained in the games until WWE ' 12 . In this mode , players could choose from superstars to play as in single @-@ player or multi @-@ player storylines . The difference is that each storyline is tailor made for the superstar the player chooses . This mode is a more authentic experience and less arcade @-@ like than the former season mode was . 
 Road to WrestleMania was replaced with Attitude Era Mode in WWE ' 13 . This single @-@ player mode is an abridged recreation of a memorable time in sports entertainment , allowing players to journey through various storylines as eight of the most popular superstars of that time , including “ Stone Cold ” Steve Austin and Dwayne " The Rock " Johnson . 
 The chapter @-@ based saga moves through WWE ’ s struggle and eventual triumph during the “ Monday Night Wars , ” which saw the company on the brink of defeat at the hands of a powerful rival , WCW . Told from the perspective of the WWE during that period , matches and in @-@ game cutscenes are supplemented by video packages assembled by WWE ’ s own editors . 
 In WWE 2K14 , a single player campaign titled " The 30 Years of WrestleMania " was introduced , a nostalgic gameplay mode that recreates nearly three decades of WWE history , including 46 matches , classic WWE footage and many legendary characters . The mode features a distinct roster of wrestlers and alternate gimmicks , who wrestled at WrestleMania . In this mode matches have primary objectives , required to beat the game , and bonus historical objectives , which result in recreated WrestleMania moments . Sometimes the player must follow a guided sequence of inputs , rather than freely control the character . The player competes through storylines of various lengths , switching predetermined characters as they are completed . Each chapter has its own title and focus ; " Hulkamania Runs Wild " focuses on Hulk Hogan and early WrestleManias , while " The New Generation " showcases the rise of Bret Hart and Shawn Michaels in the mid @-@ 1990s . The " Attitude Era " chapter brings back some matches from WWE ' 13 's " Attitude Era " mode , as well as some not covered before . The " Ruthless Aggression " chapter focuses on the departure of The Rock , lessened focus on Triple H and rise of Randy Orton and Edge . The final " Universe Era " chapter focuses on the rise of John Cena and the returns of The Rock and Brock Lesnar . The video packages provided detailed the intro to Wrestlemania , Wrestlemania III , Wrestlemania V , which background glimpses IV , Wrestlemania VI , Wrestlemania VIII , an intro to the New Generation Era leading to Wrestlemania X also another promoting X , Wrestlemania XII , a video opening the Attitude Era leading to XIV , Wrestlemania 2000 , Wrestlemania X @-@ Seven , two videos about Wrestlemania X8 , two about Wrestlemania XIX , two of Wrestlemania XX , Wrestlemania 23 , Wrestlemania XXIV , A interchange video regarding the Ruthless Aggression Era to the Universe Era opening for XXV , Wrestlemania XXVI , Wrestlemania 27 , next , a video of Wrestlemania 27 , which crosses into XXVIII and another of XXVIII which culminates the first battle between the Rock and John Cena . Videos for XXIX was not included as three important matches were just finished at that event in the same year when the game was released . The matches were Undertaker vs. CM Punk ; Triple H vs. Brock Lesnar & The Rock vs. John Cena for the Reality Era WWE Championship . The last video was an overlook of what happened throughout the decades showing some events going to the future of that pay per view . 
 WWE 2K15 features the 2K Showcase , the core stories include CM Punk vs. John Cena & Triple H vs. Shawn Michaels . These rivalries detail from 2002 to 2004 ( Triple H and Shawn Michaels ) and 2011 to 2013 ( CM Punk and John Cena ) . Three other stories which were included as DLC include The Path of the Warrior , a highlight behind the life of the Ultimate Warrior and his meteoric rise concentrating on championships to the Hall of Fame as commemoration . The Hall of Pain , a story behind the World 's Strongest Man , Mark Henry as he punished many to become the World Heavyweight Champion and attempts to gain the WWE title . And lastly , the One More Match story , which stars captain charisma , Christian as he complained about having one more match as his way of getting multiple second chances of earning the World Heavyweight Championship . Originally , these stories were meant to be produced for WWE ' 12 , WWE ' 13 & WWE 2K14 , but the developers chose to use WWE ' 12 for Road to Wrestlemania , the Attitude Era for WWE ' 13 and 30 years of Wrestlemania for WWE 2K14 . 
 WWE 2K16 details the historical career of Steve Austin , from his days at ECW when he was angry that things were not going to happen in a good sense for him to WCW when he and Brian Pillman began to become a strong tag team leading to Austin suffering injury and going through a rub shot in WWE as Stone Cold , an anti @-@ hero that was not going to be tame into a corporate man . Video Packages contain commentary that was remixed from WWE ' 13 and WWE 2K14 with the exception of some not documented before . Through DLC , the WWE Hall of Fame showcase contains what if matches and some from WCW ; these matches were announced on Oct 7th 2015 and to be released alongside the Deluxe Editions of the video game . 
 = = = General Manager Mode = = = 
 Starting with WWE SmackDown ! vs. RAW 2006 , a General Manager mode ( or GM Mode for short ) was introduced . It allowed the player to act as the General Manager of the Raw or Smackdown brands ( or ECW brand in WWE SmackDown vs. RAW 2008 ) . After choosing a brand , and selecting to participate in the WWE Draft , or using a default roster , you then start a calendar year of hiring and managing Superstar and Divas , booking matches , establishing rivalries , and other options to try and win WWE fans to support your brand . You must manage finances , contract or release Superstars & try to make better matches than your rival brand . At the end of the year at WrestleMania , Vince McMahon will give The General Manager of the Year award to the show that was able to hold the most fans . 
 In WWE SmackDown vs. RAW 2008 , GM Mode was combined into one game mode called WWE 24 / 7 Mode . This basically allowed Superstars to train , make special appearances or other actions between matches during full calendar years . After achieving specific goals through the game , a percentage will increase of becoming a WWE Hall of Famer / General Manager of the Year winner , and the mode does not end until this percentage reaches 100 % . 
 This mode was discontinued in WWE SmackDown vs. RAW 2009 . 
 = = = Universe mode = = = 
 The series has had a " WWE Universe " mode since SmackDown vs. Raw 2011 which replaces the career mode from previous games . The mode builds storylines , and integrates cut scenes and rivalries between wrestlers based on the matches that are wrestled . These cut scenes appear randomly before , during , and after the match . In WWE ' 12 , championships was not able to be toggled on and off from most wrestlers . WWE ' 13 introduced the option to toggle on and off rivalries injuries and tag team changes also crowd reactions . WWE 2K14 was the last title to use the method of created arena before it was removed in WWE 2K15 . In WWE 2K15 , secret hints had to be unlocked through actions in this mode ; they were 300 to collect . WWE 2K16 allows wrestlers to be branded by multiple promotions . WWE 2K17 will mimic the Smackdown vs. Raw series in splitting rosters . 
 = = = My Career Mode = = = 
 This mode was introduced in WWE 2K15 , social media followers were counted for the WWE Universe liking the player ( the number of followers can decrease if bad performances occur during matches ) ; pre @-@ set cutscenes that used to be created for Story Mode in WWE ' 12 to WWE 2K14 appear at random times . In WWE 2K16 , the player has to fight for ranks to earn championships ( the main goal is to reach the WWE Hall of Fame by fulfilling certain requirements ) . 
 = = = Exhibition mode = = = 
 Other than the season mode , every game features an exhibition mode , where different professional wrestling match types are available . Basic matches included in every game are " one @-@ on @-@ one " matches , where a player chooses one superstar to wrestle another bot operated or human operated superstar , or tag team matches , where a pair of superstars team together to face another team . These basic matches may also expand into six @-@ man tag team matches or non @-@ elimination type matches , which include four or more superstars . Besides basic matches , hardcore based matches are also included , such as the Steel Cage match , which has been included in every game , the Ladder match , the Elimination Chamber , which was first included with the release of WWE SmackDown ! Here Comes the Pain , and ECW Extreme Rules matches , which is basic hardcore wrestling based on the ECW brand of WWE ( which first appeared with the release of WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2008 ) . Also included in every game is the Royal Rumble match , which is based on WWE 's actual Royal Rumble match , in which a player chooses to compete as one superstar , and must wrestle against twenty @-@ nine other superstars . Two recently added matches are the Championship Scramble introduced in the 2010 game and the " I Quit " match from WWE ' 13 . In WWE ' 13 the ' special referee ' match type ( which hadn 't been seen since Smackdown vs. Raw 2007 ) made its return to the series . The exhibition mode was renamed " Play " in SmackDown vs. Raw 2010 to WWE 2K14 and renamed Exhibition in WWE 2K15 before returning as Play mode in WWE 2K16 . 
 = = = Online gameplay = = = 
 Starting with the release of WWE SmackDown ! vs. Raw , online gameplay was made available for players who had a Sony Network Adapter and a Sony PlayStation 2 . Online gameplay was kept at a minimum , as online players only had two game modes to compete in : one @-@ on @-@ one and a Bra and Panties match , in which a player competes as a WWE Diva and strips the opposition of her clothes , until she is left with only her undergarments . When WWE SmackDown ! vs. Raw 2006 was released , the online gameplay was changed , and players were able to compete in more match types , defend the created championships , and compete with up to four players in each match . With the release of WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2008 on the Xbox 360 console ( PS3 would not see this feature until WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2009 ) , players were able to select music from their system 's hard disk drive into the video game , where the music can be used in superstars ' ring entrances . 
 = = = Roster = = = 
 Every game in the WWE SmackDown vs. Raw series includes a roster of " superstars " and " Divas " based on superstars who compete for WWE . Every year , WWE acquires new superstars and releases old superstars . As a result , every time a WWE SmackDown vs. Raw game is released , the new superstars are added into the game and the old released superstars are removed from the game to reflect the changes in the actual WWE . From the release of WWF SmackDown ! to the release of WWF SmackDown ! Just Bring It , superstars were not divided into brands . In 2002 , the WWE split its entire roster into two brands of wrestling , called Raw and SmackDown ! , which were named after WWE 's television shows . The WWE Brand Extension was first featured in WWE SmackDown ! Shut Your Mouth . In 2006 , WWE launched a new brand , called ECW , which was named after the original Extreme Championship Wrestling promotion . The new ECW brand was first featured in WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2008 . WWE holds an annual draft lottery , in which WWE superstars switch brands . The games in production when the draft occurs include the changes that take place in the draft . For example , when WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2008 was in production during June 2007 , the 2007 WWE Draft took place , and the draft changes were included in the video game . Another brand of wrestling included in the series is the legends program , which was first included with the release of WWE SmackDown ! Here Comes the Pain . Popular WWE alumni or members of the WWE Hall of Fame have been included since then under the legends program . This was featured up until the release of WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2008 , as alumni and Hall of Fame members were not featured in WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2009 due to production of WWE Legends of WrestleMania . WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2009 was also the first game to feature characters as downloadable content . 
 WWE ' 12 has 56 wrestlers and 78 by DLC , WWE 13 with 84 and 107 by DLC , WWE 2K14 with 82 and 103 by DLC , WWE 2K15 with 76 and 113 with DLC , WWE 2K16 with 133 including DLC giving this title " the highest character roster in the video game 's history " with 165 . 
 = = = Create mode = = = 
 The series features a create @-@ a @-@ superstar mode , where players are able to create their own wrestler , including their move set and ring entrances . The feature was introduced when WWF SmackDown ! was released in 2000 . As new games were released , the mode was altered ; the first change came with the release of WWF SmackDown ! 2 : Know Your Role , which featured a mode in which wrestler taunts could be created and customized . This was further modified in WWE SmackDown ! Shut Your Mouth , which enabled players to create the walking style of a wrestler . With the release of WWE SmackDown ! vs. RAW 2006 , the game first featured the ability for players to make an entrance for the created superstar . The feature was expanded with the release of WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2007 , as players could place pyrotechnics and special effects in any part of the superstar 's entrance . As an addition to SmackDown vs. Raw 2009 , a create a finisher mode was introduced where the player chooses up to 10 out of 500 animations combined to make their own personalised finisher . On the 360 and PS3 versions of WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2010 , it is possible to change the colors of a featured superstar 's attire , this new mode is known as " Superstar Threads " . In this game , there is also a new creation mode giving players the ability to create their designs . 
 From WWE 2K14 alongside the " Superstar Threads " feature , in the " Create a Superstar " mode there was a new part of it called " Superstar Heads " . This feature allowed players to take certain in game models and modify or create a new attire for that model and use it as an alternative attire for the superstar that they have done it for . This was only available for very limited superstars and players couldn 't any headgear or masks to the superstar . A DLC was soon released which featured vintage versions of some of the existing models as well as few new models . 
 From WWE 2K15 , on next generation consoles a new feature was available to players which was similar to the " Superstar Heads " feature that had previously featured on WWE games but this new feature was called the " Superstar Studio " . This new " Superstar Studio " allowed players to take any existing in game model and modify their attires into anything that the player desired . Whilst this was exclusive to <unk> generation consoles , players playing on last generation consoles had the returning " Superstar Heads " mode which featured all of the models from 2K14 as well as a new Brock Lesnar model . 
 = = Development = = 
 Every game in the WWE 2K series is developed by Yuke 's and Visual Concepts , and published by 2K Sports . From 1999 - 2013 the publisher was THQ . The game engine was originally based on the one used by the Japanese professional wrestling video game series Toukon Retsuden , which was also developed by Yuke 's . Before the release of WWE SmackDown ! vs. Raw , the only communication possible in season mode was through subtitles . Voice over , however , was included in season mode with the release of WWE SmackDown ! vs. RAW . WWE superstars record a script , which is then assigned to the voice of the corresponding superstar in the game . With the exception of WWE SmackDown ! Here Comes the Pain , pre @-@ recorded commentary by WWE commentators has been included in each game since the release of WWF SmackDown ! Just Bring It . 
 Yuke 's studios in Yokohama , Japan worked with WWE writers to create storylines for the season modes of each game . When WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2007 was released for more than one console , Yuke 's had to port their original game codes that make up each game mode and graphic designs to a new game engine that supported the new consoles . When new features are added to WWE 2K games , developers have to create new gaming codes for the features . Along with the features , the developers have to test the game for any errors . An improvement done yearly by Yuke 's with each release of a WWE 2K game is the polygon count for the 3D models of the superstars in each game . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The original WWF SmackDown ! was one of the most popular games for the PlayStation console in 2000 , selling over 975 @,@ 000 units for the PlayStation , and selling over one million copies in the United States . The game lost appeal due to the failing of a well @-@ established season mode that was deemed " disappointing . " The season mode was criticized for the lack of in @-@ depth storylines and the way superstars spoke in season mode , through " putrid lines " and " blocked text . " WWF SmackDown ! 2 : Know Your Role received a better reception than the first WWE SmackDown game , as IGN stated that season mode " actually works properly " , though the audio of the game was lacking as there was no commentary , and only generic music was included in the game . WWF SmackDown ! Just Bring It , according to IGN , did little to improve the season mode of the game , while GameSpot stated that the addition of audio commentary detracted from the playing experience . 
 WWE SmackDown ! Shut Your Mouth and WWE SmackDown ! Here Comes the Pain received more positive reviews from both IGN and GameSpot , both of whom cited the expanded season mode as an improvement , although flaws were still visible in the mode . It improved from the previous three WWF SmackDown ! games , as it was written by actual WWE storyline writers . Both games also featured generic music , though the quality of it had improved . Shut Your Mouth featured little improvement to the commentary , which was then removed completely from Here Comes the Pain . WWE SmackDown ! vs. RAW received a more positive review than previous games , as GameShark stated that it was " a wonderful new edition to the SmackDown ! family , serving up slick graphics , vastly enhanced gameplay , and lots of other bells and whistles that make the whole package shine . " WWE SmackDown ! vs. RAW 2006 received a positive review and a 9 @.@ 2 / 10 rating by IGN due to the additions of matches , the General Manager mode , and the ability to defend championships in exhibition mode . WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2008 received more negative reviews due to lack of an appealing season mode and little improvement of features , with the exceptions of the " Ultimate Control moves , " " Struggle system , " and the ECW Extreme Rules matches . 
 = Mississippi Highway 198 = 
 Mississippi Highway 198 ( MS 198 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Mississippi . The highway is the designation for six former segments of U.S. Highway 98 ( US 98 ) that have been bypassed by newer alignments . These six segments are located in Tylertown , Columbia , Hattiesburg , Beaumont , McLain , and Lucedale . Five of the six sections of MS 198 are two @-@ lane undivided roads that pass through small towns ; the exception is the Hattiesburg section which is a four @-@ lane divided highway running through developed areas of the city . The total length of the six sections of MS 198 is 24 @.@ 937 miles ( 40 @.@ 132 km ) . 
 What is now MS 198 originally existed as gravel and earth roads by the 1920s . The portions of the current road became parts of MS 24 and MS 15 in the 1930s and were all paved by the 1940s . US 98 was designated on these segments in 1955 . Between the 1970s and 1990s , US 98 was rerouted to bypass Tylertown , Columbia , Hattiesburg , Beaumont , McLain , and Lucedale . By 1998 , MS 198 was designated onto the former alignment of US 98 through these communities . The McLain section was truncated from US 98 east of town to MS 57 in 2005 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MS 198 is legally defined in Mississippi Code § 65 @-@ 3 @-@ 3 as the designation for former sections of US 98 that have been relocated by the completion of new alignments . 
 = = = Tylertown = = = 
 The Tylertown section of MS 198 begins at an intersection with US 98 northwest of Tylertown in Walthall County , heading southeast on two @-@ lane undivided <unk> Avenue . The road passes through wooded areas with some homes and businesses . After passing to the south of Walthall County General Hospital , MS 198 comes to an intersection with MS 48 , at which point that highway begins a concurrency with MS 198 . The two highways continue southeast into Tylertown , curving east into residential areas . The road heads into the commercial downtown and comes to an intersection with MS 27 . The highway passes more businesses before leaving the downtown and heading into wooded areas with some homes . MS 48 splits from MS 198 by heading southeast , with MS 198 continuing east past residences and commercial establishments on Old Highway 98 East . The road leaves Tylertown and heads northeast through wooded areas with some homes . This section of MS 198 ends at another intersection with US 98 . 
 = = = Columbia = = = 
 The Columbia section of MS 198 begins at an intersection with US 98 / MS 44 southwest of Columbia in Marion County , heading northeast on two @-@ lane undivided South High School Avenue . The road passes through woodland , curving north into Columbia . In Columbia , the route becomes concurrent with MS 13 . Here , the highway heads past several businesses before turning east onto Broad Street and splitting off of MS 13 . MS 198 heads through residential areas , coming to an intersection with MS 44 . The road continues east through wooded areas with some homes and businesses as Old Highway 98 East , ending at an intersection with US 98 east of Columbia . 
 = = = Hattiesburg = = = 
 The Hattiesburg section begins at an interchange with Interstate 59 ( I @-@ 59 ) and US 98 in Hattiesburg , Lamar County , where the road continues west as part of US 98 . From this interchange , MS 198 heads east into Forrest County on Hardy Street , a four @-@ lane divided highway that passes several businesses . The highway passes to the south of the University of Southern Mississippi before ending at an intersection with US 49 . Past this intersection , Hardy Street continues east as a four @-@ lane undivided city street . 
 = = = Beaumont = = = 
 The Beaumont section of MS 198 begins at an intersection with US 98 within the DeSoto National Forest northwest of Beaumont in Perry County , heading east on a two @-@ lane undivided road . The highway heads through dense forests , curving southeast near a few homes as it runs a short distance to the southwest of a Canadian National railroad line . The road passes through more forests before entering Beaumont , where it heads near a mix of residences and businesses . MS 198 turns northeast to cross the railroad line and come to an intersection with MS 15 . At this point , MS 198 turns southeast to form a concurrency with MS 15 , leaving Beaumont for dense forests and running to the northeast of the Canadian National railroad line . The road curves south and ends at an interchange with US 98 southeast of Beaumont . 
 = = = McLain = = = 
 The McLain section of MS 198 begins at an intersection with US 98 northwest of McLain in Greene County , heading southeast on two @-@ lane undivided West Main Street . The road heads through wooded areas with some homes , entering McLain . The highway passes through residential and commercial areas in the town . MS 198 continues through woodland with some development a short distance to the northeast of a Canadian National railroad line , ending at an intersection with MS 57 . 
 = = = Lucedale = = = 
 The Lucedale section of MS 198 begins at an intersection with US 98 northwest of Lucedale in George County , heading southeast on two @-@ lane undivided Main Street . The road heads through dense forests with some homes , passing under a Canadian National railroad line . The highway continues through more rural areas , heading more to the east and passing under MS 63 , at which point the railroad tracks run immediately to the north of the road . MS 198 curves southeast away from the tracks into more forests , eventually entering Lucedale . The road heads through wooded areas of homes before turning east and passing through the commercial downtown . In this area , the highway intersects the eastern terminus of MS 26 and the northern terminus of MS 613 . The road leaves Lucedale , crossing a Canadian National railroad line and heading into a mix of farmland and woodland with some development . This section of MS 198 ends at another intersection with US 98 east of Lucedale . 
 = = History = = 
 The current alignments of MS 198 existed by 1928 as unnumbered roads . The sections in Tylertown , Columbia , Hattiesburg , and Beaumont were gravel roads and the sections in McLain and Lucedale were unimproved roads . By 1932 , what is now MS 198 in Tylertown , Columbia , Hattiesburg , Beaumont , and McLain became a part of MS 24 , which ran east @-@ west across the southern part of the state . The section of road in McLain became a gravel road by 1933 . In 1935 , the road west of Tylertown became paved . MS 15 was designated onto MS 24 east of Beaumont and in McLain and what is now the Lucedale portion of MS 198 in 1936 . A year later , the portion of road east of Lucedale was paved . In 1938 , the portion of current MS 198 southwest of Columbia was paved . The road east of Tylertown was paved by 1939 . In 1940 , a new alignment of MS 24 between McComb and Tylertown was under construction , which included what is now MS 198 northwest of Tylertown . Also by this time , the road between Columbia and MS 44 was paved . In 1941 , the portions of road in Hattiesburg , east of Beaumont , in McLain , and northwest of Lucedale were paved . The road west of Beaumont was paved in 1943 . The portion of MS 24 between McComb and Tylertown was completed as a paved road in 1944 . In 1955 , US 98 was extended into Mississippi , replacing the MS 24 and MS 15 designations on what is now MS 198 . 
 By 1973 , the road bypassed Columbia . In 1984 , US 98 was routed to bypass Hattiesburg on I @-@ 59 and a new freeway . A bypass to the north of Tylertown was built for US 98 in 1985 . US 98 was moved to a new alignment to bypass Lucedale in 1988 . In 1996 , US 98 was routed out of Beaumont and McLain as a result of the construction of a new alignment on a divided highway . By 1998 , MS 198 was marked on the six former alignments of US 98 in Tylertown , Columbia , Hattiesburg , Beaumont , McLain , and Lucedale . In 2005 , the eastern terminus of the McLain section of MS 198 was truncated from US 98 to MS 57 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = = Tylertown = = = 
 The entire route is in Tylertown , Walthall County . 
 = = = Columbia = = = 
 The entire route is in Columbia , Marion County . 
 = = = Hattiesburg = = = 
 The entire route is in Hattiesburg . 
 = = = Beaumont = = = 
 The entire route is in Beaumont , Perry County . 
 = = = McLain = = = 
 The entire route is in McLain , Greene County . 
 = = = Lucedale = = = 
 The entire route is in Lucedale , George County . 
 = John Neild = 
 John Cash Neild ( 4 January 1846 – 8 March 1911 ) was an English @-@ born Australian politician who served as a Senator from New South Wales from 1901 to 1910 . 
 Neild 's family arrived in Australia in 1860 , and he worked as an insurance agent and company manager before winning election to the New South Wales Legislative Assembly in 1885 . He served intermittently until 1901 and had a tumultuous career as a backbencher , eventually contributing significantly to the fall of the Reid government in 1899 . He also established his own volunteer regiment , which had a difficult and sometimes hostile relationship with military command . 
 Elected in 1901 to the Senate , Neild was a vigorous supporter of old @-@ age pensions , free trade and several other causes , but his ambitions of promotion were never realised . <unk> loyal to the British Empire , he questioned aspects of the White Australia policy and spoke in support of the children of Kanaka labourers facing deportation . His continued disputes with the military , including an attempt to have the commander of the Australian military forces found in contempt of Parliament , saw him lose respect among his colleagues and his later career was spent in comparative isolation . He lost his seat in 1910 and died the following year . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Neild was born in Bristol on 4 January 1846 to Maria Greenwood and John Cash Neild , a surgeon . He was named after his father . In 1853 the family moved to Taranaki in New Zealand , evacuating to Sydney in 1860 to escape the First Taranaki War . On 29 October 1868 Neild married Clara Matilda Gertrude Agnew , whose father Philip founded the New South Wales Free Church of England . Clara died in 1879 , three years after the death of the only child of the marriage ; Neild remarried on 19 February 1880 at St Paul 's Anglican Church in Redfern , to Georgine Marie Louise Uhr , daughter of a former New South Wales sheriff . 
 Neild had received a private education and was first employed at Montefiore , Joseph & Co . , an importing firm . In 1865 he set up as a commission agent , becoming an insurance agent by 1870 and later managing several companies . He was elected to Woollahra Municipal Council in 1876 and in 1882 unsuccessfully stood for the New South Wales Legislative Assembly seat of Paddington . He was successful at his second attempt in 1885 , when he was elected as a supporter of Henry Parkes ; remaining on Woollahra Council , he served as mayor from 1888 to 1889 , leaving the council in 1890 . 
 = = State politics and military career = = 
 Neild devoted his first speech to criticism of the Protectionist Dibbs government , and became known for pursuing causes such as free trade , old @-@ age pensions and law reform . He earned the nickname " Jawbone " on 23 June 1886 , after speaking for nine hours against the Jennings government 's introduction of ad valorem duties . He was narrowly passed over by Parkes for a ministry in January 1887 , but was given charge of Sir Alfred Stephen 's divorce extension bill , which passed in 1892 . Neild continued to be active in religious affairs , serving from 1891 to 1893 as Right Worshipful Grand Master of the Loyal Orange Institution of New South Wales , although he offended many extreme Protestants by praying for the recovery of the Pope . 
 Neild began to encounter difficulties in his political career towards the end of the 1880s ; his oversight of the establishment of the 1887 Adelaide Jubilee International Exhibition led to investigation by a Legislative Assembly select committee , which absolved him of accusations of extravagance and using his office for personal gain . In 1895 he began to agitate for old @-@ age pensions , but in 1899 he was investigated again after Premier George Reid paid him £ 350 for writing a report ; although Neild repaid the money , the incident was part of the pretext for a successful no confidence motion in September which brought down the Reid government . 
 In 1896 , in response to the establishment of an Irish @-@ Australian unit in the New South Wales citizen army , Neild raised a volunteer regiment that became St George 's English Rifles . He was promoted major of the regiment in July 1896 and lieutenant @-@ colonel in April 1898 , and frequently led his men , dressed as British soldiers , around Circular Quay to the tune of " The British Grenadiers " or " The English Gentleman " . Despite his promotions , Neild had no previous military experience , and in 1899 Lord Beauchamp , the Governor , wrote that his organisation was " in a state of ridiculous insubordination " . He was suspended around Easter of that year for publicly criticising a staff officer and encouraging insubordination ; following unfavourable findings by a military inquiry , Neild avoided dismissal only by investing considerable amounts of money into the regiment . 
 = = Senate career = = 
 Neild contested the first federal election in 1901 , running as a Free Trade candidate for the Senate . Together with Senator Cyril Cameron , he was one of two parliamentarians to wear full dress uniform to the opening of Parliament . He introduced the Parliamentary Evidence Bill on 9 August 1901 , which aimed " to enable and regulate the taking of evidence by Parliament and Parliamentary Committees " . The bill was withdrawn and reintroduced several times over the next decade but never passed into law . <unk> ambitions of becoming deputy President , Neild was active in many committees but failed to achieve his aim , although he did serve as Temporary Chairman of Committees from 1903 to 1910 . 
 Neild was not a supporter of party discipline , refusing to follow Sir Josiah Symon 's leadership of the Free Trade Senators . He spoke against the dictation test for non @-@ British immigrants and the deportation of Kanaka workers , and continued to advocate free trade and old @-@ age pensions . Having won the fifth position at the 1901 election , Neild faced re @-@ election in 1903 , and his impassioned support of the British Empire saw him elected at the head of the poll despite failing health . 
 In March 1904 Neild attacked the government 's military policy and the commander of the military forces , Major @-@ General Sir Edward Hutton , who had long wished to dismiss Neild from the citizen army . Neild had incited a near mutiny by destroying a well @-@ known sergeant 's military career , and was suspended from duty ; Neild responded by accusing Hutton of intimidation and infringing a Senator 's right of freedom of expression . In April 1904 the Senate formed a committee to investigate alleged contempt of Parliament by Hutton , which found that Neild had not been intimidated . In 1905 Neild retired from the militia . 
 Neild 's adventures had seen him lose respect in his political career , and he was now openly mocked in the Senate chamber , becoming something of a joke . He introduced a number of bills in his remaining five years in the Senate , all of which lapsed . He spoke in support of Muslim camel drivers and opposed military training for boys , and continued to oppose elements of the White Australia policy , raising concerns about Australian @-@ born children of Kanaka labourers : " They will have difficulties enough in front of them in a country that is so rampantly strong on the white Australia policy without our making their case worse . " Neild was defeated at the 1910 election . 
 Suffering from hepatic cirrhosis , Neild died at his home in Woollahra on 8 March 1911 , aged 65 , survived by his second wife and their two children . He received a military funeral before being buried with Anglican rites at Waverley Cemetery in Sydney . 
 = = Other interests = = 
 Neild published an anthology of his own poetry , Songs ' neath the Southern Cross , in 1896 . 
 = Foo Fighters ( album ) = 
 Foo Fighters is the debut studio album by American alternative rock band Foo Fighters , released on July 4 , 1995 , by Capitol Records through Dave Grohl 's label Roswell . Grohl wrote and recorded the entire album himself – with the exception of a guest guitar spot by Greg Dulli – with the assistance of producer Barrett Jones at Robert Lang Studios in Seattle , Washington , in 1994 . Grohl claimed he recorded the album just for fun , describing it as a cathartic experience to recover from the death of his Nirvana bandmate Kurt Cobain . 
 After Grohl completed the recordings , he chose the name " Foo Fighters " for the project to hide his identity and passed cassettes copies of the sessions to personal friends . After said tapes attracted record label interest , Grohl signed with Capitol and recruited a full band to perform the songs live . The album was promoted through extensive tours and six singles , two of which received music videos . Foo Fighters earned positive reviews praising the songwriting and performances , and was also a commercial success , becoming the band 's second @-@ best @-@ selling album in the United States and reaching the top five in the charts of United Kingdom , Canada , Australia , and New Zealand . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the death of Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain in April 1994 , drummer Dave Grohl entered a state of depression , and found it difficult to both listen to music and play instruments . He was uncertain of what to do next , even considering abandoning his musical career despite a few invitations by bands such as Danzig or Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers to become their drummer , because " it would just remind me of being in Nirvana ; every time I sat down at a drum set , I would think of that . " 
 Grohl 's first musical performance following the demise of Nirvana was performing with The Backbeat Band at the 1994 MTV Movie Awards in June , during which he was invited by Mike Watt to take part in his album Ball @-@ Hog or Tugboat ? . After enjoying the performance , Grohl figured he could do his own musical project , which could work as " some sort of cathartic therapy , to go out and record these songs that I 'd written by myself . " Grohl afterwards booked six days at Seattle 's Robert Lang Studios , which were located near his house , where he would record " my favorite songs I had written in the past four , five years that no one had heard " with the assistance of producer Barrett Jones , with whom he had recorded the demo tape Pocketwatch in 1992 . The idea was to have Grohl playing all instruments and release it under a name that would make people believe it was a band , similar to Stewart Copeland 's <unk> Kent . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Grohl and Jones produced the record across a period of one week in October 1994 , with Grohl recording all vocal , guitar , bass and drum tracks himself . Both would arrive in the morning at Robert Lang Studios , start production by noon and do four songs a day . According to Grohl , during the recording process he would run from room to room , " still sweating and shaking from playing drums and [ then ] pick up the guitar and put down a track , do the bass , maybe another guitar part , have a sip of coffee and then go in and do the next song " . The only performance by an outsider was a guitar part on " X @-@ Static " provided by Greg Dulli of The Afghan Whigs , who was watching Grohl record the songs . Grohl eventually asked him if he wanted to play and handed him a guitar . Each song took about 45 minutes to be completed , and the compositions were recorded in the same order that became the album 's track listing . The only song that required two run @-@ throughs before completion was " I 'll Stick Around " . Grohl was insecure about his singing , and added effects to his voice in " <unk> " , and tried to enhance the performance through double track – " You know how people double their vocals to make them stronger ? That album the vocals are quadrupled . " 
 In an attempt to keep his anonymity , Grohl planned to release the songs under the name Foo Fighters . It would be a very low @-@ key release , with only 100 LP records being pressed after the sessions were finished . Grohl also went to a cassette duplication lab in Seattle and created 100 cassette copies of the session and started handing them to friends for feedback and " I 'd give tapes to everybody . Kids would come up to me and say ' Nirvana was my favourite band ' and I 'd say ' well here , have this ' " . Eddie Vedder premiered two songs from the recording on January 8 , 1995 during his Self @-@ Pollution radio broadcast . The recordings quickly circulated amongst the music industry , which in turn created record label interest . A deal was eventually signed to Capitol Records , as president Gary Gersh was a personal friend of Grohl ever since he worked on Nirvana 's label Geffen Records . 
 The mixing sessions of the album began in Robert Lang Studios ( which were used on the 100 tapes Grohl gave away ) but eventually those mixes were discarded and the sessions moved to Rob Schnapf and Tom Rothrock 's " The Shop " studio in Arcata , California . Mixes were done on a 32 channel API <unk> console , custom built by Frank <unk> in 1972 for Wally Heider Recording 's ' Studio 4 ' . A Stephen 's 24 track 2 " tape machine was used for playback . Processors used in the mixes included an Eventide <unk> compressor for vocals and guitar solos , an Alan Smart stereo compressor for " squashing " the drums and mixing them back in as well as being used over the entire mix . Other processors included <unk> 1176 and <unk> compressors as well as an Echoplex for delays and a " crappy digital reverb " . Mixes were " nothing that crazy " Rob described , adding that he " mixed Big Me in 20 minutes " . 
 During the sessions , Grohl was invited by Tom Petty to perform with The Heartbreakers on Saturday Night Live one month later . The performance was followed by an invitation to be a full @-@ time member of the Heartbreakers , but once Petty heard about the Foo Fighters , he instead encouraged Grohl to move on with this solo project . Grohl soon recruited a full band , which included bassist Nate Mendel and drummer William Goldsmith of the recently disbanded Sunny Day Real Estate , as well as Nirvana touring guitarist , and former Germs member , Pat Smear . 
 = = Music and composition = = 
 Nine of the songs in the album were composed before or during Grohl 's tenure with Nirvana , and existed in demos created by Grohl on his home 8 @-@ track tape recorder . The only compositions done after Cobain 's death were " This Is a Call " , " I 'll Stick Around " , " X @-@ Static " and " <unk> " . The music mostly followed a hard rock sound with the soft @-@ loud dynamics seen in Nirvana tracks such as " Smells Like Teen Spirit " and " Heart @-@ Shaped Box " . Variants include the melancholic " Exhausted " , which Grohl defined as a song that 's " sad but makes you feel good " . 
 Most of the lyrics in Foo Fighters are nonsensical lines written by Grohl in the 20 minutes before recording began . As the frontman , Grohl explained , " I had seven days to record fifteen songs . I was just concentrating on everything being as together as possible , having everything be tight and in sync . There wasn 't too much time spent sitting in a chair thinking . " Grohl would add that the gibberish was deliberate , given that , " there was too much to say , " following Cobain 's death and , " a lot of emphasis placed on the meaning of the first Foo Fighters album . " Grohl still considered that " the things you write down spur of the moment are most revealing . Now I look at them and some of them seem to actually have meaning " , and revealed that a few songs have lyrics inspired by " personal experiences of the last four or five years " , with the standout being " Big Me " , an " out @-@ and @-@ out love song " to Grohl 's then @-@ wife Jennifer Youngblood that he described as his favorite track on the album . Contrasting with the aggressive and rebellious themes of Nirvana , Grohl had positive and cheery tunes such as " This Is a Call " , defined as " a ' hello ' and a ' thank you ' " to everyone that had played a key role in Grohl 's life ; the playful " For All the Cows " ; and " <unk> " , with a title referencing Mike Watt and lyrics that described Grohl 's " love of hardcore and old school punk rock " . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 The name " Foo Fighters " was taken from the description World War II aircraft pilots would use to describe various UFOs . This science fiction theme is further continued with the name of Grohl 's Capitol Records imprint , Roswell Records , a reference to the city of Roswell , New Mexico , known for the Roswell UFO incident of 1947 ; and the album cover done by Grohl 's then @-@ wife , photographer Jennifer Youngblood , featuring a Buck Rogers <unk> @-@ 38 <unk> Pistol . Some reviewers considered the gun on the cover as insensitive , given Kurt Cobain died by shooting himself , but Grohl dutifully disregarded it as just a coincidence . Goldsmith later explained , " It was all pretty much based on the whole Foo Fighters thing — Roswell , the space stuff , an antique Buck Rogers <unk> . It 's really a completely separate thing . Dave wasn 't even conscious of that . " Despite Grohl being the album 's only contributor , at Capitol 's insistence the liner notes included a picture of the full band that Grohl had recruited . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 In spring 1995 , the Foo Fighters embarked on their first ever United States tour supporting Mike Watt along with fellow tour newbies Hovercraft , whose line @-@ up included Vedder at the time . As well as performing with their own bands , Grohl and Vedder each picked up a role as a member of Watt 's backing band throughout the tour , supplying drums and guitar respectively . On May 1995 , radio stations KROQ @-@ FM and KNDD started playing some tracks of the then @-@ unreleased album before receiving a cease @-@ and @-@ desist from Capitol . That June , " Exhausted " and " This Is a Call " were sent to college and modern rock radio stations . One week later , " This Is a Call " became the band 's first commercial single . 
 Foo Fighters was released July 4 , 1995 on Roswell Records , distributed by Capitol Records . The band promoted the release that summer by completing another US tour with Wool and <unk> to Think , with 25 concerts in little over a month . The Foo Fighters also made their network television debut on the Late Show with David Letterman in August 14 , where they performed " This Is a Call " . Afterwards , the band played several of their largest shows up to that point , making their debut on the European festival circuit with performances at Pukkelpop , Reading and Lowlands . 
 " I 'll Stick Around " was issued as the second single on September 4 , 1995 and would also mark Foo Fighters music video debut , directed by Gerald Casale . That fall , the band continued to tour extensively , with a European tour with Built to Spill , and visits to Japan , Australia and New Zealand . The tour was wrapped with a performance at the Phoenix Festival on July 20 , 1996 . The Foo Fighters performed nearly 100 concerts throughout 1995 , and over 70 dates the following year . 
 Three more songs of the album were issued as singles : " For All the Cows " in 1995 , and both " Big Me " and " Alone + Easy Target " in 1996 . " Big Me " was the first commercial single made available in the US , and the second song from the album to see release as a music video , a parody of the Mentos television commercials directed by Jesse Peretz . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Foo Fighters earned mostly positive reviews upon release . Many critics compared the album to Grohl 's previous band , Nirvana . Reviewer David Browne of Entertainment Weekly considered that " [ Grohl 's ] songs pack the <unk> wallop of unpolished Nirvana demos , and his voice has Kurt Cobain 's lunging , over @-@ the @-@ top passion . " Writing for Spin , Terri Sutton stylistically compared the album to Nirvana 's second album , Nevermind , saying that " the album 's first half [ ... ] owes much to Nevermind , and it 's tempting to hear it in the way Nevermind taught us to hear . " Paul Rees of Kerrang ! admitted that " Foo Fighters cannot fail to evoke Kurt Cobain 's memory , whether if through Grohl 's ragged howl of a voice or the way a number of its songs go soft @-@ soft @-@ loud " , but ultimately considered the record " more than strong enough to stand or fall in its own merits " . Billboard complimented the " inspired songwriting and passionate performances " , adding the album could please grunge fans and " also remind fans of other rock and punk taste makers , from Green Day and The Offspring to Better than Ezra . " 
 The album received minor criticism for its lack of intensity , which many proposed was due to the fact that Grohl played all the instruments himself . AllMusic reviewer Stephen Thomas Erlewine wrote , " Since he recorded the album by himself , they aren 't as powerful as most band 's primal sonic workouts , but the results are damn impressive for a solo musician . " Rolling Stone 's Alex <unk> described the record as a " remarkable yet coolly understated solo debut " and felt that " the album 's only disappointment is that despite its home @-@ studio feel , it ultimately reveals little about its creator . " New York described both the overall melodies and Grohl 's singing as derivative of the grunge sound , but praised the " tight <unk> harmonies " and lyrics that " key into the more poetic moments of <unk> . " Robert Christgau wrote in The Village Voice that the band shows " spirit " but lacks an " identity " and cited the songs " Big Me " and " This Is a Call " as highlights . He later rated the album a three @-@ star honorable mention in his Consumer Guide book , indicating " an enjoyable effort consumers attuned to its overriding aesthetic or individual vision may well treasure " . 
 The album was nominated for Best Alternative Music Album at the 1996 Grammy Awards ceremony , but lost to MTV Unplugged in New York , an album by Grohl 's former band Nirvana . Kerrang ! named Foo Fighters the best album of the year , and Rolling Stone put it second on their list , behind PJ Harvey 's To Bring You My Love . It also ranked sixth on the Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop poll , and 20th on Spin 's list . 
 = = = Commercial reception = = = 
 The commercial performance of Foo Fighters was also successful . In the United States , it debuted at the Billboard 200 on number twenty @-@ three , with first @-@ week sales of 40 @,@ 000 units . The album debuted at number two in New Zealand 's album chart , three in the UK Albums Chart , and fifth in Australia 's ARIA Charts . It also peaked at number five in the Canadian Albums Chart . By December , it had reached 900 @,@ 000 units domestically and 2 million worldwide . On September 27 , 1995 , the album was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , being later certified Platinum on January 26 , 1996 . By 2011 , Foo Fighters had sold 1 @.@ 468 million units in North America , being the second most successful release of the band behind follow @-@ up The Colour and the Shape . It was also certified Platinum in Canada , and Gold in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Dave Grohl . 
 Album Reissued in 2003 ( CD ) and 2011 ( LP + MP3 Download ) with normal track list . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Foo Fighters 
 Dave Grohl – vocals , guitars , bass guitar , drums , production 
 Additional musicians 
 Greg Dulli – guitar on " X @-@ Static " 
 Technical personnel 
 <unk> Chartier – jacket artwork 
 Steve Culp – engineering 
 Curt Doughty – photography 
 Tim Gabor – art direction , album design 
 Barrett Jones – production 
 Stephen Marcussen – mastering 
 Charles Peterson – photography 
 Jeff Ross – photography 
 Tom Rothrock – mixing 
 Rob Schnapf – mixing 
 Jennifer Youngblood – cover photo , photography 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Singles charts = = = 
 = Ladas ( horse ) = 
 Ladas ( 1891 – 1914 ) was a British Thoroughbred racehorse and sire . His career attracted an unusual amount of attention as his owner , Lord Rosebery , became Prime Minister of the United Kingdom at the height of his success . 
 In a career that lasted from 1893 to 1894 , Ladas ran eleven times and won seven races . He was the leading British two @-@ year @-@ old of 1893 , being unbeaten in four starts including the Champagne Stakes and the Middle Park Stakes . In the following year , he won the 2000 Guineas at Newmarket and the Derby at Epsom to complete the first two legs of the English Triple Crown . He was beaten by the four @-@ year @-@ old colt Isinglass in his next two starts and failed in his bid for the Triple Crown when beaten in the St Leger at Doncaster . 
 Ladas was retired to stud at the end of the season , and sired the winners of several important races . He died in 1914 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Ladas was a bay horse of almost faultless conformation , standing just under 16 hands high . He was bred at the Crafton Stud in Buckinghamshire by his owner , Lord Rosebery , a prominent Liberal statesman who became Prime Minister in 1894 . He was trained by Mathew Dawson at Newmarket , Suffolk . Dawson , who was over seventy at the time , had " retired " from large @-@ scale training in 1885 , but continued to handle a small number of horses at his Melton House Stable . Ladas was ridden in his Classic wins by Jack Watts . 
 Ladas 's sire , named Hampton , was a successful racehorse , especially over long distances , who won both the Goodwood Cup and the Doncaster Cup . Hampton was the Champion sire in 1887 and sired , in addition to Ladas , the Derby winners Merry Hampton and Ayrshire , as well as Bay Ronald , the sire of <unk> . Illuminata , the dam of Ladas , also produced a filly called Gas , the dam of the Derby winner Cicero , and <unk> , who won the 1000 Guineas and herself produced the 2000 Guineas winner Neil Gow . 
 The name Ladas , derived from that of Alexander the Great 's messenger , had previously been used by Lord Rosebery 's father for a horse who ran unplaced in the 1869 Derby . Rosebery , then an under @-@ graduate at Oxford University , had tipped the horse to his friends as a likely winner and was reportedly mortified by the result . By way of an apology , Rosebery told his friends that if he ever had a horse with a " prime chance " of winning the Derby , he would name him " Ladas " so that they could all " take the tip and back him . " It was the memory of this incident which reportedly persuaded Rosebery to abandon his original plan to name the colt " Hampton Wick " . 
 The pronunciation of the name was a point of disagreement between owner and trainer : Rosebery called the colt " Lar @-@ dar " or " Lah @-@ dah " , while Dawson insisted on " Lay @-@ das " or " Ley @-@ das " . 
 = = Racing career = = 
 = = = 1893 : two @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Until 1946 , racehorses in England were allowed to race without an official name and the colt who would become Ladas was still unnamed when he made a successful debut on 31 May in the <unk> Stakes at the Epsom Derby meeting . He showed impressive acceleration to easily beat the filly Mecca and was identified as " a colt full of promise " by one correspondent . He was then sent to Royal Ascot where he started 6 / 4 ( 1 @.@ 5 / 1 ) favourite for the Coventry Stakes on 13 June . He led from the start on this occasion and shook off the opposition in the closing stages to win by one and a half lengths from a colt named Bullingdon . 
 " The Illuminata colt " , as he was still known , was then given a break of three months before returning in the Champagne Stakes at Doncaster in September , in which a horse named Sempronius was his only rival . " The Illuminata colt " led from the start , and when Sempronius moved up to challenge him , he quickened away to win easily . After his win at Doncaster , he was officially named Ladas and was then sent to Newmarket for the Middle Park Plate , the most important two @-@ year @-@ old race of the season . He started at odds of 1 / 5 ( 0 @.@ 2 / 1 ) and was never in any danger , leading at half way and winning the race by two lengths from a filly named Jocasta , with Sempronius two lengths further back in third . 
 Ladas ended the season unbeaten in four races and was the winter favourite for the following year ’ s Derby at 5 / 2 ( 2 @.@ 5 / 1 ) with the Dewhurst Stakes winner Matchbox , from the stable of John Porter , being seen as his biggest potential rival . 
 . 
 = = = 1894 : three @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 = = = = 2000 Guineas = = = = 
 Ladas progressed well over the winter , despite a reported bout of coughing in early March , and was sent straight for the 2000 Guineas for his first appearance of 1894 . On 9 May he started at odds of 5 / 6 ( 0 @.@ 83 / 1 ) in a field of eight with Matchbox the second choice on 9 / 2 ( 4 @.@ 5 / 1 ) . Ladas raced towards the rear in the early stages before moving into third place behind Matchbox and St Florian just after half way . Two furlongs from the finish , Watts ( riding on his thirty @-@ third birthday ) moved him up to challenge for the lead and , as predicted , the race developed into a contest between Ladas and Matchbox . Matchbox " came again " after being overtaken and the colts raced together for a few strides before Ladas pulled away to win by one and a half lengths . Immediately after the race , bookmakers offered Ladas at odds of 8 / 13 ( 0 @.@ 62 / 1 ) for the Derby , which was expected to be his next major target . 
 On 23 May Ladas started at odds of 1 / 12 ( 0 @.@ 08 / 1 ) for the Newmarket Stakes against four opponents . He took the lead soon after half way and won easily ( " <unk> " ) by two lengths from St Florian . His price for the Derby was immediately shortened ( reduced ) to 4 / 9 ( 0 @.@ 44 / 1 ) . In the next two weeks , Ladas was the subject of intense interest , and was protected by a group of police detectives . 
 = = = = Epsom Derby = = = = 
 At the Epsom Derby on 6 June , Ladas was the shortest @-@ priced favourite in the history of the Derby , starting at odds of 2 / 9 ( 0 @.@ 22 / 1 ) in against six opponents . Matchbox was the second favourite on 9 / 1 ahead of his stable companion Bullingdon on 100 / 6 ( 16 / 1 ) . Ladas started well , but was held up ( restrained ) by Watts and raced in fourth or fifth place in the early stages as Matchbox and Bullingdon made the running . Bullingdon weakened just after half way and Matchbox led the field into the straight , where Ladas emerged to challenge him , traveling in " grand style " and looking likely to win easily . Matchbox , however , responded well and , for the first time in his career , Ladas was placed under pressure . He " forged ahead " inside the final furlong and won the race by one and a half lengths from Matchbox , with Reminder six lengths further back in third . 
 The victory , which was received with " immense enthusiasm " , completed a three @-@ part prediction made by Rosebery as a student : that he would marry an heiress , become Prime Minister and win the Derby . He required the assistance of the police to extricate himself from the crush of well @-@ wishers at the course , while at Westminster , Ladas 's win was cheered in the House of Commons . By contrast , Rosebery was strongly criticised by some churchmen for involving himself in the " dishonesty and degradation " of the racing world . Rosebery , who responded to criticism by saying that he had " no vestige of shame " in owning a good horse , used the Derby win to his advantage ; he presented one of Ladas 's winning horseshoes as a gift to the United States ambassador Thomas F. Bayard . 
 = = = = Rivalry with Isinglass = = = = 
 Ladas was then matched against Isinglass , the Triple Crown winner of 1893 , in the £ 10 @,@ 000 Princess of Wales 's Stakes over one mile at Newmarket on 5 July . The race attracted a large crowd including the Prince of Wales ( who supported Isinglass ) and the Queen 's cousin George , Duke of Cambridge ( who favoured Ladas ) . The field also included Raeburn , the only horse to have beaten Isinglass , Ravensbury , who had won impressively at Royal Ascot , and Bullingdon , who had recovered from the bout of coughing that had reportedly affected him at Epsom . The early pace was slow , and Watts held Ladas up behind the leaders before moving into the lead just over a furlong out . He was immediately challenged , however , and overtaken inside the final furlong by both Isinglass and Bullingdon . Isinglass prevailed by a short head with Ladas , who was eased in the closing stages , finishing a well @-@ beaten third . Ladas appeared to be perfectly sound after the race , and the only explanation offered ( by The Sportsman ) was that the slow pace ( the winning time was 1 : 48 @.@ 4 ) had produced a false result . 
 In the Eclipse Stakes at Sandown on 20 July , Ladas met Isinglass again , this time over ten furlongs on soft ground . Isinglass started favourite at 4 / 5 ( 0 @.@ 8 / 1 ) with Ladas on 13 / 8 ( 1 @.@ 6 / 1 ) and the other runners , who included Raeburn , Ravensbury and a filly named Throstle virtually ignored . The outsider <unk> set off at an unsustainably fast pace , followed by Isinglass , with Watts restraining Ladas towards the rear . <unk> dropped away in the straight , leaving Isinglass in the lead with Watts moving Ladas up to challenge . The two Derby winners dominated the race in the closing stages but in spite of a " game pursuit " , Ladas was unable to overhaul Isinglass , who won by a length with the rest of the field , headed by Throstle , well beaten . There were no excuses for Ladas : Watts admitted that he had been beaten by a better horse . 
 = = = = St Leger = = = = 
 Ladas was sent to Doncaster for the St Leger on 12 September in an attempt to win the Triple Crown . Ridden by Tommy <unk> , Ladas started at odds of 10 / 11 ( 0 @.@ 9 / 1 ) in a field of eight , with Matchbox ( ridden by Watts ) the second choice on 2 / 1 and the filly Throstle ignored on 50 / 1 . As usual , Ladas was held up at the back of the field as , at first Throstle , then a horse named Legal Tender , then Matchbox made the running . Ladas moved steadily closer and turned into the straight in second , before overtaking Matchbox and going into a clear lead . In the final furlong , however , he was challenged by Throstle , and in the closing stages the latter pulled ahead to win by three quarters of a length . According to The Sportsman , the cheers of the crowd were replaced by those of the bookmakers as the outsider overhauled the favourite . 
 = = = 1895 : four @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Ladas was kept in training as a four @-@ year @-@ old for the 1895 season . Rosebery issued a challenge to Isinglass 's owner , Harry <unk> , for a match race between Ladas and Isinglass to take place at Newmarket in May . <unk> declined as he did not want to disrupt his horse 's preparation for the Ascot Gold Cup . 
 Ladas had a series of training problems which kept him off the course for most of the season and he was also becoming " short @-@ tempered and impetuous " . He made his belated seasonal reappearance at Newmarket on September 27 when he ran in the £ 10 @,@ 000 Jockey Club Stakes . Although Ladas was reported to be running with only two sound legs , he was his owner 's first choice ahead of his 1895 Derby winner , Sir Visto . Carrying top weight of 142 pounds , he raced in third place for most of the way but weakened in the closing stages . He finished fourth of the eleven runners behind horses named <unk> , None The Wiser and <unk> . Despite Ladas 's disappointing season , Rosebery turned down a reported offer of £ 20 @,@ 000 for the colt , preferring instead to retire him to his own stud . 
 = = Assessment and earnings = = 
 Before Ladas ran as a three @-@ year @-@ old , Mat Dawson , who had been training horses , including more than twenty classic winners since the 1850s , was reported to have called Ladas the best he had ever trained . Later that season he ranked him second , slightly behind St. Simon . Henry Chaplin , the owner of Hermit , called Ladas the finest horse he had seen . In June 1894 Ladas was rated fourteen pounds superior to the Derby winner Sir Visto by Dawson , who trained both horses . 
 Ladas earned £ 5 @,@ 768 as a two @-@ year @-@ old , placing him sixth among British horses for 1894 . He added £ 12 @,@ 790 in 1895 . 
 = = Stud career = = 
 Ladas had some success at stud , siring the Classic winners <unk> ( 2000 Guineas ) and Troutbeck ( St Leger ) . Another successful offspring was the gelding Epsom Lad , who won the Eclipse Stakes and the Princess of Wales ’ s Stakes as a four @-@ year @-@ old in 1901 . In total , he sired the winners of 196 races and £ 97 @,@ 000 in winnings . By 1912 he had been retired from active stud duty and become extremely bad tempered : one writer said that the old stallion had " worn himself out with his restlessness and <unk> " . He died on 31 March 1914 at his owner 's stud at Mentmore . 
 = = Pedigree = = 
 = Mingo Oak = 
 The Mingo Oak ( also known as the Mingo White Oak ) was a white oak ( Quercus alba ) in the U.S. state of West Virginia . First recognized for its age and size in 1931 , the Mingo Oak was the oldest and largest living white oak tree in the world until its death in 1938 . 
 The Mingo Oak stood in Mingo County , West Virginia , in a cove at the base of Trace Mountain near the headwaters of the Trace Fork of Pigeon Creek , a tributary stream of Tug Fork . The tree reached a height of over 200 feet ( 61 m ) , and its trunk was 145 feet ( 44 m ) in height . Its crown measured 130 feet ( 40 m ) in diameter and 60 feet ( 18 m ) in height . The tree 's trunk measured 9 feet 10 inches ( 3 @.@ 00 m ) in diameter and the circumference of its base measured 30 feet 9 inches ( 9 @.@ 37 m ) . Assessments of its potential board lumber ranged from 15 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) to 40 @,@ 000 feet ( 12 @,@ 000 m ) . Following the tree 's felling in 1938 , it was estimated to weigh approximately 5 @,@ 400 long tons ( 5 @,@ 500 t ) . 
 While the tree had long been known about for its size , the unique status of the Mingo Oak was not recognized until 1931 , when John Keadle and Leonard Bradshaw of Williamson took measurements of the tree , and found it to be the largest living white oak in the world . Various estimates place the Mingo Oak 's seeding between 1354 and 1361 AD . Using borings from the tree , the Smithsonian Institution determined that the Mingo Oak was the oldest tree of its species . The Island Creek Coal Company , the North East Lumber Company , and the Cole and Crane Real Estate Trust leased 1 @.@ 5 acres ( 0 @.@ 61 ha ) encompassing the tree to the West Virginia Game , Fish , and Forestry Commission for it to be managed as a state park for the life of the tree . The commission cleared the surrounding land and made improvements such as seating and picnic accommodations for visitors . 
 By the spring of 1938 , the Mingo Oak failed to produce leaves , and on May of that year , West Virginia state forester D. B. Griffin announced the tree 's death . The prevailing theory is that the tree died from the release of poisonous gases and sulfur fumes from a burning spoil tip in nearby Trace Gap . The tree was felled with fanfare on September 23 , 1938 , with <unk> being sent to the Smithsonian Institution and the West Virginia State Museum . Under the terms of the Island Creek Coal Company 's lease with the West Virginia Game , Fish , and Forestry Commission , the land 's lease around the former tree reverted to the company following the tree 's felling . 
 = = Geography and setting = = 
 Prior to the arrival of European American settlers and explorers , the Allegheny Plateau region of West Virginia , lying to the west of the Allegheny and Cumberland mountain ranges of the Appalachian Mountains , was overlaid with old @-@ growth forests consisting predominantly of deciduous mixed oaks and chestnut trees . The cove forests of the Appalachian Mountains were undisturbed for approximately 300 million years , and the ample moisture and deep soils of cove topography allowed for the proliferation of temperate broadleaf and mixed forest species . 
 The largest of the tree species in this virgin <unk> was the white oak ( Quercus alba ) , which often exceeded 100 feet ( 30 m ) in height and 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) in diameter . While the white oak 's range encompasses most of the Eastern United States , the most favorable environments for its growth are on the western slopes of the Appalachian Mountains . According to botanist Earl <unk> Core , the species flourishes on northern mountain flanks , and in coves , which are small valleys or ravines between two ridge lines that are closed at one or both ends . White oaks also thrive in moist lowlands and in upland topography , with the exception of extremely dry ridges with shallow soil . 
 The Mingo Oak , known alternatively as the Mingo White Oak , was a white oak that stood in such a cove at the base of Trace Mountain on a shelf near the headwaters of the Trace Fork of Pigeon Creek , a tributary stream of Tug Fork . The tree was located near the census @-@ designated place of Holden , 10 miles ( 16 km ) from Logan and 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from the Logan County line in Mingo County , from which it took its name . The county was in turn named for the Mingo Iroquois peoples , of which Native American war leader Logan was affiliated . Holden was the base of operations of the Island Creek Coal Company , which leased the land where the tree was located . 
 = = Dimensions and age = = 
 The Mingo Oak was the largest specimen of these giant white oaks that dotted the old @-@ growth forests of pre @-@ settlement West Virginia . The tree was found to be the largest living white oak in the United States , and in the world , following a survey of white oaks throughout the country . The Mingo Oak 's nearest competition was a tree that was identified in Stony Brook on Long Island with a larger circumference , but a shorter height of 86 feet ( 26 m ) . 
 Together with its uppermost branches , the tree reached a height of over 200 feet ( 61 m ) , and its trunk ( or bole ) towered to a height of 145 feet ( 44 m ) where the trunk forked into branches that spread in all directions . Its crown measured 130 feet ( 40 m ) in diameter and 60 feet ( 18 m ) in height . The tree 's trunk measured 9 feet 10 inches ( 3 @.@ 00 m ) in diameter . The tree 's circumference measured 30 feet 9 inches ( 9 @.@ 37 m ) at the base and 19 feet 9 inches ( 6 @.@ 02 m ) at 4 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) from the ground . As the virgin forest around it had been lumbered , the tree towered over the surrounding secondary forest . 
 An initial estimate by lumbermen in 1931 stated that if the tree were to be cut for lumber , it would produce between 35 @,@ 000 feet ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) and 40 @,@ 000 feet ( 12 @,@ 000 m ) of board lumber , with a value of $ 1 @,@ 400 . In February 1932 , Perkins Coville of the United States Forest Service Department of <unk> estimated the tree 's volume to contain 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 100 m ) of board lumber . In 1938 , engineers of the Island Creek Coal Company estimated that the tree 's trunk contained 15 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) of board lumber . Following the tree 's felling in 1938 , it was estimated to weigh approximately 5 @,@ 400 long tons ( 5 @,@ 500 t ) . 
 Various estimates place the tree 's seeding sometime between 1354 and 1361 AD . Using borings from the tree , the Smithsonian Institution determined that the Mingo Oak was the oldest tree of its species . In September 1932 , West Virginia state forester D. B. Griffin and Emmett Keadle , president of the Mingo County Fish and Game Protective Association in Williamson , used an increment borer to estimate the tree as having begun its growth around 1356 , with a margin of error within 25 or 30 years . Blueprints and boring samples were given to the West Virginia State Museum in Charleston and to the Smithsonian Institution in Washington , D.C. 
 = = Preservation attempts = = 
 Ownership of the timber land around the tree was eventually acquired by the Cole and Crane Real Estate Trust , which leased the timbering rights to the North East Lumber Company . Under the lease agreement , the North East Lumber Company only paid for the lumber that it cleared from the land . The company found the Mingo Oak too large to cut down , and assessed that its removal was too costly to undertake . The Cole and Crane Real Estate Trust also leased out the land where the tree was located to the Island Creek Coal Company for mining . 
 The land around the tree continued to be developed . A highway connecting Logan to Williamson , was built parallel to the Trace Fork of Pigeon Creek , opposite the Mingo Oak . While the tree had long been known for its size , the unique status of the Mingo Oak was not recognized until 1931 , when John Keadle and Leonard Bradshaw of Williamson took measurements of the tree , and found it to be the largest living white oak in the world . Upon this finding by the two men , Cole and Crane Real Estate Trust and the Island Creek Coal Company agreed to make a joint deed conveying the property to the state of West Virginia . In late 1931 , Emmett Keadle of the West Virginia Oil and Grease Company wrote a letter to Governor William G. Conley informing him of the tree 's significance and the companies ' willingness to lease the land to the state . Governor Conley responded to Keadle and suggested the companies convey the property to the West Virginia Game , Fish , and Forestry Commission . 
 The Island Creek Coal Company , the North East Lumber Company , and the Cole and Crane Real Estate Trust leased to the commission 1 @.@ 5 acres ( 0 @.@ 61 ha ) encompassing the tree for it to be managed as a state park for the lifetime of the tree . The commission removed vegetation from the immediate land around the tree , constructed a fence around the plot , and built a bridge crossing the Trace Fork of Pigeon Creek so that motorists could access the park from the highway . The state built cooking ovens , picnic tables , and benches along the tree 's southern slopes . Also , due to its enormous size and advanced age , the Mingo Oak acquired spiritual and inspirational significance . It became a place of worship , and a pulpit and benches were built beneath its branches . During the summer months , outdoor sermons were delivered by preachers at the tree . The Mingo Oak was also credited with raising awareness of conservation . 
 The Mingo Oak became a popular attraction for visitors . Conferences , such as the annual conference of the West Virginia Parent @-@ Teacher Association in 1933 , included visits to the tree as part of their itineraries . 
 = = Death = = 
 In the summer of 1937 , the Mingo Oak scarcely sprouted leaves on only a couple of its branches . In February 1938 , biologist Earl M. Vanscoy wrote in Castanea that the tree was " almost dead " due to the release of poisonous gases and sulfur fumes from a coal spoil tip of the Island Creek Coal Company , which had been burning nearby in Trace Gap . In the spring of 1938 , the tree failed to produce any leaves . White oaks flower in the spring at approximately the same time as their leaves form , between late March and late May . On May 4 , 1938 , West Virginia 's state forester , D. B. Griffin , announced that the Mingo Oak was dead . Griffin also noted that a fungus that only lived on dead or dying trees had been present on the tree for several months prior to its death . The prevailing theory is that the tree died as a result of suffocation from the fumes of the burning pile of coal waste ; however , local media initially reported that the tree was killed as a result of fungal growth . 
 = = Felling = = 
 In preparation for the tree 's felling , some preliminary cutting was undertaken in the tree 's north side in the afternoon hours of September 22 . This work was done in order to manipulate the course of the tree 's fall , and to estimate the length of time it would take to cut through the remainder of the trunk . After a saw had been worked approximately 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) into the trunk , it was discovered that the tree was decomposing and open in its center . The lumber crews trimmed the tree 's initial cut , and the further work to topple the tree was adjourned until the following morning . 
 The tree was felled on September 23 during a ceremony attended by between 2 @,@ 500 and 3 @,@ 000 people . Among those in attendance were state forester D. B. Griffin , the president of the Island Creek Coal Company , E. P. Rice , and representatives from other companies that had previously owned and leased the land where the tree was located . In addition to standard cameras photographing the event , two movie cameras were brought to capture the felling and its associated events . Uniformed West Virginia Game , Fish , and Forestry Commission officers , Mingo County sheriffs ' deputies , and other law enforcement personnel were also on hand to provide security and direct traffic . 
 Two lumberman were brought in to facilitate the cutting and toppling of the tree : Paul Criss of Charleston and Ed Meek of Indianapolis . Criss brought with him a team of woodchoppers and sawyers representing the Kelly Ax and Tool Works Company . Criss was a public relations spokesperson for the Kelly Ax and Tool Works Company . Meek arrived with his own crew from the E. C. Atkins and Company , a saw manufacturer . Griffin also enlisted the assistance of a crew of game wardens and rangers . A nearby Civilian Conservation Corps camp also provided a team to assist in the felling and dismemberment of the tree . The E. C. Atkins and Company also brought a 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) saw . Most of the readily available crosscut saws measured 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) in length , thus rendering them ineffective at cutting through the tree 's wide trunk , which measured over 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) in diameter 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) from the ground . 
 Prior to the tree 's cutting , Criss shaved Meek 's face with his axe . He lathered Meek 's face and neck and moved his axe blade over Meek 's bristles , drawing blood at his chin line . Criss commented : " That 's the trouble with having a lot of officials around . I 've shaved a thousand men with that axe and that 's the first time I ever drew blood . These officials get me a little nervous . " 
 By 09 : 00 , hundreds of people had arrived to observe the tree 's toppling . At 10 : 00 , the final cutting commenced . Criss decided to topple the tree downhill onto a ledge , which narrowed between the two ravines that emptied into Trace Fork . While it was assessed that the shelf was not long enough for the tree to land on , it was agreed upon by all the participants that given the rotten nature of the tree 's top section , it would fracture notwithstanding the orientation of its fall . Prior to Criss cutting further into the tree , he assured the crews : " I can put her anywhere you want her gentlemen . Lay a $ 10 bill anywhere you like and I 'll guarantee the trunk will cover it . " 
 The cutting of the tree began when the 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) saw , operated by six men , was positioned across the trunk . The saw penetrated the trunk , and the adjacent area was cleared of bystanders . The spectators were repositioned up the hillside to the south and across the ravine to land that had previously been cleared by the Civilian Conservation Corps camp . The men moved the saw backward and forward , as woodchoppers widened the open wedge . After approximately 30 minutes , Criss yelled , " We 're through boys . " The men removed the saw , and the woodchoppers continued to pick at the open wedge . The tree made a crackling sound , its upper limbs dipped , and the Mingo Oak crashed onto its designated felling location . While it had been intended that the tree be down by 10 : 30 , it was not until 11 : 00 that this occurred . To assist in the segmentation of the collapsed tree , competitions were held in <unk> and log sawing . Saw manufacturer E. C. Atkins and Company furnished saws for the competitors . 
 Because of the tree 's advanced decomposition within the center of its base , the trunk 's lowest 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) were assessed to be worthless ; however , 66 feet ( 20 m ) of the trunk was salvaged in one entire piece . Another cutting yielded a 40 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) log in length , that averaged 54 inches ( 140 cm ) in diameter . The Island Creek Coal Company sent the 66 @-@ foot ( 20 m ) log to the Meadow River Lumber Company plant in <unk> , which had the largest cutoff saw in the Eastern United States . From this log , <unk> were cut , and other divisions of it produced lumber , tabletops , and novelty items . Various segments of the tree were cut and given to the West Virginia State Museum and the Smithsonian Institution . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Mingo Oak was the largest living white oak ; and with the exception of the state 's box huckleberries ( Gaylussacia brachycera ) , it was the oldest living flora specimen in West Virginia . The tree was referred to as the " mighty monarch of the mountains " . Biologist Earl M. Vanscoy said that the tree was " perhaps West Virginia 's most remarkable tree " ; and Colby B. Rucker of the Native Tree Society referred to the Mingo Oak as an " exceptional forest giant " . 
 Under the terms of the West Virginia Game , Fish , and Forestry Commission 's lease from the Cole and Crane Real Estate Trust , the North East Lumber Company , and the Island Creek Coal Company , the lease for the land around the former tree reverted to the Island Creek Coal Company following the tree 's death and felling . 
 In 1940 , a club of <unk> presented a gavel made from a piece of the Mingo Oak to federal judge Harry E. Atkins in Huntington . Several of the club 's <unk> had served as members of the jury during Atkins 's court proceedings , and they presented the gavel as a token of their appreciation . 
 The West Virginia Division of Culture and History installed a historic marker as part of the West Virginia Highway Historical Marker Program near the site of the Mingo Oak ; it has since gone missing . The marker read : 
 The largest white oak in the United States when it died and was cut down , 9 @-@ 23 @-@ 1938 . Age was estimated to be 582 years . Height , 146 feet ; circumference , 30 feet , 9 inches ; diameter , 9 feet , 9 1 / 2 inches . Trunk contained 15 @,@ 000 feet B. M. lumber . 
 = The Ash Garden = 
 The Ash Garden is a novel written by Canadian author Dennis Bock and published in 2001 . It is Bock 's first novel , following the 1998 release of Olympia , a collection of short stories . The Ash Garden follows the stories of three main characters affected by World War Two : Hiroshima bombing victim Emiko , German nuclear physicist Anton Böll , and Austrian @-@ Jewish refugee Sophie Böll . The narrative is non @-@ linear , jumping between different times and places , and the point of view alternates between the characters ; Emiko 's story being written in the first person while Anton and Sophie 's stories are written in the third person . Bock took several years to write the novel , re @-@ writing several drafts , before having it published in August 2001 by HarperCollins ( Canada ) , Alfred A. Knopf ( USA ) and Bloomsbury ( UK ) . 
 Critics gave it mostly positive reviews and it became a best @-@ seller in Canada . It was nominated for the International IMPAC Dublin Literary Award , the Books in Canada First Novel Award , and the <unk> Prize . It has been analysed in several literature journals , including Canadian Ethnic Studies which noted the similarities between the character Emiko and the Hiroshima Maidens . 
 = = Background = = 
 At the time of publication , author Dennis Bock was 36 years old and living in Toronto . He had previously published a book of short stories called Olympia , but struggled with this project that would become his first novel , taking several years to write the novel . Doubleday Canada originally owned the rights but Bock withdrew the book from Doubleday citing " a difference of opinion " between himself and the editor . He had written two drafts , including one in which the main character was an art historian involved in art theft and looting during World War II . With a working title of A Man of Principle , Bock gave the draft to editor Phyllis Bruce in 1999 and sold it to Knopf for US $ 250 @,@ 000 . He re @-@ wrote most of the book with the help of Bruce , and two other editors , Gary <unk> of Knopf and Liz Calder of Bloomsbury ( who published the book in the UK ) . 
 = = Summary = = 
 The narrative alternates between three characters ( Emiko , Anton and Sophie ) and takes place around the fiftieth anniversary of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima , though the back story of each character is told . Emiko was a small girl living in Hiroshima with her parents , younger brother , and grandfather during WWII . Following the atomic bombing , with her parents dead , Emiko and her brother recover in a hospital and her grandfather cares for patients . Though her brother dies , Emiko travels to the United States as part of a group of girls receiving reconstructive surgery . On the way , the American media takes an interest in the girls and she appears on an episode of This Is Your Life thanking the American audience for bringing her to the US . She later becomes a documentary filmmaker and , in 1995 , approaches Anton Böll to be part of a new project . 
 Anton was a scientist in Nazi Germany who , following a disagreement regarding the direction of its nuclear program , is recruited by the US and flees via France , Spain , and Portugal . He becomes a part of the Manhattan Project , witnesses the tests , and travels to Hiroshima recording the aftermath . Anton regrets the consequences of the atomic bombs , attends the Pugwash Conference , but maintains his belief that it was necessary to end the war and prevented more deaths . He marries Sophie and becomes a professor at Columbia University in New York . With Sophie , he retires to a small town outside of Toronto . 
 As WWII was beginning , Sophie 's Jewish parents sent her away from Austria . She was on board of the MS St. Louis when it was turned away from Cuba and sent to the United Kingdom . She was living in a refugee camp in Canada when she met Anton . She was diagnosed with lupus and takes up gardening , planning elaborate landscapes every year . In 1995 , after refusing further medical treatments , and with Anton by her side , she succumbs to the disease . 
 After Sophie 's funeral Anton reveals to Emiko the extent to which he had been involved in Emiko 's life . He first met her while volunteering at the hospital in which her grandfather was working . Feeling he had to make amends in some way , he ensured that Emiko was on the list of girls to get reconstructive surgery , and secretly filmed her at memorial events . He had been waiting for her to find him . 
 = = Style and themes = = 
 The portions of the book that follow the character Emiko <unk> is written as a first @-@ person narrative , while the portions following Sophie and Anton Böll use the third @-@ person . The tone was described as " disturbingly calm " . Its central theme is that of identity and attempts to find solace . Bock states " All three of the main characters in The Ash Garden are refugees who don 't belong anywhere . Each has a desperate search for home . " In Harper 's Magazine , Pico Iyer compares The Ash Garden with Michael Ondaatje 's The English Patient as " a book that ends where Bock 's begins " . An essay in the journal Canadian Ethnic Studies , looked at The Ash Garden from the a Japanese historical perspective , finding strong similarities between the real @-@ life Hiroshima Maiden <unk> and the character Emiko , but noting it was not a roman à clef . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 The book was released as a hardcover on August 25 , 2001 , published by HarperCollins in Canada , Alfred A. Knopf in the United States , and Bloomsbury in the United Kingdom . Knopf ordered an initial print run of 60 @,@ 000 copies . It debuted at the # 2 sport on the Maclean 's fiction bestseller list and peaked at # 1 in late September and early October . It was translated and published in multiple languages , including Japanese and German . The book was a finalist for the 2001 for the Books in Canada First Novel Award , as well as the <unk> Prize , an international literary award for promoting greater understanding of the Pacific Rim and South Asia . It was nominated by the Vancouver Public Library and the Bergen Public Library for the 2003 International IMPAC Dublin Literary Award . 
 In Time , Brian T. Bennett wrote , " The Ash Garden may not be a page @-@ turner , but Bock 's prose lures the reader along through smooth , sculpted sentences full of rich detail and subtle meditation . " In Maclean 's magazine , Brian Bethune wrote , " Intellectually engaging , beautifully written and powered by three memorable characters , The Ash Garden will seduce anyone who reads it . " In the Christian Science Monitor , fiction critic Ron Charles wrote " Bock moves back and forth through time in a series of exquisite scenes , always keeping his vision tightly focused , despite the world @-@ altering events he describes . ... What makes the novel so compelling and disturbing , though , is its emotional restraint . " Regarding the quality of the prose , a review in the Quill & Quire said " Bock 's writing is both dense and immensely readable " while the review in Library Journal " highly recommended " it . In Books in Canada one reviewer highlighted that on " occasions , the prose turns mannered and cliches pop up " . though a later review by W. P. Kinsella called it a " brilliant novel ... [ with ] superb plot twists that make it a spellbinding adventure in reading " . 
 A Japanese review in the Yomiuri Shimbun noted " something inaccessible about all three [ characters ... who are ] as remote to each other as they [ are ] to the reader , and thus are never truly empathetic " . The review in The New York Times by literary critic Michiko Kakutani called it " an elegant , unnerving novel " but that Bock " tries too hard to underscore those links by using leitmotifs to connect his characters ' experiences " . In London , the review in The Sunday Telegraph was more critical , finding it " is badly let down by its form , a split @-@ time @-@ scale narrative ... [ and ] is significantly short of narrative dynamism " , while novelist Amanda Craig concludes that it " reads as the work of a young writer who is straining with too much effort " . 
 = Joseph Grimaldi = 
 Joseph Grimaldi ( 18 December 1778 – 31 May 1837 ) was an English actor , comedian and dancer , who became the most popular English entertainer of the Regency era . In the early 1800s , he expanded the role of Clown in the harlequinade that formed part of British pantomimes , notably at the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane and the Sadler 's Wells and Covent Garden theatres . He became so dominant on the London comic stage that the harlequinade role of Clown became known as " Joey " , and both the nickname and Grimaldi 's whiteface make @-@ up design were , and still are , used by other types of clowns . Grimaldi originated catchphrases such as " Here we are again ! " , which continue to feature in modern pantomimes . 
 Born in London to an entertainer father , Grimaldi began to perform as a child , making his stage debut at Drury Lane in 1780 . He became successful at the Sadler 's Wells Theatre the following year ; his first major role was as Little Clown in the pantomime The Triumph of Mirth ; or , Harlequin 's Wedding in 1781 , in which he starred alongside his father . After a brief schooling , he appeared in various low @-@ budget productions and became a sought @-@ after child performer . He took leading parts in Valentine and Orson ( 1794 ) and The Talisman ; or , Harlequin Made Happy ( 1796 ) , the latter of which brought him wider recognition . 
 Towards the end of the 1790s , Grimaldi starred in a pantomime version of Robinson Crusoe , which confirmed his credentials as a key pantomime performer . Many productions followed , but his career at Drury Lane was becoming turbulent , and he left the theatre in 1806 . In his new association with the Covent Garden theatre , he appeared at the end of the same year in Harlequin or Mother Goose , which included perhaps his best known portrayal of Clown . Grimaldi 's residencies at Covent Garden and Sadler 's Wells ran simultaneously , and he became known as London 's leading Clown and comic entertainer , enjoying many successes at both theatres . His popularity in London led to a demand for him to appear in provincial theatres throughout England , where he commanded large fees . 
 Grimaldi 's association with Sadler 's Wells came to an end in 1820 , chiefly as a result of his deteriorating relationship with the theatre 's management . After numerous injuries over the years from his energetic clowning , his health was also declining rapidly , and he retired in 1823 . He appeared occasionally on stage for a few years thereafter , but his performances were restricted by his worsening physical disabilities . In his last years , Grimaldi lived in relative obscurity and became a depressed , impoverished alcoholic . He outlived both his wife and his actor son , Joseph Samuel , dying at home in Islington in 1837 , aged 58 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Family background and early years = = = 
 Grimaldi was born in Clare Market , London , into a family of dancers and comic performers . His great @-@ grandfather , John Baptist Grimaldi , was a dentist by trade and an amateur performer , who in the 1730s moved from Italy to England . There he performed the role of Pantaloon opposite John Rich 's Harlequin . John Baptist 's son , Grimaldi 's paternal grandfather , Giovanni Battista Grimaldi , began performing at an early age and spent much of his career in Italy and France . According to biographer Andrew McConnell Stott , Giovanni was held in the Paris Bastille as the result of a scandalous performance . After his release , Giovanni moved to London in 1742 , where John Baptist introduced him to John Rich ; Giovanni then defrauded Rich and fled to the continent , where he later died . 
 Grimaldi 's father , Joseph Giuseppe Grimaldi ( c . 1713 – 1788 ) , an actor and dancer ( known professionally as Giuseppe or " the Signor " ) , also made his way to London in around 1760 . His first London appearance was at the King 's Theatre . He was later engaged by David Garrick to play Pantaloon in pantomimes at the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane , earning high praise , and eventually became the ballet master there . Grimaldi 's mother , Rebecca Brooker , was born in Holborn in 1764 . She was apprenticed to Giuseppe Grimaldi in 1773 as a dancer and public speaker , and she became his mistress shortly afterwards , even though she was under 14 and he was about 60 . 
 Grimaldi 's father was a serial philanderer who had at least ten children with three different women . In 1778 , he divided his time between two London addresses occupied by his mistresses , Brooker and Anne Perry . Both women gave birth that year , Perry to a daughter named Henrietta and Brooker to Joseph . Although jubilant at the birth of his first son , Giuseppe Grimaldi spent little time with Brooker , living mostly with Perry , and probably maintaining other mistresses as well . Brooker raised her son alone for the first few years in Clare Market , a slum area of west London . In about 1780 , Brooker gave birth to a second son , John Baptiste . Keen to set up an acting dynasty , Giuseppe left Perry and his daughter and moved with Brooker and his two sons to Little Russell Street , High Holborn . Giuseppe , who often displayed eccentric and obsessive behaviour , was a strict disciplinarian and often beat his children for disobeying his orders . A fascination with death consumed his later life ; he would feign death in front of his children , so as to gauge their reactions , and he insisted on his eldest daughter , Mary , decapitating him after his death because of his fear of being buried alive , a task which earned her £ 5 extra in her inheritance . 
 = = = Early years at Sadler 's Wells and Drury Lane = = = 
 From the age of two , Grimaldi was taught to act the characters in the harlequinade by his father . Although he and his younger brother John Baptiste both displayed acting talent , Joseph was groomed for the London stage . He made his stage debut at the Sadler 's Wells Theatre in late 1780 , when Giuseppe took him on stage for his " first bow and first tumble " . On 16 April 1781 , Richard Brinsley Sheridan , the manager of Drury Lane , cast both Giuseppe and Grimaldi in the pantomime The Wizard of the Silver Rocks ; or , Harlequin 's Release . Sheridan employed dozens of children , including Grimaldi , as extras at Drury Lane . 
 On Boxing Day 1781 , Grimaldi took the part of Little Clown in the pantomime The Triumph of Mirth ; or , Harlequin 's Wedding at Drury Lane . It was a success for him personally , and the pantomime enjoyed an extended run until March 1782 . As a result of his performance , he received further work offers from the management and became an established juvenile performer at Drury Lane . At the same time , he was a prolific performer at Sadler 's Wells where he played a host of minor roles , including monkeys , imps , fairies and demons . The Drury Lane season ran every year from September to late spring , with Sadler 's Wells playing from 15 April to the second week in October . Though the two theatres staged similar productions , they appealed to different audiences : Drury Lane to the wealthy classes of society and Sadler 's Wells to the boisterous working class . Although Grimaldi 's stage career was flourishing , Giuseppe enrolled him at Mr Ford 's Academy , a boarding school in Putney , which educated the children of theatrical performers . Although Grimaldi struggled with reading and writing , he showed a talent for art , as evidenced by some of his drawings that survive in the Harvard Theatre Collection . 
 Their success on the London stage allowed the Grimaldis to enjoy an affluent lifestyle in contrast to other working @-@ class families living in Clare Market and Holborn . By the age of six , Grimaldi was considered a prominent stage performer by the press , with one critic from the Gazetteer commenting that " the infant son of Grimaldi performs in an astonishing manner " . One evening , Grimaldi was playing the part of a monkey and was led onto the stage by his father , who had attached a chain to Grimaldi 's waist . Giuseppe swung his young son around his head " with the utmost velocity " , when the chain snapped , causing young Grimaldi to land in the orchestra pit . From 1789 Grimaldi would appear alongside his siblings in an act entitled " The Three Young Grimaldis " . 
 Grimaldi 's father suffered ill health for many years and died of dropsy in 1788 . As a result , at age 9 , Grimaldi became the family 's principal breadwinner . Sheridan paid him an above @-@ average wage of £ 1 a week at Drury Lane , and allowed his mother to work at Drury Lane as a dancer . However , the proprietors of Sadler 's Wells were less supportive , cutting Grimaldi 's pay from 15 shillings to 3 shillings a week , at which level it remained for the next three years . The loss of Giuseppe 's income and Joseph 's reduced summertime earnings meant the Grimaldis could no longer afford to keep the house in Holborn . They moved to the slum district of St. Giles , where they took lodgings with a furrier in Great Wild Street . Grimaldi 's brother , John Baptiste , illegally signed on as a cabin boy aboard a frigate in 1788 , when he was nine , using a false identity . Grimaldi saw him only once more in his life . 
 John Philip Kemble took over the producer 's ( director 's ) duties at Drury Lane later in 1788 when Sheridan was promoted to chief treasurer . Sheridan often employed Grimaldi in minor roles in Kemble 's productions and continued to allow him to work concurrently at Sadler 's Wells . Grimaldi took an interest in the design and construction of stage scenery and would often help to design sets . His stage performances over the next two years did not garner him the kind of success he had experienced under the management of his father , and the role of pre @-@ eminent Clown in London productions soon fell to Jean @-@ Baptiste Dubois , a versatile French acrobat , horseman , singer and strongman , with a formidable repertoire of comic tricks . Grimaldi worked as Dubois ' assistant , although in later life he denied that he had been the Frenchman 's student . 
 In 1791 the Drury Lane Theatre was demolished , and Grimaldi was loaned to the Haymarket Theatre , where he appeared , briefly , in the opera Cymon , which starred the tenor Michael Kelly . On 21 April 1794 , the new Drury Lane theatre opened , and Grimaldi , now 15 years old , resumed his place as one of the principal juvenile performers . The same year , he played his first major part since his father 's death ; as the dwarf in Valentine and Orson . Two years later , at Sadler 's Wells , he played the role of Hag <unk> in the Thomas John Dibdin Christmas pantomime The Talisman ; or , Harlequin Made Happy . The pantomime was a success , and Grimaldi received rave reviews . The Drury Lane management were eager to capitalise on his success , and later that year he was cast in <unk> , a Parisian hit adapted for the London stage by Kemble . Grimaldi played <unk> , a role that required the acrobatic and sword @-@ fighting skills that he had learned as a child . He won wider admiration as Pierrot in the 1796 Christmas pantomime of Robinson Crusoe at Drury Lane . 
 Grimaldi met his future wife , Maria Hughes in 1796 . The eldest daughter of the proprietor of the Sadler 's Wells theatre , Richard Hughes , Maria was introduced to Grimaldi by his mother , Rebecca Brooker , and a romance soon blossomed . They married on 11 May 1799 and moved to 37 Penton Street , Pentonville . Later that year , Grimaldi appeared in a succession of shows including A Trip to Scarborough ( as a countryman ) and Rule a Wife and Have a Wife ( as a maid ) . The roles he took in these productions were eccentric and usually reserved for low comedians . Despite this , he was praised for his characterisations and was deemed a player of legitimate adult roles at Drury Lane , which qualified him to become a member of the prestigious Drury Lane Theatrical Fund . 
 = = = Last years at Drury Lane = = = 
 In 1798 , Drury Lane suspended its tradition of staging an annual Christmas pantomime , which meant that Grimaldi had to seek work elsewhere during the festive period . The following year , with the help of his father @-@ in @-@ law , he joined the company at Sadler 's Wells , where he played roles in several Charles Dibdin plays . Grimaldi made a big impression , especially in Dibdin 's Easter 1800 pantomime , Peter Wilkins : or Harlequin in the Flying World , based on Robert <unk> 's 1751 novel . For this elaborate production , which featured two Clowns ( Dubois and Grimaldi ) , Dibdin introduced new costume designs . Clown 's costume was " garishly colourful ... patterned with large diamonds and circles , and fringed with tassels and ruffs , " instead of the tatty servant 's outfit that had been used for a century . The production was a hit , and the new costume design was copied by others in London . Despite Dubois ' " endless bag of tricks [ and ] vast array of skills " , his performance appeared artificial , in contrast to Grimaldi , who was better able to " draw the audience into believing the essential comedic qualities " of Clown . 
 At Drury Lane later in 1800 , he starred as an officer in The Wheel of Fortune by Richard Cumberland , a Jewish pedlar in The Indian , as Clown in Robinson Crusoe , and as the Second Gravedigger in Hamlet , alongside John Philip Kemble . Grimaldi 's wife Maria and his unborn child died during childbirth on 18 October 1800 . To cope with his grief , Grimaldi would often perform two shows a night ; one at Sadler 's Wells and the other at Drury Lane . 
 With the Christmas season approaching , and the success of Peter Wilkins still a topic of conversation within theatrical circles , Kemble decided to stage the first Drury Lane pantomime in three years , Harlequin Amulet ; or , The Magick of Mona , with Grimaldi as Punch and then as Clown , instead of Dubois . In this production , Harlequin became " romantic and mercurial , instead of mischievous " , leaving Grimaldi 's Clown as the " undisputed agent " of chaos . The pantomime was a great success , running for thirty @-@ three performances and having a second Drury Lane season at Easter 1801 ; as a result , Grimaldi became recognised as one of London 's leading Clowns . Grimaldi originated the catchphrase " Here we are again ! " , which is still used in pantomime . He also was known for the mischievous catchphrase " Shall I ? " , which prompted audience members to respond " Yes ! " 
 Grimaldi and Dubois appeared together again later that spring at Sadler 's Wells in Dibdin 's Harlequin Alchemist , which set up a mock duel between the two Clowns , with the audience deciding who could pull the most hideous face . Grimaldi consistently won . In the next piece , Harlequin Benedick ; or , The Ghost of Mother Shipton . Dubois was relegated to the role of Pierrot , while Grimaldi played Clown . Grimaldi 's mother was in the cast , appearing as the Butcher 's Wife . He then appeared in another Dibdin play , The Great Devil . During the run , he accidentally injured himself on stage by shooting himself in the foot and was confined to bed for five weeks . His mother became so concerned at her son 's fragile and still grief @-@ stricken state that she employed a dancer at Drury Lane , Mary Bristow , to care for him full @-@ time during those weeks . They formed a close friendship , which resulted in a loving relationship , and they married on 24 December 1801 . 
 After a falling @-@ out with Kemble at Drury Lane , Grimaldi was dismissed and began appearing at the nearby Covent Garden Theatre . He also took up an engagement at his father @-@ in @-@ law 's theatre in Exeter . There was no Christmas 1801 or Easter 1802 pantomime at Drury Lane , and Kemble noticed a reduction in his theatre 's audiences . Grimaldi began to appear in provincial theatres , with the first appearance being in Rochester , Kent , in 1801 . In March 1802 , he returned to Kent where he performed in pantomime , earning £ 300 for two days work . His dismissal from Drury Lane was short @-@ lived , and he was reinstated within a few months in a revival of Harlequin Amulet . 
 Sadler 's Wells closed for refurbishment at the end of its 1801 season and re @-@ opened on 19 April 1802 ; Grimaldi returned to take a major role in the Easter pantomime , for which he designed the look of his recurring Clown character " Joey " . He began by painting a white base over his face , neck and chest before adding red triangles on the cheeks , thick eyebrows and large red lips set in a mischievous grin . Grimaldi 's design is used by many modern clowns . According to Grimaldi 's biographer Andrew McConnell Stott , it was one of the most important theatrical designs of the 1800s . Later in 1802 , Dubois left the Sadler 's Wells company , making Grimaldi the sole resident Clown . Grimaldi starred in St. George , Champion of England opposite his friend Jack Bologna . This was followed by Ko and <unk> ; or , the Belle Savage . A critic from The Times remarked that the pair 's death scene together was " <unk> affecting " [ sic ] . Bologna and Grimaldi 's on @-@ stage partnership had by now become the most popular on the British stage ; the Morning Chronicle thought they " stood unrivalled " compared to other acts within the harlequinade . 
 On 21 November 1802 , his wife Mary bore Grimaldi his only child , a son , Joseph Samuel , whom they called " JS " . Grimaldi introduced his young son to the eccentric atmosphere at both Drury Lane and Sadler 's Wells from the age of 18 months . Although eager to have his son follow him onto the stage , Grimaldi felt that it was more important for the boy to have an education and eventually enrolled him at Mr Ford 's Academy . 
 Grimaldi returned to Drury Lane late in 1802 and starred in a production of Bluebeard , followed by the Christmas pantomime Love and Magic . In 1803 Grimaldi 's contract at Sadler 's Wells was extended for another three years . He starred as Rufo the Robber in Red Riding Hood , as Sir John Bull in New Broom and <unk> in Susanna <unk> 's A Bold Stroke for a Wife . The Napoleonic Wars had started , and the new proprietors of Sadler 's Wells and Drury Lane looked to Grimaldi to satisfy audiences eager for comic relief . Cinderella ; or , the Little Glass Slipper was presented at Drury Lane on 3 January 1804 . Grimaldi played the part of Pedro , a servant to Cinderella 's sisters . The production was a major success for the theatre , enhanced by Michael Kelly 's musical score ; however Grimaldi and the critics grew concerned that the theatre was <unk> his talents and that he was miscast in the role . 
 The Sadler 's Wells season commenced at Easter 1805 , and Grimaldi and Jack Bologna enjoyed a successful period . Drury Lane staged the opera <unk> , in which Grimaldi , his mother and his wife all had starring roles . After this he was asked to choreograph John Tobin 's play , The Honey Moon , at Drury Lane on short notice . He accepted on the proviso that his wages be increased for the show 's entire run and not just until a new dancing instructor was found . The Drury Lane management agreed to pay Grimaldi £ 2 more per week . A few weeks into his new assignment , management appointed James D <unk> as the new ballet master . D <unk> 's debut production was Terpsichore 's Return , in which Grimaldi played Pan , a role which he considered to be one of his best assignments to date . That October , however , the theatre reduced his wages . The extra £ 2 that he had been promised had been deducted from his salary when Terpsichore closed , and he approached Thomas Dibdin for advice . Dibdin advised him to leave Drury Lane and to take up a residency at the nearby Covent Garden Theatre . Grimaldi wrote to Thomas Harris , the manager of the Covent Garden Theatre , hoping to persuade him to stage Christmas pantomimes . Harris was already a supporter of the shows and had employed the writing talents of both Charles Dibdin and his co @-@ writer Charles Farley . Grimaldi met with Harris and obtained a contract . Before joining that theatre , however , he had to satisfy prior commitments at Drury Lane , appearing in the poorly received Harlequin 's Fireside . 
 = = = Covent Garden years = = = 
 In 1806 , Grimaldi bought a second home , a cottage in Finchley , to which he retired between seasons . He was engaged to appear at Astley 's Theatre in Dublin , in a play by Thomas Dibdin and his brother Charles . The <unk> leased the theatre , but it was badly in need of repair . As a result audiences were small , and the show 's box @-@ office takings suffered . Grimaldi donated his salary to help pay for the renovation of the theatre . The Dibdin company , with Grimaldi , transferred to the nearby Crow Street Theatre where they performed a benefit concert in aid of Astley 's . After two more plays , the company moved back to London . 
 Harlequin and the Forty Virgins opened the Easter season at Sadler 's Wells and lasted the entire season . Grimaldi sang " Me and my Neddy " , which proved very successful for both him and the theatre . Amid great expectations , he appeared at the Covent Garden Theatre on 9 October 1806 playing Orson opposite Charles Farley 's Valentine in Thomas Dibdin 's Valentine and Orson . Grimaldi , who considered the role of Orson to be the most physically and mentally demanding of his career , nevertheless performed the part with enthusiasm on tour in the provinces . 
 Perhaps the best @-@ known of Grimaldi 's pantomimes was Thomas Dibdin 's Harlequin and Mother Goose ; or , The Golden Egg , which opened on 29 December 1806 at the Covent Garden Theatre . As in most pantomimes , he played a dual role , in this case first as " Bugle " , a wealthy but abrasive eccentric womaniser , and after the transformation to the harlequinade , as Clown . Mother Goose was a runaway success with its London audiences and earned an extraordinary profit of £ 20 @,@ 000 . It completed a run of 111 performances over a two @-@ year residency , a record for any London theatre production at the time . Grimaldi , however , considered the performance to be one of the worst of his career and became depressed . Critics thought differently , attributing the pantomime 's success to Grimaldi 's performance . It prompted one critic from European Magazine to write : " We have not for several years witnessed a Pantomime more attractive than this : whether we consider the variety and ingenuity of the mechanical devices [ or ] the whim , humour , and agility of the Harlequin , Clown and Pantaloon " . Kemble stated that Grimaldi had " proved himself [ as ] the great master of his art " , while the actress Mrs Jordan called him " a genius ... yet <unk> " . The production regularly played to packed audiences . 
 In September 1808 , a fire at the Covent Garden theatre destroyed much of the Mother Goose scenery ; the production transferred to the Haymarket Theatre where it completed its run . While Kemble and Harris raised funds and renovated Covent Garden , Grimaldi made provincial appearances in Manchester and Liverpool . The Covent Garden theatre re @-@ opened in December 1809 with a revival of Mother Goose . In an attempt to recover the costs incurred by the rebuilding , Kemble raised the theatre 's seat prices , causing audiences to protest violently for more than two months , and the management was forced to reinstate the old prices . Grimaldi 's 1809 – 10 productions included Don Juan , in which he appeared as Scaramouche , and Castles in the Air , as Clown . Later in 1810 , he appeared in Birmingham in a benefit performance in aid of his sister @-@ in @-@ law . The following year , Grimaldi sang " <unk> " for the first time at Sadler 's Wells in Charles Dibdin 's pantomime Bang up , or , Harlequin Prime ; it became one of his most popular songs . 
 By 1812 , despite Grimaldi 's success as a performer , he was close to bankruptcy as a result of his wife 's extravagant spending , a number of thefts by his accountant and the cost of maintaining both an idyllic country lifestyle and his son JS 's private education . The strain on Grimaldi 's finances caused him to accept as many provincial engagements as he could . That year , he travelled to Cheltenham and appeared again as Scaramouche in a revival of Don Juan . In nearby Gloucester he met the poet Lord Byron , on whose poem the play was based , at a dinner party . Byron was in awe at meeting the famous Clown , stating that he felt " great and unbounded satisfaction in becoming acquainted with a man of such rare and profound talents " . Grimaldi returned to London to star as Queen <unk> with much success in the Covent Garden Christmas pantomime , Harlequin and the Red Dwarf ; or , The Adamant Rock . After this , he increasingly played " dame " roles . 
 Sadler 's Wells opened its season in April 1814 with Grimaldi appearing in , amongst others , <unk> ; or , The Pirate Slave . That year he played the title role in Robinson Crusoe at Sadler 's Wells , with his young son , JS , making his stage debut as Man Friday . Other pantomimes followed at Sadler 's Wells that year , including The Talking Bird , in which he played Clown , and he also played Clown in productions at the Surrey Theatre and Covent Garden – a challenging schedule . Later in 1814 , he played the title role in a revival of Don Juan at Sadler 's Wells , with JS in his second role as Scaramouche . The receipts at the box @-@ office were unusually large and confirmed , in Grimaldi 's mind , that his son was capable of sustaining his own career . Grimaldi suffered two setbacks towards the end of the year , becoming housebound for a few months due to illness and learning of the death of his friend , mentor and former father @-@ in @-@ law , Richard Hughes , in December . In early 1815 , Grimaldi and his son played father and son Clowns in Harlequin and Fortunio ; or , Shing @-@ Moo and Thun @-@ Ton . 
 During 1815 , the relationship between Grimaldi and Thomas Dibdin became strained . Dibdin , as manager at Sadler 's Wells , denied Grimaldi 's request for a month 's leave to tour the provincial theatres . Dibdin was annoyed at the tolerant attitude Grimaldi displayed in his position as the Chief Judge and Treasurer of the Sadler 's Wells Court of <unk> , a body set up to regulate the behaviour of performers . Grimaldi briefly left Sadler 's Wells in 1815 to conduct a tour of the northern provincial theatres . Alongside Jack Bologna , he staged fifty @-@ six shows during the summer months and earned £ 1 @,@ 743 , a much higher amount than he earned at Sadler 's Wells . Dibdin was struggling , and after the tour Grimaldi used the problems at Sadler 's Wells to negotiate a lucrative contract . Dibdin agreed to a salary increase but bristled at Grimaldi 's other demands and eventually gave the position of resident Clown to the little @-@ known Signor Paulo . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 In 1815 , Grimaldi played Clown in Harlequin and the Sylph of the Oak ; or , The Blind Beggar of Bethnal Green at Covent Garden , followed by the Christmas pantomime Robinson Crusoe ; or , The Bold Buccaneer , in which he played Friday to Charles Farley 's title character . Grimaldi conducted a remunerative but gruelling tour to Scotland , Manchester and Liverpool in 1818 . He sustained bruising and strains from two falls , the second of which left him briefly unable to walk . He and Mary moved to 56 Exmouth Market , Islington , where he recovered from his injuries before going on tour with his son . 
 At Easter 1819 , in The Talking Bird , or , <unk> Columbine , he introduced perhaps his best known song " Hot <unk> " , an audience participation song about a seller of roasted apples who gets drunk on gin while working the streets of London . Songs about trades were popular on the stage in the 1800s . Grimaldi sought inspiration for the character of the apple seller by walking around the streets of London and observing real @-@ life tradespeople . 
 Despite Signor Paulo 's success at Sadler 's Wells , Richard Hughes 's widow Lucy , who was a majority shareholder at the theatre , pleaded with Grimaldi to return . He agreed on the conditions that he was sold an eighth share in the theatre , remained the resident Clown and received a salary of 12 guineas a week . She agreed to his terms , and he took the part of <unk> in the 1818 Easter pantomime The Marquis De Carabas ; or , Puss in Boots . The show was a disaster and closed after one night . Grimaldi was booed off the stage after an impromptu joke ( eating a prop mouse ) upset the audience and caused two female audience members to fight in the auditorium . The audience was also angry at Grimaldi 's weak performance ; later he felt that this marked the beginning of his career 's decline . Dibdin left Sadler 's Wells that year ; his fortunes changed rapidly for the worse , and he spent time in a debtors ' prison . Grimaldi 's debut as a theatre proprietor was also a failure . Although Jack Bologna , Mary , JS and Bologna 's wife Louisa were all cast in Grimaldi 's only commissioned pantomime , The Fates ; or , Harlequin 's Holy Day , he had underestimated the amount of work required to run a theatre , and the strain of management hastened the already rapid deterioration in his health . 
 The shares in Sadler 's Wells were sold , with Grimaldi 's going to Daniel Egerton . Egerton wanted to keep Grimaldi on the payroll but proposed loaning him to other theatres . Grimaldi refused a contract on these terms and instead appeared alongside JS in a few engagements in Ireland . During the Easter season of 1820 , Grimaldi appeared at the Royal Opera House , Covent Garden , in Harlequin and Cinderella ; or , the Little Glass Slipper . Grimaldi played the wife of the lead character Baron <unk> ; the role was probably an early example of a pantomime dame . In the latter months of 1820 , Grimaldi 's health worsened , and he suffered frequent emotional breakdowns , gastric spasms , breathlessness and severe rheumatoid pain . These ailments did not affect his desire to perform . That September he appeared at Covent Garden , as <unk> in Aladdin followed by the Christmas pantomime Harlequin and Friar Bacon ; the pantomime was particularly successful . 
 In May 1821 , Grimaldi collapsed after a performance of Undine ; or , the Spirit of the Waters . Doctors diagnosed him as suffering from " premature old age " . JS took over his father 's role and completed the remainder of the show 's run . Now acting as an official understudy , JS filled many of his father 's other theatrical engagements , including a rerun of Harlequin and Mother Bunch ; or , the Yellow Dwarf , in which he caused a scandal by threatening and verbally abusing a heckler in the audience . In the early 1820s , Grimaldi made a brief recovery and held a six @-@ week engagement at the Coburg Theatre where he appeared as Clown in Salmagundi ; or , the Clown 's Dish of All Sorts ; a pantomime which ran for a week before being replaced by Disputes in China ; or , Harlequin and the Hong Merchants . Both productions were successful , but Grimaldi was taken ill half way through the latter 's run . 
 In 1822 , Grimaldi travelled to Cheltenham , in poor health , to fulfil an engagement as Clown by another actor in Harlequin and the <unk> ; or , the Sleeping Beauty in the Wood . Despite the rehearsals being cut short due to Grimaldi 's rapidly deteriorating health , critics praised his performances . 
 = = = Last years and death = = = 
 Grimaldi retired from the stage in 1823 as a result of ill health . The years of extreme physical exertion his clowning had involved had taken a toll on his joints , and he suffered from a respiratory condition that often left him breathless . The Times noted in 1813 : 
 Grimaldi is the most assiduous of all imaginable buffoons and it is absolutely surprising that any human head or hide can resist the rough trials he volunteers . Serious tumbles from serious heights , innumerable kicks , and incessant beatings come on him as matters of common occurrence , and leave him every night fresh and free for the next night 's flagellation . 
 Although officially retired , Grimaldi still received half of his former small salary from Drury Lane until 1824 . Soon after the fee stopped , Grimaldi fell into poverty after a number of ill @-@ conceived business ventures and because he had entrusted management of his provincial earnings to people who cheated him . Despite his disabilities , he offered his services as a cameo performer in Christmas pantomimes . Along with Bologna , he re @-@ appeared briefly at Sadler 's Wells where he gave some acting instruction to the mime artist William Payne , the future father of the Payne Brothers . He also started working for Richard Brinsley Peake , namesake of Richard Brinsley Sheridan , who was the dramaturge at the English Opera House . Peake hired Grimaldi to star in Monkey Island alongside his son JS . However , Grimaldi 's health deteriorated further and he was forced to quit before the show opened ; his scene was cut . The early end to his career , worries about money , and the uncertainty over his son 's future made him increasingly depressed . To make light of it , he would often joke about his condition : " I make you laugh at night but am Grim @-@ all @-@ day " . In 1828 , two " farewell " benefit performances were held for him . In the first , he appeared as Hock the German soldier and a drunken sailor in Thomas Dibdin 's melodrama The Sixes ; or , The Fiends at Sadler 's Wells to an audience of 2 @,@ 000 people . Unable to stand for long periods of time , he sang a duet with JS and finished the evening with a scene from Mother Goose . His last farewell benefit performance on 27 June 1828 was at Drury Lane . Between 1828 and 1836 , Grimaldi relied on charity benefits to replace his lost income . 
 The relationship between Grimaldi and his son first became strained during the early 1820s . JS , who had made a career of emulating his father 's act , received favourable notices as Clown , but his success was constantly overshadowed by that of his father . He became resentful of his father and publicly shunned any association with him . JS became an alcoholic and was increasingly unreliable . In 1823 , he became estranged from his parents , who saw their son only occasionally over the next four years , as JS went out of his way to avoid them . They communicated only through letters , with Grimaldi often sending his son notes begging for money . JS once replied : " At present I am in difficulties ; but as long as I have a shilling you shall have half " . However , there is no record of him ever sending money to his father . JS finally returned home in 1827 , when the Grimaldis were awakened one night to discover their son standing in the street , feverish , emaciated and dishevelled . 
 After appearing in a few Christmas pantomimes and benefits for his father , JS fell into unemployment and was incarcerated in a debtors ' prison for a time ; his alcoholism also further worsened . In 1832 , Grimaldi , Mary and their son moved to Woolwich , but JS often abused his parents ' hospitality by bringing home prostitutes and fighting in the house with his alcoholic friends . He moved out later that year and died at his lodgings on 11 December 1832 , aged 30 . With Grimaldi almost crippled , and Mary having suffered a stroke days before JS 's death , they made a suicide pact . They took some poison , but the only result was a long bout of stomach cramps . Dismayed at their failure , they abandoned the idea of suicide . 
 Mary died in 1834 , and Grimaldi moved to 33 Southampton Street , Islington , where he spent the last few years of his life alone as a depressed alcoholic . On 31 May 1837 he complained of a tightening of the chest but recuperated enough to attend his local public house , The Marquis of Cornwallis , where he spent a convivial evening entertaining fellow patrons and drinking to excess . He returned home that evening and was found dead in bed by his housekeeper the following morning . The coroner recorded that he had " died by the visitation of God " . Grimaldi was buried in St. James 's Churchyard , Pentonville , on 5 June 1837 . The burial site and the area around it was later named Joseph Grimaldi Park . 
 = = Legacy and reputation = = 
 After Grimaldi 's death , Charles Dickens was invited by Richard Bentley to edit and improve Thomas Egerton Wilks 's clumsily written life of Grimaldi , which had been based on the clown 's own notes . As a child , Dickens saw Grimaldi perform at the Star Theatre , Rochester , in 1820 . The Memoirs of Joseph Grimaldi sold well , to Dickens 's surprise . 
 Grimaldi 's fame was established primarily by his numerous successes as Clown in pantomimes . His Clown satirised many aspects of contemporary British life , and made comic mockery of absurdities in fashion . Grimaldi quickly became the most famous Clown in London , gradually transforming the Clown character from a <unk> country bumpkin into the most important character in the harlequinade , more important even than Harlequin . He expanded the role of Clown to include a range of comic impersonations , from the rival suitor , to household cook or nurse . Grimaldi 's popularity changed the balance of the evening 's entertainment , so that the first , relatively serious , section of the pantomime soon dwindled to " little more than a pretext for determining the characters who were to be transformed into those of the harlequinade . " He became so dominant in the harlequinade that later Clowns were known as " Joey " , and the term , as well as his make @-@ up design , were later generalised to other types of clowns . 
 A contributor to Bentley 's Miscellany wrote in 1846 : " To those who never saw him , description is fruitless ; to those who have , no praise comes up to their appreciation of him . We therefore shake our heads and say ' Ah ! You should have seen Grimaldi ! ' " Another writer commented that his performances elevated his role by " acute observation upon the foibles and absurdities of society . ... He is the finest practical <unk> that ever existed . ... He was so extravagantly natural , that [ no one was ] ashamed to laugh till tears coursed down their cheeks at Joe and his <unk> . " The British dramatist James Planché worried , in a rhymed couplet , that Grimaldi 's death meant the end of a genre : " Pantomime 's best days are fled ; Grimaldi , Barnes , Bologna dead ! " 
 Grimaldi became " easily the most popular English entertainer of his day " . The Victoria and Albert Museum and the actor Simon Callow have both concluded that no other Clown achieved Grimaldi 's level of fame . Richard Findlater , author of a 1955 Grimaldi biography , commented : " Here is Joey the Clown , the first of 10 @,@ 000 <unk> who took their name from him ; here is the genius of English fun , in the holiday splendour of his reign at Sadler 's Wells and Covent Garden ... during his lifetime [ Grimaldi ] was generally acclaimed as the funniest and best @-@ loved man in the British theatre . " A later biographer , Andrew McConnell Stott , wrote that " Joey had been the first great experiment in comic persona , and by shifting the emphasis of clowning from tricks and pratfalls to characterisation , satire and a full sense of personhood , he had established himself as the spiritual father of all those later comedians whose humour stems first and foremost from a strong sense of identity . " 
 Grimaldi is remembered today in an annual memorial service on the first Sunday in February at Holy Trinity Church in Hackney . The service , which has been held since the 1940s , attracts hundreds of clown performers from all over the world who attend the service in full clown costume . In 2010 a coffin @-@ shaped musical memorial dedicated to Grimaldi , made of musical floor tiles , was installed in Joseph Grimaldi Park . The bronze tiles are tuned so that when danced upon it is possible to play " Hot <unk> " . 
 = Matthew Cox = 
 Matthew Bevan Cox ( born July 2 , 1969 ) , commonly known as Matthew Cox , also sometimes known as Matthew B. Cox and Matt Cox , is an American felon and con man who has been convicted of conspiracy and grand theft . Cox , also an aspiring author , wrote an unpublished manuscript entitled The Associates in which the main character traveled the country committing mortgage fraud similarly as Cox later did . 
 Cox falsified documents to make it appear that he owned properties , and then fraudulently obtained several mortgages on them for five to six times their actual worth . He acquired millions of dollars this way ; estimates report the amount at between US $ 5 and $ 25 million . Cox 's first conviction occurred in 2002 when he was sentenced to probation for mortgage fraud . He was then fired from the mortgage broker position he held in a Tampa , Florida area firm . He began his life as a dedicated criminal in central Florida after that offense , before fleeing the area when his activities were discovered . His crime spree continued across the southern US , eventually landing him on the Secret Service 's Most Wanted list . He was aided by several female accomplices , some of whom are in prison or have served time there for their participation in his fraudulent mortgage practices . Cox was arrested on November 16 , 2006 . Indicted on 42 counts , and facing prison sentences of up to 400 years , he plea bargained his sentence down to a maximum of 54 years on April 11 , 2007 and was sentenced to 26 years on November 17 . He is currently in a low @-@ security prison in Florida . His story is well chronicled and has been featured on Dateline NBC , CNBC 's American Greed , in Fortune magazine , Bloomberg BusinessWeek , Playboy magazine and many other media outlets . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Florida , Cox struggled in school due to severe dyslexia . His teachers advised him to get a job in which he worked with his hands , so he studied sculpture at the University of South Florida , and majored in Art . Rather than follow art , Cox took a job as an insurance agent after college , but his income disappointed him , and he sought out different , more high @-@ paying work . 
 = = Adult life = = 
 = = = Tampa , Florida = = = 
 Cox left his job as an insurance agent to work as a mortgage broker for a local company . While there he developed a reputation for <unk> , which was heightened by his authorship of an unpublished 317 @-@ page manuscript entitled The Associates . The novel 's protagonist , written as a similar copy of himself , travels the country committing mortgage fraud . Cox told co @-@ workers about the book , and elaborated its details to them . " He sent it to a lot of people to see if they thought it worked " said a former co @-@ worker . After being fired from the company when he was convicted of mortgage fraud in 2002 , Cox faked a good credit history , and used that to buy dozens of homes and properties . In one instance he used the social security number of a toddler , and all of his documents — references , bank letters , rent receipts , W @-@ 2s from nonexistent employees — were counterfeit . He used his skills as an artist to decorate the properties with elaborate art deco @-@ style murals . Several of his future girlfriends said that his painting talents were part of his allure , though St. Petersburg Times said that his works were merely copies of murals by Tamara de Lempicka . Cox charmed Alison Arnold , a young local married woman , into believing he could give her a wealthy and luxurious life . While courting Arnold she said he took her to crime films such as The Italian Job and Catch Me if You Can — which he reportedly adored and watched several times — and began to detail his criminal plans to her . 
 Cox often filed fraudulent mortgage documents , and in several cases was able to mortgage properties for five to six times their actual worth . In this practice , known as " <unk> " in the real estate community , Cox either himself forged or had accomplices attain inflated appraisals to increase the value of the mortgages . One of his accomplices was a detention officer , who acquired 14 properties worth nearly $ 600 @,@ 000 , while making $ 35 @,@ 568 a year in his job . Cox took advantage of the Hillsborough County school district by selling it a property for much more than its appraised value , and arranged financing on a $ 90 @,@ 000 house for local politician Janet Cruz . He recorded that sale for $ 233 @,@ 000 , and hired Cruz to do some rezoning research . Cruz claims she was unaware he inflated the sale price , and that she was never paid for her research . When a female accomplice rented a house in Pinellas County as part of Cox 's schemes , then faked ownership of the property , the owner found out about the fraud . A title company manager had become suspicious of a loan Cox 's accomplice was applying for on the home and called the property 's real owner . The Clearwater Police department was contacted , and they began an investigation . 
 Cox and Arnold grew apart and eventually Cox began courting another woman . Rebecca Hauck , a divorced mother , moved to Tampa after falling into debt and declaring Bankruptcy in Las Vegas . She had already committed criminal offenses before meeting Cox ; Hauck was fired from a job in Las Vegas for forging her employer 's name on checks that she used to pay her debts . They met through an online dating service . She , unlike Arnold , was willing to leave her son . After finding out that a local newspaper , the St. Petersburg Times , was investigating him , Cox and Hauck fled town . Two days later , on December 14 , 2003 , a story entitled " Dubious housing deals line avenue " arrived on newsstands . 
 The story detailed Urban Equities Inc. an investment company started by Cox . His ex @-@ wife <unk> Burgos , who is mother to his son , was one of the two shareholders . Despite her involvement in the purchase or sale of 58 properties in six years , she claimed that her and the other remaining shareholder were " incapable of operating or managing Urban Equity " , so the company was put into receivership . His partners claimed to be unaware of Cox 's dealings , and they were financially ruined by the collapse of the company . 
 = = = Crime spree across the southern states = = = 
 Cox travelled to Atlanta , Georgia , where he and Hauck settled . He became a fugitive when he failed to report to his probation officers . During this period , he traveled to Mobile , Alabama , and using the identity of a former co @-@ worker , acquired credit cards and the credit needed to rent a home . After filing false documents that indicated he owned the house , Cox took out mortgages on the property for several hundred thousand dollars . He took out one mortgage under the name of The Simpsons character " C. Montgomery Burns " . Cox acquired several more properties , then the couple moved to the Tallahassee , Florida area . 
 Authorities in the Atlanta area discovered Cox 's activities , and eventually his identity . On August 6 , 2004 , police issued arrest warrants for conspiracy , stolen identification documents , mail and wire fraud , money laundering and social security number fraud . News broadcasts showed photos of Cox and Hauck and requested that viewers provide any information pertaining to their whereabouts . By spring 2005 , the couple had eluded authorities for eighteen months , using dozens of identities , including ones stolen from former co @-@ workers and acquaintances . Cox also stole identities from the homeless by posing as a survey – taking Red Cross worker to acquire their social security numbers . At this point , due to remorse and anxiety , Arnold called the FBI and confessed . She was sentenced to two years in prison for numerous offenses , including conspiracy to commit bank fraud and identity theft . Arnold was also ordered to pay $ 300 @,@ 000 dollars in restitution to her victims . Shortly thereafter , Cox filed multiple mortgages on two houses for $ 886 @,@ 318 in Columbia , South Carolina in less than a week . An <unk> noticed this , and a fraud alert was issued on one of Cox 's money laundering bank accounts . He was arrested when he returned to the bank to make a transaction , but he told authorities his name was Gary Lee Sullivan , one of about thirty aliases Cox had at the time , and because Sullivan had no open warrants the police released him . Shortly afterwards , Cox and Hauck moved to Houston , but they separated and she remained there in hiding under an assumed name . A year later the Secret Service found Hauck and arrested her . Convicted on numerous counts , Hauck was sentenced to six years in prison , and five years of supervised release . In May 2006 , after being on the run from authorities for two and a half years , Cox was placed on the Secret Service 's Most Wanted List . 
 = = = Nashville , Tennessee = = = 
 The week that Hauck was sentenced to prison , Cox was living in Nashville , Tennessee under the name Joseph Carter . He was dating a single mother , Amanda Gardner , who was unaware of his criminal past , and posing as the owner of a home restoration business . He told her he was from a wealthy family , and his silver 2005 Infiniti and " fashionably decorated bungalow " seemed to confirm this . Cox used a falsified passport to travel to Europe on a cruise of the Greek Isles with Gardner , a new friend Brian Williamson , and Williamson 's wife . He did not spend much time in Italy or Greece due to his intense fear of Interpol . He was reported by Gardner 's 60 @-@ year @-@ old babysitter , Patsy Taylor . She became suspicious of Cox , so she researched him online , where she discovered his identity . Taylor was put in contact with the attorney of Rebecca Hauck by a St. Petersburg Times reporter . Hauck 's family paid Taylor for Cox 's address , as this information could be used to reduce Hauck 's sentence . He temporarily escaped capture due to a chance series of events . Cox and his girlfriend 's home was burglarized , and he temporarily moved himself and Gardner to a hotel . On November 16 , 2006 , Cox was arrested by a half dozen Secret Service agents — who had been pursuing him for over two years — when he and Gardener returned from the hotel . He had been building Williamson a house via his fake identity and credit history , but , fortunately for his friend , he was arrested before Williamson could give him a down payment . Hauck 's sentence was later reduced from 70 to 42 months as a result of her assistance in Cox 's capture . 
 = = = Prison = = = 
 Cox faced 42 counts of fraud , in addition to felony charges for fleeing while on probation from a previous conviction . Facing potential prison sentences of over 400 years , he negotiated a plea bargain agreement that gave him a maximum of 54 years , and a $ 2 million fine . On November 16 , federal judge Timothy C. Batten , Sr. sentenced Cox to 26 years in prison . He also ordered Cox to pay $ 5 @.@ 97 million in restitution . He will not be eligible for release until 2029 . 
 Depending on the source , estimates of the amount of money Cox fraudulently obtained vary from $ 5 million , to over $ 15 million , to more than $ 25 million . He is believed to have fraudulently mortgaged more than 100 properties . Cox is serving a 26 @-@ year sentence at the Federal Correctional Institution ( FCI ) , a low @-@ security facility in Coleman , Florida . He was ordered to pay $ 5 @.@ 97 million in restitution , and testify against his co @-@ conspirators . Although as of 2010 , the United States Attorney 's office has not brought charges against any of his 13 Tampa area cohorts , even though Assistant U.S. Attorney Robert A. <unk> informed a judge in 2005 that he planned to bring charges against up to 13 accomplices . 
 While in prison , Cox mailed several letters to the St. Petersburg Times in 2008 in which he accused politician Kevin White of taking bribes from him during Cox 's criminal career . He claims he made payoffs to White , who was then a Tampa City Council candidate , in 2002 and 2003 . Cox said White told him he could not receive the money directly , so he should have his friends each donate $ 500 and then reimburse them . Records and statements from those who donated show that Cox did in fact make numerous contributions to White 's campaign , and reimbursed others who did so as well . White , he claims , agreed to vote to rezone vacant properties in Tampa and <unk> City . When Cox was first arrested the FBI talked to him about White , who they were also investigating , and he told them the same information . He claimed to have paid him $ 7 @,@ 000 in cash in addition to the recorded contributions he arranged . When White and a fellow City Council member were told Cox 's contributions might have been illegal in 2004 , his colleague told the police , while White kept silent . White has denied that he knew these contributions were reimbursed , and called Cox 's accusations " the jailhouse ramblings of a reputed con man . " White said he befriended Cox when he came to believe the con man was interested in revitalizing Tampa Heights . Cox fled the Tampa area before White cast any rezoning votes , so there is no voting record which could help confirm the validity of his accusations . 
 = = Unpublished novel = = 
 Authorities were amazed by the similarities between Cox 's actual crimes and the manuscript , which they found several years before Cox was arrested . The fictional character is 5 ft 7 in ( 170 cm ) , has brown hair and blue eyes . Cox is 5 ft 6 in ( 168 cm ) , has brown hair and green eyes . Both the fictional character and Cox drove a silver Audi TT , illegally acquired Tampa real estate worth $ 2 @.@ 7 million , were alumni of the University of South Florida , had an intense fear of Interpol , and formerly worked as insurance seller . 
 In the novel , the protagonist and a female accomplice rent a home like the one Cox and Hauck rented in Atlanta . The character then opens accounts at several banks in the area so that he can use them for money laundering purposes , which Cox did . Then , Cox , like the character in the manuscript , forged a document , claiming that the mortgage on the home — which he did not even own — was paid off . The character in the manuscript then contacted lenders , and told them he owned the property outright . Cox is in prison for this same crime . 
 = Cornwallis in North America = 
 Charles , Earl Cornwallis ( 1738 – 1805 ) was a military officer who served in the British Army during the American War of Independence . He is best known for surrendering his army after the 1781 Siege of Yorktown , an act that ended major hostilities in North America and led directly to peace negotiations and the eventual end of the war . 
 Born into an aristocratic family with a history of public service , Cornwallis was politically opposed to the war , but agreed to serve when it became clear that Britain would require a significant military presence in the Thirteen Colonies . First arriving in May 1776 , he participated in the Battle of Sullivan 's Island , before joining the main army under General William Howe . He played a notable role in the partially successful New York and New Jersey campaign when George Washington successfully eluded him after the Battle of the Assunpink Creek and inflicted a decisive defeat on troops left at his rear in the Battle of Princeton . 
 Cornwallis was also involved in the Philadelphia campaign ( 1777 – 1778 ) , leading a wing of Howe 's army , before he became one of the leading figures of the British " southern strategy " to gain control of the southern colonies . In that role he successfully led troops that gained a measure of control and influence in South Carolina before heading into North Carolina . There , despite successes like his victory at the Battle of Camden , which burnished his reputation , wings of his army were decisively defeated at Kings Mountain and Cowpens . After a Pyrrhic victory at Greensboro , North Carolina , Cornwallis moved his battered army to Wilmington to rest and resupply . 
 From Wilmington , Cornwallis , in a move that became a subject of contemporary and historical debate , led his army into Virginia , where he joined with other British troops that had been raiding economic and military targets in that colony . <unk> opposed by a smaller Continental Army under the Marquis de Lafayette , he was eventually ordered to establish a well @-@ defended port by General Henry Clinton . Poor communications in the British establishment and French naval superiority over the Chesapeake Bay caused him to become entrapped at Yorktown without the possibility of reinforcement ; he surrendered after three weeks of siege , on October 17 , 1781 . He was released on parole , and returned to England in December of that year . He and General Clinton engaged in a highly public exchange after the 1781 campaign in which each sought to deflect blame for its failure . 
 = = Background = = 
 Charles , Earl Cornwallis was a military officer born into an aristocratic family . His family had a distinguished record of public and military service , and Cornwallis was no exception . Eager for action , he served with the British Army in Europe during the Seven Years ' War , rising to the rank of lieutenant colonel . During those years he also served first in the House of Commons of Great Britain , and then , upon his accession to the title of Earl of Cornwallis in 1762 , in the House of Lords . He was politically aligned with the Whigs , and was sympathetic to the complaints of the British colonists in North America , voting against the 1765 Stamp Act . When it was repealed the following year , he was one of a few voters against the Declaratory Act , in which Parliament continued to claim authority over the colonies . Also in 1766 , he was given the colonelcy of the 33rd Regiment of Foot . In the following years he continued to argue politically in support of the colonists even as tensions rose between them and the Parliament . When the North ministry rose to power in 1770 , Cornwallis adopted a less active voice in politics , and avoided seeking political appointments . 
 In 1768 he married Jemima <unk> Jones , the daughter of a regimental colonel . They had two children , a boy and a girl , before Jemima died in 1779 , and were by all accounts a happy , devoted couple . 
 = = American War of Independence = = 
 After the opening skirmishes of the war took place near Boston , Cornwallis put his politics aside and sought active service . Despite his opposition to the king 's colonial policy , Cornwallis had retained King George III 's favour , and was rapidly promoted . On September 29 , 1775 he was promoted to major general . In November he offered to serve in North America on a proposed expedition to the southern colonies , even though the number of officers that were senior to him in rank meant he was unlikely to get an independent command . This generosity was appreciated by the king and by Lord George Germain , the secretary of state for the colonies . On January 1 , 1776 he was given the rank of lieutenant general in North America . His orders from Lord Germain were to accompany a convoy of troops from Cork , Ireland to North America , where he was to join at Cape Fear , North Carolina with General Henry Clinton , who was bringing troops from Boston for operations in the southern colonies . Clinton arrived at Cape Fear well before the earl , since logistics delayed the convoy 's departure , and then bad weather slowed its progress across the Atlantic . Cornwallis expected to have good relations with Clinton ; a mutual friend , William Phillips , reported Cornwallis to be " very happy to think he shall serve under an old friend and a man he has so good an opinion of . " 
 These forces then shifted south and participated in the first Siege of Charleston in June 1776 . Cornwallis was landed with Clinton 's troops on Long Island , where they were unable to cross the deep channel separating the island from Sullivan 's Island , where the principal colonial defenses were located . The colonists brought artillery up to oppose any attempted crossing , and the landing was a failure , as was the naval cannonade of Fort Sullivan . 
 = = = New York campaign = = = 
 After the failure in South Carolina , Clinton and Cornwallis transported their troops north to serve under William Howe in the campaign for New York City . In the Battle of Long Island , Cornwallis led the reserve division that took part in the successful flanking of the American position on Gowanus Heights . Cornwallis 's role in the following weeks was minor ; his command was not directly involved in the battles that drove George Washington across the Hudson River and into New Jersey . At the fall of Fort Washington , Cornwallis 's troops sealed one of the last escape routes . General Howe then gave Cornwallis his first chance at an independent command , assigning him to capture Fort Lee across the river from Fort Washington . The Americans occupying that fortification were led by Nathanael Greene , who would later face Cornwallis in the south , and only barely made their escape . Cornwallis 's prizes in the bloodless seizure of the fort included tents , guns , and other military supplies . Washington ended up withdrawing all the way across the Delaware River into Pennsylvania , with Cornwallis in pursuit until his force reached New Brunswick . His troops were exhausted from the chase , and his orders from Howe were to go no further . Cornwallis , who was criticized for disobeying or disregarding Clinton 's orders in later campaigns , observed that he would have disobeyed Howe 's orders if he believed further pursuit would have gained material advantage for the British . Howe joined him on December 6 , and led the pursuit to the Delaware with Cornwallis in the van . In his orders of December 14 , Howe recognized the successful close of the campaign " much to the honor of his lordship and the officers and soldiers under his command . " 
 = = = Trenton and Princeton = = = 
 After the New York City campaign and the subsequent occupation of New Jersey by the British army , Cornwallis applied for leave to return home . He was preparing to sail from New York when orders arrived cancelling his leave . Washington 's successful surprise attack on Trenton on the morning of December 26 demanded a response , and Howe ordered Cornwallis back to New Jersey to deal with Washington . 
 Cornwallis rode into New Jersey on New Year 's Day 1777 and gathered together the scattered British and German garrisons at Princeton , where an army of 8 @,@ 000 came together . Leaving 3 @,@ 000 men in posts at Princeton and Maidenhead , Cornwallis advanced with the remaining 5 @,@ 000 down the main road to Trenton early on January 2 , where Washington had established a strong position on the south side of the Assunpink Creek . He rejected advice from the Hessian Colonel Carl von Donop , who proposed a two @-@ column approach that would turn Washington 's right flank . 
 After a running series of skirmishes designed to delay the British march , Cornwallis finally reached Trenton and came upon Washington 's position around sunset . In the battle that followed , Cornwallis 's forces made three attempts to either cross bridges or ford the creek ; all were successfully repulsed . Rather than attempt a nighttime assault across unknown terrain against Washington 's position , Cornwallis ordered his troops to camp , noting that he could " bag the fox " in the morning . During the night , however , Washington 's forces slipped around his , and successfully attacked the British outpost at Princeton . Although the Continental Army 's disengagement was due in large part to Washington 's use of deception , including the maintenance of blazing campfires and the presence of a small detachment of troops to keep up camp sounds throughout the night , Cornwallis also neglected to send out sufficient patrols to monitor Washington 's activities . When the disappearance of Washington 's army was discovered in the morning , Cornwallis immediately gave chase , but his troops only began to arrive two hours after the Princeton troops surrendered . Washington , his forces tired out after the night march and battle , moved north toward Morristown , while Cornwallis returned to New Brunswick , where the large base had been left garrisoned by a single regiment , and included the British <unk> . 
 Cornwallis remained in New Jersey through the winter , where an ongoing series of skirmishes kept the German and British forces under his command constantly on edge . Persistent attacks on Cornwallis 's own regiment , the 33rd , prompted him to plan a significant retaliatory attack . In early spring 1777 , Cornwallis surprised Benjamin Lincoln 's garrison at Bound Brook on April 13 , very nearly capturing Lincoln . In June , General Howe ordered a movement in force into New Jersey apparently in an attempt to draw Washington into battle from a strong position in the Watchung Mountains . This move failed , although Cornwallis very nearly cut off a portion of Washington 's army in the June 26 Battle of Short Hills . These engagements had no long @-@ term impact , and Howe withdrew is forces onto naval transports for an expedition to capture Philadelphia . 
 = = = Philadelphia campaign = = = 
 General Howe hoped that capturing Philadelphia , the rebel capital , would end the war at a stroke . Cornwallis was given command of the army 's light infantry in the campaign , which got underway when the army disembarked at Head of Elk ( now Elkton , Maryland ) on 25 August 1777 . Advance units of Cornwallis 's division were involved in the Battle of Cooch 's Bridge on 3 September , as the army began its march northward . At the Battle of Brandywine on 11 September , Howe and Cornwallis led the flanking movement that ultimately forced the Americans from their position . Cornwallis also played an important role in the Battle of Germantown on 4 October , bringing up reinforcements late in the battle . When Howe sought to gain control over the Delaware River approaches to Philadelphia , Cornwallis was sent into New Jersey in November to secure Fort Mercer after a failed Hessian assault . The Americans abandoned the fort as his column approached . General Howe then sent Cornwallis to probe Washington 's position at White Marsh in December ; these movements resulted in a series of inconclusive skirmishes . When the army entered winter quarters in Philadelphia , Cornwallis took his long @-@ delayed leave , sailing for England on 13 December . In addition to spending several months with his devoted wife , he informed the government of affairs in the colonies and visited the families of his colleagues . He sailed from England on 21 April 1778 , and arrived in Philadelphia in early June , after a crossing that was much more pleasant than his first in 1776 . 
 During Cornwallis 's absence , control of the British forces had passed to Henry Clinton on the resignation of General Howe ; as a consequence , Cornwallis was now second in command in North America . After the surrender of John Burgoyne 's army at Saratoga and the entry of France into the war , the British decided to withdraw from Philadelphia to concentrate defenses in New York against the French threat . Cornwallis commanded the rearguard during the overland march from Philadelphia to New York City and played an important role in the Battle of Monmouth on 28 June 1778 . After a surprise attack on the British rearguard , Cornwallis launched a counter @-@ attack which checked the American advance . However , when he then led elite units against an entrenched Continental Army position , it refused to budge , and Cornwallis was forced to withdraw with heavy casualties . Even though Clinton commended Cornwallis for his performance at Monmouth , he eventually came to blame the earl for failing to win the day . 
 After returning to New York , Cornwallis applied to Clinton for leave to return to England , where his wife was ill . Clinton , believing Cornwallis was well positioned to influence the political leadership to gain additional troops for the war effort , granted the leave , and Cornwallis returned to England in December 1778 . Although he spent some time pleading Clinton 's case , his wife 's illness distracted him . Finding her in " a very weak state indeed " , he stayed with her until she died on February 14 , 1779 . Cornwallis was devastated by the loss , reporting that her death had " effectually destroyed all my hopes of happiness in this world . " He eventually decided to return to service in April 1779 ; in a letter to Clinton he offered to serve either in the southern colonies or the West Indies . 
 = = = South Carolina = = = 
 Cornwallis returned to America in July 1779 , where he was to play a central role as the lead commander of the British " Southern strategy " . At the end of 1779 , Clinton and Cornwallis transported a large force south and initiated the second siege of Charleston during the spring of 1780 , which resulted in the surrender of the Continental forces under Benjamin Lincoln . Cornwallis and Clinton at first worked closely together during the siege , but their relationship deteriorated . Cracks had formed between the two as early as October 1776 , when Cornwallis reported to General Howe critical comments that Clinton made about Howe 's conduct at White Plains . Clinton also seemed to believe that one reason for Cornwallis 's trips to England was to scheme for an independent command . Cornwallis as second in command held a dormant commission and would replace Clinton as commander in chief . He was aware that Clinton wanted to resign , but he did not want to be saddled with a difficult command situation should that occur . Cornwallis consequently avoided advising Clinton as much as possible , in order to avoid responsibility for poor outcomes . The deterioration in their relationship set the stage for some of their communication difficulties that resulted in Cornwallis 's eventual surrender at Yorktown . In late April , Clinton detached a force under Cornwallis to ensure that the enemy 's communications and supplies were interrupted around the city . Because of this , Cornwallis missed most of the siege bombardment and the surrender in May ; forces directed by Cornwallis and led by Banastre Tarleton completed the encirclement of Charleston , skirmishing with the Americans at Monck 's Corner and <unk> 's Ferry . After the American surrender Clinton ordered Cornwallis to secure South Carolina 's interior , while Clinton organized control of Charleston . Not long after Tarleton defeated Abraham Buford 's Virginia regiments at <unk> , Clinton returned to New York , leaving Cornwallis in command in the south . 
 The task Clinton left Cornwallis with was to , first and foremost , preserve the gains made by taking Charleston , and only then engage in offensive moves . Clinton 's orders gave Cornwallis wide latitude in how to achieve the goal of pacifying both South and North Carolina , after which Clinton expected Cornwallis to move into Virginia . Clinton wrote , " I should wish you to assist in operations which will certainly be carried on in the Chesapeake as soon as we are relieve from our apprehension of a superior fleet and the season will admit ... " However , Clinton provided Cornwallis with a relatively modest force of British , German , and provincial ( Loyalist ) regiments — about 3 @,@ 000 men — with which to accomplish all of this . The forces he was given to accomplish this were limited by the necessity of keeping a large British force in New York under Clinton to shadow Washington . Cornwallis was expected to recruit more Loyalists , who were believed to be more numerous in the southern colonies . 
 After the fall of Charleston , Cornwallis set about establishing a British presence throughout South Carolina . Although he successfully established outposts , keeping communication and supply lines open was an ongoing challenge . Supplies not available locally ( like uniforms , camp gear , arms , and ammunition ) were delivered all too infrequently , and supply ships were frequent targets of local privateers . The weather that summer was rainy , turning the red clay roads of the area into impassable mires . In order to help provide fresh food and forage for his troops , Cornwallis established two commissioners . The first was responsible for administering goods confiscated from Patriots ( he avoided confiscating supplies from Loyalists since he depended on them for manpower and intelligence ) , and the second for administering land that was confiscated . A chronic shortage of hard currency ( another supply only infrequently delivered to Charleston ) made it difficult to purchase supplies from any source , either Patriot or Loyalist . Cornwallis also attempted to reestablish civil authority under British or Loyalist oversight . Although these attempts met with limited success , they were continually undermined by Patriot activity , both political and military , and the indifferent abuses of British and Loyalist forces . The latter took the form of militia companies that harassed Loyalists , small British units , and supply and communication lines . 
 In early August , Cornwallis was alerted by Lord Rawdon , the commander of the British garrison at Camden that a new southern Continental Army , this time under the command of Horatio Gates , was approaching from the north . Cornwallis moved forces to Camden from Charleston , and on August 16 inflicted an embarrassing defeat on Gates at the Battle of Camden . The relatively untried Continentals in Gates ' army were routed , and suffered heavy casualties . This served to keep South Carolina clear of Continental forces , and was a blow to rebel morale . The victory added to his reputation , although the rout of the American rebels had as much to do with the failings of Gates ( whose rapid departure from the battlefield was widely noted ) as it did the skill of Cornwallis . In London , Cornwallis was perceived as a hero , and was viewed by many there as the right man to lead the British forces to victory over the rebels . 
 = = = North Carolina = = = 
 Cornwallis , buoyed by the victory at Camden , then prepared to advance north into North Carolina while militia activity , led by Thomas Sumter and Francis Marion , continued to harass the troops he left in South Carolina . He detached Patrick Ferguson , his inspector of militia , to raise a company of militia in the hills of North and South Carolina and cover his left flank . Ferguson was zealous in execution of this assignment , raising nearly 1 @,@ 100 men . However , he angered many colonists by issuing threats to " lay their country waste with fire and sword " if they continued their opposition , and a Patriot militia arose to oppose him . While Ferguson recruited , Cornwallis moved his army to Charlotte , North Carolina , skirmishing with Patriot forces left there to harass his advance . Ferguson 's Loyalists and the Patriot militia , led by a coalition of commanders , clashed at Kings Mountain in early October , two weeks after Cornwallis arrived in Charlotte . The battle was a disaster : Ferguson was killed , and nearly his entire force was killed or captured . Kings Mountain was only about 35 miles ( 56 km ) from Charlotte , within Cornwallis 's range to assist . The defeat , combined with other failures to raise Loyalist militia and ongoing Patriot activity in South Carolina , prompted Cornwallis to retreat to Winnsboro , South Carolina , where he set up a winter camp . Attempts to capture either Marion or Sumter were repeatedly frustrated . To reinforce his army , he ordered Major General Alexander Leslie , stationed at Portsmouth , Virginia , to abandon that outpost and join him in South Carolina . 
 The British camp at Winnsboro was not particularly comfortable , and the men were often sick , living in crude accommodations not unlike those that Washington 's men had erected at Valley Forge in 1777 . The army suffered from a general lack of supplies , but wagons and horses were in particularly short supply , and the earl discovered that his quartermasters were profiteering on the provisioning of those items . The methods by which horses were acquired also served to alienate their Loyalist friends , since the quartermasters were sometimes indiscriminate , seizing horses from Patriots and Loyalists alike . His supply lines were also continually harassed , particularly by Francis Marion . In November he ordered Tarleton out to capture Marion ; the two commanders successfully maneuvered themselves out of <unk> laid by the other . Tarleton eventually returned to Cornwallis , reporting that Marion 's force had been broken up ; several days later , Marion resumed his guerrilla war . 
 The arrival in North Carolina of a new Continental Army under Major General Nathanael Greene in December meant that the army would need to begin campaigning again . Although General Clinton had dispatched Brigadier General Benedict Arnold to Virginia to threaten Greene 's supply lines , Cornwallis needed to deal with the wily general . Greene had detached Brigadier General Daniel Morgan with a light infantry corps to cause trouble in the highlands of South Carolina . Cornwallis sent Tarleton with a sizable force to chase down Morgan . In a tactically brilliant battle at Hannah 's Cowpens on January 17 , 1781 , Morgan decisively defeated Tarleton , capturing most of his force . News of the battle so upset the earl that he was reported to snap a sword . He wrote that " [ T ] he late affair has almost broke my heart " , and vowed to recover the prisoners Morgan had taken . Immediately giving chase , he was unable to gain on Morgan , who , although burdened with prisoners , was not burdened by a large baggage train . Cornwallis , in a move calculated to force his army to be able to move faster , ordered most of his baggage train destroyed on January 24 . Starting with the personal effects of himself and his officers , he ordered the burning of everything except a minimal set of supplies . Cornwallis 's second in command , Charles O 'Hara , commented that the move " must ever do the greatest honor to Lord Cornwallis ' military reputation " . 
 This move inaugurated what has been called " race to the Dan " . The Dan River separated Greene 's army from his supply bases in Virginia , and Cornwallis wanted to catch Morgan before he and Greene could join forces , or before Greene could reach Virginia . In a rapid series of marches under extremely difficult conditions that tired out both armies , Greene and Morgan reunited their forces , and Greene made it across the flood @-@ swollen Dan on February 13 . Cornwallis decided to halt the pursuit , having effectively driven the Continentals from North Carolina , and returned to Hillsboro , where he again attempted to raise Loyalist militia . 
 After resting his troops , General Greene recrossed the Dan and returned to North Carolina . He and Cornwallis then engaged in a military dance of sorts , where Cornwallis tried to bring Greene to battle , while Greene , awaiting the arrival of more troops , sought to avoid it . Cornwallis 's force was also constantly suffering food shortages , and the earl ensured that officers and soldiers shared equally in the suffering . Cornwallis was unable to intercept the arriving reinforcements , and learned that Greene had taken up a position at Guilford Courthouse on March 14 , apparently ready to do battle . In the ensuing battle the next day , Cornwallis was victorious , but at significant cost . Greene 's army had numbered over 4 @,@ 000 men , while Cornwallis 's was only about 2 @,@ 000 . The British successfully pushed the Americans back , but Cornwallis was several times in personal danger , and he was forced to commit his reserves early in the battle . With a furious melee going on before him and the outcome of the battle appearing to hang in the balance , Cornwallis made a controversial decision . He ordered his artillery to load with grape shot and fire into the melee , which included men from the elite Brigade of Guards . General O 'Hara protested the move , but Cornwallis said " This is a necessary evil which we must endure , to arrest the impending destruction . " A final charge then broke the Americans , who disengaged , leaving their artillery on the field . Although Cornwallis had won the battle , he had lost a quarter of his army , and the survivors were exhausted . 
 Cornwallis , his forces reduced by the seemingly endless campaign , then moved to Wilmington on the coast to resupply . Greene , whose army was still intact after the loss at Guilford Courthouse , crossed into South Carolina , where over the course of several months regained control over most of the state . 
 Cornwallis received dispatches in Wilmington informing him that another British army under Generals Phillips and Arnold had been sent to Virginia . He finally came to the conclusion that , in spite of orders that limited him to the Carolinas , he would best serve the British cause by going to Virginia to join his army with that of Phillips and Arnold . Writing after the campaign , he explained that he did not feel he could effectively support Lord Rawdon , who he had left in command in South Carolina , and that he would be unable to gain control of North Carolina until Virginia had been pacified . Since he had not received instructions from Clinton in some time , he wrote the general a letter specifically requesting direction : " I am very anxious to receive your Excellency 's commands , being as yet totally in the dark as to the intended operations of the summer . I cannot help expressing my wishes that the <unk> may become the seat of war [ ... ] North Carolina [ ... ] is the most difficult of provinces to attack . " He also wrote to Lord Germain arguing the case for operations in Virginia . 
 = = = Virginia campaign = = = 
 Cornwallis marched from Wilmington on April 25 , sending orders to Phillips to meet him at Petersburg , Virginia . On his arrival at Petersburg on May 20 , he learned that Phillips , an old friend of his , had died a week earlier of a fever . With his arrival and that of fresh troops from New York , the army that came under his command numbered about 7 @,@ 200 . It was opposed by a Continental Army contingent currently at Richmond under the command of the Marquis de Lafayette . Lafayette 's force numbered 3 @,@ 000 , of which about two thirds were militia . He was also expecting to be reinforced soon by additional Continental Army troops from Pennsylvania led by Brigadier General Anthony Wayne . 
 = = = = Chasing Lafayette = = = = 
 Cornwallis , in the absence of instructions from Clinton , sought to execute the orders Clinton had given Phillips . These were to establish a naval station and to engage in raids against economic and military targets , and did not include any organized scheme of offense . Sending General Arnold , who complained of gout , back to New York , he set out in pursuit of the marquis on May 27 . He also sent a letter to Clinton , outlining his preference for Yorktown over Portsmouth as the site of a naval station . 
 Lafayette , aware that he was not strong enough to oppose Cornwallis , fell back rapidly toward his supply base at Fredericksburg . When Cornwallis reached Hanover Court House he stopped the chase , and instead detached Tarleton and John Graves Simcoe on two separate raiding expeditions . Tarleton he sent to raid Charlottesville , where the Virginia legislature was meeting , while he sent Simcoe to Point of Fork , where Baron von Steuben had a supply depot . Both expeditions were qualified successes ; Tarleton very nearly captured Virginia governor Thomas Jefferson at his home of Monticello , while Simcoe managed to destroy a significant cache of supplies despite being outnumbered by von Steuben 's force . While these raids went on , Lafayette and Wayne joined forces , and Lafayette was further reinforced by the arrival of about 600 experienced militia a few days later . 
 Cornwallis began to slowly move east toward Williamsburg , practically ignoring Lafayette . He periodically detached Simcoe or Tarleton on foraging and raiding expeditions as he went , and his main army reached Williamsburg on June 25 . Lafayette , buoyed by his reinforcements , followed the earl , and began sending out detachments of his own light troops to bring at least part of the British army to battle . Learning that Simcoe was foraging behind the main army , Lafayette sent out 600 men to track him down before he could rejoin Cornwallis . These two forces clashed on June 26 not far from Williamsburg , and Cornwallis escorted out reinforcements to cover Simcoe 's retreat . 
 = = = = Confusing orders = = = = 
 At Williamsburg , Cornwallis received several letters from Clinton . Clinton was upset that Cornwallis had moved into Virginia , and ordered him to establish a suitable fortified point . He also ordered him to return any troops he could spare to New York . ( This request , written in mid @-@ June , reflected concern over the movements of the French army from Newport , Rhode Island to White Plains , New York , and intelligence that General Washington was considering an attack on New York City . ) Cornwallis reconnoitered Yorktown , and found it to be inadequate . He informed Clinton that he would move to Portsmouth , embark troops there for Clinton 's use , and assess whether Portsmouth was a more suitable location for a naval station . 
 Cornwallis accordingly began moving his army toward Portsmouth . This necessitated crossing the wide James River at Jamestown , a move the earl realized would give Lafayette an opportunity to attack . He decided to lay a trap for the marquis , who had come to the same conclusion when he noticed Cornwallis heading for the ferry . Lafayette 's advance force , led by General Wayne , walked into the trap , and only just escaped it , suffering 150 casualties . 
 On July 8 Cornwallis received orders from Clinton directing the troops he was planning to embark for a potential operation against Philadelphia . Upon his arrival at Suffolk he received further dispatches from Clinton , including some that predated others he had already received . Cornwallis decided to proceed with the embarkation of troops for Philadelphia . By July 20 , some of these troops had boarded their transports when fresh orders arrived countermanding those for the Philadelphia expedition . He was now ordered to , if possible , recall any embarked troops , and instead do nothing beyond establishing a fortified naval station . He was " at full liberty to detain all the Troops now in Chesapeake " for the purpose . It proved a fateful decision on Clinton 's part , since the need to build and protect the new anchorage robbed Cornwallis of any freedom of manoeuvre . This was doubly unfortunate for as Cornwallis pointed out to his superior , the open bays and rivers of the Chesapeake , meant that any base there would " always be exposed to sudden French attack . " Nevertheless , Cornwallis , after analysing Portsmouth and several other options , dutifully chose Yorktown and Gloucester Point ( across the York River from Yorktown ) as the best of the choices for the station . On August 2 , he disembarked his army at Yorktown , and began fortifying the area . 
 = = = = Trapped = = = = 
 While Cornwallis fortified , forces from the West Indies and the allied camp outside New York were preparing to converge on his position . With the arrival of the French fleet under the Comte de Grasse at the end of August , and the arrival of General Washington 's combined French @-@ American army by late September , Cornwallis was trapped . After the Royal Navy fleet under Admiral Thomas Graves was defeated by the French at the 5 September Battle of the Chesapeake , and the French siege train arrived from Newport , his position became untenable . 
 On September 6 , General Clinton wrote a letter to Cornwallis , telling him to expect reinforcements . Received by Cornwallis on September 14 , this letter may have been instrumental in the decision by Cornwallis to remain at Yorktown and not try to fight his way out , despite the urging of Banastre Tarleton to break out against the comparatively weak Lafayette . The British military leadership in New York held a council on September 17 in which they agreed that Cornwallis could not be reinforced until they had regained control of the Chesapeake . Historian Richard Ketchum describes the decision of the council as leaving Cornwallis " dangling in the wind . " One day earlier , Cornwallis wrote a desperate plea for help : " I am of the opinion that you can do me no effectual service but by coming directly to this place . " Before dispatching the letter on the 17th , Cornwallis added , " If you cannot relieve me very soon , you must prepare to hear the worst " . 
 The siege formally got underway on September 28 . Despite a late attempt by Cornwallis to escape via Gloucester Point , the siege lines closed in on his positions and the allied cannons wrought havoc in the British camps , and on October 17 he opened negotiations to surrender . On that very day , the British fleet again sailed from New York , carrying 6 @,@ 000 troops . Still outnumbered by the French fleet , they eventually turned back . A French naval officer , noting the British fleet 's departure on October 29 , wrote , " They were too late . The fowl had been eaten . " Apparently not wanting to face Washington , Cornwallis claimed to be ill on October 19 , the day of the surrender , and sent Brigadier General O 'Hara in his place to formally surrender his sword . Washington had his second @-@ in @-@ command , Benjamin Lincoln , accept Cornwallis 's sword . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Cornwallis returned to Britain with General Arnold , and they were cheered when they landed in England on January 21 , 1782 . In 1782 Henry Laurens , a representative to the Continental Congress , was released from the Tower of London in exchange for a promise to effect the release of Cornwallis from his parole . Laurens was unsuccessful in this , and Cornwallis was not formally freed until a preliminary peace was agreed in 1783 . His tactics in America , especially during the southern campaign , were a frequent subject of criticism by his political enemies in London , especially General Clinton , who sought to blame Cornwallis for the failures . His dispute with Clinton was particularly public ; both men published works critical of the other , and much of their correspondence in 1781 was made public as a result . However Cornwallis retained the confidence of King George III and the British government . 
 = = Later career = = 
 In August 1785 Cornwallis attended manoeuvres in Prussia along with the Duke of York where they encountered Frederick the Great and Cornwallis 's Virginia opponent , the marquis de Lafayette . In 1786 he was appointed to be Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of British India and Governor of the Presidency of Fort William , also known as the Bengal Presidency . He served in these posts with distinction , enacting administrative reforms in the British East India Company , and made changes to judicial , civil , and revenue administration in the company 's territories that had significant long @-@ term consequences . He returned to England in 1794 , worn out from the difficult military campaigns of the Third Anglo @-@ Mysore War , in which he led the first major British defeat of Tipu Sultan . 
 After holding administrative posts in London , he was despatched to the Kingdom of Ireland in June 1798 after the Irish Rebellion broke out . In addition to mopping up most of the remnants of the rebellion , Cornwallis was instrumental in convincing the Irish Parliament to pass the Act of Union ( 1800 ) . This was a critical step in uniting the British and Irish crowns , creating the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland . Cornwallis resigned his posts in Ireland in 1801 after King George refused to support Catholic emancipation . 
 The king then sent Cornwallis to finalize a peace agreement with Napoleon , and signed the Treaty of Amiens in March 1802 on behalf of the United Kingdom . In 1805 Cornwallis was again appointed to India . He died not long after his arrival , in October 1805 . He is buried in Ghazipur , the place where he died . 
 = Myrmecia ( ant ) = 
 Myrmecia is a genus of ants first established by Danish zoologist Johan Christian Fabricius in 1804 . The genus is a member of the subfamily Myrmeciinae of the family Formicidae . Myrmecia is a large genus of ants , comprising at least 93 species that are found throughout Australia and its coastal islands , while a single species is only known from New Caledonia . One species has been introduced out of its natural distribution and was found in New Zealand in 1940 , but the ant was last seen in 1981 . These ants are commonly known as " bulldog ants " or " jack jumper " ants , and are also associated with many other common names . They are characterised by their extreme aggressiveness , ferocity , and painful stings . Some species are known for the jumping behaviour they exhibit when agitated . 
 Species of this genus are also characterised by their elongated mandibles and large compound eyes that provide excellent vision . They vary in colour and size , ranging from 8 to 40 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 31 to 1 @.@ 57 in ) . Although workers and queens are hard to distinguish from each other due to their similar appearance , males are identifiable by their perceptibly smaller mandibles . Almost all Myrmecia species are monomorphic , with little variation among workers of a given species . Some queens are ergatoid and have no wings , while others have either stubby or completely developed wings . Nests are mostly found in soil , but they can be found in rotten wood and under rocks . One species does not nest in the ground at all ; its colonies can only be found in trees . 
 A queen will mate with one or more males , and during colony foundation she will hunt for food until the brood have fully developed . The life cycle of the ant from egg to adult takes several months . Myrmecia workers exhibit greater longevity in comparison to other ants , and workers are also gamergates , that are able to reproduce with male ants . Myrmecia is one of the most primitive group of ants on earth , exhibiting differentiated behaviours from other ants . Workers are solitary hunters and do not lead other workers to food . Adults are omnivores that feed on sweet substances , but the larvae are carnivores that feed on captured prey . Very few predators eat these ants due to their sting , but their larvae are often consumed by blindsnakes and <unk> , and a number of parasites infect both adults and brood . Some species are also effective pollinators . 
 Myrmecia stings are very potent , and the venoms from these ants are among the most toxic in the insect world . In Tasmania , 3 % of the human population are allergic to the venom of M. pilosula and can suffer life @-@ threatening anaphylactic reactions if stung ; many human deaths have been recorded . People prone to severe allergic reactions can be treated with allergen immunotherapy ( desensitisation ) . 
 = = Etymology and common names = = 
 The generic name Myrmecia derives from Greek word <unk> ( + <unk> ) , meaning " ant " . In Western Australia , the Australian Aborigines called these ants <unk> or <unk> , meaning " lion @-@ ant " . 
 Ants of this genus are popularly known as bulldog ants , bull ants or jack jumper ants . This is due to their ferocity and the way they hang off their victims using their mandibles , and also due to the jumping behaviour displayed by some species . Other common names include inch ants , sergeant ants and soldier ants . The jack jumper ant and other members of the Myrmecia pilosula species group are commonly known as " black jumpers " , " hopper ants " , " jumper ants " , " jumping ants " , " jumping jacks " and " skipper ants " . 
 = = Taxonomy and evolution = = 
 Genetic evidence suggests that Myrmecia diverged from related groups approximately 100 million years ago . The subfamily Myrmeciinae to which Myrmecia belongs , is believed to have been found in the fossil record of 110 million years ago . However , one study suggests that the age of the most recent common ancestor for Myrmecia and Nothomyrmecia is 74 million years ago , and the subfamily is possibly younger than previously thought . Ants of the extinct genus Archimyrmex may possibly be the ancestor of Myrmecia . In the Evans ' vespoid scala , Myrmecia and other primitive ant genera such as Amblyopone and Nothomyrmecia exhibit behaviour which is similar to a clade of soil @-@ dwelling families of vespoid wasps . Four species groups form a paraphyletic assemblage while five species groups form a monophyletic assemblage . The following cladogram shows the phylogenetic relationships within Myrmecia : 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 Myrmecia was first established by Danish zoologist Johan Christian Fabricius in his 1804 publication Systema <unk> , in which seven species from the genus Formica were placed into the genus along with the description of four new species . Myrmecia has been classified into numerous families and subfamilies ; in 1858 British entomologist Frederick Smith placed it in the family <unk> , subfamily Myrmicidae . It was placed in the subfamily Ponerinae by Austrian entomologist Gustav Mayr in 1862 . This classification was short @-@ lived , as Mayr reclassified the genus into the subfamily Myrmicinae three years later . In 1877 , Italian entomologist Carlo Emery classified the genus into the newly established subfamily <unk> , family Myrmicidae . Smith , who had originally established Myrmicidae as a family in 1851 , reclassified it as a subfamily in 1858 . He would again treat it as a family in 1871 . Swiss myrmecologist Auguste Forel initially treated <unk> as a subfamily and classified Myrmecia as one of its constituent genera , but later placed it in Ponerinae . William H. <unk> placed the genus in the subfamily Myrmeciinae in 1905 , but it was later placed back in Ponerinae in 1910 by American entomologist William Morton Wheeler . In 1954 , Myrmecia was placed into Myrmeciinae ; this would be the last time the genus would be placed into a different ant subfamily . 
 In 1911 Emery classified the subgenera Myrmecia , <unk> and Promyrmecia , based on the shape of the mandibles . Wheeler established the subgenus Halmamyrmecia , and the ants placed in it were characterised by their jumping behaviour . The taxon Wheeler described was not referred to in his later publications , and the genera Halmamyrmecia and <unk> were synonymised by John Clark . At the same time , Clark reclassified the subgenus Promyrmecia as a full genus . He revised the whole subfamily Myrmeciinae in 1951 , recognising 118 species and subspecies in Myrmecia and Promyrmecia ; five species groups were assigned to Myrmecia and eight species groups to Promyrmecia . This revision was rejected by entomologist William Brown due to the lack of morphological evidence that would make the two genera distinct from each other . Due to this , Brown would classify Promyrmecia as a synonym of Myrmecia in 1953 . Clark 's revision was the last major taxonomic study on the genus before 1991 , and only a single species was described in the intervening years . In 2015 , four new Myrmecia ants were described by Robert Taylor , all exclusive to Australia . Currently , 94 species are described in the genus , but as many as 130 species may exist . 
 Under the present classification , Myrmecia is the only extant genus in the tribe <unk> , subfamily Myrmeciinae . It is a member of the family Formicidae , belonging to the order Hymenoptera . The type species for the genus is M. gulosa , discovered by Joseph Banks in 1770 during his expedition with James Cook on the HMS Endeavour . M. gulosa is among the earliest Australian insects to be described , and the specimen Banks collected is housed in the Joseph Banks Collection in the Natural History Museum in London . M. gulosa was described by Fabricius in 1775 under the name Formica gulosa and later designated as the type species of Myrmecia in 1840 . 
 = = = Genetics = = = 
 The number of chromosomes per individual varies from one to over 70 among the species in the genus . The genome of M. pilosula is contained on a single pair of chromosomes ( males have just one chromosome , as they are haploid ) . This is the lowest number possible for any animal , and workers of this species are homologous . Like M. pilosula , M. croslandi also contains a single chromosome . While these ants only have a single chromosome , M. pyriformis contains 41 chromosomes while M. brevinoda contains 42 . The chromosome count for M. <unk> and M. fulvipes is 2 and 12 , respectively . The genus Myrmecia retains many traits that are considered basal for all ants ( i.e. workers foraging alone and relying on visual cues ) . 
 = = = Species groups = = = 
 Myrmecia contains a total of nine species groups . Originally , seven species groups were established in 1911 , but this was raised to 13 in 1951 ; Promyrmecia had a total of eight while Myrmecia only had five . M. maxima does not appear to be in a species group , as no type specimen is available . 
 = = Description = = 
 Myrmecia ants are easily noticeable , due to their large mandibles , and large compound eyes that provide excellent vision , and a powerful sting that they use to kill prey . Each of their eyes contains 3 @,@ 000 facets , making them the second largest in the ant world . Size varies widely , ranging from 8 to 40 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 31 to 1 @.@ 57 in ) in length . The largest Myrmecia species is M. brevinoda , with workers measuring 37 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) ; M. brevinoda workers are also the largest in the world . Almost all species are monomorphic , but M. brevinoda is the only known species where polymorphism exists . It is well known that two worker sub @-@ castes exist , but this does not distinguish them as two different polymorphic forms . This may be due to the lack of food during winter and the fact they could be incipient colonies . The division of labour is based on the size of ant , rather than its age , with the larger workers foraging for food or keeping guard outside the nest while the smaller workers tend to the brood . 
 Their colouration is variable ; black combined with red and yellow is a common pattern , and many species have golden @-@ coloured pubescence ( hair ) . Many other species are brightly coloured , which warns predators to avoid them . The <unk> ant Camponotus <unk> is similar in appearance to M. fulvipes , and data suggests C. <unk> is a <unk> mimic of M. fulvipes . The number of malpighian tubules differs between castes ; in M. dispar , males have 16 tubules , queens range from 23 to 26 , and workers have 21 to 29 . 
 Worker ants are usually the same size as each other , although this is not true for some species ; worker ants of M. brevinoda , for example , vary in length from 13 to 37 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 51 to 1 @.@ 46 in ) . The mandibles of the workers are long with a number of teeth , and the clypeus is short . The antennae consist of 12 segments and the eyes are large and convex . Based on a study on the antennal sensory of M. pyriformis , the antennal sensilla is known to have eight types of sensilla . Large ocelli is always present . 
 Queens are usually larger than the workers , but are similar in colour and body shape . The head , node and postpetiole are broader in the queen , and the mandibles are shorter and also broad . Myrmecia queens are unique in that particular species either have fully winged queens , queens with poorly developed wings , or queens without any wings . For example , M. <unk> and M. <unk> queens are ergatoid , meaning that they are wingless . Completely excavated nests showed no evidence of any winged queen residing within them . Some species have queens which are <unk> , meaning they are either wingless or only have rudiments of wings ; the queens can be well developed with or without these wing buds . M. nigrocincta and M. <unk> are " brachypterous " , where queens have small and rudimentary wings which render the queen flightless . <unk> queens with developed wings and thorax are considered rare . In some species , such as M. brevinoda and M. pilosula , there are three forms of queens , with the <unk> queens being the most recognisable . 
 Males are easy to identify due to their perceptibly broad and smaller mandibles . Their antennae consist of 13 segments , and are almost the same length as the ants ' bodies . <unk> ( an ant that exhibits both male and worker characteristics ) males are known ; in 1985 , a male M. gulosa was collected before it hatched from its cocoon , and it had a long but excessively curved left mandible while the other mandible was small . On the right side of its body , it was structurally male , but the left side appeared female . The head was also longer on the female side , its colour was darker , and the legs and prothorax were smaller on the male side . Male genitalia are retracted into a genital cavity that is located in the posterior end of the gaster . The sperm is structurally the same to other animal sperm , forming an oval head with a long tail . 
 Among the largest larvae examined were those of M. simillima , reaching lengths of 35 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) . The pupae are enclosed in dark cocoons . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Almost all species in the genus Myrmecia are found in Australia and its coastal islands . M. apicalis is the only species not native to Australia , and is only found in the Isle of Pines , New Caledonia . Only one ant has ever established nests outside its native range ; M. brevinoda was first discovered in New Zealand in 1940 , and the ant was recorded in Devonport in 1948 , 1965 and 1981 , where a single nest was destroyed . Sources suggest the ant was introduced to New Zealand through human activity ; they were found inside a wooden crate brought from Australia . While no eradication attempt was made by the New Zealand government , the ant has not been found in the country since 1981 and is presumed to have been eradicated . 
 Ants of this genus prefer to inhabit grasslands , forests , heath , urban areas and woodland . Nests are found in Callitris forest , dry marri forest , Eucalyptus woodland and forests , mallee scrub , in paddocks , riparian woodland , and wet and dry sclerophyll forests . They also live in dry sandplains , and coastal plain . When a queen establishes a new colony , the nest is at first quite simple structurally . The nest gradually expands as the colony grows larger . Nests can be found in debris , decaying tree stumps , rotten logs , rocks , sand , and soil , and under stones . While most species nest underground , M. <unk> is an arboreal nesting species found on epiphytic ferns of the genus <unk> . Two types of nests have been described for this genus : a simple nest with a noticeable shaft inside , and a complex structure surrounded by a mound . Some species construct dome @-@ shaped mounds containing a single entrance , but some nests have numerous holes that are constantly used and can extend several metres underground . Sometimes , these mounds can be half of a metre ( 20 in ) high . Workers decorate these nests with a variety of items , including charcoal , leaves , plant fragments , pebbles and twigs . Some ants utilise the warmth by decorating their nests with dry materials that heat quickly , providing the nest with solar energy traps . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 = = = Foraging = = = 
 The genus Myrmecia is among the most primitive of all known living ants , and ants of the genus are considered specialist predators . Unlike most ants , workers are solitary hunters , and do not lay pheromone trails ; nor do they recruit others to food . Tandem running does not occur , and workers carrying other workers as a method of transportation is rare or awkwardly executed . Although Myrmecia is not known to lay pheromone trails to food , M. gulosa is capable of inducing territorial alarm using pheromones while M. pilosula can attack en masse , suggesting these ants can also induce alarm pheromones . M. gulosa induces territorial alarm behaviour using pheromones from three sources ; an alerting substance from the rectal sac , a pheromone found in the Dufour 's gland , and an attack pheromone from the mandibular gland . Despite Myrmecia ants being among the most primitive ants , they exhibit some behaviours considered " advanced " ; adults will sometimes groom each other and the brood , and distinct nest odors exist for each colony . 
 Most species are diurnal , and forage on the ground or onto low vegetation in search of food , but a few are nocturnal and only forage at night . Most Myrmecia ants are active during the warmer months , and are dormant during winter . However , M. pyriformis is a nocturnal species that is active throughout the whole year . M. pyriformis also has a unique foraging schedule ; 65 % of individuals who went out to forage left the nest in 40 – 60 minutes , while 60 % of workers would return to the nest in the same duration of time at dusk . Foraging workers rely on landmarks for navigation back home . If displaced a short distance , they will scan their surroundings , and then rapidly move in the direction of the nest . M. vindex ants carry dead nest @-@ mates out of their nests and place them on refuse piles , a behaviour known as <unk> . 
 = = = Pollination = = = 
 While pollination by ants is somewhat rare , several Myrmecia species have been observed pollinating flowers . For example , the orchid <unk> fimbriata is a <unk> which can only be pollinated by the winged male ant M. urens . Pollination of this orchid usually occurs between April and June during warm afternoons , and may take several days until the short @-@ lived males all die . The flower mimics M. urens queens , and so the males move from flower to flower in an attempt to copulate with it . M. nigrocincta workers have been recorded visiting flowers of Eucalyptus regnans and Senna acclinis , and are considered a potential pollination vector for E. regnans trees . Although Senna acclinis is self @-@ compatible , the inability of M. nigrocincta to appropriately release pollen would restrict its capacity to effect pollination . Foraging M. pilosula workers are regularly observed on the inflorescences of Prasophyllum alpinum ( mostly pollinated by wasps of the family Ichneumonidae ) . Although pollinia are often seen in the ants ' jaw , they have a habit of cleaning their mandibles on the leaves and stems of nectar @-@ rich plants before moving on , preventing pollen exchange . It is unknown whether M. pilosula contributes to pollination . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Despite their ferocity , adults are nectarivores , consuming honeydew ( a sweet , sticky liquid found on leaves , deposited from various insects ) , nectar , and other sweet substances . The larvae , however , are carnivorous . After they reach a certain size , they are fed insects that foragers capture and kill . The workers also regurgitate food for other ants to consume . Young ants are rarely fed food regurgitated by adults . Adult workers prey on a variety of insects and arthropods , such as beetles , caterpillars , earwigs , <unk> fusca moths , Perga saw flies , and spiders . Other prey include invertebrates such as bees , cockroaches , crickets , wasps and other ants ; in particular , workers prey on <unk> ants ( a subgenus of Crematogaster ) and Camponotus , although this is risky since these ants are able to call for help through chemical signals . <unk> , earthworms , scale insects , frogs , lizards , grass seeds , possum feces and kangaroo feces are also collected as food . Flies such as the housefly and <unk> are consumed . Some species , such as M. pilosula , will only attack small fly species and ignore larger ones . Nests of the social spider Delena <unk> are often invaded by M. pyriformis ants , and nests once housing these spiders are filled with debris such as twigs and leaves by the workers , rendering them useless . These " scorched earth " tactics prevent the spiders competing with the ants . M. gulosa attacks Christmas beetles , but workers later bury them . 
 Myrmecia is one of the very few genera where the workers lay trophic eggs , or infertile eggs laid as food for viable offspring . Workers laying trophic eggs have only been reported in two species ; these species are M. forceps and M. gulosa . Depending on the species , colonies specialise in trophallaxis ; queens and larvae eat eggs that are laid by worker individuals , but the workers do not feed on eggs . Neither adults nor larvae consume food during winter , but cannibalism among larvae is known to occur throughout the year . The larvae only cannibalise each other ; this is most likely to happen when no dead insects are available . 
 = = = Predators , parasites and associations = = = 
 Myrmecia ants deter many potential predators due to their sting . The <unk> Ramphotyphlops nigrescens consumes the larvae and pupae of Myrmecia , while avoiding the potent sting of the adults , which it is vulnerable to . The short @-@ beaked echidna ( Tachyglossus aculeatus ) also eats the eggs and larvae . Nymphs of the assassin bug species <unk> lemur lure these ants to themselves by trying to make the ant sting them , by waving its hind legs around to attract a potential prey item . Body remains of Myrmecia have been found in the stomach contents of the eastern yellow robin ( Eopsaltria australis ) . The Australian magpie ( Cracticus tibicen ) , the black currawong ( Strepera versicolor ) , and the white @-@ winged chough ( Corcorax melanorhamphos ) prey on these ants , but few are successfully taken . 
 The host association between Myrmecia and <unk> wasps began several million years ago ; M. forficata larvae are the host to <unk> <unk> , being the first recorded <unk> parasitoid of an ant , and <unk> <unk> is a parasitoid to M. gulosa pupae . M. pilosula is affected by a gregarines parasite that changes an ants colour from their typical black appearance to brown . This was discovered when brown workers were dissected and found to have <unk> spores , while black workers showed no spores . Another unidentified gregarine parasite is known to infect the larvae of M. pilosula and other Myrmecia species . This gregarine parasite also softens the ant 's cuticle . Other parasites include Beauveria bassiana , Paecilomyces lilacinus , <unk> affinis , <unk> wasps , and various <unk> nematodes . 
 M. hirsuta and M. inquilina are the only known species in this genus that are inquilines and live in other Myrmecia colonies . An M. inquilina queen has been found in an M. vindex colony . Myrmecia is a larval attendant to the butterfly <unk> <unk> ( saltbush blue ) , while some species , particularly M. nigrocincta , enslave other ant species , notably those in the genus <unk> . M. nigriceps ants are able to enter another colony of the same species without being attacked , as they may be unable to recognize alien conspecifics , nor do they try to distinguish nestmates from ants of another colony . <unk> <unk> and M. brevinoda share a form of symbiotic relationship known as <unk> , where one species of ant will live with another and raise their young separately , with M. brevinoda being the host . Solenopsis may sometimes nest in Myrmecia colonies , as a single colony was found to have three or four Solenopsis nests inside . <unk> beetles and rove beetles in the genus <unk> dwell inside colonies and skinks and frogs have also been found living unmolested within Myrmecia nests . <unk> <unk> , for example , has been reported living inside M. regularis colonies . 
 = = = Life cycle = = = 
 Like other ants , Myrmecia ants begin as an egg . If the egg is fertilised , the ant becomes a diploid female ; if not , it becomes a haploid male . They develop through complete metamorphosis , meaning that they pass through larval and pupal stages before emerging as adults . 
 During the process of founding a colony , as many as three to four queens cooperate with each other to find a suitable nesting ground , but after the first generation of workers are born , they fight each other until one queen is left alive . However , occasional colonies are known to have as many as six queens coexisting peacefully in the presence of workers . A queen searches for a suitable nest site to establish her colony , and excavate a small chamber in the soil or under logs and rocks , where she takes care of her young . A queen also hunts for prey instead of staying in her nest , a behaviour known as claustral colony founding . Although queens do provide sufficient amounts of food to feed their larvae , the first generation of workers are " <unk> " ( or minims ) ; smaller than the smallest workers encountered in older developed colonies . Several species do not have any worker caste , and solitary queens will raid a colony , kill the residing queen , and take over the colony . The first generation of workers may take awhile to fully develop into adults ; for example , M. forficata eggs take around three to four months ( 100 days or more ) to fully develop , while other species may take up to eight months . 
 Queens lay around eight eggs , but less than half of these eggs fully develop . Some species , such as M. simillima and M. gulosa lay their eggs singly on the colony floor , while M. pilosula ants may lay eggs in a clump . These clumps have around two to 30 eggs each with no larvae present . With this said , certain Myrmecia species do not lay their eggs singly and will form clumps of eggs instead . The larvae are capable of crawling short distances without the assistance from adult workers , and workers will cover the larvae in dirt to help them spin into a cocoon . If cocoons are isolated from a colony , they are capable of shedding their skin before hatching , allowing themselves to advance to full pigmentation . Sometimes , a newborn can emerge from their pupa without the assistance of other ants . Once these ants are born , they are able to identify distinct tasks , a well known primitive trait . Myrmecia life spans vary in each species , but their longevity is greater than many ant genera : M. nigrocincta and M. pilosula have a life span of one year , while M. nigriceps workers can live up to 2 @.@ 2 years . The oldest recorded worker was a M. vindex , living up to 2 @.@ 6 years . If a colony is deprived of workers , queens are able to revert to colony @-@ founding behaviours until there is a sustainable workforce . A colony may also emigrate to a new nesting spot altogether . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Virgin queens and males appear in colonies during January , before their nuptial flight . 20 females or fewer are found in a single colony , while males are much more common . The nuptial flight begins at different times for each species ; they have been recorded in mid @-@ summer to autumn ( January to early April ) , but there is one case of a nuptial flight occurring from May to July . Ideal conditions for nuptial flight are hot stormy days with windspeeds of 30 km / h ( 18 mi / h ) and temperatures reaching 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) , and elevations of 91 metres ( 300 ft ) . Nuptial flights are rarely recorded due to queens leaving their nest singly , although as many as four queens may leave the nest at the same time . Species are both polygynous and polyandrous , with queens mating with one to ten males . Polygynous and polyandrous societies can occur in a single nest , but particular species are either primarily polygynous or primarily polyandrous . For example , nearly 80 % of tested M. pilosula colonies are polygynous while M. pyriformis colonies are mostly polyandrous . Nuptial flight takes place during the morning and can last until late afternoon . When the alates leave the nest , most species launch themselves into the air from trees and shrubs , although others launch themselves off the ground . Queens discharge a glandular secretion from the tergal gland , which males are strongly attracted to . As many as 1 @,@ 000 alates will gather to mate . A queen was once found to have five or six males attempting to copulate with her . The queen is unable to bear the weight of the large number of males trying to mate with her , and will drop to the ground , with the ants dispersing later on . M. pulchra queens are ergatoid and cannot fly ; the males meet the queen out in an open area away from the nest and mate , and these queens do not return to their nest after mating . 
 Both independent and dependent colony foundation can occur after mating . Isolation by distance ( IBD ) patterns have been recorded with M. pilosula queens , where nests that tend to be closer together were more genetically related to each other in comparison to other nests further away . Independent colony foundation is closely associated with queens which engage in nuptial flight in areas far from their home colony , showing that dependent colony foundation mostly occurs if they mate near their nest . In some cases , queens could seek adoption into alien colonies if there are no suitable areas to find a nest or independent colony foundation cannot be carried out . Other queens could try and return to their home nest after nuptial flight , but they may end up in another nest near the nest they originally came from . In multiple @-@ queen societies , the egg @-@ laying queens are generally unrelated to one another , but one study showed that it is possible for multiple queens in the same colony to be genetically related to each other . Depending on the species , the number of individuals present in a colony can range from 50 to over 2 @,@ 200 individuals . A colony with less than 100 workers is not considered a mature colony . M. dispar colonies have around 15 to 329 ants , M. nigrocincta have over 1 @,@ 000 , M. pyriformis have from 200 to over 1 @,@ 400 and M. gulosa have nearly 1 @,@ 600 . A colony can last for a number of years . Foraging behavior among smaller workers which never usually leave the nest can be a sign of a colony 's impending demise . 
 Workers are known to produce their own eggs , but these eggs are unfertilised and hatch into male ants . There is a chance of workers attacking a particular individual who has successfully produced male offspring due to a change in a workers cuticular hydrocarbon ; cuticular hydrocarbons are believed to play a vital role in the regulation of reproduction . However , this is not always the case . Myrmecia is one of several ant genera which possess gamergate workers , where a female worker is able to reproduce with mature males when the colony is lacking a queen . Myrmecia workers are highly fertile and can successfully mate with males . A colony of M. pyriformis without a queen was collected in 1998 and kept in captivity , during which time the gamergates produced viable workers for three years . Ovarian dissections showed that three workers of this colony mated with males and produced female workers . Queens have bigger ovaries than the workers , with 44 ovarioles while workers have 8 to 14 . <unk> is present in M. gulosa workers , based on eight dissected individuals showing a spermatheca structurally similar to those found in queens . These <unk> did not have any sperm . Why the queen was not replaced is still unknown . 
 = = = Vision = = = 
 While most ants have poor eyesight , Myrmecia ants have excellent vision . This trait is important to them , since Myrmecia primarily relies on visual cues for navigation . These ants are capable of discriminating the distance and size of objects moving nearly a metre away . Winged alates are only active during the day , as they can see better . Members of a colony have different eye structures due to each individual fulfilling different tasks , and nocturnal species have larger ommatidia in comparison to those that are active during the day . <unk> lenses also vary in size ; for example , the diurnal species M. croslandi has a smaller lens in comparison to M. nigriceps and M. pyriformis which have larger lenses . Myrmecia ants have three photoreceptors that can see UV light , meaning they are capable of seeing colours that humans cannot . Their vision is said to be better than some mammals , such as cats , dogs or wallabies . Despite their excellent vision , worker ants of this genus find it difficult to find their nests at night , due to the difficulty of finding the landmarks they use to navigate . They are thus more likely to return to their nests the following morning , walking slowly with long pauses . 
 = = = Sting = = = 
 Myrmecia workers and queens possess a sting , which can be fatal to sensitive human beings . The sting has been described as " sharp in pain with no burning " , and the pain may last for several minutes . In the Starr sting pain scale , a scale which compares the overall pain of hymenopteran stings on a four @-@ point scale , Myrmecia stings were ranked from 2 – 3 in pain , described as " painful " or " sharply and seriously painful " . Unlike in honeybees , the sting lacks barbs , and so the stinger is not left in the area the ant has stung , allowing the ants to sting repeatedly without any harm to themselves . The retractable sting is located in their abdomen , attached to a single venom gland connected by the venom sac , which is where the venom is accumulated . Exocrine glands are known in some species , which produce the venom compounds later used to inject into their victims . Examined workers of larger species have long and very potent stingers , with some stings measuring 6 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 24 in ) . 
 = = Interaction with humans = = 
 Myrmecia is one of the best @-@ known genera of ants . Myrmecia ants usually display defensive behavior only around their nests , and are more timid while foraging . However , most species are extremely aggressive towards intruders ; a few , such as M. <unk> , are timid , and the workers retreat into their nest instead of pursuing the intruder . If a nest is disturbed , a large force of workers rapidly swarm out of their nest to attack and kill the intruder . Some species , particularly those of the M. nigrocincta and M. pilosula species groups , are capable of jumping several inches when they are agitated after their nest has been disturbed ; jumper ants propel their jumps by a sudden extension of its middle and hind legs . M. pyriformis is considered the most dangerous ant in the world by the Guinness World Records . M. inquilina is the only species of this genus that is considered vulnerable by the IUCN , although the conservation status needs updating . 
 Fatalities associated with Myrmecia stings are well known , and have been attested to by multiple sources . In 1931 two adults and an infant girl from New South Wales died from ant stings , possibly from M. pilosula or M. pyriformis . Another fatality was reported in 1963 in Tasmania . Between 1980 and 2000 , there were six recorded deaths , five in Tasmania and one in New South Wales . Four of these deaths were due to M. pilosula , while the remaining two died from a M. pyriformis sting . Half of the victims had known ant @-@ sting allergies , but only one of the victims was carrying adrenaline before being stung . Most victims died within 20 minutes of being stung , but one of the victims died in just five minutes from a M. pyriformis sting . No death has been officially recorded since 2003 , but M. pilosula may have been responsible for the death of a man from Bunbury in 2011 . Prior to the establishment of a desensitisation program , Myrmecia stings caused one fatality every four years . 
 = = = Venom = = = 
 Each Myrmecia species has different venom components , so people who are allergic to ants are advised to stay away from Myrmecia , especially from species they have never encountered before . Based on five species , the median lethal dose ( LD50 ) is 0 @.@ 18 – 0 @.@ 35 mg / kg , making it among the most toxic venoms in the insect world . The toxicity of the venom may have evolved due to the intense predation by animals and birds during the day , since Myrmecia is primarily diurnal . In Tasmania , 2 – 3 % of the human population is allergic to M. pilosula venom . In comparison , only 1 @.@ 6 % people are allergic to the venom of the western honeybee ( Apis mellifera ) , and 0 @.@ 6 % to the venom of the European wasp ( Vespula germanica ) . In a 2011 Australian ant @-@ venom allergy study , the objective of which was to determine what native Australian ants were associated with ant sting anaphylaxis , it was shown that 265 of the 376 participants taking part of the study reacted to the sting of several Myrmecia species . Of these , the majority of patients ( 176 ) reacted to M. pilosula venom and to that of several other species . In Perth , M. <unk> was responsible for most cases of anaphylaxis due to ant stings , while M <unk> and M. ludlowi were responsible for two cases . The green @-@ head ant ( Rhytidoponera metallica ) was the only ant other than Myrmecia species to cause anaphylaxis in patients . Dogs are also at risk of death from Myrmecia ants ; renal failure has been recorded in dogs experiencing mass envenomation , and one dog was euthanised due to its deteriorating health despite treatment . Sensitivity is persistent for many years . <unk> 3 has been identified as a major allergen in M. pilosula venom , while pilosulin 1 and pilosulin 4 are minor allergens . 
 = = = Sting treatment = = = 
 The nature of treatment for a Myrmecia sting depends on the severity of the reaction . If there are no signs of an allergic reaction , an ice pack or commercially available spray are used to relieve the pain . Washing the stung area , <unk> , or the use of antihistamine tablets are other methods to reduce the pain . Indigenous Australians use bush remedies to treat Myrmecia stings , such as rubbing the tips of bracken ferns onto the stung area . <unk> glaucescens is also used to treat stung areas , using juices that are squeezed and rubbed onto the area , which quickly relieves the pain from the sting . 
 Emergency treatment is only needed if a person is showing signs of a severe allergic reaction . Prior to calling for help , it is suggested that a person should be laid down , and their legs elevated . An EpiPen or an <unk> is given to people at risk of anaphylaxis , to use in case they are stung . If someone experiences anaphylactic shock , adrenaline and intravenous infusions are required , and those who suffer cardiac arrest require resuscitation . Desensitisation ( also called allergy immunotherapy ) is offered to those who are susceptible to M. pilosula stings , and the program has shown effectiveness in preventing anaphylaxis . However , the standardisation of M. pilosula venom is not validated , and the program is poorly funded . The Royal Hobart Hospital and the Royal Adelaide Hospital are the only known hospitals to run desensitisation programs . During immunotherapy , patients are given an injection of venom under the skin . The first dose is small , but dosage gradually increases . This sort of immunotherapy is designed to change how the immune system reacts to increased doses of venom entering the body . 
 Before venom immunotherapy , whole body extract immunotherapy was widely used due to its apparent effectiveness , and it was the only immunotherapy used for ant stings . However , fatal failures were reported and this led to scientists to research for alternative methods of desensitisation . Before 1986 allergic reactions were not recorded and there was no study on Myrmecia sting venom ; whole body extracts were later used on patients during the 1990s , but this was found to be ineffective and was subsequently withdrawn . In 2003 , ant venom immunotherapy was shown to be safe and effective against Myrmecia venom . 
 = = = Prevention = = = 
 Myrmecia ants are frequently encountered by humans , so avoiding them is difficult . Wearing closed footwear such as boots and shoes can reduce the risk of getting stung ; these ants are capable of stinging through fabric , however . There is also a risk of being stung while gardening ; most cases of stings occur when someone is gardening and is unaware of the ants ' presence . Eliminating nearby nests or moving to areas with low Myrmecia populations significantly decrease the chances of getting stung . 
 = = = In human culture = = = 
 Due to their large mandibles , Myrmecia ants have been used as surgical sutures to close wounds . The ant is featured on a postage stamp and on an uncirculated coin which are part of the Things That Sting issue by Australia Post , and M. gulosa is the emblem for the Australian Entomological Society . Myrmecia famously appears in the philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer 's major work , The World as Will and Representation , as a paradigmatic example of strife and constant destruction endemic to the " will to live " . 
 But the bulldog @-@ ant of Australia affords us the most extraordinary example of this kind ; for if it is cut in two , a battle begins between the head and the tail . The head seizes the tail in its teeth , and the tail defends itself bravely by stinging the head : the battle may last for half an hour , until they die or are dragged away by other ants . This contest takes place every time the experiment is tried . " 
 Notable Australian poet Diane Fahey wrote a poem about Myrmecia , which is based on Schopenhauer 's description , and a music piece written by German composer <unk> Obermüller was named after the ant . 
 = Mike Scully = 
 Michael " Mike " Scully ( born October 2 , 1956 ) is an American television writer and producer . He is known for his work as executive producer and showrunner of the animated sitcom The Simpsons from 1997 to 2001 . Scully grew up in West Springfield , Massachusetts and long had an interest in writing . He was an underachiever at school and dropped out of college , going on to work in a series of jobs . Eventually , in 1986 , he moved to Los Angeles where he worked as a stand @-@ up comic and wrote for Yakov Smirnoff . 
 Scully went on to write for several television sitcoms before 1993 , when he was hired to write for The Simpsons . There , he wrote twelve episodes , including " Lisa on Ice " and " Team Homer " , and served as showrunner from seasons 9 to 12 . Scully won three Primetime Emmy Awards for his work on the series , with many publications praising his episodes , but others criticizing his tenure as a period of decline in the show 's quality . Scully still works on the show and also co @-@ wrote 2007 's The Simpsons Movie . 
 More recently , Scully co @-@ created The Pitts and Complete Savages as well as working on Everybody Loves Raymond and Parks and Recreation . He co @-@ developed the short @-@ lived animated television version of Napoleon Dynamite . Scully is married to fellow writer Julie Thacker . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Scully was born October 2 , 1956 at Springfield Hospital in Springfield , Massachusetts and grew up in the Merrick section of West Springfield . His father , Richard , was a salesman and owned a dry cleaning business , his mother Geraldine worked for the <unk> Medical Center once Scully and his brothers were old enough to be left at home alone . Scully is of Irish ancestry . 
 As a child he " hoped to be a musician or a hockey player . " At Main Street Elementary School , with the encouragement of his teacher James Doyle , he developed an interest in writing , serving as editor for his school newspaper . He graduated from West Springfield High School in 1974 , having been voted " Most Likely Not to Live Up to Potential " by his classmates , and dropped out of Holyoke Community College after one day , undecided about what he wanted to do with his life . He took up work in the clothing department at Steiger 's department store , as a janitor at the <unk> Medical Center and also as a driving instructor . He commented : " I think if I had actually succeeded at college and gotten a degree in accounting or something , I might have given up too quickly on writing . Having no marketable job skills was a tremendous incentive to keep trying to succeed as a writer . " He realized " there probably wasn 't going to be a career in riding around with my friends listening to Foghat , " so Scully decided he " definitely wanted to break into comedy " even though he " really had no reason to believe [ he ] could succeed . " Regardless , he moved to Los Angeles , California in 1982 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 In California , Scully worked in a tuxedo store . He also got a job writing jokes for comedian Yakov Smirnoff and developed his joke writing skills by performing himself at amateur stand @-@ up comedy nights . He purchased scripts from a variety of half @-@ hour comedy shows , including Taxi , to train himself to write them and had numerous speculative scripts rejected . He started " bouncing around Hollywood working on some of the <unk> sitcoms in history . " He served on the writing staff of The Royal Family , Out of This World , Top of the Heap and What a Country ! , where he did audience warm @-@ up , a role he also performed on Grand . 
 = = = The Simpsons = = = 
 In 1993 , David Mirkin hired Scully to write for The Simpsons , as a replacement for the departing Conan O 'Brien , after reading some of his sample scripts . He began as a writer and producer for the show during its fifth season and wrote the episodes " Lisa 's Rival " , " Two Dozen and One Greyhounds " and " Lisa on Ice " which aired in season six . " Lisa 's Rival " was his first episode ; he wrote the script , but the original concept had been conceived by O 'Brien . Similarly , he wrote the script for " Two Dozen and One Greyhounds " , which was based on an idea by Al Jean and Mike Reiss . " Lisa on Ice " was inspired by Scully 's love of ice hockey and featured many experiences from his childhood , as was " Marge Be Not Proud " ( which he wrote for season seven ) which was based " one of the most traumatic moments " of his life , when he was caught shoplifting aged twelve . He jokingly told Variety that " It 's great to be paid for reliving the horrors of your life . " He also wrote " Team Homer " and " Lisa 's Date with Density " . Scully noted : " I wrote a lot of Lisa 's shows . I have five daughters , so I like Lisa a lot . I like Homer , too . Homer comes very naturally to me : I don 't know if that 's a good or a bad thing . A lot of my favorite episodes are the ones when Homer and Lisa are in conflict with each other ... They 're very human , I think that 's their appeal . " 
 Scully became showrunner of The Simpsons in 1997 , during its ninth season . As showrunner and executive producer , Scully said his aim was to " not wreck the show " , and he headed up the writing staff and oversaw all aspects of the show 's production . During his time as showrunner he was credited with writing or co @-@ writing five episodes : " Treehouse of Horror VIII " ( " The HΩmega Man " segment ) , " Sunday , Cruddy Sunday " , " Beyond Blunderdome " , " Behind the Laughter " and " The Parent Rap " . Scully was popular with the staff members , many of whom praised his organization and management skills . Writer Tom Martin said he was " quite possibly the best boss I 've ever worked for " and " a great manager of people " while Don Payne commented that for Scully " it was really important that we kept decent hours " . Scully served as showrunner until 2001 , during season 12 , making him the first person to run the show for more than two seasons . He returned in season 14 to write and executive produce the episode " How I Spent My Strummer Vacation " , and co @-@ wrote and co @-@ produced The Simpsons Movie in 2007 . 
 Scully 's tenure as showrunner of The Simpsons has been the subject of praise from some of the show 's fans . John Ortved wrote " Scully 's episodes excel when compared to what The Simpsons airs nowadays , but he was the man at the helm when the ship turned towards the iceberg . " The BBC noted " the common consensus is that The Simpsons ' golden era ended after season nine " , while an op @-@ ed in Slate by Chris Suellentrop argued The Simpsons changed from a realistic show about family life into a typical cartoon during Scully 's years : " Under Scully 's tenure , The Simpsons became , well , a cartoon ... [ E ] <unk> that once would have ended with Homer and Marge bicycling into the sunset ( perhaps while Bart gagged in the background ) now end with Homer blowing a tranquilizer dart into Marge 's neck . " The Simpsons under Scully has been negatively labelled as a " gag @-@ heavy , Homer @-@ centric incarnation " by Jon Bonné of MSNBC , while some fans have bemoaned the transformation in Homer 's character during the era , from sweet and sincere to " a boorish , self @-@ aggrandizing oaf " , dubbing him " Jerkass Homer " . 
 Despite this , much of Scully 's work on the show also received critical praise . Scully won five Primetime Emmy Awards for his work on The Simpsons , while Entertainment Weekly cited " How I Spent My Strummer Vacation " as the show 's 22nd best episode . Robert Canning of IGN also gave the episode a positive review , something he also did for " Behind the Laughter " and " Trilogy of Error " , which aired during season 12 . He called the latter : " one extremely enjoyable misadventure . The Simpsons may have peaked in the ' 90s , but that doesn 't mean the eight years since haven 't delivered their share of quality episodes . This was one of them . " Martin said that he does not understand the criticism against Scully , and that he thinks the criticism " bothered [ him ] , and still bothers him , but he managed to not get worked up over it . " Ortved noted in his book that blaming a single show runner for what some perceive as the lowering quality of the show " is unfair . " When asked in 2007 how the series ' longevity is sustained , Scully joked , " Lower your quality standards . Once you 've done that you can go on forever . " 
