 = Ferreira family = 
 The Ferreira family are a fictional family from the BBC soap opera EastEnders , that appeared on screen between 2003 and 2005 . Created by Tony Jordan and introduced by Louise Berridge as a new Asian family , producers hoped they would become central to the show . However , after Indian actor Dalip Tahil was forced to leave due to a controversy over his work permit , a major plot involving the family had to be scrapped and was replaced with a kidney transplant storyline that was branded " boring " . It was later revealed that the dropped storyline involved Dan being <unk> by his children and buried in a shallow grave . The characters were also called " unrealistic " , " annoying " , and " unlikeable " by many of the show 's fans and critics . They were blamed for a decline in the show 's viewing figures and were eventually axed by Kathleen Hutchison after bosses struggled to find storylines for the family . Jordan later admitted the family 's members were " the least successful characters [ he ] created " . 
 = = Creation = = 
 The Ferreiras were introduced in 2003 as the first Asian family in EastEnders since Sanjay ( Deepak Verma ) and Gita Kapoor ( Shobu Kapoor ) , who both departed from the show in 1998 . They were also the first large family to arrive since the Slater family 's arrival in 2000 . The family were the creation of writer Tony Jordan , and Bollywood star Dalip Tahil was cast by the show 's executive producer , Louise Berridge , to play Daniel " Dan " Ferreira , the patriarch of the family . The family , from Goa in India , also consisted of Dan 's three sons , Rohan " Ronnie " ( played by Ray <unk> ) , Ashwani " Ash " ( Raji James ) and Aditya " Adi " ( <unk> Chana ) , and daughter Kareena ( Pooja Shah ) . Ronnie 's friend Tariq <unk> , played by Nabil <unk> , also joined the show at the same time . 
 BBC drama bosses worked on introducing an Asian family , who would be central to the show , for a couple of years . Berridge commented on the casting : " After a search which has taken more than two years , and in which we have met literally hundreds of people , we have finally found the perfect cast for our dynamic new family . We 're delighted to welcome the Ferreiras to Albert Square and I 'm sure the viewers will be too . " Berridge also claimed the show didn 't set out to look for an Asian family , saying : " We wanted a new family as there were various elements missing from the show . I thought we were short on males and needed a surge of testosterone , " and said that the characters were formed around the actors : " We didn 't set out knowing exactly what we wanted . We workshopped constantly , trying out different improvisations with the actors and the characters evolved . " 
 It was hoped that the family would have a big impact on the other characters . The show 's producers apparently vowed not to include too many racial issues in the family 's storylines , although upon their arrival , the character of Jim Branning ( John Bardon ) was heard saying " they 're Indian , they do like to pack ' em in , don 't they ? " in reference to the family 's size . 
 On being cast in the show , Tahil admitted that he wasn 't aware of how big a part of British culture the soap was until he arrived in the United Kingdom , saying " It 's going to be a big adventure . " The other actors in the family all said they were looking forward to joining the show , with James saying " [ I 'm ] really looking forward to the challenges of working on such a huge programme , " and Shah commenting " Joining EastEnders is a dream come true . I have been a fan of the programme for many years and I 'm looking forward to joining the cast . " 
 The family first appeared on screen on 3 June 2003 . Later on in the year Indian chef Madhur Jaffrey was cast in EastEnders as Dan 's estranged wife , Pushpa . Jaffrey commented , " I really wanted to do the role because Indian women are usually portrayed as so proper and withdrawn – the kind of women who just stay at home cooking and cleaning . I thought , ' How wonderful of EastEnders to write a character that is realistic . ' What my character has done happens all the time in India ; there are all kinds of stories of people running away and marrying their lovers . This is what commonly happens in those places , but somehow the image of Indian womanhood is different . " Pushpa was a guest character only appearing for the duration of a storyline that revealed Dan had been lying about her death and had actually left him for another man , Pradeep ( Kaleem <unk> ) Dan 's best friend . 
 = = Development = = 
 In November 2003 , it emerged that actor Dalip Tahil faced being axed from the show due to not having the correct work permit . It was reported that after Tahil joined EastEnders from appearing in stage musical Bombay Dreams , neither he nor the BBC had obtained proper authorisation from the Home Office to make the switch of employment legal . The BBC issued a one @-@ line statement , which read : " We are considering any potential problems with a view to resolving them as soon as possible . " Tahil was forced to leave the show , and made his last appearance on 30 December 2003 , although the actor was eventually allowed to remain in the UK . 
 Following Tahil 's departure , plots were abandoned and many scripts had to be rewritten . EastEnders scriptwriter Tony Jordan revealed that it was intended that Dan would be murdered by his children after prolonged bullying and abuse , saying " The family arrived in Albert Square in what was expected to be a huge storyline . The father [ ... ] was an oppressive and violent bully – eventually his children were going to kill him . It was all scripted – how they buried him in a shallow grave , how they dealt with it , and how it all exploded . And then Dalip got bloody deported . He was actually on the studio floor and they marched him off . Broken legs , nervous breakdowns – we can deal with that . But when actors are physically taken away by the government and deported , there 's not much you can do . Fifty scripts had to be reworked . And because all the episodes had been written around this big storyline , we had to keep the same amount of Ferreira material . " The murder storyline was replaced with one concerning a kidney transplant between Ronny and his newly discovered half brother Tariq . Jordan admitted they could have recast the character of Dan , but it may have looked " tacky " : " We couldn 't go , ' Tonight , the part of Mr Ferreira will be played by Michael French with a suntan ' . We were trying to do it with integrity . Then somebody said , ' What if Ronnie Ferreira 's mate Tariq turns out to be his half @-@ brother and we do the whole kidney transplant thing ? ' And , of course , it was like watching paint dry . ' Can I have your kidney ? ' ' No . Oh , go on then ... ' " Jordan told the Daily Mirror the Ferreiras were " the least successful characters I created – through no fault of their own . " 
 Berridge defended the family , saying that Tahil 's departure caused a lot of problems , however , she added , " [ T ] he Ferreiras have not been as successful as we had hoped . I think in retrospect we made a mistake in giving their entrance such a fanfare as a New Asian Family . Viewers traditionally take a long time to adapt to anyone new [ ... ] so it was wrong to emphasise what was different about this family from the start . Even so , we had a terrific first story for them , which was to have culminated in a huge , action storyline to mark the exit of their father . However , the sudden removal of actor Dalip Tahil , for reasons beyond our control , meant that the story had to be abandoned quickly – and 40 scripts rewritten on the spot . The result was the transplant story , which I have to admit did go on for far too long , especially when our biggest story in this period had also to be abandoned because of the pregnancy of Kacey Ainsworth . The writers and production team did their very best under these circumstances but I would be the first to admit the end result was not our finest hour . I hope that viewers will not hold this against the Ferreira family and will be prepared to watch the next stage of their stories with an open mind . This is a very talented bunch of actors , who 've had to put up with a lot of stick for problems which have not been of their making . Viewer response to their lighter material was very favourable and I am confident the Ferreiras will regain their popularity . " Lorraine Heggessey , controller of BBC One , said the show became <unk> on the kidney transplant storyline as there were several cast problems , such as illness , pregnancy , rehab and a car crash . Berridge quit as executive producer of EastEnders and was replaced by Kathleen Hutchison . 
 In April 2004 , producers were concerned that the family were losing popularity with viewers , and a decision was made to write Pooja Shah out of the show for a while , but to bring her back with a sexier image to rival Michelle Ryan , who played Zoe Slater . Shah expressed a dislike of her character , saying " I 'm fed up with it now . Kareena 's too dowdy . I wanted Kareena to be different , to stand out . If I 'm completely honest , I can 't stand her – she just grates on my nerves . She hasn 't got many friends , but then I wouldn ’ t be her friend if I met her . " The family had failed and rumours began that the entire family would be killed off in a house fire . A further attempt to " spice up " the family was made in July 2004 by bringing back character Sasha Perkins , played by Jemma Walker , and having her move in with the Ferreiras . 
 The show struggled to find storylines for Dan 's children , and the remainder of the family , including Sasha Perkins , were dropped from the show by Hutchison in October 2004 . This was claimed to be a mutual decision between the programme makers and the actors , as the characters had " run their course . " They made their final on @-@ screen appearance on 22 March 2005 . 
 = = Family tree = = 
 = = Storylines = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Dan Ferreira is a fan of Elvis Presley , portrayed as a womaniser and a bully . He claims to be a widower , talking about his wife as being dead , both to the neighbours and his children , but they have merely separated after she had an affair with his best friend , with whom she moved in . Ash is portrayed as the intelligent member of the family , the standard of his education being much higher than his siblings , so much so that he is a lecturer . He has an on / off problem with gambling , something that presumably led to the breakup of his first marriage , before he is seen on screen . Kareena is in a relationship with Tariq , though it is not a sexual one . Ronny works as a DJ under the name DJ Ronny Flawless , and Tariq is his best friend and promoter . 
 = = = 2003 – 05 = = = 
 The Ferreiras move to Albert Square in 2003 . Kareena and Adi run a clothes stall on the market , Ash starts working at the local community centre , and Ronny earns money as a disc jockey , managed by his friend , Tariq , whom Dan dislikes . It transpires that Tariq is in a secret relationship with Kareena , but the Ferreiras discover this after they split up , causing further animosity between Tariq and Dan . 
 Dan starts a relationship with Shirley Benson ( Robyn Moore ) , telling her that his wife , Pushpa , is dead . He takes her to a wedding as his guest , but Pushpa arrives , introducing herself and exposing Dan 's lie . Shirley then breaks up with him . The Ferreiras help Shirley to deal with her neighbour from hell , Gavin Sharp ( Steve Nicolson ) , which leads to Shirley and Ash becoming close and starting a secret relationship . Shirley is unhappy that Ash refuses to tell anyone about their relationship , as he knows his father will be furious if he discovers them together . Ash reveals to Shirley that he is a compulsive gambler and he lost his house and ruined his marriage in the process ; Dan had bailed him out . He says he owes his father everything and he is not willing to hurt him . Dan attempts to woo Shirley again , forcing her to confess her relationship with Ash . This causes friction between the Ferreiras , and Ash breaks up with Shirley to keep the peace . 
 Ronny 's love life is equally unsettled . He begins dating Kelly Taylor ( Brooke Kinsella ) , but ends the relationship when he discovers her past as a prostitute and begins dating Kelly 's best friend , Zoe Slater ( Michelle Ryan ) . This abruptly ends when Kelly witnesses Ronny kissing another woman . Meanwhile , Adi has a romance with Sasha Perkins ( Jemma Walker ) , a pole dancer and escort , who he initially pays to pretend to be his girlfriend . He spends a lot of time trying to impress his father but fails . Dan disappears suddenly and clears out the family 's bank account , leaving his children £ 12 @,@ 000 in mortgage arrears . The truth behind his disappearance is never revealed . 
 Ronny is stabbed by a gang while trying to protect Tariq and has to have his kidney removed . However , it is discovered he was born with just one and will need a kidney transplant . None of his siblings are a tissue match , so Ash , Adi and Kareena visit their mother , but her kidney is not a match either . Tariq is forced to reveal that he is Dan 's son , and he donates his kidney to Ronny . He explains that he thought having a mildly romantic relationship with his half sister would bring him closer to the family . Adi dislikes the fact he and Tariq are half brothers , but mellows towards him eventually . When bailiffs arrive to evict the family from their home , they board themselves into their living room , but eventually admit defeat and move into a flat with Sasha , starting a minicab firm called Toucan Cars . 
 Kareena begins dating Mickey Miller ( Joe Swash ) , but problems arise between them when <unk> Smith ( Joseph <unk> ) gives Kareena cocaine and she is seduced by him , though she manages to sort out her differences with Mickey eventually . Adi also has relationship problems after Sasha cheats on him with Danny Moon ( Jake <unk> ) , leading to the couple 's split . Gangster Johnny Allen ( Billy Murray ) agrees to loan several cars to the Ferreiras ' business , but three of them are stolen and Johnny orders the family out of Walford immediately or face repercussions . Kareena initially opts to remain in Walford with Mickey , but at the last minute she changes her mind and departs with the rest of her family in March 2005 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Tahil 's casting was considered to be controversial , and was slammed by British Asian actors who said the part should have been given to a UK actor , referring to it as " disgraceful " . Actors Albert Moses and Renu <unk> complained that home @-@ grown talent was being overlooked , with Moses saying , " British Asian actors have been fighting for the last five years to persuade the BBC to bring an Asian family into EastEnders and when at last it happens it goes to Bollywood . It is a disgrace and an insult to British Asian actors . This is a terrible thing for the BBC to do . It should be ashamed . " <unk> said : " I have heard that for this storyline the BBC has brought over a Bollywood star to play the father . Why , when we have excellent Asian actors of our own ? " British immigration laws state that nationals from outside the European Union should not replace resident actors capable of doing the same work . A spokesperson for the BBC responded : " After due consideration , Dalip was deemed to be the most appropriate actor for the job . " 
 The family were criticised for being unrealistic , as their first names were a mixture of Muslim and Hindu and their surname was Portuguese . Additionally , it was suggested that Madhur Jaffrey was miscast in the role of Dan 's wife Pushpa . Several of the family 's storylines were criticised and branded as unbelievable and poorly researched , and they were cited as one of the main reasons viewing figures for the show dropped to a low of 6 @.@ 2 million . One columnist for the Daily Mirror wrote , " Never has a family bored me so much . During their transplant saga I nearly donated a kidney myself to end the turgid tale . Get rid of ' em . " Fans called for the family to be axed , and an editorial on the Daily Mirror stated : " The Ferreiras ' father , Dan , was probably not just the worst character in soap , but the most annoying , unlikeable person on all television . <unk> gambler , Ash and daughter Kareena are mere ciphers while Adi is just weird – like a gay version of a character from Rainbow . Ronny Ferreira , meanwhile , [ ... ] presided over the most boring storyline in EastEnders ' history when viewers spent several weeks watching him lying in bed growing a beard ( i.e. waiting for a kidney transplant ) . The fact that the Ferreiras still haven 't been axed shows how indecisive and complacent the show 's executives have become . " However , a poll on radio station BBC Asian Network found that 75 % of respondents wanted the family to stay . 
 One thousand young Asian professionals were surveyed on their opinions of the family , with most respondents saying the family were extremely unrealistic . One girl said " I think the Ferreiras are shit ! The story lines are stupid , unrealistic and dull . Most Asians would not get evicted and then remain homeless , they would go to an <unk> . " A female PR manager told the survey : " Just how many shades of brown can there be in one family ? You can 't put them in any context . They have no background , " and another participant said , " The Ferreiras should just be killed off . They are pointless , boring and the storylines are rubbish . " 
 Following the axing of the family , actor <unk> Chana accused the BBC of discriminating against the family , saying , " I 'm not afraid to admit that the Ferreira family have been treated like [ shit ] . We 've been made scapegoats , discriminated against . They wouldn 't do this to the Watts or Slater family . [ ... ] The Ferreira family have had bad storylines and we 've taken the blame for it . " 
 The family 's Goan origin was also criticised by Samir Shah , a member of the BBC 's board of directors , citing it as an example of " inauthentic representation " of ethnic minority communities . He said , " If you were to cast an Asian family in the East End , it should have been Bangladeshi . Instead we had a family of Goan descent . " A report by the Equality and Human Rights Commission claimed that the Ferreiras were an example of stereotyping in the media . 
 = Baby , Please Don 't Go = 
 " Baby , Please Don 't Go " is a blues song which has been called " one of the most played , arranged , and rearranged pieces in blues history " by music historian Gerard Herzhaft . It was likely an adaptation of " Long John " , an old folk theme dating back to slavery in the United States . Delta blues musician Big Joe Williams popularized it with several versions beginning in 1935 . The song 's roots have been traced back to nineteenth @-@ century American songs which deal with themes of bondage and imprisonment . " Baby , Please Don 't Go " became an early blues standard with recordings by several blues musicians , such as Papa Charlie McCoy , Leonard " Baby Doo " Caston , Lightnin ' Hopkins , John Lee Hooker and Big Bill Broonzy . 
 After World War II , Chicago blues and rhythm and blues artists adapted the song to newer music styles . In 1952 , a doo @-@ wop version by the Orioles reached the top ten on the race records chart . In 1953 , Muddy Waters recorded the song as an electric Chicago @-@ ensemble blues piece , which influenced many subsequent renditions . 
 In the 1960s , " Baby , Please Don 't Go " became a popular rock song after the Northern Irish group Them recorded it in 1964 . Several music writers have identified Jimmy Page , a studio guitarist at the time , as participating in the recording , although his exact contributions are unclear . Subsequently , Them 's uptempo rock arrangement has become a rock standard . " Baby , Please Don 't Go " has been inducted into both the Blues and Rock and Roll Halls of Fame . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Baby , Please Don 't Go " is likely an adaptation of " Long John " , an old folk theme which dates back to the time of slavery in the United States . It is also related to a group of early twentieth @-@ century blues songs that include " I 'm Alabama Bound " , " Elder Green Blues " , " Another Man Done Gone " , " Don 't Leave Me Here " and " Turn Your Lamp Down Low " . These songs have been traced back to late nineteenth @-@ century work songs . Author Linda Dahl suggests a connection to a song with the same title by Mary Williams Johnson in the late 1920s and early 1930s . However , Johnson , who was married to jazz @-@ influenced blues guitarist Lonnie Johnson , never recorded it and her song is not discussed as influencing later performers . Blues researcher Jim O 'Neal notes that Williams " sometimes said that the song was written by his wife , singer Bessie Mae Smith ( aka Blue Belle and St. Louis Bessie ) [ not the same as the popular Bessie Smith of the 1920s and 1930s ] " . 
 = = Original song = = 
 Big Joe Williams used the theme for his October 31 , 1935 , recording of " Baby , Please Don 't Go " during his first session for Lester Melrose and Bluebird Records in Chicago . It is an ensemble piece with Williams on vocal and guitar accompanied by Dad Tracy on one @-@ string fiddle and <unk> " Kokomo " Collins on washboard , who are listed as " Joe Williams ' <unk> Blues Singers " on the single . Musical notation for the song indicates a moderate @-@ tempo fifteen @-@ bar blues in 44 or common time in the key of B ♭ . As with many Delta blues songs of the era , it remains on the tonic chord ( I ) throughout without the progression to the subdominant ( IV ) or dominant ( V ) chords . The lyrics express a prisoner 's anxiety about his lover leaving before he returns home : 
 The song became a hit and established Williams ' recording career . On December 12 , 1941 , he recorded a second version titled " Please Don 't Go " in Chicago for Bluebird , with a more modern arrangement and lyrics . Blues historian Gerard Herzhaft calls it " the most exciting version " , which Williams recorded using his trademark nine @-@ string guitar . Accompanying him are Sonny Boy Williamson I on harmonica and Alfred Elkins on imitation bass ( possibly a <unk> bass ) . Since both songs appeared before recording industry publications began tracking such releases , it is unknown which version was more popular . In 1947 , he recorded it for Columbia Records with Williamson and Ransom <unk> on bass and Judge Riley on drums . This version did not reach the Billboard Race Records chart , but represents a move toward a more urban blues treatment of the song . 
 = = Later blues and R & B recordings = = 
 Due to the popularity of the 1935 release of Big Joe Williams " Baby , Please Don 't Go " , other blues musicians began recording their interpretations of the song and it soon became a blues standard . Early examples include Papa Charlie McCoy as " Tampa Kid " ( 1936 ) , Leonard " Baby Doo " Caston ( 1939 ) , Lightnin ' Hopkins ( 1947 ) , John Lee Hooker ( 1949 ) and Big Bill Broonzy ( 1952 ) . By the early 1950s , the song was reworked in contemporary musical styles , with an early rhythm and blues / jump blues version by Billy Wright ( 1951 ) , a harmonized doo @-@ wop version by the Orioles ( a number eight R & B hit in 1952 ) , and a Afro @-@ Cuban @-@ influenced rendition by Rose Mitchell ( 1954 ) . 
 In 1953 , Muddy Waters recast the song as a Chicago @-@ blues ensemble piece with Little Walter and Jimmy Rogers . Waters regularly performed " Baby , Please Don 't Go " and made several live recordings . Live versions appear on Muddy Waters at Newport 1960 and on Live at the Checkerboard Lounge , Chicago 1981 with members of the Rolling Stones . AllMusic critic Bill Janovitz cites the influence of Waters ' adaptation : 
 The most likely link between the Williams recordings and all the rock covers that came in the 1960s and 1970s would be the Muddy Waters 1953 Chess side , which retains the same swinging phrasing as the Williams takes , but the session musicians beef it up with a steady driving rhythm section , electrified instruments and Little Walter Jacobs wailing on blues harp . 
 = = Van Morrison and Them rendition = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 " Baby Please Don 't Go " was one of the earliest songs recorded by the Northern Irish band Them , fronted by a 19 @-@ year @-@ old Van Morrison . Their rendition of the song was derived from a John Lee Hooker version he recorded in 1949 as " Don 't Go Baby " using the pseudonym " Texas Slim " ( King <unk> ) . Hooker 's song appeared on a 1959 album titled Highway of Blues ( using the correct names ) , which Van Morrison had acquired . Morrison later explained 
 <unk> Please Don 't Go ' was on it and several other songs like ' Devil 's Stomp ' and all this slow stuff . ' Baby Please Don 't Go ' was the only fast number on it . It struck me as being something really unique and different , with a lot of soul . More soul than I 'd heard from any previous records . 
 = = = Recording and composition = = = 
 Them recorded " Baby , Please Don 't Go " for Decca Records in October 1964 . Besides Morrison , there is conflicting information about who participated in the session . In addition to the group 's original members ( guitarist Billy Harrison , bassist Alan Henderson , drummer Ronnie <unk> , and keyboard player Eric Wrixon ) , others have been suggested : Pat McAuley on keyboards , Bobby Graham on a second drum kit , Jimmy Page on second guitar , and Peter Bardens on keyboards . As Page biographer George Case notes , " There is a dispute over whether it is Page 's piercing blues line that defines the song , if he only played a run Harrison had already devised , or if Page only backed up Harrison himself " . 
 Morrison has acknowledged Page 's participation in the early sessions : " He played rhythm guitar on one thing and doubled a bass riff on the other " and Morrison biographer Johnny Rogan notes that Page " doubled the distinctive riff already worked out by Billy Harrison " . Music critic Greil Marcus comments that during the song 's quieter middle passage " the guitarist , session player Jimmy Page or not , seems to be feeling his way into another song , flipping half @-@ riffs , high , random , distracted metal shavings " . Them 's blues @-@ rock arrangement is " now regarded justly as definitive " , with " much of its appeal <unk> [ ing ] from the tingling lead guitar section " , according to music writer Adam Clayson . 
 = = = Releases and charts = = = 
 " Baby , Please Don 't Go " was released as Them 's second single on November 6 , 1964 . With the B @-@ side , " Gloria " , it became their first hit , reaching number ten on the UK Singles Chart . The single was released in the U.S. in 1965 , but only " Gloria " became a hit the following year . The song was not included on Them 's original British or American albums ( The Angry Young Them and Them Again ) , however , it has appeared on several compilation albums , such as The Story of Them Featuring Van Morrison and The Best of Van Morrison . When it was reissued in 1991 as a single in the UK ( London <unk> 292 ) , it reached number 65 in the chart . Van Morrison also accompanied John Lee Hooker during a 1992 performance , where Hooker sings and plays " Baby , Please Don 't Go " on guitar while sitting on a dock , with harmonica backing by Morrison ; it was released on the 2004 Come See About Me Hooker DVD . 
 = = AC / DC version = = 
 " Baby , Please Don 't Go " was a feature of AC / DC 's live shows since their beginning . Although they have expressed their interest and inspiration in early blues songs , music writer Mick Wall identifies Them 's adaptation of the song as the likely source . In November 1974 , Angus Young , Malcolm Young , and Bon Scott recorded it for their 1975 Australian debut album , High Voltage . Tony <unk> is sometimes identified as the drummer for the song , although he suggests that it had been already recorded by Peter Clack . Wall notes that producer George Young played bass for most of the album , although Rob Bailey claims that many of the album 's tracks were recorded with him . 
 High Voltage and a single with " Baby , Please Don 't Go " were released simultaneously in Australia in February 1975 . AllMusic critic Eduardo Rivadavia called the song " positively explosive " . Albert Productions issued it the single 's B @-@ side , however , the A @-@ side was largely ignored and " Baby , Please Don 't Go " began receiving airplay . The single entered the chart at the end of March 1975 and peaked at number 10 in April . Also in April 1975 , one month after drummer Phil Rudd and bassist Mark Evans joined AC / DC , the group performed the song for the Australian music program Countdown . For their appearance , " Angus wore his trade mark schoolboy uniform while Scott took the stage wearing a wig of blonde braids , a dress , make @-@ up , and earrings " , according to author Heather Miller . Joe <unk> describes Scott as " a demented Pippi Longstocking " and Perkins notes his " tattoos and a disturbingly short skirt . " Evans describes the reaction : 
 As soon as his vocals are about to begin he comes out from behind the drums dressed as a schoolgirl . And it was like a bomb went off in the joint ; it was pandemonium , everybody broke out in laughter . [ Scott ] had a wonderful sense of humor . 
 Scott mugs for the camera and , during the guitar solo / vocal improvization section , he lights a cigarette as he duels with Angus with a green mallet . Rudd laughs throughout the performance . Although " Baby , Please Don 't Go " was a popular part of AC / DC 's performances ( often as the closing number ) , the song was not released internationally until their 1984 compilation EP ' 74 Jailbreak . The video from the Countdown show is included on the Family Jewels DVD compilation in 2005 . 
 = = Recordings by other artists = = 
 Aerosmith recorded " Baby , Please Don 't Go " for their blues cover album , Honkin ' on Bobo , which was released on March 30 , 2004 . The album was produced by Jack Douglas , who had worked on the group 's earlier albums , and reflects a return to their hard rock roots . Billboard magazine describes the song as " the kind of straight @-@ ahead , hard @-@ driving track that always typified the band 's [ 1970s ] records " . Edna Gundersen of USA Today called their version a " terrific revival . " It was the first single to be released from the album and reached number seven on the Mainstream Rock Tracks chart . A music video , directed by Mark Haefeli , was produced to promote the single . Subsequently , the song has become a staple of the band 's concert repertoire . 
 Other recorded renditions include those by Mose Allison ( Transfiguration of Hiram Brown , 1960 ) , Paul Revere & the Raiders ( Just Like Us ! , 1966 ) , the Amboy Dukes ( reached number 106 on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles record chart in 1968 ) , and Budgie ( Never Turn Your Back on a Friend , 1973 ) . 
 = = Recognition and legacy = = 
 Big Joe Williams ' " Baby , Please Don 't Go " is included in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame list of " 500 Songs That Shaped Rock and Roll " . In 1992 , it was inducted into the Blues Foundation Hall of Fame in the " Classics of Blues Recordings " category . The Foundation noted that , in addition to various blues recordings , " the song was revived in revved @-@ up fashion by rock bands in the ' 60s such as Them , the Amboy Dukes , and Ten Years After " . 
 = Symphony in White , No. 2 : The Little White Girl = 
 Symphony in White , No. 2 , also known as The Little White Girl is a painting by James Abbott McNeill Whistler . The work shows a woman in three @-@ quarter figure standing by a fireplace with a mirror over it . She is holding a fan in her hand , and wearing a white dress . The model is Joanna Hiffernan , the artist 's mistress . Though the painting was originally called The Little White Girl , Whistler later started calling it Symphony in White , No. 2 . By referring to his work in such abstract terms , he intended to emphasize his " art for art 's sake " philosophy . In this painting , Heffernan wears a ring on her ring finger , even though the two were not married . By this religious imagery , Whistler emphasizes the aesthetic philosophy behind his work . 
 Whistler created the painting in the winter of 1864 , and it was displayed at the Royal Academy the next year . The original frame carried a poem written by Whistler 's friend Algernon Charles Swinburne – titled Before the Mirror – written on sheets of golden paper . The poem was inspired by the painting , and to Whistler this demonstrated that the visual arts need not be subservient to literature . Though there are few clues to the meaning and symbolism of the painting , critics have found allusions to the work of Ingres , as well as oriental elements typical of the popular Japonisme . 
 = = Artist and model = = 
 James Abbott McNeill Whistler was born in the United States in 1834 , the son of George Washington Whistler , a railway engineer . In 1843 , his father relocated the family to Saint Petersburg , Russia , where James received training in painting . After a stay in England , he returned to America to attend the US Military Academy at West Point in 1851 . In 1855 , he made his way back to Europe , determined to dedicate himself to painting . He settled in Paris at first , but in 1859 moved to London , where he would spend most of the remainder of his life . There he met Dante Gabriel Rossetti and other members of the Pre @-@ Raphaelite Brotherhood , who would have a profound influence on Whistler . 
 It was also in London that Whistler met Joanna Hiffernan , the model who would become his lover . Their relationship has been referred to as a " marriage without benefit of clergy . " By 1861 , Whistler had already used her as a model for other paintings . In Wapping , painted between 1860 and 1864 , Hiffernan ( according to Whistler ) portrayed a prostitute . The direct precursor of The Little White Girl was a painting created in the winter of 1861 – 62 , initially called The White Girl and later renamed Symphony in White , No. 1 . Hiffernan supposedly had a strong influence over Whistler ; his brother @-@ in @-@ law Francis Seymour Haden refused a dinner invitation in the winter of 1863 – 64 due to her dominant presence in the household . 
 = = History of the painting and Swinburne 's poem = = 
 Whistler painted The Little White Girl in 1864 , with Hiffernan as his model . In 1865 it was exhibited at the summer exhibition of the Royal Academy ; Whistler had offered The White Girl for the 1862 exhibition , but it had been rejected . English critics were not too impressed by the painting ; one in particular called it " bizarre " , while another called it " generally grimy grey " . In 1900 , however , it was one of the pictures Whistler submitted to the Universal Exhibition in Paris , where he won a grand prix for paintings . The first owner of the painting was the wallpaper manufacturer John Gerald Potter , a friend and patron of Whistler . In 1893 it came into the possession of Arthur Studd , who gave it to the National Gallery in 1919 . In 1951 it was transferred to the Tate Gallery . 
 In 1862 Whistler had met the English poet Algernon Charles Swinburne , with whom he developed a close friendship . The relationship between the two was mutually beneficial . Inspired by Whistler 's Little White Girl , Swinburne wrote a poem with the title Before the Mirror . Before the painting went on exhibition at the Royal Academy , Whistler pasted the poem written on gold leaf onto the frame . The idea of decorating a painting 's frame with a poem was one Whistler had gotten from Rossetti , who had similarly pasted a golden paper with one of his poems on the frame of his 1849 painting The Girlhood of Mary . To Whistler , this poem underlined his idea of the autonomous nature of the painted medium . It showed that painters were more than mere illustrators , and that visual art could be an inspiration for poetry , not just the other way around . 
 A misconception circulated at the time that the painting had been inspired by Swinburne 's poem . In a letter to a newspaper , Whistler refuted this , while still showing his respect for Swinburne 's work ; " those lines " he wrote " were only written , in my studio , after the picture was painted . And the writing of them was a rare and graceful tribute from the poet to the painter – a noble recognition of work by the production of a nobler one . " Swinburne repaid the compliment : " ... whatever merit my song may have , it is not so complete in beauty , in tenderness and significance , in exquisite execution and delicate strength , as Whistler 's picture ... " 
 = = Composition and interpretation = = 
 Whistler , especially in his later career , resented the idea that his paintings should have any meaning beyond what could be seen on the canvas . He is known as a central proponent of the " art for art 's sake " philosophy . The development of this philosophy he owed largely to Swinburne , who pioneered it in his 1868 book William Blake : a Critical Essay . Later , Whistler began referring to The Little White Girl as Symphony in White , No. 2 . By the musical analogy , he further emphasized his philosophy that the composition was the central thing , not the subject matter . 
 One of the most conspicuous elements of the painting is the ring on the model 's ring finger . Resting on the mantle piece , it becomes a focal point of the composition . The ring was a device of which Whistler was conscious ; it had not been present in The White Girl . Though he and Hiffernan were not married , the ring showed a development in how he represented her in his art ; from prostitute in Wapping , to mistress in The White Girl , and finally a wife in The Little White Girl . At the same time , this development reflected Whistler 's notion of his own position in the English art world : towards greater legitimacy . The ring is also an allusion to the Christian sacrament of marriage , which lends a religious aspect to the aestheticism that he and Swinburne were trying to develop . 
 In The Little White Girl , Whistler can be seen to clearly move away from the realism of the French painter Gustave Courbet , who had previously been a great influence on him . The painting contrasts soft , round figures with harder geometrical shapes , using " brushy , transparent touches and dense , vigorous strokes . " Various artists and styles have been suggested as inspirations for The Little White Girl . The painting has been compared to the work of Ingres . Though Whistler 's painting was different from Ingres ' art in many ways , he was nevertheless an admirer of the French artist , and was inspired by his work . The fan in the model 's hand and the vase on the mantelpiece are oriental elements , and expressions of the Japonisme prevalent in European art at the time . Apart from this , there are few clues for the viewer , and the picture invites a wide variety of individual interpretations . A contemporary review in the newspaper The Times commented that " Thought and passion are under the surface of the plain features , giving them an undefinable attraction . " Art critic Hilton Kramer sees in Whistler 's portraits a charm and a combination of craft and observational skills that his more radical landscapes lacked . 
 = Fremantle Prison = 
 Fremantle Prison , sometimes referred to as Fremantle Gaol or Fremantle Jail , is a former Australian prison in Fremantle , Western Australia . The six @-@ hectare ( 15 @-@ acre ) site includes the prison <unk> , gatehouse , perimeter walls , cottages , and tunnels . Initially known as the Convict Establishment or The Establishment , it was constructed as a prison for convicts , using convict labour , between 1851 and 1859 . The prison was transferred to the colonial government in 1886 for use for locally @-@ sentenced prisoners . Royal Commissions were held in 1898 and 1911 , and instigated some reform to the prison system , but significant changes did not begin until the 1960s . The government department in charge of the prison underwent several reorganisations in the 1970s and 1980s , but the culture of Fremantle Prison was resistant to change . Growing prisoner discontent culminated in a 1988 riot with guards taken hostage , and a fire that caused $ 1 @.@ 8 million worth of damage . The prison closed in 1991 , replaced by the new maximum @-@ security Casuarina Prison . 
 The prison was administered by a comptroller general , sheriff , or director , responsible for the entire convict or prison system in Western Australia , and a superintendent in charge of the prison itself . Prison officers , known as warders in the 19th century , worked under stringent conditions until they achieved representation through the Western Australian Prison Officers ' Union . Convicts were initially of good character as potential future colonists , but less desirable convicts were eventually sent . As a locally @-@ run prison , Fremantle 's population was generally short @-@ sentenced white prisoners in the 1890s , with very few Aboriginal prisoners . By the late 20th century , most prisoners were serving longer sentences , a higher proportion of them were violent , and Aboriginal people were over @-@ represented . 
 Prison life at Fremantle was highly regulated . Meals were an important part of the day , eaten in the cells throughout the operational life of the prison . Convict or prisoner labour was used on public infrastructure works until around 1911 ; subsequently , only work inside the prison was allowed , though there was never enough to fully occupy the inmates . Punishments varied over the years , with flogging and time in irons eventually replaced by lengthening of sentences and deprivation of visitors or entertainment . More than 40 hangings were carried out at Fremantle Prison , which was Western Australia 's only lawful place of execution , between 1888 and 1984 . Prominent escapees included Moondyne Joe , as well as John Boyle O 'Reilly and six other Fenians in the 19th century , and Brenden Abbott in 1989 . There have been various riots and other disturbances , with major riots causing damage in 1968 and 1988 . 
 Since 1991 , Fremantle Prison has been conserved as a recognised heritage site , and various restoration works have been undertaken . New uses have been found for some buildings within the prison , which has also become a significant tourist attraction . The process of obtaining World Heritage listing as part of the Australian Convict Sites submission focused historical interpretation and conservation efforts on the prison 's convict era ( 1850 – 1886 ) , at the expense of its more recent history , including Aboriginal prisoners held there . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Layout = = = 
 Fremantle Prison was built on a land grant of about 36 acres ( 15 ha ) from limestone quarried on @-@ site . A 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) tall boundary wall encloses the prison grounds , with a gatehouse in the centre of the western wall , facing The Terrace . Other roads bounding the site are Knutsford Street to the north , Hampton Road to the east , and Fothergill Street to the south . Cottages , which housed prison workers and officials , are located outside the wall either side of the gatehouse . Inside the walls , the parade ground is located east of the gatehouse . Beyond it is the Main Cell Block at the centre of the site , which contains two chapels . North of the main block is New Division , and west of that , in the north @-@ western corner , is the former Women 's Prison , previously the cookhouse , bakehouse and laundry . The hospital building stands in the north @-@ eastern corner , while the former workshops are located in the south @-@ eastern corner , as well as to the north of the gatehouse . A system of underground tunnels , constructed to provide fresh water from an aquifer , runs under the eastern edge of the site . 
 = = = Buildings = = = 
 = = = = Houses on The Terrace = = = = 
 North of the gatehouse , located at 2 , 4 , and 6 The Terrace , are cottages built in Victorian style , in contrast to the Georgian style of the other houses . Number 10 is a double @-@ storey house , initially built in 1853 for the chaplain , but taken over by the superintendent in 1878 and later used by the prison administration . An adjoining single @-@ storey at number 12 , finished in 1854 , was the home of the gatekeeper , located on the north side of the gatehouse . Number 16 The Terrace , south of the gatehouse , is a double @-@ storey house that accommodated first the superintendent , and later the resident magistrate . It remained in use as housing for prison officers until the 1970s . Number 18 , the southernmost house on The Terrace , and number 8 , the northernmost of the initial buildings , both featured two sitting rooms , three bedrooms , and two dressing rooms , as well as a kitchen , water closet and shed , but with mirrored layouts . Number 18 was expanded with additions built in the 1890s . 
 = = = = Gatehouse = = = = 
 The gatehouse and associated entry complex was constructed between 1854 and 1855 using convict labour . It was designed by Royal Engineer and Comptroller General Edmund Henderson , and constructed out of limestone . The gatehouse has two towers either side of a narrow gate , reminiscent of those found in 13th century English castles or walled cities . Iron that had been scavenged from shipwrecks was used to make the gate , while the clock at the top of the structure was imported from England . As the main entrance , the gatehouse has remained a significant feature and landmark ; since the closure of the prison , it has housed a café and office areas . Restoration was carried out in 2005 , preserving the original stone facade and removing non @-@ original rendering . 
 = = = = Main Cell Block = = = = 
 Little @-@ changed since its construction in the 1850s by convicts , the Main Cell Block was designed to hold up to 1000 prisoners . The central , four @-@ storey high cell block is flanked on either end by large dormitory wards , called the Association Rooms . Here , as many as 80 men slept in hammocks , either as a reward for good behaviour or because they would soon receive their ticket of leave . In contrast , the cramped cells measured just seven by four feet ( 2 @.@ 1 by 1 @.@ 2 m ) . Although each cell initially had a basin connected to running water , the installation was before the advent of S @-@ bends ; the smells coming up the pipes led to their removal by the 1860s . Following a Royal Commission , the cells were enlarged by removing a dividing wall from between two cells . Electric lighting was installed in the 1920s , but there were never any toilets – buckets were used for the duration of the prison 's operation . Since the prison 's closure , six cells have been restored to represent the varying living conditions at different times in the prison 's history . The main block also houses the gallows , solitary confinement cells , and two chapels – Anglican and Catholic . 
 = = = = New Division = = = = 
 Fremantle Prison 's New Division building was constructed between 1904 and 1907 , as a response to overcrowding . It also allowed prison administrators to implement the " separate system " , whereby prisoners were completely isolated for the first three months of their sentence . A panopticon in the exercise yard was initially used to facilitate this concept during the prisoners ' hour of exercise each day . The system was not successful , and considered a dated prisoner management strategy , leading to its removal within five years . New Division was the first building to have electricity , with underground wiring . During World War II , the Australian Army appropriated the division , to keep their prisoners separate from the main population . In 1994 the building was retrofitted to cater for offices , small business premises , and meeting rooms . 
 = = = = Women 's Prison = = = = 
 The north @-@ western complex was originally a service area with a cookhouse , bakehouse and laundry , built in the 1850s . A place for women prisoners was needed following the closure of Perth Gaol and the transfer of prisoners to Fremantle . The buildings were converted to a prison , and a wall built around them , creating Western Australia 's first separate prison for women . Population and crime growth led to them being extended in the 1890s and 1910s . The construction of Bandyup Women 's Prison saw Fremantle 's Women 's Prison close in 1970 , with the space used for education and assessment until the main prison 's closure in 1991 . 
 = = = = Hospital = = = = 
 Built between 1857 and 1859 , the hospital was a crucial component of Fremantle Prison . Public works during the convict era relied on convict labour , which could only be provided if the convicts were healthy . From 1886 to 1903 , medical services were relocated to the main cell block , with the former building used to keep invalids and female prisoners . The hospital was refurbished and reopened in 1904 . It subsequently remained in continuous operation until the prison 's closure in 1991 . 
 = = = = Workshops = = = = 
 The original workshop was a blacksmith 's shop , one of the first buildings to be constructed on the prison site . Later known as the East Workshops , other workshops included carpenter 's , plumber 's and painter 's , a printing office , and from the 1850s , a metal shop . The West Workshops were built at the start of the twentieth century , providing more work for prisoners through a paint shop , mat maker , shoe maker , book binder and tailor shop . In 1993 the four northern workshops were adapted for use as TAFE art workshops . 
 = = = Tunnels = = = 
 In the 1850s , shafts were sunk into the limestone bedrock to provide the prison with fresh water from an aquifer , and a tank was installed in 1874 to offer the town of Fremantle an alternative water supply . Prisoners worked a pump to fill the tank , which was connected to the jetties through gravity @-@ fed pipes . In 1896 , a town reservoir was constructed on Swanbourne Street , fed from the prison by a triple @-@ expansion steam @-@ driven pump that could take more than 4 @.@ 5 megalitres ( 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ) per day from the prison tunnels . Prisoners , relieved of manual pumping , were employed to supply wood and stoke boilers . The tunnels were closed in 1910 , though the groundwater continued to be used for the prison 's gardens . In 1989 , oil leaking from nearby tanks contaminated the water ; however , the pollution was cleared by 1996 through bioremediation . The tunnels were re @-@ opened in mid @-@ 2005 , and had been refurbished within a year to improve the experience for visitors . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 While the Swan River Colony was established as a " free settlement " ( unlike the penal colonies on the east coast ) , by the 1840s demand for cheap labour overcame an early reluctance , and the colony agreed to accept some convicts from Britain . The arrival of the first convict ship Scindian on 2 June 1850 was unexpected , as a sailing ship that had been sent ahead had been blown off @-@ course . The colony 's Round House jail was full , so the 75 convicts had to be left on the ship until a temporary prison was built . Comptroller General of Convicts Edward Henderson looked for a place to build a permanent convict establishment , and ultimately settled on the current site , on a hill overlooking Fremantle . 
 The design for Fremantle Prison was based on the Pentonville Prison in Britain , but with diagonal cell blocks replaced with a four @-@ storey linear structure , which would be the longest , tallest prison cell block in the southern hemisphere . Construction began in 1851 , and work rapidly progressed following the arrival of the Royal Engineers later that year . They trained convicts to work with limestone , which was quarried on @-@ site . The first priority was the construction of accommodation for Henderson and the prison warders , to relieve the expense of paying for private lodging . 
 The prison walls were constructed between 1853 and 1855 , while the gatehouse and associated entry complex was built in 1854 and 1855 . Construction of the southern half of the Main Cell Block began in 1853 and was finished in 1855 , with prisoners transferred from the temporary prison on 1 June 1855 . Construction of the northern wing followed . The Crimean War saw the Royal Engineers recalled , leaving only one of their number , Henry Wray , to oversee the building 's construction , which was completed by the end of 1859 . 
 During Western Australia 's convict era , the prison was known as the Convict Establishment , and was used for prisoners transported from Britain . Longer term locally @-@ sentenced prisoners were also held there from 1858 , at a cost to the colonial government . In 1868 , penal transportation to Western Australia ceased , and the number of convicts in the colony gradually declined , down to 83 in the mid @-@ 1880s . Due to the great expense of sending these convicts back to Britain , the authorities there negotiated with the colonial government to relinquish jurisdiction over them , as well as the prison complex – demolition was considered too expensive . Early negotiations had broken down , but were restarted in August 1883 . After one and a half years , a compromise was reached , and the transfer was finalised on 31 March 1886 . 
 Once the prison came under the control of the colonial government , it was renamed Fremantle Prison . All prisoners in Perth Gaol were transferred to Fremantle , and from 1887 female prisoners were also imprisoned there , in their own separate section . The Western Australian gold rushes of the 1890s resulted in strong economic growth , and a massive increase in population : doubling from almost 50 @,@ 000 in 1891 to more than 100 @,@ 000 by 1895 , and to 184 @,@ 000 by 1901 . This influx included desperate , dishonest people , from elsewhere in Australia and overseas , and Fremantle Prison was soon overcrowded . 
 The 1890s also saw a growing public unease with the treatment of prisoners . In September 1898 a Royal Commission was established by the Governor of Western Australia to investigate the colony 's penal system . The commission heard evidence from almost 240 witnesses , including a range of prisoners . Three reports were made between December 1898 and June 1899 , dealing with the most recognisable and prominent issues including classification , sentencing , punishments , and diet . In particular , they considered the philosophy of the prison system – the causes of crime , as well as the types of punishments and their justifications – and in light of this , the practicality of various reform proposals . 
 = = = Early 20th century = = = 
 Within a year of the enquiry , almost 100 cells had been enlarged by knocking down the inner wall between two cells , and a classification system was introduced . Internal walls were constructed in the main block , creating four separate divisions . Following the urgings of the prison Superintendent George and various official enquiries , new workshops were built to provide increased useful employment for prisoners . Five spaces were designed for tailors , bookbinders , shoemakers , mat makers and painters . 
 New regulations for prison officers were published in the Government Gazette in 1902 , and a new Prisons Act was passed in 1903 . While in theory the passing of the Act should have resulted in significant prison reform , this did not eventuate . The legislation left much of the changes to executive regulation , at the discretion of the governor , and was described by the media as a feeble document . 
 New Division , completed in 1907 and occupied in 1908 , resulted from the 1899 Commissioners ' report recommending a modified version of the separate system . The new division was similar in design to Henderson 's 1850s structure , but was constructed in an L @-@ shape , was only three stories tall , and had electric lighting . It also differed in its use from the main cell block . Unlike occupants of the earlier building , prisoners remained continuously in their cells except when exercising in separate yards , watched panopticon @-@ style by a warder in a central tower . 
 In 1911 another Royal Commission investigation into Fremantle Prison recommended closing the facility . Its report was ignored by the state government , which was more concerned with building infrastructure such as roads and schools than the plight of its prisoners . However , there was a rapid change in prison policy , with the appointment of a superintendent , Hugh Hann , who had recent English and colonial experience , and the election of a Labor government with members interested in penal reform . One immediate result was the dismantling of the separate system at Fremantle Prison and the demolition of the separate exercise yards in 1912 . 
 Fremantle Prison was partially used as a military prison during both world wars – for the detention of military personnel , as well as an internment centre . From 1940 until 1946 , it was one of more than 50 military prisons across Australia holding a combined total of more than 12 @,@ 000 enemy aliens and prisoners of war . Fremantle accommodated up to 400 military prisoners and up to 160 civilian prisoners by October 1945 . The World War II takeover necessitated the commissioning of Barton 's Mill Prison in 1942 . 
 = = = 20th century reform = = = 
 Prison outstations were established as part of the reforms in the 20th century , and to reduce the overcrowding at Fremantle . Pardelup Prison Farm opened in 1927 , near Mount Barker , while Barton 's Mill , though planned to be a temporary measure , remained open as a prison after World War II . Significant reform to Western Australia 's prison system did not begin until the 1960s , lagging behind those which occurred elsewhere in Australia and the world after World War II . Seven new prisons were opened between 1960 and 1971 , and in 1970 , female prisoners and staff were moved from Fremantle to the new Bandyup Women 's Prison . New legislation regarding probation , parole , and convicted drunkards was also introduced , which provided alternatives to imprisonment . With these new arrangements , and more variety in prisons and prison types , a classification board was set up in 1963 to assess prisoners . 
 The appointment of Colin Campbell as comptroller general in 1966 fostered substantial changes within Fremantle Prison itself . One of his first changes was to clear the classification committee 's backlog of prisoners awaiting assessment . Campbell also established an officer training school , as well as an assessment centre to evaluate new prisoners . Work release and community service programs were also introduced , along with training programs , social workers and welfare officers . Within the midst of Campbell 's reforms , the Prisons Department was renamed the Department of Corrections in 1971 , restructured , and the position of comptroller general was replaced with director of the department . 
 In 1972 a Royal Commission was appointed to investigate mistreatment of and discrimination against Aboriginal prisoners . Its 1973 report found that there was not " any appreciable discrimination " , however , racial stereotypes are present throughout the report , and the testimony of Aboriginal prisoners was considered unreliable . The report also made recommendations regarding various aspects of prison life , including additional , independent , trained welfare officers . 
 William Kidston succeeded Campbell in 1977 , and oversaw a shift in policy from " paternalistic rehabilitation " of prisoners to merely providing opportunities for rehabilitation . A new Prisons Act was passed in 1981 , which updated the 1903 Act with modern philosophies and practices . This act was , however , slanted towards prisoner management and safety , and the department was at the same time renamed the Prisons Department once more , to emphasise imprisonment as its primary responsibility . Ian Hill became Director of the Prisons Department in 1983 , and reorganised the department several times , striving for increased efficiency . Whilst the changes of the 1980s were effective throughout most of Western Australia 's prison system , the culture of Fremantle Prison was resistant to change . Growing prisoner discontent eventually culminated in the 1988 prison riot , investigated by an official enquiry later that year . 
 = = = Closure and subsequent use = = = 
 The state government made the decision to decommission Fremantle Prison in 1983 , but it remained in operation until 30 November 1991 . Prisoners were moved to a new metropolitan maximum security prison at Casuarina . There were divergent views in the community over the site 's future , whether it should be preserved or redeveloped . The ultimate decision was for conservation of the prison , but allowing for the buildings to be adapted for reuse by the community . 
 The Fremantle Prison Trust was established in 1992 to advise the Minister for Works on the management of the site . Various new uses were found for different parts of the prison , including wedding services in the chapels , the Coastal Business Centre in New Division , and the Fremantle Children 's Literature Centre in the hospital ; the prison also became a tourist attraction . A private company , the Fremantle Prison Guardians , organised the tourist operation for ten years under contract , until the end of 2001 ; subsequently , the state government took control . A hostel providing short @-@ stay accommodation in the Women 's Prison opened in May 2015 . 
 = = Staff and prisoners = = 
 = = = Administration = = = 
 Western Australia 's first comptroller general of convicts , Edmund Henderson , administered the convict establishment for thirteen years . The primary responsibilities of the comptroller general were to " direct convict labour and be responsible for convict discipline " . With the transfer of Fremantle Prison to the colonial government in 1886 , the role of the comptroller was replaced by that of the sheriff , responsible for all of the prisons in the colony . The position of comptroller general was recreated , with duties split off from the sheriff 's office , in early 1911 . In 1971 , the Prisons Department was renamed the Department of Corrections , restructured , and the position of comptroller general was replaced with director of the department . While the comptroller , sheriff , or director was responsible for the overall convict or prison system , largely centred around Fremantle Prison , the responsibility of the prison itself lay with the superintendent . 
 = = = Officers = = = 
 On convict ships , the convicts were guarded by pensioner guards , who were soldiers awarded pensions for their service in areas such as China , Crimea , and Afghanistan . Some remained in the military , but many opted to stay in the colony as settlers , having brought their wives and children with them . The pensioner guards were expected to help deal with any incidents of unrest at the prison . 
 Fremantle Prison 's officers were known as warders until the early 20th century . They lived in specially built terrace houses within walking distance of the prison , and their lives were just as regimented as the prisoners . In the 1890s warders still had stringent living and working conditions , including ten- to twelve @-@ hour working days . Due to a high turnover rate , many had little knowledge of either official policies or unofficial rules and traditions . The warder 's role , previously unwritten , only became clearly defined in 1902 . As well as guarding against escapes and enforcing discipline , they oversaw prisoner work and instructed inmates in trades . The warders were also supposed to be moral role models for prisoners , while maintaining a formal , distant , relationship . 
 The prison officer 's role in the 20th century did not change much , with the job still entailing a boredom @-@ inducing daily routine focused on security . Officer training became a priority under Campbell 's administration , from the late 1960s . Training courses were set up for staff inductions and promotions , and seminars were started for senior officers . The most significant change in this period , however , was that prison officers achieved representation through the Western Australian Prison Officers ' Union . The strength of the union was based on the ability to almost cripple the prison system through strike action , first taken in 1975 . 
 = = = Prisoners = = = 
 Convicts were introduced into Western Australia for three main purposes : inexpensive labour , additional labour , and an injection of British government spending into the local economy . During the initial years of transportation , convicts were generally young , from a rural background , and of good character , having only committed minor offences – potential future colonists , after their sentence had been served . By the 1860s the majority were older , more serious offenders from urban areas , including political prisoners considered to be " difficult and dangerous " . Following the transfer of Fremantle Prison to local control in 1886 , it became Western Australia 's primary prison . In the late 1880s and 1890s the number of inmates swelled dramatically . This increase predominantly comprised prisoners serving shorter sentences of under three months . The number of inmates in 1897 was 379 , and Inspector of Prisons James Roe viewed the prison as " inconveniently full " . 
 Despite a large expansion of the prison system , the problem of overcrowding remained throughout the 20th century , as did Western Australia 's high incarceration rate relative to the rest of Australia . The nature of prisoners changed , with three times the proportion of 16- to 19 @-@ year @-@ olds in 1984 compared to 1898 , and a growing over @-@ representation of Aboriginal prisoners to nearly half the incarcerated population . Sentences also increased in length , such that in 1984 more than 80 % of inmates were serving more than a year . In the 1970s and 1980s , there was an increasing number of people committed for violent crimes , but still a minority of the population . Both staff and prisoners , however , perceived a notable increase in violence during these years , coinciding with the rise of illegal drugs in prison , and of sentences for drug @-@ related offences . 
 = = Prison operation = = 
 = = = Routine = = = 
 In the Convict Establishment of 1855 , the day began with the wakeup bell at 4 : 30 am , and the officers and prisoners assembled in the parade ground at 5 : 25 am . Prisoners were sent to work before and after breakfast ( in their cells ) , before assembling for muster at midday . This was followed by dinner in the exercise yard or the work site , and more work throughout the afternoon , until supper at 6 : 00 pm in the cells . Night officers took over at 7 : 15 pm . The transfer of the Convict Establishment to the colonially @-@ run Fremantle Prison saw little change , and no new regulations . 
 A similar routine , but with fewer working hours , is described in the 1930s : 
 The following routine is observed by those who go to Fremantle Jail : — 6 @.@ 15 am . , warning bell ; prisoners rise and fold beds . 6 @.@ 30 @.@ officers muster and unlock cells . 7 @.@ 0 . [ sic ] breakfast , which lasts 15 minutes , after which men assemble in their respective exercise yards . 7 @.@ 55 , parade for work . 11 @.@ 45 , parade for dinner , after which men are in yard until 1 pm , parade for work ; 4 @.@ 45 parade for tea . 5 @.@ 30 @.@ muster ; all cells , etc . , locked for the night . 7 @.@ 55 @.@ warning bell ; prisoners to bed . 8 @.@ 0 , [ sic ] lights out except as provided for in reformatory regulations . 
 Not much had changed by the 1960s . The day began with a waking bell at 6 : 45 am . After a prisoner count , they moved into the yard until 7 : 30 , when they collected breakfast and headed back to their cells . The 8 : 00 bell signaled a parade , and then the start of work , which lasted until 11 : 15 . They ate a meal , locked in their cells until 12 : 20 pm , followed by some time in the yards . At 1 : 00 there was another parade , and another session of work which lasted to 4 : 15 . Another meal was collected , and prisoners were locked away in their cells overnight . The lights stayed on until 9 : 30 pm . On the weekends the routine featured no work , and included a film played for the prisoners . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Prisoners ate meals in their cells , from the early years of the prison through to its closure in 1991 . Bread from the prison bakehouse was included in every meal in the convict era . It was served with black tea for breakfast , and with either tea or cocoa in the evening . The main meal , called dinner , was in the middle of the day , and also featured soup , meat , and vegetables . By the 1890s food was still very limited in variety , with few vegetables . Porridge was given for breakfast , usually too fluid or overly solid , and the general standard of the prison 's food was quite low , particularly in 1897 and 1898 . However , the quality soon improved , as noted by the 1898 Royal Commission , which recommended decreasing rations to reduce costs . 
 In the 1960s , food preparation was overseen by a qualified chef , who also trained prisoners . The diet consisted of quality food , but " without trimmings " . Breakfast was porridge , with a third of a pint of milk , a hot drink ( tea , unless the prisoner bought coffee or cocoa ) , and either Vegemite , honey , or margarine , depending on the week . Lunch and dinner had more variation . Both meals consisted of a meat dish – corned beef , sausages , or mince pie – as well as mashed potato and cabbage , although there was occasionally a roast dinner . Meat , vegetables and bread were still a prominent part of the diet in 1991 . 
 = = = Labour = = = 
 As well as being used to build the prison itself , convict labour , with convicts in chain gangs , was used for other public works in the Fremantle and surrounding Perth area , including The Causeway , Perth Town Hall and Stirling Highway . The work undertaken by a convict depended on their behaviour and demeanour . Upon arrival to Western Australia , convicts were kept within the prison for a period of observation . If found to have a reasonable disposition , the convict would be sent to work , in a gang under the control of a warder . Typical activities included " quarrying , filling swamps , burning lime , constructing public buildings , roads and jetties " around Fremantle and Perth . 
 After some time , they might be sent to work on road or other projects away from these main settlements . Continued good behaviour could see the convict granted a ticket @-@ of @-@ leave , allowing private employment in a specified district of the colony , and eventually a Conditional Pardon , allowing most freedoms , except for returning to England . A Certificate of Freedom would only be granted at the end of a sentence . <unk> would result in demotion through these levels of work , including returning to convict status within the prison . Re @-@ offenders and captured escapees , after corporal punishment and time in solitary confinement , would be placed on a chain gang undertaking hard labour , typically on roads near Fremantle . 
 Outside work , mostly on public infrastructure , continued beyond the convict era , but gradually declined due to discipline concerns , the rise of trade unions that saw such work as " a threat to free labour " , and an increasing emphasis on work as rehabilitation rather than punishment . By 1911 outside work had all but ceased , but could not adequately be replaced by employment within the prison walls ; a lack of suitable work plagued the prison throughout its lifetime . Work in the 19th century consisted of cooking , washing clothes , cleaning the prison , tailoring , bootmaking , and printing . However , demand exceeded the availability of such work – increasingly so in the later years of the 19th century – so prisoners were also given activities with no practical value other than keeping them occupied . These included breaking stones , operating a water pump , and oakum picking . Even with these extra activities , by 1899 , 60 to 70 men were employed at the pump , each doing only a few minutes work per hour , and occupied the rest of the time with recreation such as draughts . 
 New workshops built in 1901 allowed prisoners to work in bootmaking and tailoring , and from 1904 , printing . Only a small fraction of prisoners were allocated to the workshops – 35 out of an average of 279 prisoners in 1902 . In 1908 , there were still few men employed in the workshops , 20 in tailoring , 15 in bootmaking , and 12 in mat making , with only half of these working at a time , and little improvement by the 1911 Royal Commission . The 20th century saw little change in the work prisoners did . There were similar workshops , with the addition of metal work , and similar jobs around the prison complex , including in the laundry , in the kitchen , and cleaning the prison . In 1984 , 90 % of prisoners were reported to be employed , either full @-@ time or part @-@ time . The meaningfulness of the work was nominal , as work was viewed as " a management option rather than [ for ] production " , but security concerns and discipline restricted the rehabilitative value of the work , and limited much of the work to jobs non @-@ existent outside of prison . 
 = = = Punishments = = = 
 In the convict era , particularly during Hampton 's term as governor , misbehaving prisoners were punished with flogging , solitary confinement , and working in chain gangs at gunpoint . Particularly difficult prisoners were put to work hand pumping groundwater into the prison 's reservoir . Known as cranking , it was especially despised by the prisoners . Staff disliked giving the lashings – in 1851 , out of a total of 400 lashings ordered , 150 were remitted as the superintendent could not find anyone to undertake the task . The role was so disliked that inducements were offered , including extra pay or improved lodgings . 
 By the 1880s , punishments also included a restricted diet of bread and water ( for a short time span ) , time in irons , and a lengthening of a prisoner 's sentence by a visiting magistrate . The cat o ' nine tails , which had been used since the early days of the prison , was abolished during the post @-@ 1911 Royal Commission reforms . Other reforms in this period saw the number of punishments inflicted decrease from 184 in 1913 to 57 in 1914 , and 35 in 1915 . 
 Flogging was discontinued in the 1940s , with the last incident occurring in 1943 . From that decade , punishments were decided by the superintendent after hearing the case against a prisoner , or by a magistrate for grievous violations . Lesser transgressions could result in solitary confinement , or restriction from visitors , education , and concerts ; serious offences were punishable by the cancellation of any remission earned and a bread @-@ and @-@ water diet , normally over a two @-@ week period . 
 = = = Executions = = = 
 As soon as Fremantle Prison came under local control in 1886 , a refractory block with gallows was planned . It was completed in 1888 , and first used in 1889 to execute a convicted murderer , Jimmy Long , a Malayan . The gallows room was the only lawful place of execution in Western Australia between 1888 and 1984 . At least 43 men and one woman were hanged in this period . Martha Rendell was the only woman to be hanged at the prison , in 1909 . The last person to be hanged was serial killer Eric Edgar Cooke , executed in 1964 . 
 From the day of sentencing to death , prisoners were kept in a concrete @-@ floored cell in New Division . They were vigilantly observed to prevent them escaping their sentence through suicide . With hangings taking place on Monday mornings , at 8 : 00 am , condemned prisoners were woken three hours earlier , and provided with a last meal , shower , and clean clothes . Afterwards , handcuffed , they were moved to a holding or " condemned cell " nearby the gallows , and allowed a couple of sips of brandy to calm their nerves . Shortly before 8 : 00 am , they were hooded , led up to the execution chamber , which could hold as many as eleven witnesses , stood over the trap door , had a noose put around their neck , and were hanged by dropping through the opening trap door . After medical examination , the deceased was removed for burial . 
 = = = Escapes = = = 
 There were a multitude of attempted escapes from Fremantle Prison . Prominent escapees included Moondyne Joe in 1867 , John Boyle O 'Reilly in 1869 and six other Fenians in 1876 , and Brenden Abbott in 1989 . 
 = = = = Moondyne Joe = = = = 
 Joseph Bolitho Johns , better known as Moondyne Joe , was Western Australia 's best known bushranger . In July 1865 , Johns was sentenced to ten years penal servitude for killing a steer . He and another prisoner absconded from a work party in early November , and were on the run for nearly a month , during which time Johns adopted the nickname Moondyne Joe . For absconding and for being in possession of a firearm , Moondyne Joe was sentenced to twelve months in irons , and transferred to Fremantle Prison . In July 1866 he received a further six months in irons for trying to cut the lock out of his door , but in August Moondyne Joe succeeded in escaping again . Moondyne Joe formulated a plan to escape the colony by travelling overland to South Australia , but was captured on 29 September about 300 kilometres ( 190 mi ) north @-@ east of Perth . 
 As punishment for escaping and for the robberies committed while on the run , Moondyne Joe received five years hard labour on top of his remaining sentence . Extraordinary measures were taken to ensure that he did not escape again . He was transferred to Fremantle Prison where a special " escape @-@ proof " cell was made for him , built from stone , lined with jarrah sleepers and over 1000 nails . In early 1867 Moondyne Joe was set to work breaking stone , but rather than permit him to leave the prison , the acting comptroller @-@ general ordered that the stone be brought in and dumped in a corner of the prison yard , where Moondyne Joe worked under the constant supervision of a warder . 
 Governor John Hampton was so confident of the arrangements , he was heard to say to Moondyne Joe : " If you get out again , I 'll forgive you " . However , the rock broken by Moondyne Joe was not removed regularly , and eventually a pile grew up until it obscured the guard 's view of him below the waist . Partially hidden behind the pile of rocks , he occasionally swung his sledgehammer at the limestone wall of the prison . On 7 March 1867 , Moondyne Joe escaped through a hole he had made in the prison wall . A few days before the second anniversary of his escape , Moondyne Joe was recaptured , returned to prison , and sentenced to an additional four years in irons . Eventually , Governor Frederick Weld heard of his predecessor Hampton 's promise , and decided that further punishment would be unfair . Moondyne Joe was given a ticket of leave in May 1871 . 
 = = = = The Fenians = = = = 
 From 1865 to 1867 , British authorities rounded up supporters of the Irish Republican Brotherhood , or Fenians , an Irish independence movement , and transported sixty @-@ two of them to Western Australia . In 1869 , John Boyle O 'Reilly escaped on the American whaling ship Gazelle and settled in Boston . Later that year , pardons were issued to many of the imprisoned Fenians , after which only eight militant Fenians remained in Western Australia 's penal system . 
 The Fenians in America bought the whaling ship Catalpa , which on 29 April 1875 sailed from New Bedford , Massachusetts on a secret rescue mission . Coordinating with local Fenian agents , the escape was arranged for 17 April 1876 , when most of the Convict Establishment garrison would be watching the Royal Perth Yacht Club regatta . Catalpa dropped anchor in international waters off Rockingham and dispatched a whaleboat to the shore . At 8 @.@ 30 am , six Fenians who were working in work parties outside the prison walls absconded , and were met by carriages that raced 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) south to where the boat was waiting . 
 The whaleboat managed to rendezvous with Catalpa the following day , which then headed out to sea . They were chased by the steamship SS Georgette , which had been commandeered by the colonial governor . Though Georgette caught up with the whaler on 19 April , Catalpa 's master claimed they were in international waters , and that an attack on Catalpa would be considered an act of war against the United States . Not wanting to cause a diplomatic incident , Georgette allowed Catalpa to flee . 
 = = = = Brenden Abbott = = = = 
 Brenden Abbott , " the Postcard Bandit " , escaped from Fremantle Prison in 1989 . He had been sentenced to twelve years in prison for " Australia 's first ' drop in ' -style bank robbery " at the Belmont branch of the Commonwealth Bank . While working in the prison 's tailor shop , he was able to stitch together overalls resembling those worn by the guards . Abbott and two accomplices took the opportunity to escape , wearing the overalls , when left unsupervised in the workshop . They cut through a bar and got onto the roof . One accomplice fell and broke his leg , but Abbott and the other managed to jump over to the wall , and thus escape . 
 Abbott avoided capture until 1995 , committing various robberies as he moved across Australia . He also escaped from a Queensland prison after two years and returned to Western Australia , allegedly robbing the Commonwealth Bank 's <unk> branch . Abbott was recaptured in Darwin , six months after his escape , and was sent to a Queensland maximum @-@ security prison with a twenty year sentence to serve . 
 = = = Riots = = = 
 There have been various prisoner riots and other disturbances at Fremantle Prison over the years that it was operational . One of the earliest was in 1854 , while major riots which occurred in 1968 and 1988 resulted in damage to the prison . 
 = = = = 1968 = = = = 
 A riot occurred on 4 June 1968 , precipitated by the serving of allegedly contaminated food to prisoners the previous evening . Other factors that contributed were the rudimentary and deplorable state of sanitation and personal cleanliness facilities , tougher sentencing introduced with the Parole Act of 1964 , and the overcrowding . When the work bell was rung at 1 pm , prisoners rebelled ; refusing to go back to work , they assembled themselves in the exercise yards . The prison superintendent Mr Thorpe negotiated with two deputations of prisoners . As well as better food , they demanded single cells and the dismissal of specific wardens . 
 After approximately three hours , the negotiations broke down , and that night 's evening meal was withheld . That caused the prisoners to riot , breaking fittings ; during the commotion , three prison officers , three prisoners , and a detective sustained injuries . Additional police and wardens arrived at 5 pm , but took seven hours to subdue the prisoners , with the last of them locked in their cells just after midnight . The extent of the damage was in the order of $ 200 to $ 300 . To relieve the overcrowding and reduce prisoner agitation , around 60 men who had not taken part in the riot were transferred to prisons at Albany , Geraldton , <unk> , and Barton 's Mill . However , other improvements could not be undertaken without funding from the state government , which did not consider prison reform a priority . 
 = = = = 1988 = = = = 
 On 4 January 1988 , despite the 42 ° C ( 108 ° F ) heat , officers decided prisoners should remain outside in the exercise yards in the afternoon . As division 3 prisoners were let inside at around 4 pm , a voice exclaimed " Let 's take ' em " , and simultaneously , guards were splashed with boiling water , usually used for making tea . A horde of prisoners stormed the cellblock , attacking the guards with whatever makeshift weapons they could find . This resulted in pandemonium ; prisoners rushed along landings , overpowering officers and taking them hostage , while at the same time , other prisoners darted between cells , starting fires . The prisoners withdrew to the exercise yard , taking six hostages , as flames quickly overran the building , spread into the rafters , and caused the roof to collapse . 
 Police negotiators communicated with the ring leaders , and by nightfall only five hostages remained . Meanwhile , the fire brigade had trouble bringing the inferno in the main cell block under control , as the prison 's gate was too narrow for their trucks , and prisoners impeded their endeavours by throwing debris at them . The prisoners ' leaders made three demands : a meeting with Attorney General Joseph <unk> , access to the media , and a guarantee of no retribution afterwards . The next morning , after 19 hours , the hostages were released , even though only the third demand had been met . Prisoners did , however , have an opportunity to communicate with the press during the siege , as the riot was a live media event with television helicopters filming from overhead . 
 Although there were no deaths , the fire caused $ 1 @.@ 8 million of damage , and officers were injured . In the aftermath of the riot , there was extensive media attention on Fremantle Prison , and investigative journalists uncovered prior warnings to the prison authorities of the risk of such an event . The government hastily initiated an enquiry into the incident , and a report was completed within six weeks . A trial involving thirty @-@ three prisoners charged over the riot was also held , the largest in the state 's history , which resulted in lengthened sentences for the prisoners . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 = = = Heritage listing = = = 
 Fremantle Prison was listed in the Western Australian Register of Historic Places as an interim entry on 10 January 1992 and included as a permanent entry on 30 June 1995 . Described as the best preserved convict @-@ built prison in the country , it became the first building in Western Australia to be listed on the Australian National Heritage List , in 2005 . The Australian Federal Heritage Minister , Senator Ian Campbell , stated that it would be included in a nomination of eleven convict areas to become World Heritage Sites . Five years later , these locations were inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List in 2010 as the Australian Convict Sites . 
 The process of obtaining World Heritage listing focused historical interpretation and conservation efforts on the prison 's convict era . This came at the expense of its more recent history , included use as an internment centre during World War II , and the imprisonment of Aboriginal prisoners . The prioritisation , evident from the first conservation plans from before the prison closed , is reflected in the branding of the tourist experience as " Fremantle Prison – the Convict Establishment " , and through restorations that , while necessary to prevent damage and deterioration , strip away the site 's recent history . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 Various parts of Fremantle Prison have had restoration works undertaken since the 1990s ; a total of $ 800 @,@ 000 was spent between 1996 / 97 and 1998 / 99 on works which included restoring the facade of the Anglican chapel . In 2005 , work was undertaken on the restoration of the prison gatehouse area . Non @-@ original rendering was removed and the original stonework was revealed . Work was also completed on the tunnels during 2005 / 06 , and the main cell block was restored with an eighteen month , $ 1 @.@ 9 million project in 2006 and 2007 . The gallows room was restored in 2013 to conditions at the time of the last execution , in 1964 . 
 = = Tourism = = 
 Fremantle Prison receives international and domestic tourists , as well as ex @-@ prisoners , former prison officers , and their descendants . Tourist numbers increased each year from 2001 / 02 to 2009 / 10 , up from almost 105 @,@ 000 to nearly 180 @,@ 000 over that period . As of 2014 , the prison has won , been a finalist in , or received other commendation at tourism or heritage awards each year since 2006 . While the tourist experience is based on authenticity and heritage values , some details are concealed or de @-@ emphasised , such as prison tattooing , riots , and graffiti portraying revenge , sexuality , or brutality . 
 Attractions include guided tours , a visitors ' centre with searchable convict database , art gallery , café , gift shop , and tourist accommodation . Educational activities are regularly held for school children , as are exhibitions and re @-@ enactments of historical events . Functions such as theme parties and dinners are held in the prison , with re @-@ enactments serving as entertainment . Tours of the prison show aspects of prison life and recount successful and attempted escapes . Sections of the tunnels are accessible , and night tours focus on the prison 's reputation for being haunted . 
 The Fremantle Prison Collection contains around 15 @,@ 000 items associated with the prison 's site , history , or the experiences of its workers and prisoners . It is also involved in preserving oral histories , with interview transcripts stored at Fremantle Prison and recordings archived in the <unk> Library Oral History Collection . Recollections have been recorded since 1989 , and include the experiences of authorities , staff , volunteer visitors , and prisoners . The Fremantle Prison records and collections , including archaeological , provide a substantial resource for researchers . 
 The Prison Gallery showcases and offers for sale the artworks of current and ex @-@ prisoners of Western Australia . It also hosts other exhibits related to the history of the prison , including historical artefacts . Many cells and areas of the prison depict prisoners ' artwork , including that of the 19th @-@ century forger James Walsh , whose artwork was hidden beneath layers of white @-@ wash for decades . Painting or drawing on walls was originally forbidden , though graffiti , which could be viewed as art or vandalism , occurred throughout the prison 's operational years . This rule was relaxed in special cases – including , from 1976 , long @-@ term prisoners within their own cells – but only for work considered art and not graffiti . Art , or art therapy , was not officially permitted until the 1980s ; graffiti was never formally permitted , but in the prison 's last six months , with closure imminent , the rule was not enforced . 
 A more contemporary prison artist was Dennis ( <unk> ) <unk> , who stated that he found art on death row , in 1982 . Some of his work currently is held in the collections of Curtin University , Perth Central TAFE , and the WA Government , Department of Justice . Other cells contain Aboriginal artwork , many by unknown artists . The <unk> artist Jimmy Pike started painting in Fremantle prison , having received tuition from Steve Culley and David Wroth . 
 = = = Attribution = = = 
 This article incorporates text from the source Australian Heritage Database – Fremantle Prison ( former ) , 1 The Terrace , Fremantle , WA , Australia , which is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 3 @.@ 0 Australia licence ( CC @-@ BY 3 @.@ 0 AU ) . Required attribution : © Commonwealth of Australia 2013 . 
 = Darzu ist erschienen der Sohn Gottes , BWV 40 = 
 Darzu ist erschienen der Sohn Gottes ( For this the Son of God appeared ) , BWV 40 , is a church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . He composed it in 1723 , his first year in Leipzig , for the Second Day of Christmas , and first performed it on 26 December that year in both main churches , Thomaskirche and Nikolaikirche . It was the first Christmas cantata Bach composed for Leipzig . The title of the cantata also appears in more modern German as Dazu ist erschienen der Sohn Gottes . 
 The theme of the work is Jesus as the conqueror of the works of the devil , who is frequently mentioned as the serpent . The music is festively scored , using two horns , similar to Part IV of Bach 's later Christmas Oratorio . The text by an unknown poet is organised in eight movements , beginning with a choral movement on the biblical text , followed by a sequence of recitatives and arias which is structured as three stanzas from three different hymns . Only two of these hymns are Christmas carols . 
 Bach used the opening chorus for the concluding Cum Sancto Spiritu in his 1738 Missa in F major , BWV 233 . 
 = = History = = 
 Bach composed the cantata in his first year in Leipzig , for the Second Day of Christmas . On this day Leipzig celebrated Christmas and St. Stephen 's Day in alternating years , with different readings . In 1723 , St. Stephen 's Day was remembered , with the prescribed readings for the feast day from the Acts of the Apostles , the Martyrdom of Stephen ( Acts 6 : 8 – 7 @,@ 22 , Acts 7 : 51 – 59 ) , and from the Gospel of Matthew , Jerusalem killing her prophets ( Matthew 23 : 35 – 39 ) . The cantata text by an unknown author is not related to the martyrdom , but generally reflects Jesus as the conqueror of sin and the works of the devil . The text quotes the Bible in movement 1 , a verse from the First Epistle of John ( 1 John 3 : 8 ) . The contemporary poetry alludes to the Bible several times . Movement 2 is based on the Gospel of John ( John 1 : 14 ) . Movement 5 reflects the creation narrative ( Genesis 3 : 15 ) ; the image of the serpent is also used in movements 4 and 6 . Movement 7 finally picks up a line from the day 's Gospel , verse 37 , " how often would I have gathered thy children together , even as a hen <unk> her chickens under her wings " . 
 No fewer than three chorale stanzas from three different hymns are part of the structure : movement 3 is stanza 3 from Kaspar Füger 's " Wir Christenleut " ( 1592 ) ; movement 6 is stanza 2 from Paul Gerhardt 's " <unk> dich auf zu deinem Gott " ( 1648 ) ; and the closing chorale is the fourth ( final ) stanza from Christian <unk> 's " <unk> euch , ihr Christen alle " ( 1646 ) . This is unusual ; many of Bach 's cantatas include only one chorale stanza for a conclusion , and the cantata performed a day before , Christen , ätzet diesen Tag , BWV 63 , an early work composed in Weimar , contained no chorale at all . During the 1723 Christmas season , Bach used the structural device of three chorale stanzas , otherwise rare in his cantatas , twice more , in Sehet , welch eine Liebe hat uns der Vater erzeiget , BWV 64 , and in Schau , lieber Gott , wie meine Feind , BWV 153 . He used the structuring of major works in scenes which are closed by chorale later in his Passions and in his Christmas Oratorio . In this cantata , the first insertion is from a hymn that Bach would later use at the end of Part III of his Christmas Oratorio , sung to the earlier melody ( 1589 ) by an anonymous composer . The second insertion is not from a Christmas hymn , but its addressing the " alte Schlange " ( old serpent ) matches the context . It is sung to a melody possibly composed by Friedrich <unk> . The closing chorale is sung to a melody by Andreas Hammerschmidt , published in his collection <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Fourth part of musical meditations ) in Freiberg , Saxony ( 1646 ) . 
 The cantata was the first Christmas cantata composed for Leipzig . Bach first performed it on 26 December 1723 , and once more , in either 1746 or 1747 . For the Christmas season of 1723 , from the First Day of Christmas to Epiphany , Bach had performed a program of six cantatas , five of them new compositions , and two major other choral works : 
 25 December 
 Main service : Christen , ätzet diesen Tag , BWV 63 and a new Sanctus in D major , BWV 238 
 vespers service , BWV 63 and the Magnificat in E @-@ flat major , BWV 243a 
 26 December : this cantata 
 27 December : Sehet , welch eine Liebe hat uns der Vater erzeiget , BWV 64 
 1 January : Singet dem Herrn ein neues Lied , BWV 190 
 2 January : Schau , lieber Gott , wie meine Feind , BWV 153 
 6 January : Sie werden aus Saba alle kommen , BWV 65 
 The cantatas were performed twice on the principal feast days , in the main service , alternating in one of the two major churches of Leipzig Thomaskirche and Nikolaikirche , and in the vespers service in the other . 
 Bach parodied the first movement of this cantata for the Cum Sancto Spiritu fugue in his 1738 Missa in F major , BWV 233 . 
 = = Scoring and structure = = 
 For the festive occasion , the cantata is scored for three vocal soloists — alto , tenor and bass — a four @-@ part choir , two horns ( corno da caccia ) , two oboes , two violins , viola and basso continuo . Bach later used a similar scoring in Part IV of his Christmas Oratorio , to be performed on New Year 's Day . 
 The cantata consists of eight movements : 
 Chorus : Darzu ist erschienen der Sohn Gottes 
 Recitative ( tenor ) : Das Wort ward Fleisch 
 Chorale : Die Sünd macht Leid 
 Aria ( bass ) : <unk> Schlange , wird dir nicht <unk> ? 
 Recitative ( alto ) : Die Schlange , so im Paradies 
 Chorale : <unk> deinen Kopf und <unk> 
 Aria ( tenor ) : <unk> , freuet euch ! 
 Chorale : Jesu , <unk> dich deiner Glieder 
 = = Music = = 
 According to musicologist Julian Mincham , the cantata has three sections , each concluded by a chorale : 
 Chorus , recitative , chorale – " Christ 's purpose in a world of sin " 
 Aria , recitative , chorale – " Christ 's actions in dispelling Satan " 
 Aria , chorale – " consequential Christian delight " 
 Bach used material from the chorales in his own composition , for example deriving the first horn motif from the beginning of the chorale tune of the first chorale . This suggests that he had chosen the structure before he began the composition . 
 The opening chorus in F major is a setting of the short text " Dazu ist erschienen der Sohn Gottes , daß er die Werke des <unk> <unk> . " ( For this the Son of God appeared , that he might destroy the works of the Devil . ) Klaus Hofmann notes : " This work of destruction is portrayed in the chorus by repeated percussive notes and extended coloratura , but all these illustrative elements are subordinated to a festive Christmas spirit " . The horns open the ritornello with a short signal @-@ like motif that is picked up by the oboes and the strings . The movement resembles a prelude and fugue , because the text is first presented in homophony to a repeat of the beginning of the ritornello , then repeated as a fugue , and finally repeated in madrigal style similar to the first section . 
 John Eliot Gardiner , who conducted this and other Christmas cantatas during the Bach Cantata Pilgrimage with the Monteverdi Choir in 2000 , compares the movement 's style to the <unk> concitato ( excited style ) of Claudio Monteverdi and notes its " vigorous endorsement to the military campaign against sin and the devil instituted with Jesus ' birth " . The text speaking of the " works of the devil " is rendered on repeated notes both in the prelude section as in the fugue section ; the destruction is pictured in a twisted , almost snake @-@ like , coloraturas in both sections , but the text " Darzu ist erschienen der Sohn Gottes " is graced by a new calm theme that is introduced by the tenor , followed by bass , soprano and alto , only accompanied by the continuo . Then the theme contrasts with the two other elements depicting the works of the devil and destruction ; it shines almost throughout the fugue . 
 The short secco recitative , sung by the tenor , the typical voice for Evangelist narration , delivers the message " Das Wort ward Fleisch und <unk> in der Welt " ( The word became flesh and lived in the world ) . The chorale , set for four parts , returns to the thought of sin , " Die Sünd macht Leid " ( Sin makes suffering ) . The bass line rises to affirm the last line " Wer ist , der uns als Christen kann <unk> ? " ( Who could condemn us as Christians ? ) . 
 The bass aria " <unk> Schlange , wird dir nicht <unk> ? " ( <unk> serpent , are you not afraid ) is accompanied by oboes and strings . Hofmann describes it as a " wide @-@ ranging , operatic bass solo , triumphant about the ' hellish snake ' " . The accompagnato recitative " Die Schlange , so im Paradies " ( The serpent that in Paradise ) explains that sin has been redeemed . The second chorale " <unk> deinen Kopf und <unk> " ( Shake your head and say ) is also a four @-@ part setting . The vivid bass line illustrates the crushing of the serpent 's head . 
 The tenor aria " <unk> , freuet euch ! " ( Christian children , rejoice ! ) is accompanied by both horns and oboes and stresses the words " freuet " ( be glad ) by extended coloraturas and " <unk> " ( terrify ) by sudden rests . It reflects the joyful mood of the opening chorus . The cantata is closed by " Jesu , <unk> dich deiner Glieder " ( Jesu , take to Yourself Your members ) , the third four @-@ part chorale , asking Jesus for further support in the new year . For several passages , the bass line is moving to illustrate joy and bliss . The harmonisation begins in F minor , changes several times according to the words and reaches F major on the final word " <unk> " ( Sun of mercy ) . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 A list of recordings is provided by Aryeh Oron on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . The type of choir and orchestra is roughly shown as a large group by red background , and as an ensemble with period instruments in historically informed performance by green background . 
 = Harlem Shake ( song ) = 
 " Harlem Shake " is a song recorded by American DJ and producer Baauer . It was released as his debut single on May 22 , 2012 , by Mad Decent imprint label Jeffree 's . The uptempo song incorporates a mechanical bassline , Dutch house synth riffs , a dance music drop , and samples of growling @-@ lion sounds . It also samples Plastic Little 's 2001 song " Miller Time " , specifically the vocal " then do the Harlem shake " , which is an allusion to the dance of the same name . Baauer added a variety of peculiar sounds to the song so that it would stand out . 
 The single did not begin to sell significantly until February 2013 , when a YouTube video set to its music developed into an Internet meme of the same name . The media response to the meme helped increase the single 's sales , as it charted at number one for five consecutive weeks on the US Billboard Hot 100 . It also reached number three in the United Kingdom and number one in both Australia and New Zealand . During the song 's chart run , Billboard enacted a policy that included video streams as a component of their charts . 
 " Harlem Shake " was well received by music critics , who viewed it as an appealing dance track , although some felt that it was more of a novelty song . After the song became a hit , Mad Decent label head Diplo reached an agreement with the artists of the song 's samples , which had not been contractually cleared before its release . However , according to Baauer , he has not received any of the money the song made because of the legal issues from not having properly cleared the samples . American rapper Azealia Banks released a remix to " Harlem Shake " on her SoundCloud page , which was subsequently removed at Baauer 's request and led to a dispute between the two . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2011 , Baauer rededicated himself to music after studying at City College and began to practice making beats . He recorded " Harlem Shake " in 2012 in his bedroom studio in Brooklyn , New York . With the song , he wanted to record a high @-@ pitched , Dutch house synthesizer over a hip hop track and make it stand out by adding a variety of peculiar sounds . He later referred to it as " a goofy , fun song " . Baauer posted " Harlem Shake " , along with several of his other recordings , on his SoundCloud page , and in April , Scottish DJ Rustie featured the song in his Essential Mix for BBC Radio 1 . Record producer and Mad Decent label head Diplo heard the song , and released it on May 22 as a free digital download through Mad Decent 's imprint label Jeffree 's . It was Baauer 's debut single . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 " Harlem Shake " features harsh snares , a mechanical bassline , samples of growling lions , and Dutch house synth riffs . It has a high tempo characteristic of hip hop and a dance music drop . According to Andrew Ryce from Resident Advisor , " Harlem Shake " is a hip hop and bass song , while David Wagner of The Atlantic viewed it as trap , a musical subgenre with stylistic origins in EDM and Southern hip hop . Ryce felt the song 's music " represents the hip @-@ hop contingent of " bass music , which is typified by rolling snares and jerky basslines , finding it " particularly symptomatic of a growing strain of music obsessed with ' trap ' " . By contrast , Jon Caramanica from The New York Times argued that it " isn 't a hip @-@ hop song , but it is hip @-@ hop @-@ influenced . " 
 " Harlem Shake " begins with a sample of a voice shouting " con los <unk> " , a Spanish phrase which translates to " with the terrorists " in English . Although listeners assumed it was a female voice , the sample was taken from the 2006 reggaeton song " <unk> " by Héctor Delgado , who often used the line as a refrain on his other songs . In 2010 , the recorded phrase was used by Philadelphia disc jockeys Skinny Friedman and DJ Apt One on their remix of Gregor Salto 's dance track " Con Alegría " . Baauer said he found the vocal sample from an unidentified source on the Internet . The sampled voice is followed by building synths and snares , and a syncopated sub @-@ bass sound before another voice commands listeners to " do the Harlem shake " . The line was sampled from Plastic Little 's 2001 hip hop song " Miller Time " , which Baauer sampled after having a friend play it for him and " [ getting it ] stuck in my head for a while " . Plastic Little member Jayson Musson said his line was inspired by a fist @-@ fight that he ended by performing the <unk> shake dance move : " This was my first fight and I didn ’ t know how to properly ' end ' a fight , so I just smiled at him and did the Harlem shake , blood gushing from glass cuts on my face . The other kid , I guess not wanting to fight anymore , or maybe not wanting to fight someone who just danced at him , got on his skateboard and took off without his shoes . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Harlem Shake " was released commercially in June 2012 . Mad Decent commissioned a music video for the single at the time , but were not satisfied with the result and shelved it . It gradually received listens online , and was re @-@ released as a single on January 8 , 2013 . However , it did not begin to sell significantly until February , when its music was set to a YouTube video that developed into an Internet meme of the same name . The 30 @-@ second video featured people dancing to the song and was parodied more than 3 @,@ 000 times in other user @-@ submitted videos . Billboard magazine cited " Harlem Shake " as " the biggest viral sensation since PSY 's ' Gangnam Style ' " . Baauer and Mad Decent generated income from both the user @-@ submitted videos and Baauer 's original audio post on YouTube because of the site 's Content ID service , which allows artists , labels , and publishers to monetize songs . According to MSN Money , they earned $ 6 for every 1 @,@ 000 views of the video . 
 The late @-@ week media response to the meme helped the single sell 12 @,@ 000 units on iTunes in the week ending February 10 , according to Nielsen SoundScan . It consequently entered the US Dance / Electronic Digital Songs at number nine and the Dance / Electronic Songs at number twelve . Mad Decent 's manager Jasper Goggins said that " Harlem Shake " was the " biggest thing " they have released , " and it 's happened within six days . " In the United Kingdom , " Harlem Shake " reached number twenty @-@ two on the UK Singles Chart during the week of the meme 's phenomena . By the end of the chart week , the single had climbed nineteen spots to number three . Martin Talbot , the Official Charts Company 's managing director , said that the single 's climb on the chart " underlines just how quickly this track has turned into a bone fide phenomenon . At the start of the week , it wasn 't even selling enough to make the Top 20 — but it is now one of the UK 's most popular tracks . " 
 The following week , " Harlem Shake " debuted at number one on the US Billboard Hot 100 and climbed to number one on the Dance / Electronic Songs , while selling 262 @,@ 000 units . It was the first instrumental track to top the Hot 100 since Jan Hammer 's 1985 Miami Vice theme . It was also the twenty @-@ first song in the Hot 100 's history to debut at number one and was aided by 103 million weekly video streams , which was announced that week by Billboard and Nielsen SoundScan as a new component of their charts . According to Billboard 's editorial director Bill Werde , " Harlem Shake " ' s success prompted them to enact the chart policy after two years of discussions with YouTube . However , Silvio <unk> , the magazine 's director of charts , said in an interview for The A.V. Club that their timing was coincidental and came after a period of negotiating the chart policy and its logistics . However , because it lacked major label promotional support , the single registered low in airplay . It also debuted at number one on the ARIA Singles Chart and became 1000th number @-@ one song since Australia began compiling charts in 1940 . 
 " Harlem Shake " remained at number one on the Hot 100 in its second week , when it sold 297 @,@ 000 digital units . It also received more airplay after being promoted to radio by Warner Bros. Records , who had agreed to a deal with Mad Decent on February 26 to distribute the song worldwide . " Harlem Shake " topped the Hot 100 for a third week and sold 228 @,@ 000 units , despite a decline in YouTube streams . By March 10 , it had reached sales of one million digital units . On March 12 , Sean Michaels of The Guardian reported that the song had earned more than £ 50 @,@ 000 from YouTube . " Harlem Shake " remained at number one for five consecutive weeks on the Hot 100 . 
 = = Copyright infringement = = 
 Neither vocal samples used on " Harlem Shake " were contractually cleared with Héctor Delgado or Jayson Musson , who were both shocked to hear the song after it became a hit . In February , Delgado was told by his former manager Javier Gómez that he heard his voice on the song and wanted to take legal action . According to Gómez , Diplo subsequently called Delgado and told him that he was unaware " Harlem Shake " sampled his voice when it was released as a single . Gómez called " Harlem Shake " " a clear breaking of intellectual property rights " and said that since Diplo 's call , lawyers for Machete Music have been negotiating with Mad Decent over compensation for the sample . 
 Musson received an enthusiastic call in late February from a past member of Plastic Little telling him that his voice was sampled on " Harlem Shake " . Musson did not have a problem with Baauer using the sample without his permission and found the song 's production " phenomenal " . He subsequently called Baauer to thank him for " doing something useful with our annoying music " . However , he felt that the allusion to the dance was " peculiar " and outdated : " I was like , Who the fuck is rapping about the Harlem Shake in 2012 ? " Musson said in an interview in March that he was negotiating with Mad Decent over compensation and that , although no agreement had been reached , the label had been " more than cooperative during this " . 
 In April , Diplo told The Huffington Post that he had reached an agreement to clear the samples . However , in an August interview with Pitchfork Media , Baauer said that he has not made any money from the song , despite Diplo 's reported agreement : " I 'm meeting with my lawyer ... so I 'm gonna find that out . I think it 's mostly because of all the legal shit . I didn ’ t clear the samples because I was in my fucking bedroom on Grand Street . I wasn 't going to think to call up [ Delgado ] , I didn ’ t even know who it was who did that [ sample ] ; I knew the Jayson Musson [ sample ] . So I found myself in that fucking pickle . Legal letters and shit . Ugh . Lawyers . So exposure @-@ wise it was fantastic , but everything else ... " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Pitchfork Media 's Larry Fitzmaurice labelled the song " Best New Track " upon its release in May 2012 and called it a " disorienting banger " with an " irresistible appeal " that " owes almost everything " to its " menacing , world @-@ smashing bassline " . Fitzmaurice wrote in conclusion , " Along with this purely visceral pleasure , it 's hard not to marvel at how awesome those growling @-@ lion samples sound . " Randall Roberts of the Los Angeles Times said that he liked the song and viewed it as a " syrupy instrumental " that foreshadows " the convergence of hip @-@ hop , dance and rock " . 
 Andrew Ryce of Resident Advisor gave " Harlem Shake " a rating of three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five and found its musical climax " admittedly satisfying — that is , until it resumes flailing like a novelty track " , writing that " it 's not hard to see why the track is well @-@ liked , but its <unk> ubiquity is a bit of a head @-@ scratcher , simply because it 's not all that interesting . " Similarly , Jon Caramanica of The New York Times said that , after hearing a minute of it being played during Power 105 @.@ 1 FM 's <unk> , the song " felt more like a novelty than like part of a strategy . " Caramanica felt that its success , along with that of Macklemore 's 2012 song " Thrift Shop " , reflects a " centerless future " for hip hop and stated , " Depending on your lens , this reflects a tremendous cultural victory for hip @-@ hop or the moment when hip @-@ hop , as a construct , begins to lose meaning . " 
 = = Remixes = = 
 On February 14 , 2013 , American rapper Azealia Banks released a remix to " Harlem Shake " on SoundCloud , which was then removed at Baauer 's request . Banks disparaged Baauer on Twitter in response and claimed to have e @-@ mails sent from him giving her permission to use the song . She then said that Diplo had sent her an e @-@ mail telling her that the remix was removed because they would rather have rapper Juicy J on it . On February 16 , Banks shared a music video for her remix on Vimeo , and revealed a purported e @-@ mail from Baauer saying he liked the remix . Baauer responded in an interview for The Daily Beast , saying that they had planned to release a version of the song with Banks , but felt that her verse did not meet their expectations : 
 Jon Caramanica of The New York Times cited Banks ' remix as one of her best songs , while Chris Martins of Spin wrote that she delivers " fire @-@ hot verse after fire @-@ hot verse " and facetiously remarked that " Banks raps all over your dumb ' Harlem Shake ' meme " . 
 Pitbull and Jim Jones also recorded freestyle raps over the song . After releasing his version , Jones claimed in an interview that " Harlem Shake " was a song he originally recorded one year ago for an album by Pauly D , but that they ultimately scrapped it : " When I started to hear the ' Harlem Shake ' and heard the beat , I was like damn , I had the record for a year . So I just put the record out . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Harlem Shake " – 3 : 16 
 " <unk> ! " – 2 : 11 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Zab Judah = 
 <unk> " Zab " Judah ( born Leroy Jones on October 27 , 1977 ) is an American professional boxer . He is a five @-@ time world champion at light welterweight and welterweight , and is a former undisputed welterweight world champion . 
 = = Amateur career = = 
 Judah began boxing at the age of six and compiled an amateur record of 110 – 5 . He was a two @-@ time US national champion and three @-@ time New York Golden Gloves Champion . He also won the 1996 PAL National Championship . Judah beat Ishe Smith and Hector Camacho , Jr . , but lost to David Díaz in the finals of the Olympic trials , thus failing to qualify for the Olympic boxing team . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Light Welterweight = = = 
 Judah made his professional debut as an 18 @-@ year @-@ old on September 20 , 1996 , in Miami , Florida and defeated Michael Johnson by technical knockout in the second round . Judah accidentally butted heads with Esteban Flores in a fight in March 1999 . Flores was cut on his forehead , and the match was halted in the third round . The bout was originally recorded as a technical draw , but the result was changed to a no contest in May 1998 . On April 14 , 1998 , Judah defeated Angel Beltre in the second round . 
 Judah then defeated Micky Ward by unanimous decision for the USBA Light Welterweight title . He successfully defended the USBA title by stopping Darryl Tyson in the eleventh round on October 15 , 1998 . 
 = = = = IBF Champion = = = = 
 Judah defeated Wilfredo Negron in January 1999 with a fourth @-@ round knockout to win the Interim IBF Light Welterweight title . On February 12 , 2000 , he defeated Jan Piet Bergman to win the vacant IBF Light Welterweight title . Bergman went down twice in the first round , but recovered in the second round , knocking Judah down . Judah knocked out Bergman in the fourth round to win the title . On June 20 , 2000 , Judah made his first title defense against Junior Witter in Glasgow , Scotland . It was an awkward fight for Judah , as Witter rarely engaged in an extended exchange of punches . Witter frequently switched between fighting right @-@ handed and left @-@ handed , making him an elusive opponent . Judah 's consistent body punching slowed Witter down , and in the fifth round , Judah caught Witter with a straight left hand that hurt Witter and sent his mouthpiece skittering across the ring . Judah defeated Witter by unanimous decision . 
 Two months later , on August 5 , 2000 , at the Mohegan Sun in Connecticut , Judah defeated former IBF Light Welterweight Champion Terron Millett by fourth round knockout . Judah was knocked down in the first round from a left hand . Judah rose quickly , and from that point on he dominated the fight . Judah hurt Millett with two combinations near the end of the first round . In round two , Judah sent Millett down with a right hand to the chin . Millett survived the round , but he was clearly hurt . In round four , Judah charged across the ring and inflicted a series of blows on Millett , knocking him down again . Millett got up , but Judah continued his assault and knocked Millett down again . Millett rose at the count of four , but his legs were unsteady and the referee decided to stop the bout . 
 In his third title defense , Judah stopped Hector Quiroz in the eighth round on October 20 , 2000 , at The Palace of Auburn Hills in Auburn Hills , Michigan . On January 13 , 2001 , Judah defeated Reggie Green by tenth round technical knockout at the Mohegan Sun in Connecticut . Judah had trouble landing punches effectively against Green for the majority of the fight , but in round ten , he knocked Green down with a left hook . Green beat the count , but Judah then ran across the ring and sent Green down to the canvas with a right hand , forcing the referee to stop the fight . On June 23 , 2001 , Judah defeated Allan Vester by third round knockout in his fifth successful defense of the IBF title . In round two , Judah put Vester down to the canvas twice . In the third round , Judah knocked out Vester with a left hand that connected on Vester 's temple . Vester went down on his knees and nearly lost his mouthpiece . The referee stopped the fight right before the closing bell . The fight would set up a unification match between Judah and WBC and WBA Light Welterweight Champion Kostya Tszyu , who defeated <unk> Urkal on the undercard . 
 = = = = Unification Match with Tszyu = = = = 
 The much anticipated matchup between Judah and <unk> took place on November 3 , 2001 , at the MGM Grand in Las Vegas , Nevada for the Undisputed Light Welterweight Championship . Judah entered the fight as a 3 @-@ to @-@ 1 favorite to win . With 10 seconds left to go in round two , Tszyu landed a right hand clean on Judah 's chin and he backed away from Tszyu with his hands down . Tszyu went after Judah , throwing another right hand that landed on his chin and sent Judah crashing to the canvas . Judah jumped up instinctively and tried to signal that he was fine to referee Jay Nady , but was still dazed by the punch and fell down a second time . When Judah collapsed , Nady waved the fight over , resulting in a technical knockout victory for <unk> and Judah 's first professional loss . 
 While Tszyu celebrated in his corner , Judah was in disbelief of what just happened and became infuriated . Judah picked up his stool and hurled it towards center ring . While being restrained by his father and trainer , Yoel Judah , he broke loose and walked up to Nady and stuck his gloved fist into his neck and had to be pulled off by cornermen . A few minutes later , Jimmy Lennon , Jr. announced the official decision and Judah screamed out and again had to be restrained by a growing number of security guards and cornermen . Judah was fined $ 75 @,@ 000 and suspended for six months by the Nevada State Athletic Commission . 
 After defeating Omar Weis by unanimous decision in July 2002 , Judah challenged DeMarcus Corley for the WBO Light Welterweight title on July 12 , 2003 , at the Orleans Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas . Judah knocked Corley down with a left hand in the third round en route to defeating Corley by split decision . Judah broke his left hand during the fight . In his only defense of the WBO title , Judah knocked out Jaime Rangel in the first round on December 13 , 2003 . 
 = = = Welterweight = = = 
 = = = = Cory Spinks = = = = 
 On April 10 , 2004 , at the Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino in Las Vegas , Judah fought Cory Spinks for the Undisputed Welterweight Championship . Judah had trouble at the start figuring out how to fight Spinks , the taller fighter . He could not move forward to get inside , but was having success moving laterally . Spinks scored a knockdown in the eleventh round , but Judah came back and put Spinks down to the canvas in the final round . In the end , Spinks defeated Judah by unanimous decision with scores of 114 – 112 twice and 116 – 111 . 
 For the rest of 2004 , Judah defeated Rafael Pineda by split decision and Wayne Martell by first round technical knockout . On February 5 , 2005 , Judah would get a rematch with Spinks at the <unk> Center in St. Louis , Missouri , Spinks ' hometown . The fight was the first major bout in St. Louis in more than 40 years , and it was a sellout . Judah was the aggressor throughout the fight . He knocked Spinks down to his knees at the bell in the seventh round , but it was not ruled a knockdown . Spinks had a strong start to the ninth round and connected with a left hand , then followed with a right hand and a combination , but Judah scored a knockdown moments later . Judah pressed the attack after the first knockdown and avoided Spinks ' desperate efforts to tie him up . After Spinks was knocked down for the second time , the referee stopped the fight , and Judah became the new Undisputed Welterweight Champion . 
 = = = = Undisputed Welterweight Champion = = = = 
 In his first fight as undisputed welterweight champion , he fought Cosme Rivera on May 14 , 2005 , at the MGM Grand in Las Vegas . Judah sent Rivera down with a straight left hand to the face less than 30 seconds into the bout . Rivera beat the count , but was knocked down again about 10 seconds later . Judah hit Rivera hard several times in the second round , and in the third round , he connected with a left uppercut , that caused Rivera to stagger backwards and fall into the ropes before hitting the canvas . Rivera rose at the count of five , but he was badly hurt and the referee stopped the fight . 
 His next fight took place on January 7 , 2006 at Madison Square Garden in New York City against Carlos Baldomir . For Judah , the fight was viewed as a <unk> bout that would lead to a lucrative bout between Judah and WBC Light Welterweight Champion Floyd Mayweather , Jr . , which was tentatively scheduled for April . Judah entered the fight as a 10 @-@ to @-@ 1 favorite over Baldomir . The stage was set when Judah <unk> punched Baldomir on the thigh during the <unk> introductions instead of touching gloves to show sportsmanship . The early rounds of the fight were close , but as the rounds passed , Judah was doing less than necessary to win , while Baldomir kept applying pressure on Judah . In round seven , Judah was hurt by a right hand and Baldomir landed a series of right hands to Judah 's head along the ropes during the tenth round . Baldomir defeated Judah by unanimous decision with scores of 115 – 113 , 114 – 113 and 115 – 112 from the three judges . The Ring named Baldomir 's victory over Judah the upset of the year for 2006 . Judah 's IBF and WBA belts were not on the line , because Baldomir did not pay sanctioning fees to the IBF and WBA . Baldomir did win The Ring and WBC titles , while the WBA ( Super ) title was vacated after Judah 's loss ( WBA ( Regular ) titleholder Luis Collazo became the sole WBA Champion ) , but the IBF still recognized him as their champion . 
 = = = = Judah vs. Mayweather = = = = 
 With the loss to Baldomir , it appeared that Judah 's much anticipated bout with Mayweather was off , but Judah 's promoter Don King and Mayweather 's promoter Bob Arum reworked the deals so the fight would go on . Mayweather was scheduled to earn a minimum $ 6 million while Judah was to earn $ 3 million plus a percentage of the profits , but because of Judah 's loss , Mayweather earned a minimum $ 5 million while Judah was guaranteed $ 1 million plus a percentage of profits above $ 7 million . The fight took place on April 8 , 2006 , at the Thomas and Mack Center in Las Vegas . 
 Judah started strongly and put up a valiant fight , at times matching Mayweather 's speed and punching precision . It appeared that Judah scored a knockdown in the second round when Mayweather 's glove touched the canvas ; however , referee Richard Steele ruled it a slip . In round four , Judah landed a right hand to the head that caused Mayweather to retreat to the ropes and cover up . The momentum changed in the fifth round , when Mayweather hurt Judah with a combination to the face . Then Mayweather landed a right hand on the bridge of Judah 's nose , and blood began to flow . The seventh round was the most dominant for Mayweather to that point . Once again , he drew blood from Judah 's nose . A combination from Mayweather backed Judah into a corner , and Judah 's foot movement was considerably slower than it had been earlier in the fight . 
 With about 10 seconds left in the tenth round , Judah hit Mayweather with a low blow and followed it with a right hand to the back of Mayweather 's head . As Mayweather hopped around the ring in pain , Steele called time to give Mayweather a rest period . Mayweather 's uncle and trainer , Roger Mayweather , climbed into the ring and approached Judah . Yoel Judah entered the ring and threw a punch at Roger . At that point , members of both fighters ' camps entered the ring and an all @-@ out melee ensued . More than a dozen security officers and police officers rushed into the ring and managed to control the situation . After the ring was cleared , Roger Mayweather was ejected from the fight . Mayweather cruised through the last two rounds on his way to a unanimous decision victory by scores of 116 – 112 , 117 – 113 and 119 – 109 . 
 After the fight , the purses for both fighters were withheld until video of the fight could be reviewed . Don King argued that Mayweather should have been disqualified because his uncle was the first person to enter the ring . At an April 13 hearing , the Nevada State Athletic Commission fined Roger Mayweather $ 200 @,@ 000 and revoked his boxing license for one year . At a hearing on May 8 , the Commission disciplined the other offenders in the melee . It fined Yoel Judah $ 100 @,@ 000 and revoked his license for one year , fined Mayweather cornerman Leonard Ellerbe $ 50 @,@ 000 and suspended his license for four months , and fined Zab Judah $ 350 @,@ 000 and revoked his license for one year . 
 = = = = Return from Suspension = = = = 
 On April 13 , 2007 , Judah made his return to the ring against Ruben Galvan at the Fitzgeralds Casino & Hotel in Tunica , Mississippi . Judah came out strongly in the first round , landing numerous shots on Galvan . During the round , a bad cut opened near the top of Galvan 's head . The referee called for a timeout to allow the doctor to take a look at the cut . Due to the severity of the cut , the fight was waved off . The cut was ruled to be caused by an accidental foul with an elbow and since the fight did not go past four rounds , the fight was ruled a no contest . 
 = = = = Judah vs. Cotto = = = = 
 On June 9 , 2007 , Judah took on WBA Welterweight Champion Miguel Cotto in New York City before a <unk> crowd at Madison Square Garden . In the first round , Cotto landed a low blow that put Judah to the canvas . Referee Arthur <unk> , Jr. offered a stern warning to Cotto . In the third round , Judah took yet another low blow from Cotto , which resulted in Cotto receiving a point deduction . Cotto and Judah delivered an all @-@ action brawl , but after weathering some difficult early rounds as he figured out Judah 's southpaw style and adjusted to his speed , Cotto took over the bout . In round seven , both fighters went toe @-@ to @-@ toe and in round eight he hurt Judah several times . In round nine , Judah took a knee to gain a breather from Cotto 's aggressive style . By the tenth round , Judah was bleeding from a cut over his right eye and was hurt by an uppercut from Cotto that sent him retreating to the ropes , but Judah stayed upright . Early in the eleventh round , Cotto landed a combination that dropped Judah to the canvas . He managed to get to his feet , but Cotto went after Judah with a relentless attack , turning him sideways along the ropes as he continued to throw punches . That forced the referee to stop the fight . 
 Judah , who trailed 97 – 91 on all three scorecards , claimed he had been weakened by the two low blows early in the fight . He said , " The first low blow was very hard . The second one took a lot out of me . The low blows affected me from the time they hit me . " Cotto earned $ 2 @.@ 5 million plus a piece of the pay @-@ per @-@ view profits , while Judah earned $ 1 million plus a percentage of the profits . 
 Judah fought Edwin Vazquez at the Hard Rock resort in Biloxi , Mississippi on September 7 , 2007 . Despite suffering a cut over his left eye , Judah defeated the overmatched Vazquez by unanimous decision . Judah hurt Vazquez several times over the course of the contest , but he injured his left hand midway through the fight and was unable to finish off Vasquez . On November 17 , 2007 , in Providenciales , Judah defeated Ryan Davis by unanimous decision . Judah was scheduled to fight Shane Mosley on May 31 , 2008 , at the Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino in Las Vegas , but it was postponed after Judah needed 50 stitches in his right arm after slipping in his bathroom and smashing it through a glass shower door . 
 = = = = Judah vs. Clottey = = = = 
 On August 2 , 2008 , Judah lost to Joshua Clottey by technical decision in a fight for the vacant IBF Welterweight title at the Palms Casino Resort in Las Vegas . Judah began the busier fighter , showing quick hands and throwing effective combinations behind a jab . Clottey began steadily closing the distance between himself and his opponent from the third round , landing an increasing number of punches that took their toll on Judah . In round four , Clottey landed an uppercut that caused Judah to lose his balance , and by the end of the round , Judah had blood running down his nose . Judah staged a comeback in the sixth round , but in the middle of the seventh round , Clottey landed a right hand that hurt Judah and caused him to back into a corner . In round nine , Judah suffered a cut over his right eye and the fight was stopped after he said he could not see . The referee had ruled the cut was caused by an accidental clash of heads and so the fight went to the scorecards . Two judges scored the fight 86 – 85 and the other judge scored it 87 – 84 , all in favor of Clottey . 
 = = = = Comeback Trail = = = = 
 After the loss to Clottey , Judah fought Ernest Johnson on November 8 , 2008 , at Madison Square Garden in New York City . Judah dominated the bout early , but in round three , Judah suffered two cuts from accidental head butts . Finding success with lead right hands and short left hands . Judah won the bout by unanimous decision with scores of 99 – 91 , 98 – 92 and 98 – 92 . 
 On November 6 , 2009 , Judah took on Ubaldo Hernandez from Mexico at Palms Resort , in Las Vegas , Nevada . The former Undisputed Welterweight Champion won the fight by TKO in the second round . 
 Judah was in line for a fight with Devon Alexander , after the latter 's win against Juan <unk> . He has also been linked to a match with Timothy Bradley , as he was considered as a possible replacement for Marcos Maidana . The former undisputed champion publicly challenged both of them on more than one occasion in 2010 . Promoter Gary Shaw tried to begin negotiations with Judah for a potential bout in 2010 . However , Judah declined the match but promised to fight Bradley and Alexander after a tune @-@ up fight on July 16 at the Prudential Center in New Jersey . 
 The Brooklyn native 's tune up fight in July was co @-@ promoted by Main Events and Super Judah Promotions . In June 2010 , Judah expressed his intention in moving down to the light welterweight division after the upcoming fight , hoping to revitalize his career . His opponent was Jose Armando Santa Cruz of Mexico ( 28 – 4 ; 17 KO ) . Judah won the bout by TKO in round three . 
 = = = Return to Light Welterweight = = = 
 On November 6 , 2010 , Judah won a split decision over previously undefeated Lucas Matthysse in a fight for the vacant regional NABO Light Welterweight title at the Prudential Center in Newark , New Jersey . The former world champion fought in the light welterweight division for the first time in almost seven years . 
 The Brooklyn native began the busier fighter , using the jab and trying to land uppercuts for the first two rounds , while Matthysse worked on the body . In round three , a clash of heads opened a cut outside of the left eye of Judah . Matthysse displayed more aggression and became the aggressor in the third and the fourth round and Judah switched to a defensive tactic . In the next two rounds , the American boxer picked up the pace , beginning to land more combinations . The seventh round was less active but in the eight , Judah landed some hard right counter shots . Judah continued to box throughout the ninth round but Matthysse began to show more power in the tenth , focusing on the head of his opponent and knocking down the American boxer after a hard right hand to the jaw . Judah got up but he was hurt , and the Argentine fighter tried to press the attack after the knockdown . However , Judah held and worked on the defensive and managed to finish the bout . Two judges scored the fight 114 – 113 for Judah , while the other judge scored it 114 – 113 for Matthysse . 
 = = = = Regaining the IBF title = = = = 
 Following the win against Matthysse , negotiations for a fight against <unk> <unk> began . Both sides eventually agreed to a March 5 bout , with the vacant IBF Light Welterweight title on the line . Former champion Pernell Whitaker joined Judah 's training camp to help him prepare for the match . Whitaker said : " I don 't train guys to be like me . I help guys to do the things that work for them . If I can teach you how to hit and not get hit , that 's a blessing for you . Zab has the same abilities I have , but Zab still has to put it together and do it the way that Zab knows how to do it . " On March 5 , 2011 , Judah defeated <unk> via technical knockout in the seventh round , at the Prudential Center in Newark , New Jersey , claiming the IBF title again after almost ten years . 
 = = = = Judah vs. Khan unification bout = = = = 
 Judah fought WBA ( Super ) Champion Amir Khan in a unification bout on July 23 , 2011 at Mandalay Bay Resort & Casino , Las Vegas . Judah was knocked out by Khan in the 5th round after Khan landed an uppercut body shot . Judah was unable to answer the referee 's 10 count , thus recording his 7th career loss . Khan was ahead 40 @-@ 36 on all three judges score cards at the time of the knock out . Judah was adamant that the body shot should have been called low and claimed that he had been expecting a mandatory five @-@ minute recovery period . 
 = = = = Judah vs. Garcia = = = = 
 Judah 's next bout was scheduled for February 9 against undefeated WBC & WBA ( Super ) Champion Danny García at the Barclays Center in Brooklyn , but was subsequently rescheduled to April 27 , 2013 due to a rib injury sustained by Garcia during training . 
 After a heated week of pre @-@ fight confrontations , fans were expecting something special from Danny Garcia vs. Zab Judah . And the fighters delivered , though in an unanticipated fashion . From early on it was clear that the bad blood would not adversely impact the fight , as both men fought strong technical fights . 
 During the early rounds , Garcia steadily pulled ahead , <unk> Judah throughout . Judah was in serious trouble in rounds 5 and 6 , then finally went down in the 8th . From there , things took a surprising turn . Never known for his resolve or ability to turn the fight around late , Judah responded to the knockdown by coming on strong down the stretch . Judah took the last 3 rounds , though his deficit from earlier in the fight meant it wasn 't enough and Garcia defeated Judah by unanimous decision ( 115 @-@ 112 , 114 @-@ 112 , 116 @-@ 111 ) 
 = = Professional boxing record = = 
 = = Titles in boxing = = 
 Major World Titles : 
 Interim IBF Light Welterweight Champion ( 140 lbs ) 
 IBF Light Welterweight Champion ( 140 lbs ) 
 WBO Light Welterweight Champion ( 140 lbs ) 
 WBC Welterweight Champion ( 147 lbs ) 
 WBA ( Super ) Welterweight Champion ( 147 lbs ) 
 IBF Welterweight Champion ( 147 lbs ) 
 ( 2 ) IBF Light Welterweight Champion ( 140 lbs ) 
 Minor World Titles : 
 International Boxing Council Light Middleweight Champion ( 154 lbs ) 
 The Ring / Lineal Championship Titles : 
 The Ring Welterweight Champion ( 147 lbs ) 
 Regional / International Titles : 
 Interim USBA Light Welterweight Champion ( 140 lbs ) 
 WBO Inter @-@ Continental Welterweight Champion ( 147 lbs ) 
 WBO NABO Welterweight Champion ( 147 lbs ) 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Judah has nine brothers and two sisters . Five of his brothers also box , with three of them , Josiah , Joseph and Daniel Judah , boxing professionally . Judah 's father and trainer , <unk> Jones , is a six @-@ time kickboxing world champion and a seventh degree black belt . Judah 's father is an avowed Black Hebrew Israelite and Judah 's family has declared themselves Jewish . Judah thanked " his Lord and Savior Jesus Christ " after his 2005 fight against Spinks . Zab is now a Born again Christian . 
 In July 2006 , he was arrested after a celebrity basketball game at Madison Square Garden on a Family Court warrant . In August 2007 , Judah became involved in a fight at Stereo nightclub in New York . According to the New York Daily News , Judah started throwing punches after he was hit first by someone who approached him . Two of the perpetrator 's friends then joined in the fight and eventually everyone involved were kicked out of the club . After reviewing the videotape , the club indicated the perpetrators " might have been plotting something . " 
 New York Police linked rapper Fabolous to a crew of robbers who targeted Judah twice . According to police reports , the Street Fam Crew , the gang that attempted to rob Judah , is made up of 20 members , all former drug dealers from Fabolous ' Brooklyn neighborhood . In 2006 , three men tried to rob Judah as he stood next to his Lamborghini on West 27th Street at 10th Avenue in New York City . The three men drove up to Judah in a minivan at about 5 am , and came out . One man pulled a handgun on Judah , and told him to put his jewelry on the hood of his car , but Judah ran instead . The muggers followed in their minivan , but crashed into a tree a block away . All three robbers fled the scene , but one was captured by a Homeland Security agent on his way to work , and another was grabbed by a nearby cab driver . 
 = Billy Bremner = 
 William John " Billy " Bremner ( 9 December 1942 – 7 December 1997 ) was a Scottish professional footballer and manager known for his strength , skills and compact constitution . 
 A midfielder , he played for Leeds United from 1959 to 1976 , and captained the side during this time , which was the most successful period of the club 's history . With the club he won the First Division ( 1968 – 69 and 1973 – 74 ) , Second Division ( 1963 – 64 ) , Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup ( 1968 and 1971 ) , FA Cup ( 1972 ) , League Cup ( 1968 ) , and Charity Shield ( 1969 ) . The club also finished second in numerous competitions , doing so in the league five times and ending as runners @-@ up in seven cup finals , including the 1975 European Cup . He was also named as the FWA Footballer of the Year in 1970 and was listed on the PFA Team of the Year in 1973 – 74 . He has since been voted Leeds United 's greatest player of all time and has a statue outside the South East corner of Elland Road . He has also been included in the Football League 100 Legends and is a member of both the English Football Hall of Fame and Scottish Football Hall of Fame . 
 He spent 1976 to 1978 at Hull City , before being appointed player @-@ manager at Doncaster Rovers in November 1978 . He spent seven years at the helm , guiding the club to promotion out of the Fourth Division in 1980 – 81 and 1983 – 84 , before he took on the managers job at Leeds United in October 1985 . He could not get the club promoted back into the top @-@ flight and left the club in September 1988 . He returned to Doncaster in July 1989 , ending his second spell in charge in November 1991 . 
 He is on the Scotland national football team roll of honour due to having won more than 50 caps for Scotland . He captained his country at the 1974 FIFA World Cup , where Scotland left at the Group Stages despite going unbeaten in the competition . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Leeds United = = = 
 Born in Stirling , Stirlingshire , Scotland , to James and Bridget Bremner , he attended St <unk> 's High School and represented Scotland Schoolboys . His father forbade him from joining Celtic as he did not want him involved in the religion @-@ based rivalry with Rangers , and Bremner rejected both Arsenal and Chelsea as he did not enjoy his stay in London during trial spells with the two clubs , and was instead convinced to join Bill Lambton 's Leeds United in 1959 . He joined along with his friend Tommy Henderson , who would return to Scotland due to homesickness without making a first team debut . Manager Jack Taylor gave him his debut at outside @-@ right in a 3 – 1 win against Chelsea at Stamford Bridge , at the age of 17 years and 47 days ; Yorkshire Evening Post reporter Phil Brown noted that Bremner showed " enthusiasm , guts , intelligence , most accurate use of the ball and unselfishness " despite poor weather conditions . A Sunday Times headline later dubbed him as " <unk> of barbed wire " due to his tenacity and tough tackling . Regular outside @-@ right Chris Crowe was sold to Blackburn Rovers in March 1960 , allowing Bremner to take his place on a permanent basis . However , Leeds went on to be relegated from the First Division at the end of the 1959 – 60 season . 
 Dropped following an opening day defeat to Liverpool at Anfield , Bremner had to win back his first team place later in the 1960 – 61 season after meeting with Jack Taylor to explain his frustration at being left out of the team . Taylor resigned in March 1961 , and player Don Revie was promoted to manager . Revie rejected an approach of £ 25 @,@ 000 from Hibernian for Bremner , despite the player wanting to return to Scotland to be with his fiancée . Leeds struggled in the 1961 – 62 campaign , finishing just three points above the Second Division relegation zone , despite 12 goals in 45 appearances from Bremner , who finished as the club 's joint top @-@ scorer alongside centre @-@ half Jack Charlton . One bright spot was the signing of Bobby Collins in March , who helped form the " win @-@ at @-@ all @-@ costs " attitude that defined Leeds and Bremner throughout the rest of Revie 's 13 years as manager . 
 United had a more promising 1962 – 63 campaign , finishing four points shy of promotion , though Bremner was limited to 24 appearances . He was out of form and dropped from the first team during the end of season run @-@ in , which contained a disproportionately large number of games due to the high level of postponements that occurred during the harsh winter . Revie moved Bremner to central midfield , and bought Manchester United 's Johnny Giles to create what would prove to be one of the most highly effective central midfield partnerships of the next 12 years . With Bremner , Collins and Giles in midfield , Leeds went on to win promotion as champions in the 1963 – 64 season . The club won no friends in doing so however , and the following summer were labelled by the Football Association 's own FA News as " the dirtiest [ team ] in the Football League . In November of the 1964 – 65 season Bremner featured heavily in a win at Everton that was marred by violent clashes on the pitch , the game was stopped for a short spell ten minutes before half @-@ time as the referee felt that a spell of cooling down was needed to prevent further violence ; despite the referee only giving 12 Leeds fouls to Everton 's 19 the match helped to cement United 's reputation as a dirty and overly physical team . A run of victories put the club top by the new year , however they lost the title on goal average to Manchester United after drawing the last game of the season with already @-@ relegated Birmingham City . The Manchester club would become a keen rival , one which intensified after Leeds knocked them out of the FA Cup at the semi @-@ finals after two physical encounters . Leeds faced Liverpool in the final at Wembley , and the game went to extra @-@ time after a 0 – 0 draw ; Bremner scored a half @-@ volley in the 100th minute to cancel out Roger Hunt 's opener , but Ian St John won the game for Liverpool in the 113th minute . 
 In October 1965 , Leeds skipper Collins was injured in an Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup game against Torino and Revie gave the captaincy to Bremner after initially handing the armband to Charlton for the remainder of the season ; Charlton was keen to give up the captaincy as it prevented his superstitious ritual of coming out of the tunnel last on match days . Revie and Bremner had a strong bond of trust , which was why the manager gave him the captaincy at such a young age . Leeds finished second in the league in the 1965 – 66 campaign to Liverpool , who had finished six points clear at the top . 
 A poor start to the 1966 – 67 season prevented another push for the title , and Leeds eventually finished in fourth place . They made it to the FA Cup semi @-@ finals , before Chelsea knocked them out with a 1 – 0 win . In Europe they beat DWS ( Netherlands ) , Valencia ( Spain ) , Bologna ( Italy ) and Kilmarnock ( Scotland ) to reach the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup final against Dinamo Zagreb ( Yugoslavia ) ; Zagreb won 2 – 0 at the Stadion Maksimir and held Leeds to a 0 – 0 draw at Elland Road to leave Leeds with another second @-@ place finish . 
 The club had a slow start to the 1967 – 68 season but soon picked up , particularly so with a 7 – 0 victory over Chelsea , though for the second successive season they ended up in fourth spot . Success instead came from the cup competitions , as they first knocked out Luton Town , Bury , Sunderland , Stoke City and Derby County en route to the final against Arsenal at Wembley ; Leeds won the game 1 – 0 in a dour defensive manner but striker Jimmy Greenhoff later said it was the most memorable of the club 's trophies due to it being the first such success . The second soon followed , despite a disappointment of exiting the FA Cup at the semi @-@ final stage with defeat to Everton , as they reached the final of the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup by beating CA Spora ( Luxembourg ) , FK Partizan ( Yugoslavia ) , Hibernian ( Scotland ) , Rangers ( Scotland ) , and Dundee ( Scotland ) . They beat Ferencvárosi ( Hungary ) 1 – 0 at Elland Road and held them to a 0 – 0 draw at <unk> to win the club 's first European trophy . 
 Revie targeted the title for the 1968 – 69 campaign and played Bremner in every league game as Leeds finished six points clear at the top to become champions of England for the first time . The title was secured with a 0 – 0 draw with title rivals Liverpool at Anfield on 28 April , after which Bremner led the players to applaud the Liverpool fans who responded by chanting " Champions , Champions , Champions ... " . Leeds set a number of records : most points ( 67 ) , most wins ( 27 ) , fewest defeats ( 2 ) , and most home points ( 39 ) . A still @-@ unbroken club record is their 34 match unbeaten run that extended into the following season . 
 The 1969 – 70 season opened with victory in the 1969 FA Charity Shield , as Bremner captained Leeds to a 2 – 1 victory over Manchester City . With new arrival Allan Clarke played upfront alongside Mick Jones and Peter Lorimer Revie had to instruct Bremner and Giles to resist the temptation to get forward and attack . It took the team some time to gel , as only two wins came from the opening eight league games , and Leeds eventually finished a distant second to champions Everton . They chased Everton all season only to give up on the title after a home defeat to Southampton late in the campaign . In the European Cup Leeds recorded a club record 10 – 0 win over Norwegian side Lyn , with Bremner netting two of the goals . However they exited the competition at the semi @-@ final stage after two defeats to Celtic ; Bremner levelled the aggregate score by putting United 1 – 0 ahead in front of a competition record 136 @,@ 505 spectators at Hampden Park , but Celtic came back to win the game and the tie with two second half goals . Further disappointment came in the 1970 FA Cup Final , where Leeds were beaten 2 – 1 in extra @-@ time of the replay at Old Trafford . Bremner was named as FWA Footballer of the Year for the season . 
 " Leeds , like Sisyphus , have pushed three boulders almost to the top of three mountains and are now left to see them all back in the dark of the valley . " 
 The league title in the 1970 – 71 season was decided in mid @-@ April in front of the Match of the Day cameras at Elland Road , when Leeds lost their lead at the top with defeat to West Bromwich Albion . The Leeds players blamed the referee for costing them the title as offside was not given for Colin <unk> 's winner , and despite Bremner saying " But we fight on . Make no mistake about that , it is not over yet " Leeds could not overtake Arsenal , who went on to win the Double . Success instead came in the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup , as Leeds knocked out Sarpsborg ( Norway ) , Dynamo Dresden ( East Germany ) , Sparta Prague ( Czechoslovakia ) , Vitória ( Portugal ) and Liverpool to reach the final with Juventus ( Italy ) . Bremner recovered from an ankle injury just in time to face Liverpool in the semi @-@ finals , and scored the only goal of the two @-@ legged tie with a header at Anfield . Leeds won the final on the away goals rule after recording a 2 – 2 draw at the Stadio Olimpico di Torino and then a 1 – 1 draw at Elland Road . 
 Leeds finished second in the league for the third successive season in the 1971 – 72 campaign , despite playing some of the best football in the club 's history . They knocked out Bristol Rovers , Liverpool , Cardiff City , Tottenham Hotspur and Birmingham City to reach the 1972 FA Cup Final with Arsenal ; they then won the trophy for the first time in the club 's history with Allan Clarke scoring the final 's only goal . Two days after the final Leeds could have secured the Double by winning a point against Wolverhampton Wanderers at Molineux , but a 3 – 2 defeat handed the title to Derby County . On 3 February 1982 , Bremner won £ 100 @,@ 000 libel damages , along with legal costs , after he sued the Sunday People newspaper for publishing an article on 11 September 1977 that alleged he tried to fix football matches , including the May 1972 game at Wolves . 
 The title was nowhere near as close in the 1972 – 73 season , which saw Leeds finished third , seven points behind Liverpool . However more runners @-@ up medals came from the FA Cup and the European Cup Winners ' Cup . After Bremner scored the only goal of the semi @-@ final clash with Wolves , Leeds went on to lose the FA Cup final 1 – 0 to Second Division Sunderland . They were then beaten 1 – 0 by Italian side A.C. Milan at the <unk> Stadium in the European Cup Winners ' Cup Final , though Bremner missed the final due to suspension . 
 Revie instructed Bremner to be more attacking in the 1973 – 74 campaign , and the result was 11 goals in 52 appearances , his biggest goal tally in 12 years . The manager focused entirely on the league and told his team the aim was to go the season unbeaten , and although they lost three games they secured a second league title by a five @-@ point margin on second @-@ place Liverpool . Bremner was named on the PFA Team of the Year and finished second in the FWA Footballer of the Year voting to Ian Callaghan . At the end of the season he was given a testimonial match against Sunderland which raised him £ 32 @,@ 500 ; he had chosen the opponents in an attempt to avenge defeat in the previous year 's FA Cup final . 
 Manager Don Revie took the England management job in July 1974 . Bremner applied for the vacant Leeds job after Johnny Giles had been named by Revie as his successor , but instead the board surprised everyone by appointing Brian Clough , who went on to a disastrous 44 day spell in charge of Leeds at the start of the 1974 – 75 season . Revie 's departure was tough for Bremner , who had a strong bond with his manager . Leeds lost the 1974 FA Charity Shield in a penalty shoot @-@ out to Liverpool , but more significantly Bremner and Kevin Keegan were sent off for fighting and received eleven game suspensions . By the time Bremner was allowed to play again Jimmy Armfield was the manager , though he refuted the accusation that he had attempted to undermine Clough as " ridiculous " . Teammate Peter Lorimer insisted that the only criticism he had of Bremner was in applying for the management job against Giles , which had caused to board to look elsewhere for fear of dividing the dressing room by choosing between Bremner and Giles . Results improved with Bremner back in the side , and though they ended the season in ninth place , they were only eight points behind champions Derby . The club 's biggest aim would be success in the European Cup , and they made it to the final after knocking out FC Zürich ( Switzerland ) , Újpest FC ( Hungary ) , Anderlecht ( Belgium ) , and Barcelona ( Spain ) . Their final opponents at Parc des Princes were defending champions Bayern Munich ( Germany ) , who beat Leeds 2 – 0 ; United had a goal controversially ruled out for offside and the tie ended in rioting by United fans . 
 With most of the Revie built team retiring or moving on to other clubs , Armfield had to rebuild the squad , though Bremner would still play 38 games in the 1975 – 76 campaign . However he missed a lengthy spell in the new year due to injury and results dipped during this time and ultimately ended the club 's title hopes ; they went on to end the campaign in fifth spot . 
 = = = Hull City = = = 
 Bremner signed with Hull City for a £ 25 @,@ 000 fee on 23 September 1976 , manager John Kaye feeling that Bremner 's experience would benefit his youthful Second Division side . His debut at Boothferry Park came against Brian Clough 's Nottingham Forest , and Bremner was credited with scoring the winning goal of the game with a free @-@ kick , though it seemed to have gone in with a significant deflection . Despite the good start results dipped midway through the 1976 – 77 season and the " Tigers " ended the season in 14th place . Despite suffering with a back injury Bremner was appointed as captain and played 32 games . 
 He missed the 1977 – 78 pre @-@ season with a knee injury , but recovered well enough to make 36 appearances throughout the campaign . Kaye was sacked after a poor start to the season , and was replaced by Bremner 's former Leeds teammate Bobby Collins , who had joined the club as assistant manager in the summer ; as at Leeds , Bremner had applied for the vacant managerial role , but was rejected . After being turned down for the job he announced his intention to retire as a player at the end of his contract in summer 1978 . The season was a disaster , and though Collins was sacked and replaced by youth coach Ken Houghton in February , results did not improve and Hull were relegated in last place , ten points from safety . 
 = = International career = = 
 Bremner was well established in the Scotland set @-@ up , winning three under @-@ 23 caps , before he made his debut for Scotland in a 0 – 0 draw with Spain at Hampden Park . He went on to feature in qualifying games for the 1966 FIFA World Cup , but defeats to Poland and Italy left Scotland second in the Group , which was not enough to qualify . He also played in friendlies against Brazil and Portugal , and received a black eye from Pelé 's elbow in a clash during a high ball ; despite this being an accident it still demonstrated to Bremner how he had failed to intimidate Pelé as he had done to many other great players of the day . 
 The England – Scotland football rivalry was intense throughout his playing career , and so great media attention came upon Bremner and the rest of the Scottish players after they beat World Cup winners England 3 @-@ 2 at Wembley to become " Unofficial World Champions " on 15 April 1967 . Many teammates said that Bremner held this match as one of the proudest moments of his career . 
 Placed in a tough group for qualification to the 1970 FIFA World Cup , Scotland failed to qualify after finishing in second place . Bremner captained his country throughout the process , having first taken up the armband in a friendly defeat to Denmark in Copenhagen . He scored his first international goal in a 2 – 1 qualifying victory over Austria at Hampden Park , his first game as captain . This game was followed by two victories over Cyprus and a 1 – 1 draw with West Germany , however a 3 – 2 defeat to West Germany in Hamburg ended their hopes of making it to the World Cup . Bremner 's second international goal came in a 3 – 2 win over Wales in a British Home Championship game at the Racecourse Ground . 
 Scotland were the only home nation to qualify for the 1974 FIFA World Cup after finishing ahead of Czechoslovakia and Denmark in their group . However , Bremner was nearly not selected by manager Willie Ormond after Ormond found him drunk in a bar not long after Jimmy Johnstone had to be rescued by the Coast guard having gotten stranded in a rowing boat during a night out following a Home Internationals match with Northern Ireland . Having been selected , Bremner captained Scotland to a 2 – 0 win over Zaire at the Westfalenstadion . A highly creditable 0 – 0 draw with World Champions Brazil left Scotland with high hopes of qualifying to the Second Round . Yet a 1 – 1 draw with Yugoslavia sent Scotland out of the competition unbeaten due to Brazil and Yugoslavia finishing level on points but with superior goal difference . 
 Bremner 's last cap came against Denmark on 3 September 1975 , an incident in Copenhagen after the game where several players were ejected from a nightclub for an alleged fight led to a lifetime ban from international football by the Scottish Football Association ; four other players , Willie Young , Joe Harper , Pat McCluskey and Arthur Graham also were banned for life ( Graham and Harper later had their bans overturned ) . Bremner maintained his innocence , stating that the incident had been blown out of proportion by the SFA . 
 = = Management career = = 
 = = = Doncaster Rovers = = = 
 Bremner was appointed manager of struggling Fourth Division side Doncaster Rovers in November 1978 . He oversaw a 1 – 0 win over Rochdale at Belle Vue in his first match in charge . Results fluctuated during the 1978 – 79 season , demonstrated by a 7 – 1 defeat to struggling Bournemouth punctuating a run of five wins in six games . Rovers ended the season in 22nd place , though 11 points ahead of Halifax Town and Crewe Alexandra , and successfully applied to the Football League for re @-@ election . 
 He introduced massages and changed the canteen and team kit for the 1979 – 80 campaign . With no money available for transfers he was forced to turn to the youth team for new players , though he could afford to take on Ian Nimmo , Hugh Dowd , John Dowie and Billy Russell on free transfers . He appointed former Leeds coach Les Cocker as his assistant . The season started poorly , but the squad bonded following Cocker 's death on 4 October and went on a run of six straight wins , for which Bremner was credited with the Fourth Division Manager of the Month award . However a run of just one win in 15 games followed , for which Bremner blamed his small squad and lack of training facilities . A mounting injury crisis caused him to make a return to playing on 29 March for the visit of Bournemouth , a game in which 16 @-@ year @-@ old Ian Snodin was named on the bench . Rovers ended the season in 12th place . 
 A disappointing opening sequence of the 1980 – 81 season was followed by six wins in six games in September , and Bremner won his second Manager of the Month award . The good results continued for the rest of the campaign , and Rovers were promoted in third place . He signed Celtic 's Colin Douglas for the challenge of Third Division football , but otherwise remained loyal to his promotion squad for the approaching 1981 – 82 season . Another strong September , six wins seeing the club rise to second in the table , won Bremner the Third Division Manager of the Month award . However a lean spell would follow , and from November to February Doncaster failed to win in the league . Results again picked up with only two defeats in the last 14 games , and they ended the campaign in 19th spot , three points above the relegation zone . 
 Strong competition promoted from the Fourth Division – Wigan Athletic , Sheffield United and Bradford City – made the 1982 – 83 campaign a tough prospect . A weak defence saw an unusual sequence of high @-@ scoring matches early in the season : 6 – 1 win over Exeter City , 7 – 5 win over Reading , 6 – 3 defeat to Wigan , and a 4 – 4 draw with Brentford . Only seven wins from the last 36 games of the season left Doncaster relegated in 23rd place , 16 points behind 20th @-@ place Orient . 
 To try and win immediate promotion during the 1983 – 84 season Bremner signed veteran forward Ernie Moss ( who had won three promotions out of the division ) , Andy Kowalski , left @-@ back John Breckin , experienced defender Bill Green , and young midfielder Mark Miller . Investment by new director Peter Wetzel allowed Bremner to spend £ 120 @,@ 000 on three players in March : £ 60 @,@ 000 on Stirling Albion defender John <unk> , £ 25 @,@ 000 on young Celtic midfielder Jim Dobbin , and £ 35 @,@ 000 on Shrewsbury Town defender Alan Brown . Promotion was secured in comfortable fashion , as they finished as runners @-@ up to runaway champions York City , ten points above fifth @-@ place Aldershot . 
 Building for the 1984 – 85 campaign , Bremner signed former Leeds striker Aiden Butterworth and winger John Buckley ( £ 25 @,@ 000 from Partick Thistle ) . Doncaster won five of their opening seven games , and though they were unable to sustain a promotion push they showed their ability with a 1 – 0 win over eventual champions Bradford at Valley Parade on Boxing Day and a 1 – 0 FA Cup win over First Division side Queens Park Rangers on 5 January . Rovers finished the season in 14th place , some distance from the promotion and the relegation places . 
 To pay for stadium upgrades necessitated by the aftermath of the Bradford City stadium fire Doncaster were forced to sell Ian and Glynn Snodin , who went to Leeds and Sheffield Wednesday and respectively for a total of £ 315 @,@ 000 . To replace then he bought Dave <unk> from Gillingham for £ 10 @,@ 000 and spent £ 60 @,@ 000 on Millwall defender Dave Cusack . 
 = = = Leeds United = = = 
 Bremner was appointed as Leeds United manager in October 1985 , having impressed the boardroom with his work at Doncaster , particularly his negotiation skills during the sale of Ian Snodin ; Leeds paid Doncaster £ 45 @,@ 000 in compensation . The club had declined during his absence ; Leeds had dropped down into the Second Division , sold Elland Road to the council to raise money , and club supporters picked up a reputation for violence after regular hooligan riots in the stands . He quickly reinstated Don Revie 's philosophy and his little traditions , for example he reinstated the sessions of carpet bowls on Friday evenings . Despite this he appointed Ian Snodin as club captain , and dropped former captain and teammate Peter Lorimer from the starting line eleven . He also moved on the young players signed by former manager and teammate Eddie Gray , choosing to sign experienced players in their place . Five key young players to leave the club were Scott Sellars ( £ 20 @,@ 000 to Blackburn Rovers ) , Terry Phelan ( free transfer to Swansea City ) , Denis Irwin , Tommy Wright and Andy Linighan ( all to Oldham Athletic for £ 60 @,@ 000 , £ 55 @,@ 000 and £ 80 @,@ 000 respectively ) . The money raised allowed him to buy central defender Brendan Ormsby ( £ 65 @,@ 000 from Aston Villa ) , and also sign David Rennie , Brian Caswell and Ronnie Robinson . Leeds struggled in the 1985 – 86 season , but managed to steer away from the relegation zone to finish in 14th place . 
 In summer 1986 , Bremner spent £ 125 @,@ 000 on 29 @-@ year @-@ old Sheffield United striker Keith Edwards , and a further £ 80 @,@ 000 to bring in 31 @-@ year @-@ old Carlisle United defender Jack Ashurst and Newcastle United defender Peter Haddock . Other new arrivals were winger Russell Doig ( £ 15 @,@ 000 from East Stirlingshire ) , goalkeeper Ronnie Sinclair ( free transfer from Nottingham Forest ) and midfielder John Buckley ( £ 35 @,@ 000 from Doncaster Rovers ) . Aiming for a promotion push in the 1986 – 87 campaign , Leeds were stuck in mid @-@ table by February after selling Snodin to Everton for £ 840 @,@ 000 . This sale though allowed Bremner money for further signings and he took left @-@ back Bobby McDonald from Oxford United , full @-@ back Micky Adams from Coventry City for £ 110 @,@ 000 , and striker John Pearson and defender Mark Aizlewood from Charlton Athletic for £ 72 @,@ 000 and £ 200 @,@ 000 respectively . A 2 – 1 FA Cup Fifth Round victory over First Division side Queens Park Rangers then raised belief in the players , and they qualified for the play @-@ offs by the end of the campaign . The FA Cup run continued into the semi @-@ finals , where they were knocked out 3 – 2 by Coventry City at Hillsborough in a close @-@ run game that ran into extra @-@ time . After overcoming Oldham in the play @-@ off semi @-@ final their opponents in the play @-@ off final were Charlton Athletic , and after 1 – 0 home wins in both legs the tie went to a replay at St Andrew 's . John Sheridan put Leeds ahead in extra @-@ time of the replay , but two late goals from Peter Shirtliff changed the game and denied Leeds promotion . 
 Bremner signed a new three @-@ year contract in summer 1987 . New arrivals at the club were Glynn Snodin ( £ 150 @,@ 000 from Sheffield Wednesday ) , winger Gary Williams ( £ 230 @,@ 000 from Aston Villa ) and Bobby Davison ( £ 350 @,@ 000 from Derby County ) , as well as Jim Melrose and Ken <unk> . A more significant new face was David Batty , a key player of the future who was given his debut from the youth team . United started the season inconsistently , but five straight wins in December won Bremner the Second Division Manager of the Month award . The inconsistent results returned however , and Leeds finished the 1987 – 88 season in seventh place , eight points outside the play @-@ offs . Bremner did not enjoy a good relationship with the club 's board , who felt him to be uncommunicative with them , and after a poor start to the 1988 – 89 season he was sacked in September 1988 . His successor , Howard Wilkinson , was given money to spend by the board and Leeds went on to win promotion in 1990 . 
 = = = Return to Doncaster Rovers = = = 
 In July 1989 Bremner went back to Doncaster as manager , who had fallen back into the Fourth Division during his absence . He signed Lincoln City winger John McGinley and Leeds midfielder John Stiles , and led the club to a 20th @-@ place finish in 1989 – 90 , which represented a small improvement on the previous season . Greater success came in the Football League Trophy , Rovers reaching the area finals , where they were beaten by Third Division leaders Tranmere Rovers . 
 New additions for the 1990 – 91 campaign were Peterborough United goalkeeper Paul Crichton , Stoke City defender Andy Holmes and Tottenham Hotspur midfielder Eddie Gormley , as well as his former Leeds captain Brendan Ormsby . Rovers were top of the table at the turn of the year , but injuries and lack of form caused results to fall away , as did hopes of promotion , and Doncaster finished the campaign in 11th place . Rovers started the 1991 – 92 season badly and Bremner tendered his resignation on 2 November , with the club sitting bottom of the Football League . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 He married Vicky Dick in November 1961 . He had a ghost @-@ written column in Shoot throughout the 1970s . After retiring from football in November 1991 he took up work as an after dinner speaker . 
 At the beginning of December 1997 , Bremner was rushed to hospital after suffering from pneumonia , but suffered a suspected heart attack at his Doncaster home in the small village of Clifton and died two days before his 55th birthday . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 A statue by sculptor Frances <unk> of Bremner in celebratory pose was erected outside Elland Road in tribute in 1999 . In 1988 , the Football League , as part of its centenary season celebrations , included Bremner on its list of 100 League Legends . He was inducted into both the English Football Hall of Fame and the Scottish Football Hall of Fame . In 2006 he was voted Leeds United 's greatest player of all time . In September 2013 he was voted as the greatest captain in the Football League 's history . 
 " Billy Bremner was one of Britain 's most fiery , skilful and industrious footballers of the post @-@ war years . An essential cog in the pragmatic , often over @-@ robust yet frequently wonderfully entertaining Leeds United team of the Sixties and Seventies , he was also the red @-@ haired dynamo in Scotland 's international side , winning 54 caps . " 
 Bremner was portrayed by British actor Stephen Graham in the 2009 biographical drama film The Damned United , directed by Tom Hooper and starring Michael Sheen as former Leeds United manager Brian Clough . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Playing statistics = = = 
 a . ^ Includes matches in Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup , European Cup , European Cup Winners ' Cup , and UEFA Cup competitions . 
 b . ^ Includes two FA Charity Shield appearances ( 1969 – 70 and 1974 – 75 ) . 
 = = = Managerial statistics = = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = As a player = = = 
 Leeds United 
 Football League Second Division champion : 1963 – 64 
 Football League First Division champion : 1968 – 69 , 1973 – 74 
 Football League First Division runner @-@ up : 1964 – 65 , 1965 – 66 , 1969 – 70 , 1970 – 71 , 1971 – 72 
 FA Cup winner : 1972 
 FA Cup runner @-@ up : 1965 , 1970 , 1973 
 FA Charity Shield winner : 1969 
 FA Charity Shield runner @-@ up : 1974 
 Football League Cup winner : 1968 
 Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup runner @-@ up : 1967 
 Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup champion : 1968 , 1971 
 Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup play @-@ off runner @-@ up : 1971 
 European Cup Winners ' Cup runner @-@ up : 1973 
 European Cup runner @-@ up : 1975 
 Individual 
 FWA Footballer of the Year : 1970 
 PFA Team of the Year ( First Division ) : 1973 – 74 
 Scotland national football team roll of honour : 1974 
 = = = As a manager = = = 
 Doncaster Rovers 
 Football League Fourth Division third @-@ place promotion : 1980 – 81 
 Football League Fourth Division runner @-@ up : 1983 – 84 
 Individual 
 Football League Fourth Division Manager of the Month : October 1979 , September 1980 
 Football League Third Division Manager of the Month : September 1981 
 Football League Second Division Manager of the Month : December 1987 
 = Thomas de Rossy = 
 Thomas de Rossy ( de Rossi ) O. F. M. was a late 14th century Scottish Franciscan friar , papal penitentiary , bishop and theologian . Of unknown , or at least unclear origin , he embarked on a religious career in his early years , entering the Franciscan Order , studying in England and at the University of Paris . 
 He preached and lectured on the Immaculate Conception , and rose to seniority under the patronage of the Avignon Papacy and King Robert II of Scotland , becoming Bishop of Galloway and the only Franciscan to hold a Scottish bishopric . Thereafter he was a staunch advocate of Avignon Pope Clement VII against the English @-@ backed Urban VI , for whom he engaged in partisan preaching and writing , famously challenging any English bishop to settle the issue by single combat . 
 = = Early years = = 
 There is not enough evidence to detail Rossy 's early life and career . His name indicates a family origin from Rossie , but many locations have this name , including Rossie in Gowrie , Rossie in Angus and Rossie in Strathearn . On 3 October 1371 , following a request from King Charles V of France and Robert II of Scotland , he received papal permission to take the Bachelor of Theology degree at the University of Paris ; this is his first appearance in contemporary records . 
 This Papal Bull provides information about his earlier life . He was Scottish , had entered the Order of the Friars Minor ( Franciscans ) , he had studied the Seven Liberal Arts and Theology at various locations — including the University of Paris — and had preached in Paris . It is likely that Thomas had returned to his home country to preach and teach , a custom in the Franciscan Order . In his later writings he claimed to have studied in Paris and to have lived among the English for seven years , obtaining a good " understanding of their character " . 
 = = Pre @-@ episcopal career = = 
 Thomas was at the Papal court in Avignon in 1371 acting as proctor for Patrick de Leuchars , Bishop of Brechin , making a payment to the papal chamber . Having obtained his Theology degree , Thomas lectured on the conception of the immaculate Virgin at Paris in 1373 as a Bachelor of Sentences ( <unk> <unk> ) ; he had previously been appointed by the Chancellor of the university to deliver the summer lectures on the Sentences . 
 By 1375 Thomas , now vicar general of the Franciscan Order for Scotland , was running out of money . This put the completion of his studies in jeopardy . For this reason , Pope Gregory XI wrote to Walter de Wardlaw , Bishop of Glasgow , authorising Walter ( a renowned scholar himself ) and other doctors to grant Thomas , if they " found him fit " , a Licentiate and a Doctorate in Theology . Such a grant would enable Thomas to teach legally , allowing him to lessen the burden of his financial problems . 
 Thomas was at Avignon again in 1375 , but had returned to Scotland between March 1378 and April 1379 when he received a gift of £ 10 from the King of the Scots . By 22 June 1379 , Thomas was once again at the papal court at Avignon . While present , the recently elected anti @-@ Pope , Clement VII , appointed him papal penitentiary " for the English and Irish languages " . 
 = = Becoming Bishop of Galloway = = 
 On 15 July 1379 , Clement VII conditionally provided Thomas de Rossy to the Bishopric of Galloway with mandate for consecration should Ingram de <unk> wish to resign his right to the see . On the same day Thomas and another Scot , Hugh de <unk> , were sent to Scotland with 50 florins and with documentary evidence regarding the events leading to the Western Schism , events which allegedly nullified the election of Pope Urban VI . 
 The Galloway bishopric was vacant because of the death of Adam de Lanark , a death which had occurred during the vacancy of papal see . Oswald , the prior of <unk> Abbey , had been elected by the canons of Whithorn to succeed Adam , an election which Urban VI , sometime after 18 April 1378 , supported . This election was not supported by the Scottish @-@ backed anti @-@ Pope Clement VII . Clement instead appointed Ingram de <unk> , Archdeacon of Dunkeld ; however , Ingram was unwilling to take up the bishopric , and raised objections to his own appointment . 
 Ingram 's refusal allowed Rossy to take up the bishopric . He was consecrated by 16 July 1380 . Oswald launched an appeal to Clement , but a letter to Thomas dated 29 October 1381 , confirmed this had been rejected . A further letter was sent , as follows : 
 To the bishops of St Andrews and Dunkeld . Mandate to enquire into the claim advanced by Oswald , claustral prior of <unk> , O. <unk> . , Galloway diocese , to be the true bishop of Galloway in virtue of his election by the chapter of Galloway and subsequent provision made by Urban VI . They are to impose silence on him and to put Thomas de Rossy , provided to the bishopric by Clement VII and duly consecrated , into peaceful possession . 
 The cancellation of Oswald 's appointment does not appear to have silenced Oswald , who appears active in England , a kingdom which supported Urban VII . 
 = = Pro @-@ Clementine Thomas = = 
 As bishop of Galloway Thomas remained a close and highly active supporter of Clement . He preached the cause of Clement before Robert II at Dundee on 2 February 1380 . A military attack by Clementine Scotland on Urbanist England was planned . John <unk> related that a commission was granted to a Scottish bishop to lead a " crusade " on behalf of Clement into England ; this bishop was almost certainly Thomas de Rossy . Thomas preached sermons in the English marches attempting to win supporters for the cause , and authored a tractate attacking the Urbanist cause along with English support for it . 
 Although no " crusade " ever took place , around 1384 Thomas sent a letter to the bishops of England . The letter invited Henry le Despenser , Bishop of Norwich , or any other English bishop , to come to a debate with him ; if they preferred , he wrote , they could settle the matter for both countries through single combat . Henry le Despenser was probably addressed because he was known for his love of fighting , and had led a short expedition into France during the summer of 1383 . Despite his keenness to fight another bishop , Thomas de Rossy had apparently refused the offer of combat given by an English priest because of the latter 's lower status . 
 = = Bishop of Galloway = = 
 Thomas was the first and only Franciscan to become bishop of a Scottish diocese . Records of the day @-@ to @-@ day activities of Thomas as Bishop of Galloway , however , are thin . One charter survives , dated 16 July 1381 , confirming a grant of the church of Buittle to Sweetheart Abbey . The charter was issued at <unk> in <unk> parish , and was confirmed by the ( Avignon ) Pope on 18 October when Rossy himself was present at the papal court . On 31 December , he presented to Pope Clement VII a roll of petitions — a series of requests — all of which were granted . 
 After the death of King Robert II in 1390 , Bishop Thomas along with other prelates of the Scottish kingdom , attended the coronation of the new king . At Scone , on 16 August 1390 , two days after the coronation of Robert III of Scotland , Bishop Thomas gave a sermon ; according to Wyntoun : 
 The <unk> off Galloway <unk> , Thomas , 
 ( A <unk> solempne he was ) , 
 Made a <unk> <unk> <unk> , 
 And to the <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Death and succession = = 
 Bishop Thomas was at Avignon again in the mid @-@ 1390s , as attested by record of a series of mundane transactions conducted by him there . On 10 September 1395 , he was granted an <unk> to administer his bishopric in absentia , via a deputy ; he is not known to have returned to Scotland . His name appeared in the sources for the last time on 6 September 1397 . 
 The exact date he died is a mystery , but it was not until 28 May 1406 , that a successor , <unk> <unk> , was appointed to the see , meaning that Rossy 's death could have occurred anywhere between these dates . 
 As a friar and a bishop , Thomas could not father legitimate offspring and no partners or bastards are known . His own family background is likewise unknown , though he had a nephew for whom he obtained several papal favours . 
 = = Theology and writings = = 
 Thomas de Rossy was a theologian and known as such , though his extant writings are dominated by political invective . He authored two extant <unk> and probably at least two others not extant . His <unk> de <unk> Virginis <unk> was a reiteration of some of the arguments for the Immaculate Conception made by Duns Scotus . It was also a refutation of the scholars who had written against it , including Bernard of Clairvaux , Giles of Rome , Bonaventure O. F. M. , Richard Middleton , <unk> de <unk> , Robert Cowton O. F. M. , Alexander of Hales and Gregory of Rimini . Thomas ' focus on the Immaculate Conception stemmed from his days in Paris , where he preached in its favour ; it has even been suggested that Thomas was the Friar Minor particularly noted in Paris for his " cavalier treatment of St Bernard " . 
 Rossy 's second work , the Tractatus Episcopi <unk> <unk> de Regno Scotiae in Facto <unk> contra <unk> <unk> <unk> was a defense of Clement VII and an attack on the legitimacy of " Bartolomeo of Bari " ( i.e. Urban VI ) . It contains a long , detailed account of the events preceding the Schism , an account partially derived from a work of Cardinal Peter <unk> . In justifying the pontificate of Clement , the Tractatus made extensive use of prophecy , especially prophecies attributed to Saint John of Bridlington . The Tractatus Episcopi is the work , mentioned above , to which his letter to the bishops of England was appended . In the Tractatus he accused the English of supporting Urban solely through hatred of the French . 
 = The Care Bears Movie = 
 The Care Bears Movie is a 1985 Canadian / American animated fantasy film , the second feature production from the Toronto animation studio Nelvana . One of the first films based directly on a toy line , it introduced the Care Bears characters and their companions , the Care Bear Cousins . In the film , orphanage owners tell a story about the Care Bears , who live in a cloud @-@ filled land called Care @-@ a @-@ Lot . Travelling across Earth , the Bears help two lonely children named Kim and Jason find new parents , and also save a young magician 's apprentice named Nicholas from an evil spirit 's influence . Deep within a place called the Forest of Feelings , Kim , Jason , and their friends soon meet another group of creatures , the Care Bear Cousins . 
 American Greetings Corporation , the owners of the Care Bears characters , began development of a feature film in 1981 . Later on , the card company chose Toronto 's Nelvana to produce it , granted them rights to the Care Bears characters , and financed the film along with cereal manufacturer General Mills and television syndicator LBS Communications . Nelvana 's founders were on hand as producers , while fellow employee Arna Selznick directed . Production lasted eight months , cost no less than US $ 2 million , and took place in Canada , Taiwan , and South Korea . The voice cast included Mickey Rooney , Georgia Engel , Jackie Burroughs and Cree Summer . Two pop music stars , Carole King and John Sebastian , contributed several songs . 
 Although major US studios passed on the project , newly established independent distributor The Samuel Goldwyn Company acquired it and soon spent a record US $ 24 million promoting it . The film premiered on March 24 , 1985 , in Washington , D.C. and entered wide release in around 1 @,@ 000 North American theatres five days later . Another Nelvana work , Strawberry Shortcake Meets the Berrykins , played alongside the feature in theatres . The Care Bears Movie received mixed reviews from the outset ; critics raised concern over its potential as a full @-@ length advertisement for the title characters , among many other aspects . It went on to earn US $ 23 million domestically ; as Canada 's highest @-@ grossing film during 1985 ( with C $ 1 @.@ 845 million ) , it won a Golden Reel Award . Nelvana 's surprise hit also played in Europe , Australia , and Latin America . With over US $ 34 million in worldwide sales , it set a box @-@ office record for Canadian and non @-@ Disney animation , and has remained one of US distributor Goldwyn 's largest releases . 
 The movie 's success saved Nelvana from closing , helped revive films aimed at children in the US market , and has been cited as inspiring a spate of toy @-@ based animated and live @-@ action features . Nelvana produced two sequels in the next two years , A New Generation ( 1986 ) and Adventure in Wonderland ( 1987 ) ; neither surpassed the original financially or critically . The Care Bears franchise continues , and has included television series and specials , videos , and films . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mr. and Mrs. Cherrywood are a middle @-@ aged couple who run an orphanage . Mr. Cherrywood tells the orphans a story about the Care Bears and Care @-@ a @-@ Lot , their home in the clouds . In the story , Friend Bear and Secret Bear travel looking for people to cheer up . They meet Kim and Jason , two lonely orphaned children . Friend Bear and Secret Bear introduce themselves and remind the children of their ambitions , but neither of them are interested . 
 At an amusement park , Tenderheart Bear spots a magician 's apprentice named Nicholas . While unloading a trunk of goods for his master , the " Great <unk> " , Nicholas finds an old book with a diary @-@ style lock . When he unlocks it , an evil spirit appears as a woman 's face , and starts corrupting him . With his help , it lays waste to the park , and begins a quest to remove all caring from the world . 
 Back at Care @-@ a @-@ Lot , some of the other bears are working on their new invention : the Rainbow Rescue Beam , a portal that can send any bear to Earth and back . The two Care Bear cubs belonging to Grams Bear , Baby Hugs and Baby Tugs , interfere with it and bring forth a group of unexpected visitors : Friend Bear , Secret Bear , Kim , and Jason . The bears introduce themselves to the children , and give them a tour of their home . Tenderheart Bear returns on his now out of control Rainbow Roller just before a " Cloud Quake " caused by the spirit , which ruins Care @-@ a @-@ Lot . He informs the others of Nicholas ' troubles on Earth . Using the Rainbow Rescue Beam , he sends Kim and Jason to the park , along with Friend Bear and Secret Bear . They end up in the Forest of Feelings when the portal malfunctions . From a nearby river , the rest of the bears begin searching for them aboard a cloud ship called the Cloud Clipper . 
 Within the Forest , the children and their friends are introduced to Brave Heart Lion and Playful Heart Monkey , two of the Care Bear Cousins . Later on , the other bears discover more of these creatures , among them Cozy Heart Penguin , <unk> Heart Elephant , Swift Heart Rabbit , and Bright Heart Raccoon . During their stay , the spirit attacks them in several disguises : a <unk> , tree , and eagle . After the Care Bears and their Cousins defeat it , they venture back to Earth to save Nicholas from its influence . 
 At the park , Nicholas obtains the ingredients for his spell against the children and the creatures . After he casts it , the Care Bears and company engage in a long battle . The bears shoot beams of bright light on him , forming their " Stare " ; the Cousins help with their " Call " . As the creatures ' power drains away , Nicholas and the spirit briefly regain control . After Kim and Jason assist him , he finally realizes his misdeeds . With Secret Bear 's help , he closes the spirit 's face back into the book and saves himself , the park , and the world . He thanks the group and reunites with <unk> , while Tenderheart Bear inducts the Care Bear Cousins into the Care Bear Family , and Kim and Jason find new parents who take them to one of Nicholas ' shows . 
 As Mr. Cherrywood finishes his story , it is revealed that he is actually Nicholas , and that his wife is Kim . Tenderheart Bear , who has been listening from outside a window , returns to Care @-@ a @-@ Lot in his <unk> . The film ends with every member of the Care Bear Family waving good @-@ bye . 
 = = Voice cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The Care Bears were created in 1981 by Those Characters from Cleveland ( TCFC ) , a division of the Cleveland greeting card company American Greetings Corporation ( AGC ) . That same year , the title characters made their debut on greeting cards by Elena Kucharik , while American Greetings began to develop a feature @-@ length film using the characters . Kucharik , along with Linda Denham , Linda Edwards , Muriel <unk> , Dave <unk> , Tom Schneider , Ralph Shaffer , and Clark Wiley , created the original characters . Early in their tenure , the Bears appeared as toys from the Kenner company , and starred in two syndicated television specials from a Canadian animation studio , Atkinson Film @-@ Arts of Ottawa : The Care Bears in the Land Without Feelings ( 1983 ) and The Care Bears Battle the Freeze Machine ( 1984 ) . 
 Production of the first feature took place at another Canadian outlet , Toronto 's Nelvana studio . This came in a period in the company 's history which Nelvana co @-@ founder Michael Hirsh refers to as its " dark years " . At the time , Nelvana had just finished production of its first full @-@ length film , 1983 's Rock & Rule , which was produced using almost all of its resources ( for around US $ 8 million ) , and failed to find proper distribution . The film put them on the verge of closing down . Soon after , the Nelvana team began doing work on television shows like Inspector Gadget ( from DIC Entertainment ) , 20 Minute Workout ( from Orion Television ) , and Mr. <unk> . During this period , they also made syndicated specials based on American Greetings properties : Strawberry Shortcake , The Get Along Gang , and Herself the Elf . " In some instances , " noted Harvey Levin , vice @-@ president of marketing and entertainment communications at TCFC , " their capabilities [ on the Strawberry Shortcake specials ] surpassed Disney quality . " Various companies vied to produce a Care Bears feature , and Nelvana was the first to do so ; Hirsh sought to seize the opportunity after hearing of its development . DIC Entertainment also expressed interest . Thanks to the Strawberry Shortcake specials and their experience on Rock & Rule , Nelvana acquired the rights to the characters and gained a contract from American Greetings to create the script . To convince the production partnership of TCFC and Kenner Toys , Hirsh held a competition inspired by Pepsi @-@ Cola 's " Pepsi Challenge " commercials of the time , in which he tested clips from Nelvana and other vying studios and checked the " animation quality , music , sound effects , and colour " of each . He then asked the producers to decide on the best demo , and Nelvana scored highest . Hirsh later recalled the words of his partners : " We know you 've rigged this against everybody else because you 've chosen the clips . But we like the approach . " 
 = = = Producers and crew = = = 
 The Care Bears Movie was one of the first films to be based directly on an established toy line . It featured the ten original Bears , along with six additions to the line @-@ up , and marked the media debut of the Care Bear Cousins . Produced for at least US $ 2 million , the film was financed by American Greetings , the owners of the Care Bears franchise ; General Mills , the toys ' distributor ; and television syndicator LBS Communications . The Kenner company also took part in the production . Brought in under budget , The Care Bears Movie became Nelvana 's second feature @-@ length production , and was made over an eight @-@ month period that lasted until February 1985 . Michael Hirsh is quoted as saying in Daniel <unk> 's 2002 book , The Nelvana Story : " Nobody had ever made an animated movie for theatrical release for as little money and in as little time . " In 2009 his partner , Clive A. Smith , told Canadian Business magazine : " I swear I grimaced at the thought of doing a Care Bears feature . But Michael [ Hirsh ] went out and actually brought that project in . " Nelvana was responsible for the script , several special effects , including those for the " Care Bear Stare " , and hired musicians and voice actors . With this project , Arna Selznick became the third of only four women ever to direct an animated feature ; prior to this , she worked on several Nelvana productions , including Strawberry Shortcake and the Baby Without a Name . Nelvana 's founders — Michael Hirsh , Patrick Loubert , and Clive A. Smith — participated as the main producers . The studio 's roster included Charles Bonifacio , the director of animation , and supervising animator D. Brewster , who previously took part in the animation courses at Ontario 's Sheridan College . Dale Schott , who served as a storyboard artist , remarked that " Nelvana had a lot to do with reviving the low @-@ budget feature " with its efforts on The Care Bears Movie . 
 Four employees of the film 's financiers served as executive producers : Louis Gioia Jr . , president of Kenner 's Marketing Services division ; Jack Chojnacki , co @-@ president of TCFC ; Carole MacGillvray , who became president of General Mills ' M.A.D. ( Marketing and Design ) division in February 1984 ; and Robert <unk> , LBS ' senior vice @-@ president of programming . A fifth producer , American Greetings staffer W. Ray Peterson , went uncredited . Three associate producers worked on the film : Paul Pressler , another employee at Kenner ; John <unk> , who later became LBS ' executive vice @-@ president ; and Harvey Levin . Lenora Hume , the director of photography on Rock & Rule , was the supervising producer . 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 Along with Inspector Gadget , The Care Bears Movie was Nelvana 's first foray into animation outsourcing . Production took place at Nelvana 's facilities , Taiwan 's Wang Film Productions ( Cuckoo 's Nest Studio ) , and the newly established <unk> Heung @-@ Up and <unk> studios in South Korea . Delaney and Friends , a Vancouver @-@ based outlet , did uncredited work . Nelvana faced several problems with their Korean contractors , among them the language barrier between the Canadian crew and the overseas staff , and the unwieldy processes through which the film reels were shipped to the West . At one point , Loubert , Smith , and fellow staffer David Altman spent three days trying to persuade several unpaid animators to return important layout sketches . In exchange for the layouts , Nelvana gave them US $ 20 @,@ 000 in Korean won . By then , the production was falling behind schedule , and an opening date was already set ; Loubert sent half of the work to Taiwan ( where Lenora Hume supervised ) , while the remainder stayed in Korea under Loubert 's and Smith 's watch . 
 Back in the Americas , Hirsh tried to promote the unfinished feature before its deadline ; unable to get available footage , he instead managed to show potential marketers some Leica reels and a few moments of completed colour animation . According to him , it was the first time an animated " work in progress " was screened to exhibitors ; this ploy has since been used by the Disney company , particularly in the case of Beauty and the Beast ( at the 1991 New York Film Festival ) . " People loved the movie anyway , " he said of this experiment . " I was told it was considered great salesmanship . It made [ them ] feel that they were part of the process because they were seeing unfinished work . " 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music for The Care Bears Movie was composed by Patricia Cullen . The soundtrack album was released in LP and cassette format by Kid Stuff Records in the United States , and on Cherry Lane Records in the United Kingdom . Six songs were performed by Carole King , John Sebastian , NRBQ , and the Tower of Power ; actor Harry Dean Stanton had a guest appearance as Brave Heart Lion for the song " Home is in Your Heart " . The songs were produced by Lou Adler and John Sebastian , with additional lyrics and music by Ken Stephenson , Walt Woodward , and David Bird ; Nelvana crewmember Peter <unk> prepared the song sequences . 
 Before The Care Bears Movie , Sebastian contributed to several other Nelvana specials , including The Devil and Daniel Mouse ( 1978 ) . When asked to compose three tracks for the film , he learned about the characters since he was unfamiliar with the franchise . Despite his misgivings on the marketing aspects , Sebastian said in April 1985 , " I think their central theme — being candid about your feelings , sharing your feelings — is a very positive message for children . " 
 Adele Freedman of Toronto 's The Globe and Mail wrote positively about the music in the film : 
 A lot of caring has gone into the soundtrack . It doesn 't attack the eardrum in the manner of so much current kids ' stuff . It supposes that a child 's ear can discriminate between good music and aural pollution as well as anybody else 's . Carole King ( of Tapestry fame ) wrote and performed the theme song , " Nobody Cares Like A Bear " . [ sic ] The remaining songs , written by John Sebastian , are likewise entertaining and imaginatively arranged . The music does a lot to make the kingdom of Care @-@ a @-@ lot , where the goody @-@ goody bears hang out on clouds monitoring life below on their Caring Meter , a slightly less irritable place . 
 Other critics tended to differ . The Houston Chronicle 's Stephen Hunter found that " the film integrates its music into the story very clumsily . It 's not merely that the numbers are forgettable — they are — it 's that they 're shoe @-@ horned so obviously into the story that they don 't amplify it , they stop it cold . " Likewise , Michael Blowen of The Boston Globe said that " the uninspired songs ... add nothing to the banal plot . " 
 = = Release = = 
 In 1984 , before the film 's completion , Carole MacGillvray offered The Care Bears Movie for consideration to major studios in the US Since they did not see the financial potential in a picture aimed strictly at children , they declined the offer . MacGillvray told Adweek magazine in April 1985 , " I made several trips , and I was really disappointed . They kept telling me things like ' Animated movies won 't sell ' and ' Maybe we 'd consider it if you were Disney , ' but most just said , ' You 're very nice , good @-@ bye . ' " When few takers were left , she took it to the Samuel Goldwyn Company . A newcomer in the independent market , it agreed to release the film . Comparing the title characters ' appeal to Hollywood stars like Barbra Streisand and Robert Redford , founder Samuel Goldwyn , Jr. remarked : " Having my [ two ] children , I know these bears are stars , too . " 
 According to the 1985 edition of Guinness Film Facts and Feats , the Samuel Goldwyn Company spent up to US $ 24 million on the publicity budget for The Care Bears Movie , the largest at that time . The film 's advertising budget was US $ 4 million ; Variety reported that " the beneficiaries of [ its ] merchandising tie @-@ ins have earmarked [ the remaining ] $ 20 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to promo Care Bear products in step with the film 's release " . For the film 's promotion , Goldwyn 's staff partnered with Kenner Toys and the fast food chain Pizza Hut ; there were also tie @-@ ins on Trix cereal boxes . Parker Brothers published two tie @-@ in books , Meet the Care Bear Cousins and Keep On Caring , shortly after the film 's release ; both were reissued in October 1985 by Children 's Press . 
 The Goldwyn staff came up with two advertising strategies , which tested well with the company — one was aimed at the film 's target audience of children as young as age five ; another targeted grown @-@ ups , parents , and older children . In the words of Cliff Hauser , the distributor 's executive director of marketing , " We didn 't want parents to think the movie was threatening . So the big debate was — although the formula for success in animated film is the triumph of good over evil — how can you do that in single @-@ image ads ? " Jeff <unk> , vice @-@ president of theatrical at Goldwyn , referred to the first one as " the cheery approach " ; ads therein featured the Care Bears on clouds , and carried the tagline " A movie that 'll make the whole family care @-@ a @-@ lot " . Hauser said , " That 's one that a mother can look at and know she can take the 2 @-@ year @-@ old to it and not worry . " The other campaign , which <unk> called " more Disney @-@ esque " , featured an evil tree whose hands reached out to capture the Bears ; its tagline , " What happens when the world stops caring ? " , was also seen on the official poster . Bingham Ray , Goldwyn 's vice @-@ president of distribution , was involved in the promotional efforts . 
 Around opening time , Hirsh predicted that The Care Bears Movie would be its decade 's response to Pinocchio and Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs , both from Walt Disney Productions . Loubert added , " These characters say something important to children . Our challenge has been to create a very distinct character for each Care Bear . A lot of effort went into bringing out their individuality . " Some time afterward , Hirsh conceded that parents had to come to the film , out of respect for the dark content within . " Frightening scenes , " he said , " are a necessity for the reality of the hero and villain — just as it works in nursery rhymes . Kids work out their fears this way . " TCFC 's Jack Chojnacki offered this vindication in the Wall Street Journal : " We consider a film one of the many products we license . When we started the whole Care Bears project we knew the importance of bears in the market but that there was a void . There were no specific bears . In the movie marketplace there was a void for good family @-@ fare films . " And , in the words of Carole MacGillvray , " Toy recognition drives this movie . " 
 = = = North America = = = 
 The Care Bears Movie premiered in Washington , D.C. , on March 24 , 1985 , as part of a Special Olympics benefit ; Georgia Engel , the voice of Love @-@ a @-@ lot Bear , attended this event . The film opened on March 29 , 1985 , in the United States and Canada , as Nelvana 's first widely released feature . It became surprisingly successful at the North American box office , playing primarily at matinees and early evening showings . At the time , the North American film industry was bereft of children 's and family fare ; with The Care Bears Movie , Hirsh said , " There 's such a large audience for a film that appeals primarily to 6 @-@ year @-@ olds . " He remarked later on , " What we 've done [ at Nelvana ] is tailor the film to a pre @-@ literate audience , the very young . It 's interesting to see the audience . The kids are fixated on the screen . [ It 's ] awesome to them . " Clive A. Smith observed that some children came to showings with their Bears ; long line @-@ ups held back its audience in several cities . Among those attending the matinee screenings was John Waters , a filmmaker known for Pink Flamingos and Polyester . The film made an appearance at the USA Film Festival in Dallas , Texas , during its release . 
 When shown in theatres , the feature was immediately followed by Nelvana 's TV special , Strawberry Shortcake Meets the Berrykins . It was directed by Laura Shepherd and produced by Nelvana 's founders along with Lenora Hume . The story involves Strawberry Shortcake and a tiny group of creatures called the Berrykins as they work to clear their home of Strawberryland of the " world 's favourite perfume " , a pungent odour which was unleashed from a purple cloud . LBS Communications syndicated it on US television around the time of The Care Bears Movie 's theatrical tenure ; a video release from Family Home Entertainment soon followed . 
 The Care Bears Movie ranked fourth at the North American box office on its first two weekends , grossing US $ 3 @.@ 7 million and US $ 3 @.@ 2 million respectively . It was screened in 1 @,@ 003 venues during its first four weeks . After three months , it grossed about US $ 23 million in the United States , and placed 40th among 1985 's major films ; it brought in US $ 9 @,@ 435 @,@ 000 in rentals for the Goldwyn company . In Canada , the film was released by Astral Films and Criterion Pictures Corporation , and made C $ 1 @,@ 845 @,@ 000 by the end of 1985 . It was the year 's highest @-@ grossing release in that market , followed by Disney 's One Magic Christmas and a Quebec production called Le <unk> . 
 Several months after The Care Bears Movie , Walt Disney Pictures released its animated feature The Black Cauldron . Costing US $ 25 million , it was the most expensive animated film of its time , but grossed nearly as much as Nelvana 's production ( US $ 21 @.@ 3 million ) . As a result , The Care Bears Movie 's performance alarmed animators at the Disney Studios ; Don Bluth , a former recruit , dismissed the " public taste " factor that it demonstrated . Another animator , Ron Clements , later reflected on this : " Everyone was kind of scared about the future of Disney animation . It wasn 't a good time . It was really a terrible time . " This sentiment was echoed in Waking Sleeping Beauty , Disney 's 2010 documentary on the revival of its animation unit . While comparing The Black Cauldron with The Care Bears Movie , The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution singled out the " putrid pastels " of Nelvana 's production and commented that they " don 't even deserve to be mentioned in the same review . " Months afterward , a re @-@ issue of Disney 's One Hundred and One Dalmatians surpassed both The Care Bears Movie and The Black Cauldron , with over US $ 30 million in sales . 
 Sometime after the film 's release , Children 's Video Library ( a division of Vestron Video ) picked up the video rights to The Care Bears Movie for US $ 1 @.@ 8 million . It was released in the United States on July 10 , 1985 , in VHS and Betamax formats . On August 10 , 1985 , it debuted in 26th place on Billboard 's Top Videocassette Rentals chart . It ranked fourth on the first edition of the magazine 's Top Kid Video chart ( on October 5 ) . It was tracked by Video Insider 's children 's chart ( on August 30 , 1985 ) , as one of five toy @-@ related titles on tape ( along with two compilations of Hasbro 's Transformers series ; another with Hallmark Cards ' Rainbow Brite ; and the last with Strawberry Shortcake ) . By 1988 , Vestron 's edition sold over 140 @,@ 000 copies . In 1990 Video Treasures reissued it on videocassette ; on October 10 , 1995 , Hallmark Home Entertainment published another VHS edition as part of a six @-@ title package from Goldwyn and Britain 's Rank Organisation . 
 On September 5 , 2000 , MGM Home Entertainment re @-@ released the film on video as part of its Family Entertainment Collection ; the DVD edition premiered on August 6 , 2002 , and was packaged with the 1978 British family film The Water Babies . In 2003 the film was inducted into the MGM Kids line . In honour of the Care Bears ' 25th anniversary , another DVD edition of the film was released on March 20 , 2007 , with restored picture quality ; it contained the franchise 's second Atkinson Film @-@ Arts special , The Care Bears Battle the Freeze Machine , as an extra . American Greetings launched an official anniversary website and a Dodge Grand Caravan giveaway as part of the proceedings . By 2007 , home video sales of The Care Bears Movie totalled over five million units . 
 The Care Bears Movie was scheduled to premiere on the US premium television network , Disney Channel , on June 28 , 1986 , but did so one month in advance . In September 1987 , the film made its terrestrial broadcast premiere on the ABC network 's Saturday morning schedule . It also aired on American Movie Classics in July 7 , 1991 , and on Showtime and The Movie Channel in the 2000s . The film aired on Starz Entertainment 's Encore channel in September 2007 , as part of its " Big ' 80s " Labour Day marathon , chronicling various releases from that decade . It was among the first films shown on Canada 's <unk> channel in October 1994 . 
 = = = Overseas = = = 
 Amid the US and Canadian success of The Care Bears Movie , Goldwyn took the film to the 38th edition of the Cannes Film Festival , where it was highly received ; a group of costumed Care Bears strolled along the <unk> to promote the picture . Among its overseas distributors was Germany 's <unk> , which released it on March 20 , 1986 , under the title Der <unk> Film . It sold 538 @,@ 487 tickets in that territory , placing 47th among new releases , and grossed over <unk> ( € 2 @,@ 051 @,@ 600 ; US $ 2 @,@ 868 @,@ 000 ) . The film was released on VHS in October 1986 by the local division of CBS / Fox Video , and aired on national broadcaster ARD during the 1988 Christmas season . 
 The Care Bears Movie was released in the United Kingdom by Miracle Films in August 1985 , and did well in matinee @-@ only engagements ; a video edition from Vestron 's local branch came out some months later . In February 1986 the film was released by France 's <unk> under the franchise name Les Bisounours ; publishing rights were held by Hachette Livre . It opened on March 20 , 1986 , in the Netherlands as De Troetelbeertjes . On July 21 , 1986 , the Bermudez de Castro company opened the film in Madrid , Spain , as Los <unk> <unk> ; it grossed over 23 @,@ 728 @,@ 000 Pts ( € 142 @,@ 606 ; US $ 199 @,@ 500 ) from 93 @,@ 294 admissions . Among that country 's Catalan speakers , it is known as Els <unk> <unk> . The film was released in Czechoslovakia by <unk> <unk> <unk> on December 1 , 1988 , as <unk> <unk> . It was advertised in Italy as <unk> del cuore , and in Poland as <unk> o <unk> <unk> . 
 In Mexico , The Care Bears Movie was released on April 24 , 1986 , as Los <unk> <unk> . In Brazil , the film was promoted as As <unk> <unk> dos <unk> <unk> . Television airings occurred on Australia 's Nine Network in 1987 , and Malaysia 's TV2 ( in August 1993 ) and Disney Channel in April 2002 . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 As opposed to Rock & Rule ( which Nelvana owned outright ) , the characters in The Care Bears Movie were the property of American Greetings , who paid Nelvana a service fee to work on the film . Nelvana , however , hardly received any profits from the production ; this caused its founders to express regret about the situation . In The Nelvana Story , Patrick Loubert explained the catch @-@ 22 that they would face numerous times in the years to come : " We could have waived our fee and taken a big piece of the film . We were offered that deal . But if we had waived the fee , we couldn 't have made the payroll . Once the picture was hugely successful , we thought we should have waived the fee . But we couldn 't have . " At the time of production , Nelvana had begun embarking on service work that other companies provided them , not only to help ease the debts the studio incurred after Rock & Rule , but also because it proved profitable in due time . 
 By 1989 , The Care Bears Movie made over US $ 34 million worldwide , according to Maclean 's magazine ; this made it the highest @-@ grossing animated feature film to come from Canada . It became the highest @-@ grossing animated film not produced by the Disney company , surpassing the US $ 11 million of Atlantic Entertainment Group 's 1983 release The Smurfs and the Magic Flute ; Don Bluth 's An American Tail ( 1986 ) and The Land Before Time ( 1988 ) later took over this position . As of 2016 , that title is held by Illumination Entertainment 's Minions ( 2015 ) , with US $ 1 @.@ 157 billion . The film virtually saved a fledgling Nelvana from going out of business , and was the company 's highest @-@ grossing venture . It is also among the highest @-@ grossing releases from either incarnation of Samuel Goldwyn . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical analysis = = = 
 The Care Bears Movie received mixed reviews . During its original release , The Care Bears Movie had varying degrees of success with critics . The New York Times ' Richard Grenier wrote , " [ The film ] recalls vintage Walt Disney , both in substance and in the style of hand animation . " Rick Lyman of Knight Ridder News Services said in his review : " Any movie — even an animated one — that has characters with names such as <unk> Bear , Love @-@ a @-@ lot Bear , and <unk> Heart Elephant is obviously going to rank quite high on the cute meter . And this one sends the needle right off the chart . You 've never seen such cuteness . " Adele Freedman also gave it a positive review , commenting : " [ It ] has a lot going for it if you can tolerate the Bears . " Edward Jones of Virginia 's The Free Lance @-@ Star praised it , but stated that " More comedy would have helped broaden [ its ] appeal to older youngsters . " The Deseret News of Utah gave it three stars out of four ( a " Good " grade ) with this comment : " Sticky sweet , but a nice message . " 
 Michael Blowen began his review of the film by stating that " [ it ] satisfies the primary obligation of a bedtime story — before it 's half over the children will be fast asleep . " He added that " this sugar @-@ coated trifle could only satisfy the most ardent Care Bears fan " , and that " the characters themselves lack definition " . The Arkansas Democrat @-@ Gazette said , " Who except a callous <unk> would carp about the fact that The Care Bears Movie espouses a <unk> philosophy of ' sharing our feelings ' that seems drawn straight from the pages on one of those insufferable self @-@ motivation tomes ? No one , that 's who . " In the words of The Washington Post reviewer Paul Attanasio , " The best cartoons recognize the dark side of kids , their penchant for violence , their fearful fantasies . [ This movie ] just patronizes them . It even has a child chortling , ' Aren 't parents great ! ' Well , they are and they aren 't , and kids know that . " 
 The animation in the film received mixed reviews as well . Adele Freedman praised the style and backgrounds , and called the special effects " stunning " . Likewise , John Stanley wrote that " The style is cartoonish and cute " in his 1988 film guide , Revenge of the Creature Features . While complimenting it as " a harmless film diversion " , Stephen Hunter said that " the movie has the lustrous , glossy look of the very best in children 's book illustrations " . " On the other hand , " he added , " the producers obviously couldn 't afford an expensive [ multiplane ] camera , the staple of the Disney product , and so the scenes have a depressing flatness to them . And the backgrounds , so brilliantly developed in Disney , tend to be blurry and hastily done . " Jim Moorhead of Florida 's The Evening Independent said , " [ Nelvana 's ] animation is not the best . Far from it . Everything 's in pastels , fine details are largely missing , mouth movements are minimal and the motions of the figures are scarcely better than some of those awful Saturday morning cartoons on TV . " The staff at Variety magazine stated that the " style ... tends towards a primer reading level . " Halliwell 's Film Guide called it " sluggishly animated and narrated " . As with the Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution , The New York Times ' Janet Maslin found that the quality paled in comparison to Disney features ( in this case , 1940 's Pinocchio ) . 
 The Los Angeles Times ' Charles Solomon ( in his 1989 book Enchanted Drawings : The History of Animation ) , and Michael <unk> of Rhode Island 's Providence Journal , faulted the plot . The Evening Independent 's Moorhead and Jim Davidson of the Pittsburgh Press noticed at least two parallel storylines in the film , one of which involved the magician Nicholas . The National Coalition on Television Violence counted at least 20 acts of violence throughout the picture . 
 Critics questioned its purpose as a feature @-@ length advertisement for Care Bears merchandise ; among them were Charles Solomon , Paul Attanasio , The Morning Call of Pennsylvania , and Bill Cosford of The Miami Herald . The Boca Raton News ' Skip Sheffield commented , " I couldn 't help being bothered by the blatant commercialism of this whole venture . " The British magazine Films and Filming remarked : " The purpose of the film is presumably to sell more toys as it unashamedly pushes the message that without at least one Care Bear around life can be very lonely . " <unk> observed , " one of the youngest target audiences of any animated movie " , as did the Halliwell 's staff ; film critic Leonard Maltin ( in his Movie Guide ) ; and Henry <unk> ( in his Family Guide to Movies on Video ) . 
 The 1986 International Film Guide called it " an elementary piece of animation lacking colour and character , with not much humour , quite lacking in charm , and indifferently scored " . Maltin gave it two stars out of four in his Movie Guide ; similarly , the Gale Group publication , VideoHound 's Golden Movie Retriever , gave it two bones out of four in its 1997 edition . According to Derek Owen of Time Out 's Film Guide , " Adults forced to accompany three @-@ year @-@ olds to the movie would have had a little moment of satisfaction when the time came to shovel the Care Bears toys out of the house into landfill sites . " 
 The mixed reception carried on in the years ahead : in her 1995 book Inside <unk> , Loretta <unk> said of the film and its subsequent follow @-@ ups , " If you can hack the sugarcoated attitudes of this group of cuddly bears , more power to you ! There 's nothing insidious about the Care Bears , but their overbearing sweetness may not appeal to all viewers . " She cautioned parents of the merchandising aspect behind the tapes . Dave <unk> of Illinois ' Courier @-@ News wrote in 1998 , " One Care Bears Movie ... can give all G @-@ rated entertainment a bad name . " In 2003 the Erie Times @-@ News acknowledged its financial success , but commented on its " lack of a creative title " . Animation expert Jerry Beck wrote in his 2005 book , The Animated Movie Guide , " It 's a simple , serviceable adventure with several standout sequences . ... There 's no doubt about it , this is a children 's film aimed at the under @-@ seven crowd . But it 's one of the better animated children 's films produced during this period . " 
 = = = Allusions = = = 
 In his Christian Science Monitor review , David Sterritt observed that The Care Bears Movie was mostly influenced by The Sorcerer 's Apprentice , a 1797 poem by German author Johann Wolfgang von Goethe , along with " a trace of H. P. Lovecraft " that probably wasn 't intended " . He went on to say , " I also noticed a subtle sexism at work . Why must it be the little girl [ Kim ] who dreams of being a nurse and the little boy [ Jason ] of being a jet pilot — and not the other way around , to stimulate young imaginations instead of echoing past patterns ? " Blowen wrote that the two children both get turned " from cynics to idealists " . Joe Fox of Ontario 's The Windsor Star , and Stephen Hunter , compared the Bears ' home of Care @-@ a @-@ lot to King Arthur 's mythical castle of Camelot ; Blowen commented that in this place , " altruism is king " . Hunter noted that " the celestial physics are left vague " , concerning Kim and Jason 's trip from Care @-@ a @-@ lot to the Forest of Feelings . Critics compared at least two aspects of the film to Disney 's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs : the Spirit received similarities to the Magic Mirror and the Wicked Queen , but Charles Solomon felt that the Bears lacked the individual qualities of the Dwarfs . Solomon noted that in animated features of that era , villains such as the Spirit " lacked motivation — if the viewer accepts their evil intentions , it 's only because he 's been told to " . According to Tom Ogden ( in his 1997 book Wizards and Sorcerers : From <unk> to Zoroaster ) , the Bears ' Stare against the Spirit serves as a kind of white magic . " Such a non @-@ violent solution , " wrote Bruce Bailey in The Montreal Gazette , " should sit well with peace lobbyists " . According to a 2005 article in The Times of London , an Internet reviewer called The Care Bears Movie " a fine example of Christian socialism " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 At the 1985 Genie Awards in its native Canada , The Care Bears Movie won the Golden Reel Award for being the country 's highest @-@ grossing film of the year . Ron Cohen , president of the Academy of Canadian Cinema and Television , presented the award to producers Hirsh , Loubert , and Smith . John Sebastian 's " Nobody Cares Like a Bear " received a Genie nomination for Best Original Song ; his performance was part of CBC 's live telecast of the ceremony on March 20 , 1986 . The film received a Young Artist Award nomination for " Best Family Animation Series or Special " , but lost to the CBS series The Charlie Brown and Snoopy Show . During its 21st annual award ceremony on October 17 , 1985 , Nashville 's performance rights organization SESAC honoured Woodward and Bird for their songwriting efforts . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In the words of Jerry Beck , " [ The Care Bears Movie 's ] box @-@ office gross signalled to Hollywood a renewed interest in animated features , albeit for children . This is something The Secret of NIMH tried to accomplish but failed to do . " A plethora of children 's and family film entertainment followed in its wake , such as Sesame Street Presents Follow That Bird from Warner Bros. , and a re @-@ issue of Universal Studios ' E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial . Atlantic Releasing joined this movement by establishing Clubhouse Pictures , which showed G @-@ rated films during 1986 . Nelvana 's film helped to bring back matinee engagements to prominence across North America . 
 Mentioning The Care Bears Movie as " the most recent example " , Charles Solomon brought up the subject of feature @-@ length toy adaptations in an April 1985 interview on Los Angeles ' <unk> @-@ FM . He spoke to Warner Bros. animator Chuck Jones , who replied : " I feel that it 's proper — after all , that 's the way Alice in Wonderland was written : the dolls were all made first , then they made the picture about the dolls , right ? " In July 1985 Sarah <unk> of United Press International ( UPI ) called The Care Bears Movie " another licensing innovation for TCFC " , following the department 's previous endeavours . UPI 's Vernon Scott ( in 1985 ) , and Bruce A. Austin ( in his 1989 book Immediate Seating ) , observed how the merchandising arrived in advance of the film 's release . In forthcoming years , several media adaptations based on established toy lines would follow a similar marketing tactic . Examples included films based on Hasbro 's Transformers ( in 1986 and 2007 ) and My Little Pony ; features with Tonka 's <unk> ( Battle of the Rock Lords ) and Pound Puppies ( Legend of Big Paw ) ; and a television series and feature with Hallmark 's Rainbow Brite . The Care Bears Movie was parodied in " At the Movies " , a 1991 episode of Nickelodeon and Klasky Csupo 's animated series Rugrats . In that episode , the Pickles family goes to see The Land Without Smiles , starring the Dummi Bears ( who are patterned after the Care Bears ) . 
 = = Follow @-@ ups = = 
 After the release of The Care Bears Movie , DIC Entertainment produced a syndicated 11 @-@ episode television series featuring the title characters . Another series , Nelvana 's The Care Bears Family , premiered on ABC in the US and Canada 's Global in September 1986 , and was subsequently broadcast in 140 countries . Nelvana followed the first film with another two theatrical instalments , Care Bears Movie II : A New Generation ( 1986 ) and The Care Bears Adventure in Wonderland ( 1987 ) ; neither made as much of a critical or commercial impact . A New Generation , released by Columbia Pictures , made over US $ 8 @.@ 5 million in North America and US $ 12 million worldwide . Adventure in Wonderland was self @-@ financed by Nelvana and released by Cineplex Odeon Films , and grossed US $ 2 @.@ 608 million domestically ; with worldwide earnings of US $ 6 million , it barely recovered its costs . Because of this , Michael Hirsh later declared , " It was just one sequel too many . " The Bears returned for one more animated production , Care Bears Nutcracker Suite , which debuted on video and television in December 1988 . The franchise 's next feature film , 2004 's Journey to Joke @-@ a @-@ lot , also premiered on video ( via Lionsgate and Family Home Entertainment ) . 
 = Battle of Posada = 
 The Battle of Posada ( November 9 , 1330 – November 12 , 1330 ) was fought between Basarab I of Wallachia and Charles I Robert of Hungary . 
 The small Wallachian army led by Basarab , formed of cavalry and foot archers , as well as local peasants , managed to ambush and defeat the 30 @,@ 000 @-@ strong Hungarian army , in a mountainous region near the border between Oltenia and Severin . 
 The battle resulted in a major Wallachian victory and disaster for Charles Robert , becoming a turning point in the politics of Hungary , which had to abandon its hopes of extending the kingdom to the Black Sea . For Wallachia , the victory meant an increase in morale and the further evolution of the independent state . 
 = = Background = = 
 Some historians claim that the Cumans aided the Wallachians in the battle . In 1324 , Wallachia was a vassal of Hungary , and Robert referred to Basarab as " our Transalpine Voivode " . 
 The war started with encouragement from the Voivode of Transylvania and a certain <unk> , who later bore the title Ban of Severin . In 1330 , Robert captured the long disputed Wallachian citadel of Severin and handed it to the Transylvanian Voivode . 
 Basarab sent envoys who asked for the hostilities to cease , and in return offered to pay 7 @,@ 000 marks in silver , submit the fortress of Severin to Robert , and send his own son as hostage . According to the Viennese Illuminated Chronicle , a contemporary account , Robert said about Basarab : " He is the shepherd of my sheep , and I will take him out of his mountains , dragging him by his beard . " Another account writes that Robert said that : " ... he will drag the Voivode from his cottage , as would any driver his oxen or shepherd his sheep . " 
 The King 's councillors begged him to accept the offer or give a milder reply , but he refused and led his 30 @,@ 000 @-@ strong army deeper into Wallachia " without proper supplies or adequate reconnaissance " . Basarab was unable to stand a battle in the open field against a large army , due to the poor state of his troops , and he decided to retreat somewhere into the Transylvanian Alps . 
 Robert entered Curtea de <unk> , the main city of the Wallachian state . He realised that Basarab had fled into the mountains and decided to give chase . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The location of the battle is still debated among historians . One theory gives the location of the battle at <unk> , in some mountain gorges , in the valley of Olt , Transylvania . However , Romanian historian Neagu Djuvara denies this and states that the location of the battle was somewhere at the border between Oltenia and Severin . 
 The Wallachian army , led by Basarab himself , probably numbered less than 10 @,@ 000 men and consisted of cavalry , infantry archers , and some locally recruited peasants . When Robert saw his best knights being killed , without being able to fight back , while the escape routes were blocked by the Wallachian cavalry , he gave his royal robes and insignia to one of his captains – " who dies under a hail of arrows and stones " – and , with a few loyal subjects , made a difficult escape to Visegrád " clad in dirty civilian clothes " . 
 Robert later recounted in detail , in a charter of December 13 , 1335 , how one " Nicholas , son of " Radoslav " , saved his life by defending him from the swords of five Wallachian warriors , giving him enough time to escape . Most of the Hungarian army – which included many nobles – was destroyed ; among the casualties were the Voivode of Transylvania and the priest who accompanied the king . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The victory represented the survival of the Wallachian state , as well as the beginning of a period of tense relations between Basarab and the Kingdom of Hungary , which lasted until 1344 , when Basarab sent his son Alexandru in order to re @-@ establish a relationship between the two states . 
 Because of its large financial power , the Kingdom of Hungary quickly rebuilt its army and found itself in conflict with the Holy Roman Empire in 1337 . However , the Hungarian king maintained a de jure suzerainty over Wallachia until the diplomatic disputes had been resolved . 
 = Crash : Mind over Mutant = 
 Crash : Mind over Mutant is a platform video game published by Activision in North America and by Sierra Entertainment internationally and developed by Vancouver @-@ based Radical Entertainment for the PlayStation 2 , PlayStation Portable ( ported by Virtuos ) , Wii and Xbox 360 . The Nintendo DS version of the game was developed by TOSE . It was released in North America on October 7 , 2008 and was later released in Europe and Australia on October 31 . It is the second game in the series not to have a Japanese release , after Crash of the Titans . 
 Crash : Mind over Mutant is the fifteenth and so far latest installment in the Crash Bandicoot video game series , the seventh in the main franchise , and is the second title in accordance to the mutant series ' chronology . The game 's story centers on the arrival of a popular technological device ( a parody of devices such as the iPhone and BlackBerry ) that puts whoever uses it under the control of the device 's creators Doctor Neo Cortex and Doctor Nitrus Brio , who serve as the stories ' primary antagonists . Crash Bandicoot - protagonist of the series and only one unaffected by the device besides his spirit ally Aku Aku - must free his friends from the control of the device and put an end to Doctor Cortex 's plot . 
 The title received a generally mixed response , with reviews varying from version to version . The Wii and PlayStation 2 versions were met with generally positive reviews , while the Xbox 360 version received a mediocre critical response . Much of the game 's praise went to the humorous cutscenes and dialogue , while the <unk> camera and extensive use of backtracking was sharply criticised . The Nintendo DS version was received negatively for its dull and repetitive gameplay . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Crash : Mind over Mutant is a beat ' em up game in which the player controls Crash Bandicoot , whose main objective is to explore his home , Wumpa Island , and surrounding environments to uncover the mystery behind the " NV " , a personal digital assistant created by the main antagonist . Crash : Mind over Mutant is a mission @-@ based game as opposed to Crash of the Titans 's level @-@ based structure , with goals being given by non @-@ playable characters . Characters with exclamation points ( ! ) over their heads , when talked to , give out important information that is needed to continue the story . 
 Scattered throughout the world are special items that empower Crash in one way or another . Golden stopwatches trigger a time @-@ limited <unk> which usually involves collecting objects or breaking things to earn bonuses . Red running shoes serve to temporarily power up Crash 's kick attack and cause him to move faster , while the " Quad Damage " power @-@ up can be used by Crash to temporarily multiply his attack power by four . 
 = = = Combat = = = 
 Crash can perform both a light and heavy @-@ powered attack . He can also block , dodge @-@ and @-@ counter , or break an enemy 's block . When he defeats enemies or destroys objects , a magical substance known as Mojo is released that , when collected , allows Crash 's abilities to be upgraded . 
 While small minions require only a single combo attack for Crash to defeat , larger enemies , known as " Titans " , require more effort to subdue . Each of the unique Titans in the game possess a star meter that indicates how close they are to being stunned . When the meter is full , the Titan is susceptible to " jacking " , meaning Crash can mount the creature and control it . While controlled by the player , the Titan possesses a similar moveset to Crash , although some jacked Titans can shoot projectiles . Besides having more health , the Titans controlled by Crash have a purple Titan Meter which , when full , allows the Titan unleash a powerful special attack . This fully drains the meter in the process . 
 A feature new to the series involves Crash storing a Titan in his pocket and utilizing it when it is most advantageous . When Crash is riding a Titan , any Mojo collected goes to the Titan . If enough is collected , the Titan 's abilities are upgraded rather than Crash 's . 
 = = = Co @-@ operative play = = = 
 A player using a second controller can join in the game at any time . The second player will initially appear as a mask floating around Crash . The mask can attack enemies by using magic projectiles . By pressing a certain button , the second player 's character can exit and enter the mask . In the Wii and Xbox 360 versions of the game , Crash 's sister , Coco Bandicoot , fills in the role of the second player , while a white @-@ furred version of Crash known as " Carbon Crash " takes on this role in the PlayStation 2 version . Coco is not available for play until she is defeated in a boss fight , after which she is fully playable ( though the player can choose to continue with Carbon Crash ) . This method of play is useful for overpowering enemies and collecting Mojo faster . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The game is played in a free @-@ roaming format rarely seen in previous games , although the DS version is played as a 2 @-@ D beat ' em up as a means of utilising the handheld 's hardware to its greatest capacity . The opening events of the game take place on Wumpa Island . Crash 's house is accessible here , and can be used by the player to access skins , concept art , enemy bios and cutscenes . Surrounding environments consist of societies inhabited by friendly Titans , including the <unk> Kingdom , the <unk> Desert and the Sludge Junkyard . Other areas include the Evil Public School , attended by the main antagonist 's niece , and Mount Grimly , where the evil mask Uka Uka is held . The final events of the game take place in the Space Head , a space station recycled from junkyard parts that is operated by Doctor Neo Cortex . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Nine returning characters from previous Crash titles star in the home console version of Crash : Mind over Mutant . The protagonist of the game , Crash Bandicoot , is a bandicoot who must defeat the main antagonist Doctor Cortex and free the Titans from the control of Cortex 's new device . Aiding Crash is Aku Aku , an ancient wooden mask who can take control of Titans by entering their heads . Crash 's genius sister , Coco Bandicoot , appears initially as a boss character under the control of Cortex 's and Brio 's handheld device . Afterward , she acts as a playable character during the co @-@ operative mode of the Wii and Xbox 360 console versions ; she is replaced by a white @-@ furred version of Crash named " Carbon Crash " in the PlayStation 2 version . Crunch Bandicoot , Crash 's muscular cyborg friend , also appears in the game as a brainwashed boss . 
 The main antagonist of the series , Doctor Neo Cortex , is a mad scientist who plans on taking control of the denizens of the Wumpa Islands by marketing a mind @-@ controlling mobile phone , the " NV " , to them . Doctor Nitrus Brio makes a return appearance as Cortex 's partner , aiding him in the development of the NV . Uka Uka , Aku Aku 's evil twin brother , is the source of the bad Mojo necessary to take control of those using the NV device . Nina Cortex , Neo Cortex 's niece , also appears in the game , having been transferred to an evil public school by her uncle . Doctor N. Gin , Cortex 's demented right @-@ hand man , makes a relatively minor appearance as a boss character early in the game . 
 A number of small fodder enemies attempt to hinder Crash in his journey , much of them appearing in the previous Crash of the Titans . The <unk> , who previously worked for Doctor Neo Cortex , have since gone feral and vegetarian , and now work for the minor antagonist Doctor N. Gin . The Brat Girls , who previously worked for Nina Cortex , have betrayed her and now run the Evil Public School and supervise the <unk> in the <unk> Kingdom . The Doom Monkeys make a return appearance as employees of Nitrus Brio in the Sludge Junkyard . Two new fodder enemies make their debut in the game : the <unk> , a group of small , warty creatures that inhabit Mount Grimly , and the Slap @-@ E 's , hand @-@ shaped robots that share Doctor Cortex 's memories and personal problems . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Social satire and the theme of consumerism are frequent sources of humor in the plot of Crash : Mind over Mutant , with the game featuring jokes about SUVs and the skyrocketing prices of gas at the time . The game 's story is told through a number of cut scenes animated in 2D Animation with different styles , such as those of Dragon Ball , The Animatrix , and South Park . 
 Crash : Mind over Mutant takes place a year later after the events of where Crash of the Titans left off . The Titans , free from the control of Doctor Neo Cortex , have spread throughout the Wumpa Islands and cultivated their own societies and towns . All seems well until a rejuvenated Doctor Neo Cortex teams up with his old partner Doctor Nitrus Brio to invent a personal digital assistant , the " NV " , that can control the minds of both mutants and bandicoots by transmitting bad Mojo , forcefully siphoned from Cortex 's former boss Uka Uka . Crash and Aku Aku are not affected by the device , but their family members Coco and Crunch , are soon transformed into monstrous version of themselves who seek Crash 's destruction . After Coco is freed from the NV 's control , the Bandicoots learn of Doctor Cortex 's plot by accessing his blog , and decide to go to the Evil Public School , where Nina was placed by Doctor Cortex . Nina in return for Crash saving her science fair project , informs the heroes of Cortex 's and Brio 's alliance and reveals their location in the Junkyard , where Brio is recycling parts to create a new space station , the " Space Head " , for Cortex and new NV devices . Crash and Aku Aku find Crunch and Brio at the Junkyard and manage to break Crunch free from the NV 's control . After learning of Uka Uka 's whereabouts from Brio , Crash and Aku Aku go to Mount Grimly , where Uka Uka is being drained of all his Mojo . After being freed , Uka Uka informs Crash that his voodoo bones , his source of power , have been stolen and given to six of the worst Titans on the Island , and tells them to go and retrieve the bones for him . When the bones have been gathered , Uka Uka uses his restored power to send Crash to the Space Head and Crash can enact Uka Uka 's vengeance on Cortex . Crash engages in a fight against Cortex , who uses a mutation formula stolen from Brio to empower himself for the battle . Upon losing to the Bandicoot , Cortex throws a tantrum , causing the Space Head to fall towards the Earth . Cortex , having returned to normal , makes his escape from the plummeting Space Head , while Crash and Aku Aku brace themselves for a crash @-@ landing on Wumpa Island . Crash and Aku Aku manage to survive the crash and reunite with Coco and Crunch as parts of the Space Head rain down from the sky . As the story ends , Coco tells Aku Aku that they 're not going to help clean up , much to his chagrin . 
 = = Development = = 
 Development on Crash : Mind over Mutant began immediately after the completion of Crash of the Titans . The idea of preserving a titan for later use came from the play testing sessions of Crash of the Titans , in which the testers were found to be reluctant to leave the titans behind after an epic battle was won . Fans of the series were also a source of inspiration for Crash : Mind over Mutant , having such wishes as a free @-@ roaming environment , Coco Bandicoot being a playable character and the return of the character Doctor Nitrus Brio . Full camera control was considered for the game , but was rejected for graphical reasons and to avoid having to insert a split @-@ screen view in the cooperation mode . Online gameplay was also considered as a feature in the finished game , but was omitted due to the brief development schedule . Coco Bandicoot as a playable character was omitted from the PlayStation 2 version of the game due to her distinct animations taking up much of the console 's memory . The Wii version of Crash : Mind over Mutant was created first , with the graphics scaled up for the Xbox 360 , and scaled down for the PlayStation 2 . A PlayStation 3 version of the game was rumored , but was promptly debunked by Radical Entertainment as a mistake on many press sites ' behalf . 
 There was an open call for fan art of Crash Bandicoot to be submitted as part of a contest . The contest was hosted at Kidzworld as part of a preview page and was aimed at fans under the age of 18 . Selected artwork is included in the final build of the game either inside of a comic book in Crash 's house or on a wall in the school attended by Nina Cortex . In addition , winners had their names appear in the game 's credits and received a free copy of the game when it was released . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 To ensure that the audio does not become repetitive , Crash : Mind over Mutant features more than 8 @,@ 500 lines of dialogue . Many of the voice actors from the previous Crash of the Titans reprised their roles , including Jess Harnell as Crash , Greg Eagles as Aku Aku , Lex Lang as Doctor Neo Cortex , Debi Derryberry as Coco , Nolan North as Doctor N. Gin , John DiMaggio as Uka Uka , Chris Williams as Crunch and Amy Gross as Nina Cortex . The role of Doctor Nitrus Brio is played by Maurice LaMarche , a newcomer to the series . Miscellaneous voices in the game are provided by a number of veteran voice actors , including Carlos Alazraqui , Rodger Bumpass , Grey DeLisle , Kathryn Feller , Quinton Flynn , Tabitha St. Germain , Tania <unk> , Mark Hamill , Richard Steven Horvitz , Tom Kenny , Rik <unk> , Tara Strong , Lee Tockar , Billy West and Cedric Yarborough . The music of Crash : Mind over Mutant was composed by Radical Entertainment 's in @-@ house composer Marc Baril , who composed the music for the previous Crash Bandicoot games Crash Tag Team Racing and Crash of the Titans . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reviews for the PlayStation 2 and Wii versions of Crash : Mind over Mutant were generally positive . Dakota Grabowski of GameZone considered the game " slightly better " than Crash of the Titans , noting improvements in controls , gameplay and storyline from its predecessor , but lamented that " the camera almost ruins the whole package . " The Wii version of Crash : Mind over Mutant was also met positively , though not to the same degree as the PlayStation 2 version . Louis Bedigian of GameZone stated that the young demographic of the Crash Bandicoot series " may be annoyed by the camera and / or repetitive objectives but will be entertained by what is the best Crash game developed in a long time – and one of the best Mario clones released for Nintendo Wii . " Neal Ronaghan of Nintendo World Report , meanwhile , felt that " the charming story and genuine humor " of the game were " overshadowed by the shallow gameplay . " 
 Reviews for the Xbox 360 version of Crash : Mind over Mutant were mixed . Christopher Ewen of GameZone praised the series ' transition into a free @-@ roaming gameplay environment , but felt that the game was too easy . Matt Casamassina of IGN found the game to be " exactly like its predecessor : a mildly enjoyable beat ' em up romp that 's sure to satisfy younger players , but won 't provide much that seasoned players haven 't already experienced before " . Andy Eddy of TeamXbox praised the game 's strong voice acting , but noted the uninspired gameplay , which was " not very consistent in its fun generation . " Justin Calvert of GameSpot claimed that the game " has too much backtracking and too many camera problems to make it recommendable " . Official Xbox Magazine concluded that " there 's very little about Mind over Mutant that makes it worth your $ 50 or the four hours it takes to complete . " Dan Pearson of Eurogamer criticized the game 's fixed camera , extensive backtracking , useless mission log and dated concepts . Andrew Reiner of Game Informer proclaimed that the game 's " unpredictable framerates , extensive backtracking , and the guarantee of one death caused by faulty camera positioning for every platforming segment " made it " a mess of a game , and a new low point for the once @-@ loved marsupial . " 
 The Nintendo DS version of the game received generally negative reviews compared to the console version . Mike David of GameZone denounced the game as the " first really disappointing Crash title " , while Neal Ronaghan of Nintendo World Report felt that the game " leaves much to be desired in terms of depth and level design . " Craig Harris of IGN affectionately christened the Nintendo DS version a " boring , drab , uninspired beat ' em up with none of what made last year 's game so good on DS . " 
 = Dál Riata = 
 Dál Riata ( also Dalriada or <unk> ) was a Gaelic overkingdom that included parts of western Scotland and northeastern Ireland , on each side of the North Channel . In the late 6th – early 7th centuries it encompassed roughly what is now Argyll in Scotland and County Antrim in the Irish province of Ulster . 
 In Argyll it consisted initially of three kindreds : 
 Cenél Loairn ( kindred of Loarn ) in north and mid @-@ Argyll 
 Cenél nÓengusa ( kindred of Óengus ) based on Islay 
 Cenél nGabráin ( kindred of Gabrán ) based in Kintyre 
 A fourth kindred , Cenél <unk> in Islay , was seemingly too small to be deemed a major division . By the end of the 7th century another kindred , Cenél Comgaill ( kindred of Comgall ) , had emerged , based in eastern Argyll . The Lorn and Cowal districts of Argyll take their names from Cenél Loairn and Cenél Comgaill respectively , while the Morvern district was formerly known as <unk> , from the Cenél Báetáin , a subdivision of the Cenél Loairn . 
 Latin @-@ language sources often referred to the inhabitants of Dál Riata as Scots ( Scoti in Latin ) , a name originally used by Roman and Greek writers for the Irish who raided Roman Britain . Later it came to refer to Gaelic @-@ speakers , whether from Ireland or elsewhere . They are referred to herein as Gaels , an unambiguous term , or as Dál <unk> . 
 The kingdom reached its height under Áedán mac Gabráin ( r . 574 – 608 ) , but King Æthelfrith of Bernicia checked its growth at the Battle of Degsastan in 603 . Serious defeats in Ireland and Scotland in the time of Domnall Brecc ( d . 642 ) ended Dál Riata 's " golden age " , and the kingdom became a client of Northumbria , then subject to the Picts . There is disagreement over the fate of the kingdom from the late eighth @-@ century onwards . Some scholars have seen no revival of Dál Riata after the long period of foreign domination ( after 637 to around 750 or 760 ) , while others have seen a revival of Dál Riata under Áed Find ( 736 – 778 ) , and later under Kenneth MacAlpin ( Cináed mac Ailpín , who ( some sources claim ) took the kingship there in <unk> following the disastrous defeat of the Pictish army by the Danes ) : some even claim that the Dál Riata usurped the kingship of Fortriu several generations before MacAlpin ( 800 – 858 ) . The kingdom 's independence ended in the Viking Age , as it merged with the lands of the Picts to form the Kingdom of Alba . 
 The name of the kingdom survives in the terminology of the Dalradian geological series , a term coined by Archibald Geikie in 1891 because its outcrop has a similar geographical reach to that of the former Dál Riata . 
 = = Name = = 
 The name Dál Riata is derived from Old Irish . Dál , cognate to English dole and deal , German Teil / <unk> , and Latin <unk> and descendants including French taille and Italian <unk> , means " portion " or " share " ( as in " a portion of land " ) ; Riata or Riada is believed to be a personal name . Thus , the name refers to " Riada 's portion " of territory in the area . 
 = = People , land and sea = = 
 The modern human landscape of Dál Riata differs a great deal from that of the first millennium . Most people today live in settlements far larger than anything known in early times , while some areas , such as Kilmartin and many of the islands , such as Islay and Tiree may well have had as many inhabitants as they do today . Many of the small settlements have now disappeared , so that the countryside is far emptier than was formerly the case , and many areas which were formerly farmed are now abandoned . Even the physical landscape is not entirely as it was : sea @-@ levels have changed , and the combination of erosion and silting will have considerably altered the shape of the coast in some places , while the natural accumulation of peat and man @-@ made changes from peat @-@ cutting has altered inland landscapes . 
 As was normal at the time , subsistence farming was the occupation of most people . Oats and barley were the main cereal crops . <unk> was especially important , and transhumance ( the seasonal movement of people with their livestock between fixed summer and winter pastures ) was the practice in many places . Some areas , most notably Islay , were especially fertile , and good grazing would have been available all year round , just as it was in Ireland . Tiree was famed in later times for its oats and barley , while smaller , uninhabited islands were used to keep sheep . The area , until lately , was notable for its inshore fisheries , and for plentiful shellfish , therefore seafood is likely to have been an important part of the diet . 
 The Senchus fer n @-@ Alban lists three main kin groups in Dál Riata in Scotland , with a fourth being added later : 
 The Cenél nGabráin , in Kintyre , supposedly the descendants of Gabrán mac Domangairt . 
 The Cenél nÓengusa , in Islay and Jura , supposedly the descendants of Óengus Mór mac <unk> . 
 The Cenél Loairn , in Lorne , perhaps also Mull and Ardnamurchan , supposedly the descendants of Loarn mac <unk> . 
 The Cenél Comgaill , in Cowal and Bute , a later addition , supposedly the descendants of Comgall mac Domangairt . 
 The Senchus does not list any kindreds in Ireland , but does also list an apparently very minor kindred called Cenel <unk> in Islay descended from another son of Erc , Fergus <unk> . Another kindred , Cenél Báetáin of Morvern ( later Clan Maclean ) , branched off from Cenel <unk> about the same time Cenel Comgaill separated from its parent kindred . The Cenel Loairn may have been the largest of the " three kindreds " , as the Senchus reports it being divided further into Cenel <unk> , Cenel <unk> , Cenel <unk> , Cenel <unk> . Among the Cenél Loairn it also lists the Airgíalla , although whether this should be understood as being Irish settlers or simply another tribe to whom the label was applied is unclear . Bannerman proposes a tie to the Uí <unk> <unk> . The meaning of Airgíalla ' hostage givers ' adds to the uncertainty , although it must be observed that only one grouping in Ireland was apparently given this name and it is therefore very rare , perhaps supporting the Ui <unk> <unk> hypothesis . There is no reason to suppose that this is a complete or accurate list . 
 Among the royal centres in Dál Riata , Dunadd appears to have been the most important . It has been partly excavated , and weapons , <unk> @-@ stones and many moulds for the manufacture of jewellery were found in addition to fortifications . Other high @-@ status material included glassware and wine amphorae from Gaul , and in larger quantities than found elsewhere in Britain and Ireland . Lesser centres included Dun <unk> , seat of the Cenél Loairn kings , and <unk> , at the southern end of Kintyre , in the lands of the Cenél nGabráin . The main royal centre in Ireland appears to have been at <unk> ( Dún <unk> ) . 
 The difficulty of overland travel and the many islands made Dál Riata an archipelago , with travel by sea by far the easiest means of moving any distance . As well as long distance trade , local trade must also have been significant . <unk> were probably the most common seagoing craft , and on inland waters dugouts and coracles were used . Large timber ships , called long ships , perhaps similar to the Viking ships of the same name , are attested to in a variety of sources . 
 = = Religion and art = = 
 No written accounts exist for pre @-@ Christian Dál Riata , and the earliest known records come from the chroniclers of Iona and Irish monasteries . Adomnán 's Life of St Columba implies a Christian Dál Riata . Whether this is true cannot be known . The figure of Columba looms large in any history of Christianity in Dál Riata . Adomnán 's Life , although useful as a record , was not intended to serve as history , but rather as hagiography . Because the writing of the lives of the saints in Adomnán 's day had not reached the stylised formulas of the High Middle Ages , the Life contains a great deal of historically valuable information . It is also a vital linguistic source indicating the distribution of Gaelic and P @-@ Celtic placenames in northern Scotland by the end of the 7th century . It famously notes Columba 's need for a translator when conversing with an individual on Skye . This evidence of a non @-@ Gaelic language is supported by a sprinkling of P @-@ Celtic placenames on the remote mainland opposite the island . 
 Columba 's founding Iona within the bounds of Dál Riata ensured that the kingdom would be of great importance in the spread of Christianity in northern Britain , not only to Pictland , but also to Northumbria , via Lindisfarne , to Mercia , and beyond . Although the monastery of Iona belonged to the Cenél Conaill of the Northern Uí Néill , and not to Dál Riata , it had close ties to the Cenél nGabráin , ties which may make the annals less than entirely impartial . 
 If Iona was the greatest religious centre in Dál Riata , it was far from unique . Lismore , in the territory of the Cenél Loairn , was sufficiently important for the death of its abbots to be recorded with some frequency . Applecross , probably in Pictish territory for most of the period , and Kingarth on Bute are also known to have been monastic sites , and many smaller sites , such as on Eigg and Tiree , are known from the annals . In Ireland , Armoy was the main ecclesiastical centre in early times , associated with Saint Patrick and with Saint <unk> , said to have been first bishop at Armoy . An important early centre , Armoy later declined , overshadowed by the monasteries at <unk> ( <unk> ) and Bangor . 
 As well as their primary spiritual importance , the political significance of religious centres cannot be dismissed . The prestige of being associated with the saintly founder was of no small importance . Monasteries represented a source of wealth as well as prestige . Additionally , the learning and literacy found in monasteries served as useful tools for ambitious kings . 
 The illuminated manuscript Book of Kells was probably at least begun at Iona , although not by Columba as legend has it , as it dates from about 800 ( it may have been commissioned to mark the bicentennial of Columba 's death in 597 ) . Whether it was or not , Iona was certainly important in the formation of Insular art , which combined Mediterranean , Anglo @-@ Saxon , Celtic and Pictish elements into a style of which the book of Kells is a late example . 
 For other arts , a number of sculptures remain to give an impression of Dál Riatan work . The St. Martin 's Cross on Iona is the best @-@ preserved high cross , probably inspired by Northumbrian free @-@ standing crosses , such as the Ruthwell Cross , although a similar cross exists in Ireland ( <unk> , County Tipperary ) . The Kildalton Cross on Islay is similar . A sculpted slab at Ardchattan appears to show strong Pictish influences , while the Dupplin Cross , it has been argued , shows that influences also moved in the opposite direction . Fine Hiberno @-@ Saxon metalwork such as penannular brooches is believed to have been created at Dunadd . 
 In addition to the monastic sites , a considerable number of churches are attested , not only from archaeological evidence , but also from the evidence of place @-@ names . The element " kil " , from Gaelic cill , can be shown in many cases to be associated with early churches , such as at Kilmartin by Dunadd . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The Duan Albanach ( Song of the Scots ) tells that the three sons of Erc — Fergus Mór , Loarn and Óengus — conquered Alba ( Scotland ) around 500 AD . Bede offers a different , and probably older , account wherein Dál Riata was conquered by Irish Gaels led by a certain <unk> . Old Gaelic Dál means " portion " or " share " , and is usually followed by the name of an eponymous founder . Bede 's tale may come from the same root as the Irish tales of <unk> Riata and his brothers , the <unk> <unk> ( sons / descendants of Conaire Mór / Conaire <unk> ) . The story of Dál Riata moves from foundation myth to something nearer to history with the reports of the death of Comgall mac Domangairt around 540 and of his brother Gabrán around 560 . 
 The version of history in the Duan Albanach was long accepted , although it is preceded by the purely fictional tale of <unk> and Brutus conquering Britain . The presence of Gaelic in Scotland was seen as the result of either a large @-@ scale migration from Ireland , or a takeover by Irish Gaelic elites . However , this theory is no longer universally accepted . In his academic paper Were the Scots Irish ? , archaeologist Dr Ewan Campbell says that there is no archaeological or placename evidence of a migration or takeover . This lack of archaeological evidence was previously noted by Professor Leslie Alcock . Archaeological evidence shows that Argyll was different from Ireland , before and after the supposed migration , but that it also formed part of the Irish Sea province with Ireland , being easily distinguished from the rest of Scotland . Campbell suggests that Argyll and Antrim formed a " maritime province " , united by the sea and isolated from the rest of Scotland by the mountainous ridge called the Druim Alban . This allowed a shared language to be maintained through the centuries ; Argyll remained Gaelic @-@ speaking while the rest of Scotland was Pictish / Brittonic @-@ speaking . Campbell argues that the medieval accounts were a kind of dynastic propaganda , constructed to bolster a dynasty 's claim to the throne and to bolster Dál Riata claims to territory in Antrim . This view of the medieval accounts is shared by other historians . In her critical analysis of Campbell 's paper , Bridget Brennan criticizes his archeological arguments , but says that many of them " are sound , particularly with respect to historical documentation and even to a certain extent the linguistic argument " . 
 However Dál Riata came to be , the time in which it arose was one of great instability in Ulster , following the Ulaid 's loss of territory ( including the ancient centre of Emain Macha ) to the Airgíalla and the Uí Néill . Whether the two parts of Dál Riata had long been united , or whether a conquest in the 4th century or early 5th century , either of Antrim from Argyll , or vice versa , in line with myth , is not known . " The thriving of Dalriada " , pp. 47 – 50 , notes that a conquest of Irish Dál Riata from Scotland , in the period after the fall of Emain Macha , fits the facts as well as any other hypothesis . 
 Linguistic and genealogical evidence associates ancestors of the Dál Riata with the prehistoric <unk> and <unk> , suggesting kinship with the Ulaid and a number of shadowy kingdoms in distant Munster . The <unk> have also been suggested as ancestral . Ultimately the Dál Riata , according to the earliest genealogies , are descendants of <unk> mac Sin , a prehistoric king or deity of the <unk> . 
 = = = Druim <unk> to Mag Rath = = = 
 By the mid 6th @-@ century , the Dál Riata possessions in Scotland came under serious threat from Bridei I , king of the Picts , resulting in them seeking the aid of the Irish Northern Uí Néill . The king of Dál Riata , Áedán mac Gabráin , had already granted the island of Iona off the coast of Scotland to the Cenél Conaill prince and saint , Columba , who in turn negotiated an alliance between the Northern Uí Néill and Dál Riata in 575 at the Convention of Druim <unk> near Derry . The result of this pact was the removal of Dál Riata from Ulaid 's overlordship allowing it to concentrate on extending its Scottish domain . 
 The kingdom of Dál Riata reached its greatest extent in the reign of Áedán mac Gabráin . It is said that Áedán was consecrated as king by Columba . If true , this was one of the first such consecrations known . As noted , Columba brokered the alliance between Dál Riata and the Northern Uí Néill . This pact was successful , first in defeating <unk> mac Cairill , then in allowing Áedán to campaign widely against his neighbours , as far afield as Orkney and lands of the Maeatae , on the River Forth . Áedán appears to have been very successful in extending his power , until he faced the Bernician king Æthelfrith at Degsastan c . 603 . Æthelfrith 's brother was among the dead , but Áedán was defeated , and the Bernician kings continued their advances in southern Scotland . Áedán died c . 608 aged about 70 . Dál Riata did expand to include Skye , possibly conquered by Áedán 's son Gartnait . 
 It has been suggested that Fiachnae mac Báetáin ( d . 626 ) , Dál nAraidi over @-@ king of Ulaid , was overlord of both parts of Dál Riata . Fiachnae campaigned against the Northumbrians , and besieged Bamburgh , and the Dál <unk> are thought to have fought in this campaign . 
 Dál Riata remained allied with the Northern Uí Néill until the reign of Domnall Brecc , who was persuaded by the king of Dál nAraidi , Congal Cáech , to renounce this alliance . In an attempt to have himself installed as High King of Ireland , Congal made alliances with Dál Riata and Strathclyde , which resulted in the disastrous Battle of Moira in 637 , which saw Congal slain by High King Domnall mac <unk> of the Northern Uí Néill and resulted in Irish Dál Riata losing possession of its Scottish lands . A battle had also taken place at sea at <unk> , off Kintyre , in 637 . This defeat was then attributed as divine retribution for Domnall Brecc turning his back on his prior alliance . Domnall Brecc 's policy appears to have died with him in 642 , at his final , and fatal , defeat by Eugein map Beli of Strathclyde at Strathcarron , for as late as the 730s , armies and fleets from Dál Riata fought alongside the Uí Néill . 
 This defeat shattered the power of Dál Riata as well as that of Dál nAraidi , allowing the Northern Uí Néill to become the dominant force in the north of Ireland . By the 10th @-@ century , the Irish lands of Dál Riata were under the control of the Uí <unk> , and their clients , the Fir Lí . 
 = = = Mag Rath to the Pictish Conquest = = = 
 It has been proposed that some of the more obscure kings of Dál Riata mentioned in the Annals of Ulster , such as <unk> ua <unk> and <unk> may have been kings of Irish Dál Riata . 
 The after @-@ effect of the Battle of Moira in regards to Scottish Dál Riata , appears to have resulted in it becoming tributary to Northumbrian kings , which lasted until the Pictish king <unk> mac Bili defeated Ecgfrith of Northumbria at Dun Nechtain in 685 . It is not certain that this subjection ended in 685 , although this is usually assumed to be the case . However , it appears that Eadberht Eating made some effort to stop the Picts under Óengus mac Fergusa crushing Dál Riata in 740 . Whether this means that the tributary relationship had not ended in 685 , or if Eadberht sought only to prevent the growth of Pictish power , is unclear . 
 Since it has been thought that Dál Riata swallowed Pictland to create the Kingdom of Alba , the later history of Dál Riata has tended to be seen as a prelude to future triumphs . The annals make it clear that the Cenél <unk> lost any earlier monopoly of royal power in the late 7th century and in the 8th , when Cenél Loairn kings such as Ferchar <unk> , his son <unk> , and grandsons Dúngal and Muiredach are found contesting for the kingship of Dál Riata . The long period of instability in Dál Riata was only ended by the conquest of the kingdom by Óengus mac Fergusa , king of the Picts , in the 730s . After a third campaign by Óengus in 741 , Dál Riata then disappears from the Irish records for a generation . 
 = = = The last century = = = 
 Áed Find may appear in 768 , fighting against the Pictish king of Fortriu . At his death in 778 Áed Find is called " king of Dál Riata " , as is his brother Fergus mac Echdach in 781 . The Annals of Ulster say that a certain <unk> , " king of Dál Riata " died in 792 , and there the record ends . Any number of theories have been advanced to fill the missing generations , none of which are founded on any very solid evidence . A number of kings are named in the Duan Albanach , and in royal genealogies , but these are rather less reliable than we might wish . The obvious conclusion is that whoever ruled the petty kingdoms of Dál Riata after its defeat and conquest in the 730s , only Áed Find and his brother Fergus drew the least attention of the chroniclers in Iona and Ireland . This argues very strongly for Alex Woolf 's conclusion that Óengus mac Fergusa " effectively destroyed the kingdom . " 
 It is unlikely that Dál Riata was ruled directly by Pictish kings , but it is argued that Domnall , son of Caustantín mac Fergusa , was king of Dál Riata from 811 to 835 . He was apparently followed by the last named king of Dál Riata Áed mac Boanta , who was killed in the great Pictish defeat of 839 at the hands of the Vikings . 
 = = = From Dál Riata to the Innse Gall = = = 
 If the Vikings had a great impact on Pictland and in Ireland , in Dál Riata , as in Northumbria , they appear to have entirely replaced the existing kingdom with a new entity . In the case of Dál Riata this was to be known as the kingdom of the Sudreys , traditionally founded by Ketil Flatnose ( Caitill Find in Gaelic ) in the middle of the 9th century . The Frankish Annales Bertiniani may record the conquest of the Inner Hebrides , the seaward part of Dál Riata , by Vikings in 847 . 
 Alex Woolf has suggested that there occurred a formal division of Dál Riata between the Norse @-@ Gaelic Uí Ímair and the natives , like those divisions that took place elsewhere in Ireland and Britain , with the Norse controlling most of the islands , and the Gaels controlling the Scottish coast and the more southerly islands . In turn Woolf suggests that this gave rise to the terms <unk> <unk> and Innse Gall , respectively " the coast of the Gaels " and the " Islands of the foreigners " . 
 = = = Under the House of Alpin = = = 
 Woolf has further demonstrated that by the time of Malcolm II , the leading <unk> of Dál Riata had moved from the southwest of the region ( north of the <unk> ) to the north , east , and northeast , with Cenel Loairn moving up the Great Glen to occupy Moray , the former and sometimes still Fortriu , one branch of Cenel <unk> occupying the district known as Gowrie and another the district of Fife , Cenel <unk> giving its name to Circinn as Angus , Cenel Comgaill occupying Strathearn , and another lesser known kindred , Cenel Conaing , probably moving to Mar. 
 = = In fiction = = 
 In Rosemary Sutcliff 's 1965 novel The Mark of the Horse Lord the Dál Riada undergo an internal struggle for control of royal succession , and an external conflict to defend their frontiers against the <unk> . 
 In Rosemary Sutcliff 's historical adventure novel The Eagle of the Ninth ( 1954 ) , a young Roman officer searches to recover the lost Roman eagle standard of his father 's legion in the northern part of Great Britain . The story is based on the Ninth Spanish Legion 's supposed disappearance in the Scottish Highlands near the end of the Roman occupation . The novel was adapted by Jeremy Brock into the film The Eagle ( 2011 ) . 
 In the <unk> novels ( a series , beginning with <unk> 's Dart , 2001 ) , by Jacqueline Carey , the Dalriada of the Kingdom of Alba figure prominently in a Royal marriage and subsequent alliance with France ( known in the series as " Terre d <unk> " ) . 
 In Julian May 's Saga of Pliocene Exile series , the non @-@ born Aiken Drum 's homeworld is an ethnic Scottish planet called Dalriada . 
 In the Lost Girl TV series , the pub where the Light Fae and the Dark Fae mingle is called the Dal Riata ; named after the ancient kingdom . 
 In Jules Watson 's Dalriada Trilogy ( 2006 – 2008 ) , three centuries are chronicled during the time of the Roman Invasion of Britain . 
 A feature length fantasy film named <unk> 's King is being made in Scotland , with a story based loosely on the first king of the Scots . It is currently in postproduction and the release date is set for late 2016 . 
 Dál Riata is a playable nation in Paradox Interactive 's 4X video game Crusader Kings II . At the earliest start date , 769 AD with the Charlemagne DLC , they are an independent petty kingdom and considered ethnically Irish with Catholicism as their default religion . In start dates from 867 to 1241 the area is under first Norse , then Norwegian control , while by the latest 1337 start date it has become a vassal of King David II of Scotland . 
 Dalriada is the name of a Hungarian folk metal band : Dalriada . 
 = Robert Kurrle = 
 Robert Kurrle , also known as Robert B. Kurrle was an American cinematographer during the silent and early talking film eras . Prior to entering the film industry , he was already experimenting with aerial photography . Considered a very prominent cinematographer , even his early work received notice and praise from both critics and other industry professionals . The advent of sound film did not abate his continued rise , and he became the top director of photography at Warner Brothers by 1932 . 
 He shot 70 films over the sixteen years of his career , working with such prominent directors as William Wellman , Raoul Walsh , Michael Curtiz , Archie Mayo , and William Dieterle . He was a member of the American Society of Cinematographers by 1921 , and he was also one of the inaugural members of the International Photographers branch of <unk> ( International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees ) . In October 1932 , at the height of his career , he suddenly fell ill after wrapping a film . Hospitalized , his condition quickly worsened and within a week he was dead of an infection to the brain . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born Robert Bard Kurrle in Port Hueneme , California on February 2 , 1890 , Kurrle had at least one sibling , Ernest W. Kurrle . Prior to his entry into the film industry , Kurrle was already an innovative filmmaker . In 1909 , flying in a Curtiss open cockpit bi @-@ plane , he photographed the Panama Canal from the air . In 1913 , Kurrle would become the first photographer to take an aerial photograph of the city of Oakland , California . Describing the experience , Kurrle said " ... we went along just as smoothly as if we were riding on velvet " . 
