 = = Documentaries = = 
 Paul Yule , In The Footsteps of Bruce Chatwin ( <unk> mins ) , BBC , 1999 – Berwick Universal Pictures 
 = Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom = 
 Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom is a 1984 American action @-@ adventure film directed by Steven Spielberg . It is the second installment in the Indiana Jones franchise and a prequel to the 1981 film Raiders of the Lost Ark and followed by Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade in 1989 and Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull in 2008 respectively , featuring Harrison Ford reprising his role as the title character . After arriving in North India , Indiana Jones is asked by desperate villagers to find a mystical stone and rescue their children from a Thuggee cult practicing child slavery , black magic and ritual human sacrifice in honor of the goddess Kali . 
 Executive producer and co @-@ writer George Lucas decided to make the film a prequel as he did not want the Nazis to be the villains again . After three rejected plot devices , Lucas wrote a film treatment that resembled the film 's final storyline . Lawrence Kasdan , Lucas 's collaborator on Raiders , turned down the offer to write the script , and Willard Huyck and Gloria Katz were hired as his replacements , with the screenplay partly based upon the 1939 film Gunga Din . 
 The film was released to financial success but mixed reviews , which criticized its violence , later contributing to the creation of the PG @-@ 13 rating , as well as the character of Willie Scott for being annoying and useless . However , critical opinion has improved since 1984 , citing the film 's intensity and imagination . Some of the film 's cast and crew , including Spielberg , retrospectively view the film in a negative light , partly due to the film being the most overtly violent Indiana Jones film . The film has also been the subject of controversy due to its portrayal of India and Hinduism . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1935 , Indiana Jones narrowly escapes the clutches of Lao Che , a crime boss in Shanghai in the Republic of China . With his 11 @-@ year @-@ old Chinese sidekick Short Round and the nightclub singer Willie Scott in tow , Indy flees Shanghai on an airplane that , unknown to them , is owned by Lao . While the three of them sleep on the plane , the pilots parachute out , and they leave the plane to crash over the Himalayas while dumping its fuel . Indy , Shorty , and Willie discover this and narrowly manage to escape by jumping out of the plane on an inflatable raft , and then riding down the slopes into a raging river . They come to <unk> , a desolate village in northern India , where the poor villagers believe them to have been sent by the Hindu god Shiva and enlist their help to retrieve the sacred <unk> stone stolen from their shrine , as well as the community 's children , from evil forces in the nearby Pankot Palace . During the journey to Pankot , Indy hypothesizes that the stone may be one of the five fabled Sankara stones that promise fortune and glory . 
 The trio receive a warm welcome from the Prime Minister of Pankot Palace , Chattar Lal . The visitors are allowed to stay the night as guests , during which they attend a lavish but grotesque banquet given by the young Maharajah , <unk> Singh . Chattar Lal rebuffs Indy 's questions about the villagers ' claims and his theory that the ancient Thuggee cult is responsible for their troubles . Later that night , Indy is attacked by an assassin , leading Indy , Willie , and Shorty to believe that something is amiss . They discover a series of tunnels hidden behind a statue in Willie 's room and set out to explore them , overcoming a number of booby @-@ traps along the way . 
 The trio eventually reach an underground temple where the Thugs worship the Hindu goddess Kali with human sacrifice . They discover that the Thugs , led by their evil , bloodthirsty high priest Mola Ram are in possession of three of the five Sankara stones , and have enslaved the children to mine for the final two stones , which they hope will allow them to rule the world . As Indy tries to retrieve the stones , he , Willie , and Shorty are captured and separated . Indy is whipped and forced to drink a potion called the " Blood of Kali " , which places him in a trance @-@ like state where he begins to mindlessly serve the Thugs . Willie , meanwhile , is kept as a human sacrifice , while Shorty is put to work in the mines alongside the enslaved children . Shorty breaks free and escapes back into the temple where he burns Indy with a torch , shocking him out of the trance . After defeating Chattar Lal , also a Thuggee worshiper , they go back to the mines to free the children , but Indy is caught up in a fight with a hulking overseer . The Maharajah , who was also forcibly entranced by the " Blood of Kali , " attempts to cripple Indy with a voodoo doll . Shorty spars with the Maharajah , ultimately burning him to snap him out of the trance . With his strength returned , Indy kills the overseer . The Maharajah then tells Shorty how to get out of the mines . While Mola Ram escapes , Indy and Shorty rescue Willie and retrieve the three Sankara stones , the village children escape . 
 After a mine cart chase to escape the temple , the trio emerge above ground and are again cornered by Mola Ram and his henchmen on a rope bridge high above a crocodile @-@ infested river . Using a sword , Indy cuts the rope bridge in half , leaving everyone to hang on for their lives . Indy utters an incantation which causes the stones to glow red hot . Two of the stones fall into the river , while the last falls into Mola Ram 's hand , burning him . Indy catches the now @-@ cool stone , while Mola Ram falls into the river below , where he is devoured by a <unk> crocodile . The Thugs then attempt to shoot Indy with arrows , until a company of British Indian Army riflemen from Pankot arrive , having been summoned by the palace Maharajah . In the ensuing firefight , many of the Thuggee archers are killed and the remainder are surrounded and captured . Indy , Willie , and Shorty return victoriously to the village with the children and give the missing stone back to the villagers . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Harrison Ford as Indiana Jones : An archaeologist adventurer who is asked by a desperate Indian village to retrieve a mysterious stone and rescue the missing village children . Ford undertook a strict physical exercise regimen headed by Jake Steinfeld to gain a more muscular tone for the part . 
 Kate Capshaw as Wilhelmina " Willie " Scott : An American nightclub singer working in Shanghai . Willie is unprepared for her adventure with Indy and Short Round , and appears to be a damsel in distress . She also forms a romantic relationship with Indy . Over 120 actresses auditioned for the role , including Sharon Stone . To prepare for the role , Capshaw watched The African Queen and A Guy Named Joe . Spielberg wanted Willie to be a complete contrast to Marion Ravenwood from Raiders of the Lost Ark , so Capshaw dyed her brown hair blonde for the part . Costume designer Anthony Powell wanted the character to have red hair . 
 Amrish Puri as Mola Ram : A demonic Thuggee priest who performs rituals of human sacrifices . The character is named after a 17th @-@ century Indian painter . Lucas wanted Mola Ram to be terrifying , so the screenwriters added elements of Aztec and Hawaiian human sacrificers , and European devil worship to the character . To create his headdress , make @-@ up artist Tom Smith based the skull on a cow ( as this would be sacrilegious ) , and used a latex shrunken head . 
 Jonathan Ke Quan as Short Round : Indy 's eleven @-@ year @-@ old Chinese sidekick , who drives the 1936 Auburn Boat Tail Speedster which allows Indy to escape during the opening sequence . Quan was chosen as part of a casting call in Los Angeles . Around 6000 actors auditioned worldwide for the part : Quan was cast after his brother auditioned for the role . Spielberg liked his personality , so he and Ford improvised the scene where Short Round accuses Indy of cheating during a card game . He was credited by his birthname , Ke Huy Quan . 
 Roshan Seth as Chattar Lal : The Prime Minister of the Maharaja of Pankot . Chattar , also a Thuggee worshiper , is enchanted by Indy , Willie and Short Round 's arrival , but is offended by Indy 's questioning of the palace 's history and the archaeologist 's own dubious past . 
 Philip Stone as Captain Philip Blumburtt : A British Indian Army Captain called to Pankot Palace for " exercises " . Alongside a unit of his riflemen , Blumburtt assists Indy towards the end in fighting off Thuggee reinforcements . David Niven was attached to the role but died before filming began . 
 Roy Chiao as Lao Che : A Shanghai crime boss who , with his sons , hires Indy to recover the cremated ashes of one of his ancestors , only to attempt to kill him and cheat him out of his fee , a large diamond . 
 David Yip as Wu Han : A friend of Indy . He is killed by one of Lao Che 's sons while posing as a waiter at Club Obi Wan . 
 Raj Singh as <unk> Singh : The adolescent <unk> of Pankot , who appears as an innocent puppet of the Thuggee faithful . In the end , he helps to defeat them . 
 D. R. <unk> as Shaman : The leader of a small village that recruits Indy to retrieve their stolen sacred Shiva lingam stone 
 Actor Pat Roach plays the Thuggee overseer in the mines . Spielberg , Lucas , Marshall , Kennedy , and Dan Aykroyd have cameos at the airport . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 When George Lucas first approached Steven Spielberg for Raiders of the Lost Ark , Spielberg recalled , " George said if I directed the first one then I would have to direct a trilogy . He had three stories in mind . It turned out George did not have three stories in mind and we had to make up subsequent stories . " Spielberg and Lucas attributed the film 's tone , which was darker than Raiders of the Lost Ark , to their personal moods following the breakups of their relationships ( George with his wife , and Spielberg with his girlfriend ) . In addition , Lucas felt " it had to have been a dark film . The way Empire Strikes Back was the dark second act of the Star Wars trilogy . " 
 Lucas made the film a prequel as he did not want the Nazis to be the villains once more . Spielberg originally wanted to bring Marion Ravenwood back , with Abner Ravenwood being considered as a possible character . Lucas created an opening chase scene that had Indiana Jones on a motorcycle on the Great Wall of China . In addition , Indiana discovered a " Lost World pastiche with a hidden valley inhabited by dinosaurs " . Chinese authorities refused to allow filming , and Lucas considered the Monkey King as the plot device . Lucas wrote a film treatment that included a haunted castle in Scotland , but Spielberg felt it was too similar to Poltergeist . The haunted castle in Scotland slowly transformed into a demonic temple in India . 
 Lucas came up with ideas that involved a religious cult devoted to child slavery , black magic and ritual human sacrifice . Lawrence Kasdan of Raiders of the Lost Ark was asked to write the script . " I didn 't want to be associated with Temple of Doom , " he reflected . " I just thought it was horrible . It 's so mean . There 's nothing pleasant about it . I think Temple of Doom represents a chaotic period in both their [ Lucas and Spielberg ] lives , and the movie is very ugly and mean @-@ spirited . " Lucas hired Willard Huyck and Gloria Katz to write the script because of their knowledge of Indian culture . Gunga Din served as an influence for the film . 
 Huyck and Katz spent four days at Skywalker Ranch for story discussions with Lucas and Spielberg in early @-@ 1982 . They later said the early plot consisted of two notions of Lucas ' : that Indy would recover something stolen from a village and decide whether to give it back , and that the picture would start in China and work its way to India . Huyck says Lucas was very single @-@ minded about getting through meetings , while " Steve would always stop and think about visual stuff . " 
 Lucas 's initial idea for Indiana 's sidekick was a virginal young princess , but Huyck , Katz and Spielberg disliked the idea . Just as Indiana Jones was named after Lucas 's Alaskan Malamute , Willie was named after Spielberg 's Cocker Spaniel , and Short Round was named after Huyck 's dog , whose name was derived from The Steel Helmet . 
 Lucas handed Huyck and Katz a 20 @-@ page treatment in May 1982 titled Indiana Jones and the Temple of Death to adapt into a screenplay . Scenes such as the fight scene in Shanghai , escape from the airplane and the mine cart chase came from original scripts of Raiders of the Lost Ark . 
 Lucas , Huyck , and Katz had been developing Radioland Murders ( 1994 ) since the early 1970s . The opening music was taken from that script and applied to Temple of Doom . Spielberg reflected , " George 's idea was to start the movie with a musical number . He wanted to do a Busby Berkeley dance number . At all our story meetings he would say , ' Hey , Steven , you always said you wanted to shoot musicals . ' I thought , ' Yeah , that could be fun . ' " 
 Lucas , Spielberg , Katz and Huyck were concerned how to keep the audience interest while explaining the <unk> cult . Huyck and Katz proposed a tiger hunt but Spielberg said , " There 's no way I 'm going to stay in India long enough to shoot a tiger hunt . " They eventually decided on a dinner scene involving eating bugs , monkey brains and the like . " Steve and George both still react like children , so their idea was to make it as gross as possible , " says Katz . 
 Lucas sent Huyck and Katz a 500 @-@ page transcript of their taped conversations to help them with the script . The first draft was written in six weeks , in early @-@ August 1982 . " Steve was coming off an enormously successful movie and George didn 't want to lose him , " said Katz . " He desperately wanted him to direct ( Temple of Doom ) . We were under a lot of pressure to do it really , really fast so we could hold on to Steve . " 
 A second draft was finished by September . Captain Blumburtt , Chattar Lal , and the boy Maharaja originally had more crucial roles . A dogfight was deleted , as well as those who drank the Kali blood turned into zombies with physical superhuman abilities . During pre @-@ production , the Temple of Death title was replaced with Temple of Doom . From March — April 1983 , Huyck and Katz simultaneously performed rewrites for a final shooting script . 
 Huyck and Katz later said Harrison Ford took many of the one liners originally given to Short Round . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Huyck later recalled " at one point when we were writing it we told George “ We know a lot of Indians . We 've been there ... I don 't think they 're going to think this is really so cool . Do you think you 're going to have trouble shooting there ? ” He said , “ Are you kidding ? It 's me and Steve . " Months later they called and said , “ We can 't shoot in India . They 're really upset . ” So they shot in Sri Lanka and London , mostly . ” 
 The filmmakers were denied permission to film in North India and Amer Fort due to the government finding the script offensive . The government demanded many script changes , rewritings and final cut privilege . As a result , location work went to Kandy , Sri Lanka , with matte paintings and scale models applied for the village , temple , and Pankot Palace . Budgetary inflation also caused Temple of Doom to cost $ 28 @.@ 17 million , $ 8 million more than Raiders of the Lost Ark . Filming began on April 18 , 1983 in Kandy , and moved to Elstree Studios in Hertfordshire , England on May 5 . Producer Frank Marshall recalled , " when filming the bug scenes , crew members would go home and find bugs in their hair , clothes and shoes . " Eight out of the nine sound stages at Elstree housed the filming of Temple of Doom . Lucas biographer Marcus Hearn observed , " Douglas Slocombe 's skillful lighting helped disguise the fact that about 80 percent of the film was shot with sound stages . " 
 Danny Daniels choreographed the opening music number " Anything Goes " . Capshaw learned to sing in Mandarin and took tap dance lessons . However , when wearing her dress , which was too tight , Capshaw was not able to tap dance . Made of the 1920s and 1930s original beads , the dress was one of a kind . The opening dance number was actually the last scene to be shot , but the dress did feature in some earlier location shots in Sri Lanka , drying on a nearby tree . Unfortunately an elephant had started to eat it , but some was salvaged . Consequently , some emergency repair work had to be done with what remained of the original beads , and it was costume designer Anthony Powell who had to fill in the insurance forms . As to the reason for damage , he had no option but to put " dress eaten by elephant " . 
 Norman Reynolds could not return for Temple of Doom because of his commitment to Return of the Jedi . Elliot Scott ( Labyrinth , Who Framed Roger Rabbit ) , Reynolds ' mentor , was hired . To build the rope bridge the filmmakers found a group of British engineers working on the nearby Balfour Beatty dam . Harrison Ford suffered a severe spinal disc herniation by performing a somersault while filming the scene with the assassin in Jones ' bedroom . A hospital bed was brought on set for Ford to rest between takes . Lucas stated , " He could barely stand up , yet he was there every day so shooting would not stop . He was in incomprehensible pain , but he was still trying to make it happen . " With no alternatives , Lucas shut down production while Ford was flown to Centinela Hospital on June 21 for recovery . Stunt double Vic Armstrong spent five weeks as a stand @-@ in for various shots . Wendy Leech , Armstrong 's wife , served as Capshaw 's stunt double . 
 Macau was substituted for Shanghai , while cinematographer Douglas Slocombe caught fever from June 24 to July 7 and could not work . Ford returned on August 8 . Despite the problems during filming , Spielberg was able to complete Temple of Doom on schedule and on budget , finishing principal photography on August 26 . Various pick @-@ ups took place afterwards . This included Snake River Canyon , in Idaho , Mammoth Mountain , Tuolumne and American River , Yosemite National Park , San Joaquin Valley , Hamilton Air Force Base and Arizona . Producer Frank Marshall directed a second unit in Florida in January 1984 , using alligators to double as crocodiles . The mine chase was a combination of a roller coaster and scale models with dolls doubling for the actors . Minor stop motion was also used for the sequence . Visual effects supervisors Dennis Muren , Joe Johnston and a crew at Industrial Light & Magic provided the visual effects work , while Skywalker Sound , headed by Ben Burtt , commissioned the sound design . Burtt recorded Willie Scott 's scream and roller coasters at Disneyland Park in Anaheim for the mine cart scene . 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 " After I showed the film to George [ Lucas ] , at an hour and 55 minutes , we looked at each other , " Spielberg remembered . " The first thing that we said was , ' Too fast ' . We needed to decelerate the action . I did a few more matte shots to slow it down . We made it a little bit slower , by putting breathing room back in so there 'd be a two @-@ hour oxygen supply for the audience . " 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Temple of Doom was released on May 23 , 1984 in America , accumulating a record @-@ breaking $ 45 @.@ 7 million in its first week . The film went on to gross $ 333 @.@ 1 million worldwide , with $ 180 million in North America and $ 153 @.@ 1 million in other markets . The film had the highest opening weekend of 1984 , and was that year 's highest grossing film ( third in North America , behind Beverly Hills Cop and Ghostbusters ) . It was also the tenth highest grossing film of all time during its release . It sold an estimated 53 @,@ 532 @,@ 800 tickets in the US . 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 Marvel Comics published a comic book adaptation of the film by writer David Michelinie and artists Jackson <unk> , Ian Akin , Brian Garvey , and Bob Camp . It was published as Marvel Super Special # 30 and as a three @-@ issue limited series . 
 LucasArts and Atari Games promoted the film by releasing an arcade game . Hasbro released a toy line based on the film in September 2008 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film received mixed reviews upon its release , but over the years the film 's reception has shifted to a more positive tone . American Movie Classics considers Temple of Doom to be one of 1984 's best films . On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 85 % , based on 63 reviews , with an average rating of 7 @.@ 3 / 10 . The site 's critical consensus reads , " It may be too " dark " for some , but Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom remains an ingenious adventure spectacle that showcases one of Hollywood 's finest filmmaking teams in vintage form . " On Metacritic the film has a rating of 57 out of 100 , based on 14 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . 
 Roger Ebert gave the film a perfect four star rating , calling it " the most cheerfully exciting , bizarre , goofy , romantic adventure movie since Raiders , and it is high praise to say that it 's not so much a sequel as an equal . It 's quite an experience . " Vincent Canby felt the film was " too shapeless to be the fun that Raiders is , but shape may be beside the point . Old @-@ time , 15 @-@ part movie serials didn 't have shape . They just went on and on and on , which is what Temple of Doom does with humor and technical invention . " Neal Gabler commented that " I think in some ways , Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom was better than Raiders of the Lost Ark . In some ways it was less . In sum total , I 'd have to say I enjoyed it more . That doesn 't mean it 's better necessarily , but I got more enjoyment out of it . " Colin Covert of the Star Tribune called the film " sillier , darkly violent and a bit dumbed down , but still great fun . " Pauline Kael , writing in The New Yorker , claimed it was " one of the most sheerly pleasurable physical comedies ever made . " Halliwell 's Film Guide described the film as a " slow @-@ starting adventure romp with much ingenuity and too much brutality and horror . " 
 Dave Kehr gave a largely negative review ; " The film betrays no human impulse higher than that of a ten @-@ year @-@ old boy trying to gross out his baby sister by dangling a dead worm in her face . " Ralph Novak of People complained " The ads that say ' this film may be too intense for younger children ' are fraudulent . No parent should allow a young child to see this traumatizing movie ; it would be a cinematic form of child abuse . Even Harrison Ford is required to slap Quan and abuse Capshaw . There are no heroes connected with the film , only two villains ; their names are Steven Spielberg and George Lucas . " The Observer described it as " a thin , arch , graceless affair . " The Guardian summarized it as " a two @-@ hour series of none too carefully linked chase sequences ... sitting on the edge of your seat gives you a sore bum but also a numb brain . " Leonard Maltin gave the movie only 2 out of 4 stars , saying that the film " never gives us a chance to breathe " and chiding the " ' gross @-@ out ' gags . " 
 Kate Capshaw called her character " not much more than a dumb screaming blonde . " Steven Spielberg said in 1989 , " I wasn 't happy with Temple of Doom at all . It was too dark , too subterranean , and much too horrific . I thought it out @-@ <unk> Poltergeist . There 's not an ounce of my own personal feeling in Temple of Doom . " He later added during the Making of Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom documentary , " Temple of Doom is my least favorite of the trilogy . I look back and I say , ' Well the greatest thing that I got out of that was I met Kate Capshaw . We married years later and that to me was the reason I was fated to make Temple of Doom . " 
 The film 's depiction of Hindus caused controversy in India , and brought it to the attention of the country 's censors , who placed a temporary ban on it . The depiction of the goddess Kali as a representative of the underworld and evil was met with much criticism , as she is almost exclusively depicted as a goddess of change and empowerment ( Shakti ) , meaning that while she does destroy , she almost always does so in order to effect positive change . The depiction of Indian cuisine was also criticized , as dishes such as baby snakes , eyeball soup , beetles and chilled monkey brains are not actual Indian foods . Shashi Tharoor has condemned the film and has criticised numerous parts of the film as offensive and factually inaccurate . Yvette Rosser has criticized the film for contributing to negative stereotypes of Indians in Western society , writing " [ it ] seems to have been taken as a valid portrayal of India by many teachers , since a large number of students surveyed complained that teachers referred to the eating of monkey brains . " 
 In 2014 , Time Out polled several film critics , directors , actors and stunt actors to list their top action films . Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom was listed at 71st place on this list . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Dennis Muren and Industrial Light & Magic 's visual effects department won the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects at the 57th Academy Awards . Soundtrack composer John Williams was , as he had been for his work on Raiders of the Lost Ark , again nominated for Original Music Score . The visual effects crew won the same category at the 38th British Academy Film Awards . Cinematographer Douglas Slocombe , editor Michael Kahn , Ben Burtt and other sound designers at Skywalker Sound received nominations . Spielberg , the writers , Harrison Ford , Jonathan Ke Quan , Anthony Powell and makeup designer Tom Smith were nominated for their work at the Saturn Awards . Temple of Doom was nominated for Best Fantasy Film but lost to Ghostbusters . 
 = St Catherine 's Castle = 
 St Catherine 's Castle ( Cornish : Kastel S. <unk> ) is a Henrician castle in Cornwall , built by Thomas Treffry between approximately 1538 and 1540 , in response to fears of an invasion of England by France and the Holy Roman Empire . The D @-@ shaped , stone fortification , equipped with five gun @-@ ports for cannon , overlooked the mouth of the River Fowey in Cornwall . It was protected by a curtain wall and the surrounding cliffs . The castle remained in use for many years until it was closed at the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 . Brought back into service in 1855 during the Crimean War , it was fitted with two new artillery positions , but it soon became obsolete and was abandoned . During the Second World War the castle was refortified and used to house a battery of naval guns , protecting the coast against the threat of German attack . At the end of the conflict the castle was restored to its previous condition and is now managed by English Heritage as a tourist attraction . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 St Catherine 's Castle was built as a consequence of the international tensions between England , France and the Holy Roman Empire in the final years of the reign of King Henry VIII . Traditionally the Crown had left coastal defences to the local lords and communities , only taking a modest role in building and maintaining fortifications , and while France and the Empire remained in conflict with one another , maritime raids were common but an actual invasion of England seemed unlikely . Modest defences , based around simple blockhouses and towers , existed in the south @-@ west and along the Sussex coast , with a few more impressive works in the north of England , but in general the fortifications were very limited in scale . 
 In 1533 , Henry broke with Pope Paul III in order to annul his long @-@ standing marriage to Catherine of Aragon and remarry . Catherine was the aunt of Charles V , the Holy Roman Emperor , and he took the annulment as a personal insult . This resulted in France and the Empire declaring an alliance against Henry in 1538 , and the Pope encouraging the two countries to attack England . An invasion of England now appeared certain and Henry began to improve his coastal defences . 
 In response to this situation , a small , D @-@ shaped stone fortification was built to protect Fowey Harbour in Cornwall , then an important centre for trade . The harbour was reached through the Fowey estuary , which the local town had protected in the previous century with two blockhouses positioned along the river 's edge — the Fowey and Polruan blockhouses — and a boom chain strung between them . The new castle replaced these and was located high on the headland overlooking the entrance to the estuary itself , St Catherine 's Point , from which it took its name . 
 Construction work began on the castle at some point between 1538 and 1540 , under the direction of a member of the local Cornish gentry , Thomas Treffry . By 1540 , a map of the local defences described the castle as only " half @-@ made " ; when the antiquarian John Leland visited what he described as a blockhouse in 1542 , he was hosted by Treffry , and afterwards recorded that the construction had been funded partly by Treffry and partly by the local town . 
 = = = Later use = = = 
 St Catherine 's Castle remained in use for many years . During the English Civil War of the 1640s , it was held by the Royalist supporters of King Charles I against Parliament ; in 1684 the local burgesses reported that the fortification was in a " <unk> " state . The antiquarian Francis Grose visited the castle in 1786 and noted that the fortification was still being maintained at the expense of the local town . He praised its " picturesque and romantic " position but concluded that the building itself was of " little importance , either to antiquity or architecture " . At this time the castle was equipped with six cannons and it continued to be used as a battery until the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 . 
 After the Crimean War broke out in 1853 , fresh concerns of invasion were raised and the coastline was refortified . The castle was redeveloped as part of this work in 1855 , and two new gun positions built around the old blockhouse . In 1887 , the castle was equipped with 64 @-@ pound ( 29 kg ) rifled , muzzle @-@ loading artillery pieces , supported by volunteer forces and used for training purposes , but the weaponry became obsolete and the site had fallen out of use again by the end of the century . 
 The castle was brought back into use in the Second World War by the British Southern Command to defend the coast against German attack . In June 1940 it was re @-@ equipped as a gun battery and observation post , with additional concrete defences laid around the position . Two 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) naval guns were installed in one of the 19th century firing positions and in a new gun position built 50 metres ( 160 ft ) to the west of the castle ; these were supplemented by a French 75 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) gun , and the old blockhouse itself was used to control a minefield in the estuary below . The guns were manned first by the 364 Coast Battery of the Royal Artillery and then by the 379 Battery of the 557 Coast Regiment , but the battery was retired from active operations in November 1943 . After 1945 the entire fort was decommissioned and the newer defences removed . 
 In the 21st century , the castle is operated by the heritage organisation English Heritage as a tourist attraction and is protected under UK law as a Grade 2 * listed building and scheduled monument . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The 16th century blockhouse is a two @-@ storey , D @-@ shaped design , 5 by 4 @.@ 4 metres ( 16 by 14 ft ) internally , with walls of slate rubble up to 1 @.@ 35 metres ( 4 ft 5 in ) thick resting on a platform cut out of the bedrock . The ground floor originally had three semi @-@ circular gun @-@ ports overlooking the sea and the estuary , although one has since been blocked up . On the first floor were two more gun @-@ ports — one now filled in — and smaller windows that could have been used for smaller gunpowder weapons . The building had a fireplace and chimney , with a small guard chamber by the entrance , and was topped by a parapet walk . 
 The blockhouse overlooks the sea and the estuary from its position on a rocky outcrop . It is surrounded by cliffs and a curtain wall , enclosing a semi @-@ circular area around 500 square metres ( 5 @,@ 400 sq ft ) in size , incorporating slits for firing muskets . A rectangular bastion , 5 @.@ 7 by 3 @.@ 2 metres ( 19 by 10 ft ) internally with 0 @.@ 75 metres ( 2 ft 6 in ) thick walls , protects the rear of the blockhouse . The original pathway to the blockhouse was blocked by later work , and the current steps up to the building are of 19th century origin . 
 A flat @-@ roofed magazine was cut out of the rock just below the blockhouse in the 19th century , and a gun platform with two circular recesses for gun carriage rails was constructed , protected by a granite parapet . The curtain wall was reworked in this period and marked by plaques labelled " WD 1855 " . The recesses and marks from the additional defences in the Second War can still be seen in places along the gun platform . 
 = Cruachan Power Station = 
 The Cruachan Power Station ( also known as the Cruachan Dam ) is a pumped @-@ storage hydroelectric power station in Argyll and Bute , Scotland . The turbine hall is located inside Ben Cruachan , and the scheme takes water between Cruachan Reservoir to Loch Awe , a height difference of 396 metres ( 1 @,@ 299 ft ) . It is one of only four pumped storage power stations in the UK , and is capable of providing a black start capability to the National Grid . 
 Construction began in 1959 to coincide with the Hunterston A nuclear power station in Ayrshire . Cruachan uses cheap off @-@ peak electricity generated at night to pump water to the higher reservoir , which can then be released during the day to provide power as necessary . The power station is open to visitors , and around 50 @,@ 000 tourists visit it each year . 
 = = Location = = 
 The power station is on the <unk> road , about 8 km or 5 miles west of Dalmally , on a branch of Loch Awe leading to the River Awe , which is the outflow from the loch , at its NW corner . There is a seasonally open Falls of Cruachan railway station nearby . 
 = = History = = 
 Construction commenced in 1959 , and the power station was opened by Queen Elizabeth II on 15 October 1965 . The concept was designed by Sir Edward MacColl , who died before it opened . The civil engineering works of the scheme were by James Williamson & Partners of Glasgow , and the main project contractors were William <unk> of Aberdeen and Edmund Nuttall of Camberley . Consultant electrical engineers were Merz & McLellan of Newcastle on Tyne . At the peak of the construction , there were around 4 @,@ 000 people working on the project . Thirty @-@ six men died in the construction of the power station and dam , and the cost of the scheme was GB £ 24 @.@ 5 million . 
 Cruachan was one of the first reversible pumped @-@ storage systems , where the same turbines are used as both pumps and generators . Previous pumped @-@ storage systems used separate pumps with a network of pipes to return water to the upper reservoir , making them much more expensive to build than conventional hydroelectric systems . Cruachan is predated by the smaller 232 megawatts ( 311 @,@ 000 hp ) <unk> ( de ) of 1958 and the 360 megawatts ( 480 @,@ 000 hp ) Ffestiniog Power Station of 1963 . It is one of four pumped storage schemes in the UK . 
 Its construction was linked to that of Hunterston A nuclear power station , to store surplus night @-@ time nuclear generated electrical energy . The power station was originally operated by the North of Scotland Hydro @-@ Electric Board , before being transferred to the South of Scotland Electricity Board . It has been owned by Scottish Power since the privatisation of Britain 's electricity industry in 1990 , and they are looking to increase capacity to 1 @,@ 040 MW . 
 Its early life was fraught with technical difficulties , but the size of the maintenance team has been reduced from 30 in 1989 to 12 in 2010 . Maintenance of the penstocks , which formerly required them to be drained , is now done using a remotely operated underwater vehicle . 
 In 2015 to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the station 's opening a BBC radio documentary " Inside the rock " covered the history of construction . BBC documentary ' Inside the <unk> 
 = = Design = = 
 The Cruachan station temporarily stores energy at times of low demand , and releases it at times of high demand , when electricity prices are higher , reducing the maximum power that must be provided by power stations . It is also used to cope with sudden surges in the demand for electricity , such as at the end of television programmes . Despite the use of some rainwater , Cruachan is not a net generator of electricity : it uses more energy for pumping water and spinning its turbines than it generates . 
 Water is pumped from Loch Awe to the upper reservoir , 396 metres ( 1 @,@ 299 ft ) above , during periods of low energy use ( such as at night ) , and then released during the day . The upper reservoir also receives rainwater , supplemented by a network of 19 kilometres ( 12 mi ) of tunnels . Around 10 % of the energy from the station is generated from rainwater ; the rest is from the water pumped up from Loch Awe . 
 The station is capable of generating 440 megawatts ( 590 @,@ 000 hp ) of electricity from four turbines , two of 100 megawatts ( 130 @,@ 000 hp ) and two of 120 megawatts ( 160 @,@ 000 hp ) capacity , after two units were upgraded in 2005 . It can go from standby to full production in two minutes , or thirty seconds if compressed air is used to start the turbines spinning . When the top reservoir is full , Cruachan can operate for 22 hours before the supply of water is exhausted . At full power , the turbines can pump at 167 cubic metres ( 5 @,@ 900 cu ft ) per second and generate at 200 cubic metres ( 7 @,@ 100 cu ft ) per second . 
 The power station is required to keep a 12 @-@ hour emergency water supply in order to provide a black start capability to the National Grid , to enable utilities to be restarted without access to external power . 
 = = = Turbine hall = = = 
 There are four Francis turbines , which operate as both pumps and generators . These are housed in a cavern within Ben Cruachan , which is 91 @.@ 5 metres ( 300 ft ) long , 23 @.@ 5 metres ( 77 ft ) wide and 38 metres ( 125 ft ) high , with an adjacent transformer hall . The chamber is at a depth of around 300 metres ( 980 ft ) , and is located within a hard granite intrusion . Construction of the power station required the removal of 220 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 7 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of rock . Access to the hall is gained by a road tunnel 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) long , 4 metres ( 13 ft ) high and 7 metres ( 23 ft ) wide , which is warm and humid enough to allow tropical plants to grow . 
 The transformers step up the voltage from 16 kV to 275 kV for transmission . Six oil @-@ filled cables carry the electric current up a cable shaft to a point in front of the dam , and from there it is carried on pylons to Dalmally 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) to the east . The staircase in the cable shaft has 1 @,@ 420 steps , making it the tallest in Britain . 
 After passing through the turbines , the water enters a surge chamber designed to balance fluctuations in the level of water before entering the tailrace tunnel to Loch Awe , which is 7 metres ( 23 ft ) in diameter and 935 metres ( 3 @,@ 068 ft ) long . 
 = = = Reservoir = = = 
 The Cruachan Reservoir is 396 metres ( 1 @,@ 299 ft ) above Loch Awe , and is contained by a dam 316 metres ( 1 @,@ 037 ft ) long . The reservoir has a catchment area of 23 square kilometres ( 8 @.@ 9 sq mi ) , and is capable of holding 7 gigawatt @-@ hours ( 25 TJ ) of energy . Environmental restrictions meant that the dam had to have a " clean " structure , so the operational equipment is located within the dam wall itself . 
 The penstocks are a pair of tunnels , 260 metres ( 850 ft ) long and inclined at 56 ° from the horizontal with a 5 @.@ 3 metres ( 17 ft ) diameter , which then bifurcate into four steel lined 190 metres ( 620 ft ) long , 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 ft 2 in ) diameter shafts . The penstocks underwent a major inspection and refurbishment in 2003 . 
 = = Tourist attraction = = 
 The power station was listed by the conservation organisation <unk> as one of the sixty key monuments of post @-@ war Scottish architecture . In November 2012 , the power station received the Institution of Mechanical Engineers ' Engineering Heritage Award . 
 A visitor centre , refurbished in 2009 , is situated at the outflow to Loch Awe and receives around 50 @,@ 000 visitors a year . 
 The power station houses a three @-@ section 48 by 12 foot ( 14 @.@ 6 m × 3 @.@ 7 m ) modernist mural in wood , plastic and gold leaf by English artist Elizabeth Falconer . The mural includes Celtic crosses , pylons , mythical beasts , and men of industry . The first section depicts the mythical Cailleach Bheur , who guarded the spring underneath the mountain . The middle panel commemorates fifteen workers killed when the roof of the turbine hall collapsed , and the final section shows the station working . 
 = New Guinea crocodile = 
 The New Guinea crocodile ( Crocodylus novaeguineae ) is a small species of crocodile found on the island of New Guinea where there are two geographically isolated populations to the north and south of the mountain ridge that runs along the centre of the island . In the past it included the Philippine crocodile , C. n. mindorensis , as a subspecies , but today they are regarded as separate species . The habitat of the New Guinea crocodile is mostly freshwater swamps and lakes . It is most active at night when it feeds on fish and a range of other small animals . A female crocodile lays a clutch of eggs in a nest composed of vegetation and she lies up nearby to guard the nest . There is some degree of parental care for newly hatched juveniles . This crocodile was over @-@ hunted for its valuable skin in the mid 20th century , but conservation measures have since been put in place , it is reared in ranches and the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) lists it as being of " Least Concern " . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 The New Guinea crocodile was first described by the American herpetologist Karl Patterson Schmidt in 1928 as Crocodylus novaeguineae . At one time it was thought that there were two subspecies , C. n. novaeguineae , the New Guinea crocodile native to Papua New Guinea and Western New Guinea , and C. n. mindorensis , the Philippine crocodile , native to several islands including <unk> , Luzon , Masbate , Mindoro , Negros , Samar and Mindanao . Most authorities now consider that the Philippine crocodile is an entirely separate species . In fact DNA sequencing data reported in 2011 has shown that the Philippine crocodile is paraphyletic with regard to the New Guinea crocodile , and that the latter constitutes a population within the Philippine crocodile . 
 The genus name Crocodylus comes from the Greek <unk> which means a pebble and <unk> , a worm or man , referring to the knobbly appearance of the dorsal surface of the reptile . The specific epithet novaeguineae is from the Latin and means " of New Guinea " . Other common names for this crocodile include New Guinea freshwater crocodile , Singapore large grain , Puk Puk , Buaya air <unk> and <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Phylogeny = = = 
 The cladogram below follows the topology from a 2011 analysis of mitochondrial DNA sequences by Robert W. Meredith , <unk> R. <unk> , George Amato and John <unk> . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The New Guinea crocodile grows to a length of up to 3 @.@ 5 m ( 11 ft ) for males and 2 @.@ 7 m ( 8 @.@ 9 ft ) for females , although most specimens are smaller . The body ranges from grey to brown in colour , with darker <unk> on the tail and body which become less noticeable as the animal grows . Longitudinal ridges in front of the eyes and some granular scales on the back of the neck between four large scales are distinctive features of this species . There are some differences between the northerly and southerly populations in the morphology of the skull and the arrangement of the scales . The snout is pointed and relatively narrow during juvenile stages and becomes wider as the animal matures . The New Guinea crocodile bears a physical similarity to the nearby Philippine crocodile ( C. mindorensis ) and Siamese crocodile ( C. siamensis ) . The colouring is similar to that of the freshwater crocodile ( Crocodylus johnsoni ) of northern Australia , but the snout is somewhat shorter and broader . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 This crocodile is to be found in the freshwater swamps , marshes and lakes of New Guinea , particularly in the interior . It has been known to enter brackish waters such as those of the Fly River estuary but is very rare in coastal areas , and never found in the presence of the competing saltwater crocodile ( C. porosus ) . The animal was first described from the Sepik River area in the north of Papua New Guinea . A separate population is found in the southern half of the island , with a range that extends from southeastern Papua New Guinea to the Indonesian provinces of Papua and West Papua . It is separated from the northern population by the mountain range that runs along the centre of the island . DNA analysis has revealed these to be genetically separate populations . There are estimated to be between 50 @,@ 000 and 100 @,@ 000 New Guinea crocodiles in the wild . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 New Guinea crocodiles have a mostly aquatic lifestyle and are largely nocturnal . They spend much of the day underwater , often with their nostrils and eyes above the surface . Powerful side @-@ to @-@ side movements of their tails propel them through the water and they use both tail and legs to steer . When on land , they favour shady , dense areas of undergrowth . They tend to bask in a group during the day , dispersing at night to feed . 
 Females become sexually mature when about 1 @.@ 6 to 2 metres ( 5 ft 3 in to 6 ft 7 in ) long and males at about 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 ft 2 in ) . Eggs are laid about 14 days after mating . In the northern population , breeding takes place during the dry season between August and October . A floating nest composed of vegetation is made in a shallow water location such as in an overgrown channel , at the edge of a lake , on a scroll <unk> or beside a stream . A clutch of between 22 and 45 eggs is laid and covered with further vegetation . In the southern population , the wet season is chosen for reproduction . The nest is sometimes built in a similar locations to the northern nests , but is more often on land , and a smaller number of rather larger eggs is laid . In both populations , the mother stays near the nest during the incubation period , which lasts about 80 days . When the eggs start to hatch , the emerging young are quite vocal , and both male and female crocodiles have been observed transporting hatching and newly hatched young to open water , carrying them delicately in their mouths . 
 Newly hatched New Guinea crocodiles feed on aquatic insects , spiders , tadpoles , freshwater snails , frogs , fish and small mammals . As they grow , so does the size of their prey and their consumption of fish rises , but they still will eat anything of a worthwhile size that they can find . An adult 's diet is largely fish , caught by sweeping the snout sideways and snapping at the prey , but also includes shrimps , crabs , frogs , snakes , birds and medium @-@ sized mammals . A crocodile catches its prey by stealth with a flick of its head , impaling it with its sharp teeth and gripping and crushing it . The jaws cannot move sideways to chew the food ; instead , the crocodile 's head is tossed to move the prey to the back of the mouth before the prey is swallowed whole . This crocodile is surprisingly agile and can lunge its body upward into the air to catch bats , flying birds , and leaping fish . It can also probe into the mud at the bottom of river or swamp with its snout to search for crabs and molluscs . 
 Adult and young New Guinea crocodiles have a range of vocalisations . An adult female can produce a repeated throaty " roar " when approached by another adult . The young start communicating with each other while still in the egg ; this may help synchronise hatching . Newly hatched juveniles use various yelps and grunts . When startled , a warning sound emitted by one will send all the juveniles diving to the bottom of the water . Adults in the vicinity respond with growls , threats , and attacks . The distress noises of a youngster when handled at a ranching facility was observed to cause all the larger animals to become involved in frenzied activity , with some rushing towards the juvenile and others thrashing about in the water and slapping their heads down on the surface . 
 = = Status and conservation = = 
 The IUCN listed this crocodile as being " Vulnerable " in its Red List of Threatened Species in 1986 and 1988 , but changed the assessment to " Least Concern " in 1996 . At the time it was stated that the animal has a large area of suitable habitat and seemed to be plentiful . Its status has not been reassessed since then . It is included in Appendix II of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) . 
 The skin of the New Guinea crocodile is valuable and in the 1950s and 1960s the animals in the northern population were heavily hunted to a point where they might have become extinct . Around 1970 , legislation was put in place and they received some protection . In the period 1977 to 1980 , the harvest of wild skins was over 20 @,@ 000 per year but in the 1980s this declined to 12 @,@ 000 to 20 @,@ 000 . As well as this , some 2 @,@ 500 to 10 @,@ 000 eggs and hatchlings were collected annually to raise on ranches . However , in 1995 , the largest ranch on the island initiated a change of strategy to concentrate on raising the saltwater crocodile , and demand for the eggs and juveniles of the New Guinea crocodile dried up . Since then , cropping of wild animals has been controlled in both Indonesia and Papua New Guinea . In the former it is limited to a belly width of 25 to 51 cm ( 10 to 20 in ) for wet skins and in the latter to salted skins with a belly width of 18 to 51 cm ( 7 to 20 in ) . Some eggs and hatchlings are still removed from the nest and raised in enclosures and a similar programme has more recently been initiated for southern populations . 
 = Britten family = 
 The Brittens are a family of fictional characters featured in the American television police procedural fantasy drama Awake . The Brittens are a nuclear family consisting of the married couple Michael and Hannah and their child son Rex . The family was involved in a car crash , which caused Michael , to live in two separate realities , one in which his wife Hannah was killed in the crash , and in the other his son Rex was killed . 
 The main characters reside in Los Angeles , California , in the United States , and were created by series executive producer and writer Kyle Killen , who conceived the idea after creating and developing Lone Star for the Fox network . The portrayal of the Britten family was praised by television critics . Alongside the three main family members , several other characters were mentioned . 
 = = Main family = = 
 The Brittens are a family who live in Los Angeles , California , in the United States , at an unknown address . Michael , the father , works at the Los Angeles Police Department as a police detective , alongside his partner Isaiah Freeman , who he calls Bird . After a car crash , Michael , the father , has to live in two separate realities , one in which his wife Hannah was killed in the crash , and in the other his son Rex was the one killed . Also , in one reality , his now works with a new rookie partner Efrem Vega , where Isaiah goes to work in the Western Division with Ed Hawkins . In the other reality , he is still partnered with Bird . He see two two separate therapists : Dr. John Lee in one reality , and Dr. Judith Evans in the other . Michael is married to Hannah , an American housewife and mother . They have one son child : Rex , a school teenager who is very emotional , rude , and gets low grades after Hannah 's death in that reality . His best friend is Cole , whom he works on a motorbike with . The family owns a Chevrolet as a vehicle . 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 Killen conceived of the idea for the Brittens after creating and developing Lone Star for the Fox network . NBC had encouraged Killen to conceive a concept for a future television series after Lone Star 's cancellation . Within a few weeks , Killen sent a rough draft of the script to his agent Marc Korman . " It was 1 or 2 o 'clock in the morning , and I remember I was so freaked out by the script that I went upstairs to our guest bedroom where my wife was sick with the flu and I got into bed with her , " recalled Korman . " I called Jen and said : ' I 'm telling you , this script is remarkable . I 've never read a pilot like this , and for a guy who has never written a procedural show in his life , he 's actually making two cases work " . Initially , Salke and Korman looked to sell acquisition rights to Fox . 
 The Britten family debuted on March 1 , 2012 , in " Pilot " , on the American police procedural drama television series Awake , which is a one @-@ hour series broadcast on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) . They last appeared on television on the same network , on May 24 , 2012 , in " Turtles All the Way Down " . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 In February 2011 , Jason Isaacs obtained the role of Michael Britten , the central character of the series . Gordon summated the premise of the character : " He 's a guy who goes to sleep , wakes up , he ’ s with his wife , goes to sleep , wakes up , and he 's with his son . And so — and he 's a cop who sees clues and details that crossover from one world to the next , and he uses that insight to solve crimes . " Killen thought that the premise behind the series would be relatable to audiences , making it easier to broader his fanbase . " I think there were aspects of Lone Star that were more difficult to get a wider , broader audience interested in , " he articulated . " [ The main character ] was somebody that you couldn ’ t decide if you liked or hated , and I think that Britten 's dilemma is something that we ’ re not only sympathetic for , but somehow we want him to win . " The succeeding month , Laura Allen was approached by producers to play Hannah Britten . Michaela McManus initially received the role , but was later given the role of Tara , whom Allen originally auditioned to play . 
 In March 2011 , Dylan Minnette was cast as Rex Britten . Minnette commended the episode 's script , and noted the auditioning sequence was fast . He stated , " The process of getting the job actually went by really fast because the first audition Kyle Killen [ ... ] was in the room , Jason [ Isaacs ] was in the room , the cast director was in the room and the director was in the room . David Slade . And they were all there , for the first audition and I was like ' Wow ! Okay . ' " Minnette received the role two weeks after his audition . 
 = = = Michael Britten = = = 
 Michael Britten , portrayed by Jason Isaacs , is the father of the Britten family . He is married to Hannah , and has to live in two separate realities , after a car crash , one in which his wife Hannah was killed in the crash , and in the other his son Rex was the one killed . Also , in one reality , his now works with a new rookie partner Efrem Vega , where Isaiah goes to work in the Western Division with Ed Hawkins . In the other reality , he is still partnered with Bird . He see two two separate therapists : Dr. John Lee in one reality , and Dr. Judith Evans in the other . He wears a green wrist band in one reality , where Rex is alive , and a red wrist band in the other reality , where Hannah . He is seen very emotional in " Say Hello to My Little Friend " , because he doesn 't see he son . Because of his two realities , Michael now has routine to help him maintain the illusions of control . 
 = = = Hannah Britten = = = 
 Hannah Britten , portrayed by Laura Allen , is the well @-@ meaning and emotional wife of Michael , and the mother of her son Rex . She is alive in Michael 's " red reality " . She began to renovate their home after the car crash . Though she hardly showed it , she felt great pain and grievance over the death of Rex and was saddened by the thought of his empty room upstairs . 
 = = = Rex Britten = = = 
 Rex Britten , portrayed by Dylan Minnette , is Michael 's son who is featured in Michael 's " green reality " . Green is Rex 's favorite color . He is a teenage school student . Outside of school , Rex claims he is going to the beach , although he is really going to his best friend Cole 's house to work on a motorbike with him . Like Hannah , Rex is also very emotional , and often gets angry , due to Hannah 's death in the crash . He kept a tennis racket to remain , and make him deal with Hannah 's death . However , Cole accidentally broke it , Rex fights with him because of this . He later apologizes to him . He hates " cereal and soda night " because Michael doesn not cook " actual food " for dinner . Rex has an aunt named Carol , who is mentioned in " Two Birds " , in Michael 's " green reality " . She wants to spend more time with Rex since the crash . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The portrayal of the Britten family was praised by television critics . Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly was keen to Isaacs ' acting in the series . " It helps enormously to have Isaacs playing the lead . This actor knows how to convey a gravity that contrasts well with the series ' airy concept , but he avoids becoming heavy and morose . " West summated that the cast " really couldn 't be better on this series " ; " Isaacs [ delivered ] a stellar performance as the intelligent detective , and loving father and husband who ’ s just trying to make sense of what ’ s going on and probably not entirely regretful to be experiencing a split reality . Cinema Blend 's Kelly West claimed that " Laura Allen and Dylan Minnette also deliver strong performances as Michael 's wife and son respectively " . Critics IGN , TV Fanatic , and the Paste magazine all argued that Jason Isaacs performance deserves an Emmy . 
 = Quagga = 
 The quagga ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / ) ( Equus quagga quagga ) is an extinct subspecies of plains zebra that lived in South Africa until the 19th century . It was long thought to be a distinct species , but genetic studies have shown it to be the southernmost subspecies of plains zebra . It is considered particularly close to Burchell 's zebra . Its name is derived from its call , which sounds like " kwa @-@ ha @-@ ha " . 
 The quagga is believed to have been around 257 cm ( 8 ft 5 in ) long and 125 – 135 cm ( 4 ft 1 in – 4 ft 5 in ) tall at the shoulder . It was distinguished from other zebras by its limited pattern of primarily brown and white stripes , mainly on the front part of the body . The rear was brown and without stripes , and therefore more horse @-@ like . The distribution of stripes varied considerably between individuals . Little is known about the quagga 's behaviour , but it may have gathered into herds of 30 – 50 individuals . Quaggas were said to be wild and lively , yet were also considered more docile than Burchell 's zebra . They were once found in great numbers in the Karoo of Cape Province and the southern part of the Orange Free State in South Africa . 
 After the Dutch settlement of South Africa began , the quagga was heavily hunted as it competed with domesticated animals for forage . While some individuals were taken to zoos in Europe , breeding programs were unsuccessful . The last wild population lived in the Orange Free State , and the quagga was extinct in the wild by 1878 . The last captive specimen died in Amsterdam on 12 August 1883 . Only one quagga was ever photographed alive and only 23 skins are preserved today . In 1984 , the quagga was the first extinct animal to have its DNA analysed , and the Quagga Project is trying to recreate the phenotype of hair coat pattern and related characteristics by selectively breeding Burchell 's zebras . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The name " quagga " is derived from the Khoikhoi word for zebra and is onomatopoeic , being said to resemble the quagga 's call , variously transcribed as " kwa @-@ ha @-@ ha " , " <unk> " , or " <unk> @-@ ga " . The name is still used colloquially for the plains zebra . The quagga was originally classified as a distinct species , Equus quagga , in 1778 by Dutch naturalist Pieter Boddaert . Traditionally , the quagga and the other plains and mountain zebras were placed in the subgenus Hippotigris . 
 There has been much debate over the status of the quagga in relation to the plains zebra . It is poorly represented in the fossil record , and the identification of these fossils is uncertain , as they were collected at a time when the name quagga referred to all zebras . Fossil skulls of Equus <unk> from Algeria have been claimed to show affinities with the quagga and the plains zebra , but they may be too badly damaged to allow definite conclusions to be drawn from them . Quaggas have also been identified in cave art attributed to the San . Reginald Innes Pocock was perhaps the first to suggest that the quagga was a subspecies of plains zebra in 1902 . As the quagga was scientifically described and named before the plains zebra , the trinomial name for the quagga becomes E. quagga quagga under this scheme , and the other subspecies of plains zebra are placed under E. quagga as well . 
 Historically , quagga taxonomy was further complicated by the fact that the extinct southernmost population of Burchell 's zebra ( Equus quagga burchellii , formerly Equus burchellii burchellii ) was thought to be a distinct subspecies ( also sometimes thought a full species , E. burchellii ) . The extant northern population , the " Damara zebra " , was later named Equus quagga antiquorum , which means that it is today also referred to as E. q. burchellii , after it was realised they were the same taxon . The extinct population was long thought very close to the quagga , since it also showed limited striping on its hind parts . As an example of this , Shortridge placed the two in the now disused subgenus Quagga in 1934 . Most experts now suggest that the two subspecies represent two ends of a cline . 
 Different subspecies of plains zebra were recognised as members of Equus quagga by early researchers , though there was much confusion over which species were valid . Quagga subspecies were described on the basis of differences in striping patterns , but these differences were since attributed to individual variation within the same populations . Some subspecies and even species , such as E. q. <unk> and Hippotigris isabellinus , were only based on illustrations ( <unk> ) of aberrant quagga specimens . Some authors have described the quagga as a kind of wild horse rather than a zebra , and one <unk> study from 1980 seemed to confirm its affiliation with the horse ( Equus caballus ) . It has been pointed out that early morphological studies were erroneous ; using skeletons from stuffed specimens can be problematical , as early taxidermists sometimes used donkey and horse skulls inside their mounts when the originals were unavailable . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 The quagga was the first extinct animal to have its DNA analysed , and this 1984 study launched the field of ancient DNA analysis . It confirmed that the quagga was more closely related to zebras than to horses , with the quagga and mountain zebra ( Equus zebra ) sharing an ancestor 3 – 4 million years ago . An immunological study published the following year found the quagga to be closest to the plains zebra . A 1987 study suggested that the mtDNA of the quagga diverged at a range of roughly 2 % per million years , similar to other mammal species , and again confirmed the close relation to the plains zebra . 
 Later morphological studies came to conflicting conclusions . A 1999 analysis of cranial measurements found that the quagga was as different from the plains zebra as the latter is from the mountain zebra . A 2004 study of skins and skulls instead suggested that the quagga was not a distinct species , but a subspecies of the plains zebra . In spite of these findings , many authors subsequently kept the plains zebra and the quagga as separate species . 
 A genetic study published in 2005 confirmed the subspecific status of the quagga . It showed that the quagga had little genetic diversity , and that it diverged from the other plains zebra subspecies only between 120 @,@ 000 and 290 @,@ 000 years ago , during the Pleistocene , and possibly the penultimate glacial maximum . Its distinct coat pattern perhaps evolved rapidly because of geographical isolation and / or adaptation to a drier environment . In addition , plains zebra subspecies tend to have less striping the further south they live , and the quagga was the most southern @-@ living of them all . Other large African ungulates diverged into separate species and subspecies during this period as well , probably because of the same climate shift . The simplified cladogram below is based on the 2005 analysis ( some taxa shared haplotypes and could therefore not be differentiated ) : 
 = = Description = = 
 The quagga is believed to have been 257 cm ( 8 ft 5 in ) long and 125 – 135 cm ( 4 ft 1 in – 4 ft 5 in ) tall at the shoulder . Its coat pattern was unique among equids : zebra @-@ like in the front but more like a horse in the rear . It had brown and white stripes on the head and neck , brown upper parts and a white belly , tail and legs . The stripes were boldest on the head and neck and became gradually fainter further down the body , blending with the reddish brown of the back and flanks , until disappearing along the back . It appears to have had a high degree of polymorphism , with some individuals having almost no stripes and others having patterns similar to the extinct southern population of Burchell 's zebra , where the stripes covered most of the body except for the hind parts , legs and belly . It also had a broad dark dorsal stripe on its back . It had a standing mane with brown and white stripes . 
 The only quagga to have been photographed alive was a mare at the Zoological Society of London 's Zoo . Five photographs of this specimen are known , taken between 1863 and 1870 . On the basis of photographs and written descriptions , many observers suggest that the stripes on the quagga were light on a dark background , unlike other zebras . Reinhold Rau , pioneer of the Quagga Project , claimed that this is an optical illusion : that the base colour is a creamy white and that the stripes are thick and dark . <unk> evidence supports zebras being dark coloured with white as an addition . 
 Living in the very southern end of the plains zebra 's range , the quagga had a thick winter coat that moulted each year . Its skull was described as having a straight profile and a concave diastema , and as being relatively broad with a narrow occiput . Like other plains zebras , the quagga did not have a dewlap on its neck as the mountain zebra does . The 2004 morphological study found that the skeletal features of the southern Burchell 's zebra population and the quagga overlapped , and that they were impossible to distinguish . Some specimens also appeared to be intermediate between the two in striping , and individuals of the extant Burchell 's zebra population still exhibit limited striping . It can therefore be concluded that the two subspecies graded morphologically into each other . Today , some stuffed specimens of quaggas and southern Burchell 's zebra are so similar that they are impossible to definitely identify as either , since no location data was recorded . The female specimens used in the study were larger than the males on average . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 The quagga was the southernmost distributed plains zebra , mainly living south of the Orange River . It was a grazer , and its habitat range was restricted to the grasslands and arid interior scrubland of the Karoo region of South Africa , today forming parts of the provinces of Northern Cape , Eastern Cape , Western Cape and the Free State . These areas were known for distinctive flora and fauna and high amounts of endemism . 
 Little is known about the behaviour of quaggas in the wild , and it is sometimes unclear what exact species of zebra is referred to in old reports . The only source that unequivocally describes the quagga in the Free State is that of the English military engineer and hunter Major Sir William Cornwallis Harris . His 1840 account reads as follows : 
 The geographical range of the quagga does not appear to extend to the northward of the river Vaal . The animal was formerly extremely common within the colony ; but , vanishing before the strides of civilisation , is now to be found in very limited numbers and on the borders only . Beyond , on those sultry plains which are completely taken possession of by wild beasts , and may with strict propriety be termed the domains of savage nature , it occurs in interminable herds ; and , although never intermixing with its more elegant congeners , it is almost invariably to be found ranging with the white @-@ tailed gnu and with the ostrich , for the society of which bird especially it evinces the most singular predilection . Moving slowly across the profile of the ocean @-@ like horizon , uttering a shrill , barking <unk> , of which its name forms a correct imitation , long files of quaggas continually remind the early traveller of a rival caravan on its march . Bands of many hundreds are thus frequently seen doing their migration from the dreary and desolate plains of some portion of the interior , which has formed their secluded abode , seeking for those more luxuriant pastures where , during the summer months , various herbs thrust forth their leaves and flowers to form a green carpet , spangled with hues the most brilliant and diversified . 
 Quaggas have been reported gathering into herds of 30 – 50 individuals and sometimes travelled in a linear fashion . They may have been sympatric with Burchell 's zebra between the Vaal and Orange rivers . This is disputed , and there is no evidence that they interbred . It could also have shared a small portion of its range with Hartmann 's mountain zebra ( Equus zebra <unk> ) . 
 Quaggas were said to be lively and highly strung , especially the stallions . During the 1830s , quaggas were used as harness animals for carriages in London , the males probably being gelded to mitigate their volatile nature . Local farmers used them as guards for their livestock , as they were likely to attack intruders . On the other hand , captive quaggas in European zoos were said to be tamer and more docile than Burchell 's zebra . One specimen was reported to have lived in captivity for 21 years and 4 months , dying in 1872 . 
 Since the practical function of striping has not been determined for zebras in general , it is unclear why the quagga lacked stripes on its hind parts . A cryptic function for protection from predators ( stripes obscure the individual zebra in a herd ) and biting flies ( which are less attracted to striped objects ) , as well as various social functions , have been proposed for zebras in general . Differences in hind quarter stripes may have aided species recognition during stampedes of mixed herds , so that members of one subspecies or species would follow its own kind . It has also been evidence that the zebras developed striping patterns as thermoregulation to cool themselves down , and that the quagga lost them due to living in a cooler climate , although one problem with this is that the mountain zebra lives in similar environments and has a bold striping pattern . A 2014 study strongly supported the biting @-@ fly hypothesis , and the quagga appears to have lived in areas with lesser amounts of fly activity compared to other zebras . 
 = = Decline and extinction = = 
 As it was easy to find and kill , the quagga was hunted by early Dutch settlers and later by Afrikaners to provide meat or for their skins . The skins were traded or used locally . The quagga was probably vulnerable to extinction due to its limited distribution , and it may have competed with domestic livestock for forage . The quagga had disappeared from much of its range by the 1850s . The last population in the wild , in the Orange Free State , was extirpated in the late 1870s . The last known wild individual died in 1878 . 
 Individual quaggas were also captured and shipped to Europe , where they were displayed in zoos . Lord Morton tried to save the animal from extinction by starting a captive breeding program . He was only able to obtain a single male which , in desperation , he bred with a female horse . This produced a female hybrid with zebra stripes on its back and legs . Lord Morton 's mare was sold and was subsequently bred with a black stallion , resulting in offspring that again had zebra stripes . An account of this was published in 1820 by the Royal Society . This led to new ideas on telegony , referred to as pan @-@ genesis by Charles Darwin . 
 The last captive specimen , a female in Amsterdam 's Natura Artis <unk> zoo , lived there from 9 May 1867 until it died on 12 August 1883 , but its origin and cause of death were not recorded . The specimen in London died in 1872 and the one in Berlin in 1875 . There are 23 known stuffed and mounted quagga specimens throughout the world . In addition , there is a mounted head and neck , a foot , seven complete skeletons , and samples of various tissues . A twenty @-@ fourth mounted specimen was destroyed in Königsberg , Germany , during World War II . 
 = = = Breeding back project = = = 
 After the very close relationship between the quagga and surviving zebras was discovered , Reinhold Rau started the Quagga Project in 1987 in South Africa to create a quagga @-@ like zebra population by selective breeding for a reduced stripe pattern from plains zebra stock , with the eventual aim of introducing them to the quagga 's former range . To differentiate between the quagga and the zebras of the project , they refer to it as " Rau quaggas " . The founding population consisted of 19 individuals from Namibia and South Africa , chosen because they had reduced striping on the rear body and legs . The first foal of the project was born in 1988 . Once a sufficiently quagga @-@ like population has been created , it will be released in the Western Cape . 
 Introduction of these quagga @-@ like zebras could be part of a comprehensive restoration program including such ongoing efforts as eradication of non @-@ native trees . Quaggas , wildebeest , and ostriches , which occurred together during historical times in a mutually beneficial association , could be kept together in areas where the indigenous vegetation has to be maintained by grazing . In early 2006 , the third and fourth generation animals produced by the project were considered looking much like the depictions and preserved specimens of the quagga . This type of selective breeding is called breeding back . The practice is controversial , since the resulting zebras will resemble the quaggas only in external appearance , but will be genetically different . The technology to use recovered DNA for cloning does not yet exist . 
 = Liao dynasty = 
 The Liao dynasty ( Khitan : Mos <unk> ; simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> cháo ) , officially the Great Liao ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Dà <unk> ) , also known as the Khitan Empire ( Khitan : Mos <unk> @-@ d <unk> <unk> gur ; Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> ) and the Liao Empire , was an empire in East Asia that ruled from 907 to 1125 over present @-@ day Mongolia and portions of the Russian Far East , northern Korea , and northern China . The Liao dynasty was founded by Abaoji , Khagan of the Khitan people around the time of the collapse of Tang China . It was the first state to control all of Manchuria . 
 Almost immediately after its founding , the Liao dynasty began a process of territorial expansion , with Abaoji leading a successful conquest of Balhae . Later emperors would gain the Sixteen Prefectures by fueling a proxy war that led to the collapse of the Later Tang ( 923 – 936 ) and would establish tributary relationships with Goryeo and Song China after failing to conquer Goryeo . 
 Tension between traditional Khitan social and political practices and Chinese influence and customs was a defining feature of the dynasty . This tension led to a series of succession crises ; Liao emperors favored the Chinese concept of primogeniture , while much of the rest of the Khitan elite supported the traditional method of succession by the strongest candidate . So different were Khitan and Chinese practices that Abaoji set up two parallel governments . The Northern Administration governed Khitan areas following traditional Khitan practices , while the Southern Administration governed areas with large non @-@ Khitan populations , adopting traditional Chinese governmental practices . 
 Differences between Chinese and Khitan society included gender roles and marital practices : the Khitans took a more egalitarian view towards gender , in sharp contrast to Chinese cultural practices that segregated men 's and women 's roles . Khitan women were taught to hunt , managed family property , and held military posts . Many marriages were not arranged , women were not required to be virgins at their first marriage , and women had the right to divorce and remarry . 
 The Liao dynasty was destroyed by the Jurchen people of the Jin dynasty in 1125 with the capture of Emperor Tianzuo of Liao . However , the remnant Khitan , led by Yelü Dashi , established the Qara Khitai ( Western Liao dynasty ) , which ruled over parts of Central Asia for almost a century before being conquered by the Mongols . Although cultural achievements associated with the Liao dynasty are considerable , and a number of various statuary and other artifacts exist in museums and other collections , major questions remain over the exact nature and extent of the influence of the Liao Khitan culture upon subsequent developments , such as the musical and theatrical arts . 
 = = Name = = 
 The Liao dynasty was officially known as the Khitan or Khitan state in 916 . The name " Great Liao " began to appear as the country name between 936 and 947 . The dynasty name " Liao " means " iron " , but it also refers to the Liao River in southern Manchuria , the traditional Khitan homeland . Since 983 the state became again known as the Khitan , but " Great Liao " reappeared as the country name in 1066 , which lasted until the end of the dynasty . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Khitans before Abaoji = = = 
 Neither the origins , ethnic makeup , nor early history of the Khitans are well documented in historical records . The earliest reference to a Khitan state is found in the Book of Wei , a history of the Northern Wei Dynasty ( 386 – 534 ) that was completed in 554 . Several books written after 554 mention the Khitans as being active during the late third and early fourth centuries . The Book of Jin ( 648 ) , a history of the Jin dynasty ( 265 – 420 ) , refers to the Khitans in the section covering the reign of <unk> Sheng ( 398 – 401 ) . Samguk Sagi ( 1145 ) , a history of the Three Kingdoms of Korea , mentions a Khitan raid taking place in 378 . 
 According to sinologists Denis C. Twitchett and Klaus @-@ Peter Tietze , it is generally held that the Khitans emerged from the Yuwen branch of the Xianbei people . Following a defeat at the hands of another branch of the Xianbei in 345 , the Yuwen split into three tribes , one of which was called the Kumo Xi . In 388 the Kumo Xi itself split , with one group remaining under the name Kumo Xi and the other group becoming the Khitans . This view is partially backed up by the Book of Wei , which describes the Khitans as being of Xianbei origins . There are also several competing theories on the origin of the Khitans . Beginning in the Song dynasty , some Chinese scholars suggested that the Khitans might have descended from the Xiongnu people . While modern historians have rejected the idea that the Khitan were solely Xiongnu in origin , there is some support for the claim that they are of mixed Xianbei and Xiongnu origin . Beginning with Rashid @-@ al @-@ Din Hamadani in the fourteenth century , several Western scholars have theorized that the Khitans were Mongolic in origin , and in the late 19th century Western scholars made the claim that the Khitans were Tungusic in origin — modern linguistic analysis has discredited this claim . 
 By the time the Book of Wei was written in 554 , the Khitans had formed a state in what is now China 's Jilin and Liaoning Provinces . The Khitans suffered a series of military defeats to other nomadic groups in the region , as well as to the Chinese Northern Qi ( 550 @-@ 577 ) and Sui ( 589 @-@ 618 ) Dynasties . Khitan tribes at various times fell under the influence of Turkic tribes such as the Uighurs and Chinese dynasties such as the Sui and Tang . This influence would significantly shape Khitan language and culture . In the <unk> ( Book of Sui , Volume 84 ) the Khitan are described as " bellicose in plundering and raiding borders " and " the most <unk> and arrogant among all barbarians " . The <unk> ( LS , vol . 32 and 59 ) gives the following account of the early Khitan : 
 Residing in the Great Desert ( <unk> - <unk> ) , where there is much cold and much wind , they had livestock tending and fishing as food source , fur as dress and migrated with the seasons . Their specialty was carts and horses ... In the old Khitan custom , their wealth was horses , their strength was soldiers . Horses were released all through the open country and demobilized soldiers were spread throughout the people . When a matter of importance or battle arose they were called to arms . If the order was given at 5am they would all assemble forthwith at 7am . Horses followed water and grass . People relied on milk and <unk> . They bent the powerful bow and shot animals for their daily use . They had dried food and fodder . This was their Way ( 道 - dào ) . On account of this they maintain victory and wherever they look they encounter no opposition . 
 The <unk> ( LS , vol . 32 ) names the ancient eight tribes of the Khitan ( who are also mentioned in the <unk> ) : 
 These are the ancient eight tribes : the <unk> tribe , the <unk> tribe , the <unk> tribe , the <unk> tribe , the <unk> tribe , the Pixie tribe , the Li ( Black ) tribe , the <unk> tribe ... Soon after increasing in population they invaded the Northern Qi ( <unk> - Běi <unk> ) but lost a hundred thousand people to captivity . Then , being pressed by the Turks ( <unk> - <unk> ) , they temporarily resided in Korea ( <unk> - <unk> ) numbering not much more than ten thousand families . The tribes became scattered and were no longer the eight tribes of old . 
 For most of the century between 630 and 730 , the Khitans were under the influence of the Tang dynasty . The arrangement was largely the doing of the Khitan Dahe clan . The Tang emperor bestowed the Chinese surname Li on the Dahe and appointed their leader to a governorship that Twitchett and Tietze described as " an office specifically created for the indirect management of the Khitan tribes " . Towards the turn of the century , however , Tang control of the north began to slip as it focused attention on its other borders . In 696 the Dahe leader , Li <unk> , launched a rebellion and led Khitan forces into Hebei . Although the rebellion was defeated , it took over fifteen years before the Tang were able to reassert control over the Khitans , and that control would never be strong or long @-@ lived . Re @-@ disintegration of Khitan @-@ Liao relations in the 730s saw the Yaolian clan replace the Dahe as the Khitan ruling clan , forcing Tang governor An Lushan to launch two invasions into Khitan territory in 751 and 755 . After being soundly defeated by the Khitans during the first invasion , An Lushan was successful in the second , but he then led a rebellion against the Tang that included Khitan troops in his army . The An Lushan Rebellion marked the beginning of the end of the Tang dynasty . 
 Following the An Lushan Rebellion , the Khitans became vassals of the Uighurs , while simultaneously paying tributes to the Tang , a situation that lasted from 755 until the fall of the Uighurs in 840 . From 840 until the rise of <unk> , the Khitans remained a tributary of the Tang dynasty . 
 = = = Abaoji and the rise of the Khitans = = = 
 Abaoji , who later became Emperor Taizu of Liao , was born in 872 , the son of the chief of the Yila tribe . At that time , the Yila tribe was the largest and strongest of the eight affiliated Khitan tribes ; however , the Great Khan , the overall leader of the Khitans , was drawn from the Yaolian lineage . In 901 Abaoji was elected to be the chief of the Yila tribe by its tribal council . By 903 , Abaoji had been named the <unk> , the overall military leader of the Khitans , subordinate only to the Great Khan . Four years later , in 907 , Abaoji became the Great Khan of the Khitans , ending nine generations of Yaolian rule . Abaoji acquired the prestige needed to secure the position of Khitan Great Khan through a combination of effective diplomacy and a series of successful military campaigns , beginning in 901 , against the Han Chinese forces to the south , the Xi and <unk> to the west , and the Jurchens in the east . 
 The same year that Abaoji became Great Khan , the Chinese warlord Zhu Wen , who in 904 had murdered the last legitimate emperor of the Tang dynasty , declared the Tang over and named himself emperor of China . His dynasty dissolved quickly , ushering in the fifty @-@ three @-@ year period of disunity known as the Five Dynasties period . One of the five dynasties , the Later Jin ( 936 – 947 ) , was a client state of the Khitans . 
 For much of Chinese history , the position of Emperor was determined by primogeniture ; the position would pass from father to first @-@ born son upon the father 's death . While Khitan succession was also kept within families , an emphasis was placed on selecting the most capable option , with all of a leader 's brothers , nephews , and sons considered valid choices for succession . Khitan rulers were expected to hand over power to a paternal relative after serving a single three @-@ year term . Abaoji signaled his desire to become a permanent ruler at his accession in 907 , securing his position by killing most of the other Khitan chieftains . Between 907 and 910 Abaoji 's rule went unchallenged . It was only after 910 , when Abaoji disregarded the Khitan tradition that another member of the family assume the position of Great Khan , that his rule came under direct challenge . In both 912 and 913 members of Abaoji 's family , including most of his brothers , attempted armed insurrections . After the first insurrection was discovered and defeated , Abaoji pardoned the conspirators . After the second , only his brothers were pardoned , with the other conspirators suffering violent deaths . The brothers plotted additional rebellions in 917 and 918 , both of which were easily crushed . 
 In 916 , at what would have been the end of his third term as Khitan Grand Khan , Abaoji made a number of changes moving the Khitan state closer to the model of governance used by the Chinese dynasties . He assumed the title of Celestial Emperor and designated an era name , named his oldest son Yelü Bei as his successor , and commissioned the construction of a Confucian temple . Two years later he established a capital city , Shangjing ( <unk> ) , which imitated the model of a Chinese capital city . 
 Before his death in 926 , Abaoji greatly expanded the areas that the Khitans controlled . At its height , the Liao dynasty encompassed modern @-@ day Mongolia , parts of Kazakhstan and the Russian Far East , and the Chinese provinces of Hebei , Heilongjiang , Inner Mongolia , Jilin , Liaoning , and Shanxi . 
 = = = Succession issues and the occupation of Kaifeng = = = 
 In 916 Emperor Taizu ( Abaoji ) officially designated his eldest son , Yelü Bei , as his successor . Succession by primogeniture was a long @-@ held standard in Chinese culture but was not accepted among the Khitans , creating a friction between Taizu 's desires and the beliefs of the Khitan elites , including Taizu 's wife , Empress Shulü Ping . Taizu , sensing the possibility that the succession process would run into difficulty , forced the Khitan leadership to swear allegiance to Yelü Bei after he was installed as heir apparent . To the Khitans , this was considered a radical move . This friction between primogeniture and succession by the strongest candidate would lead to repeated succession crises , the first of which occurred after Taizu 's sudden and unexpected death in 926 . 
 Yelü Bei was twenty @-@ six years old at the time of his father 's death . A polymath , Bei exemplified many of the values of the Chinese aristocracy ; he was an expert in music , medicine , fortune @-@ telling , painting , and writing ( in both Chinese and Khitan ) . He was also an accomplished warrior , leading troops into battle during his father 's conquest of Balhae . After the campaign ended in victory for the Liao in 926 , Emperor Taizu gave Bei command of the conquered territory – – which became known as the principality of Dongdan – – as well as the title of Prince of Dongdan . 
 Empress Shulü Ping , who became known as Empress Dowager Yingtian following the death of her husband , was an exceptionally powerful figure both before and after Taizu 's death . While the latter was alive , Shulü Ping commanded an army of 200 @,@ 000 horsemen that was tasked with maintaining order while Taizu led military campaigns abroad . She also led campaigns herself . Following the death of her husband , the Empress rejected the traditional Khitan custom of being buried with him , and elected to cut off her right hand and bury that with the Emperor instead . Shulü Ping then seized full military and civil authority in order to oversee the imperial succession under her own terms . The Empress 's refusal to kill herself and be buried with Taizu effectively ended the longstanding custom . 
 Precisely because Prince Yelü Bei exemplified both Chinese and Khitan values , Empress Shulü Ping objected to Bei assuming the role of Emperor . The Empress believed that Bei 's openness to Chinese culture detracted from his leadership ability as a Khitan , and she instead favored Emperor Taizu 's more traditionalist second son , Yelü Deguang . Deguang enjoyed not only the support of his mother , but also of the Khitan nobility . Realizing that he could not assume the throne , and that it would be dangerous to try , Bei campaigned in favor of allowing his younger brother to assume the throne , and by the end of 927 , formally stated to his mother that Deguang 's qualifications were superior to his own , functionally ending his ability to challenge Deguang 's ascension to the throne . 
 Despite Bei voluntarily relinquishing his claim , Deguang , who had assumed the title of Emperor Taizong of Liao , viewed Bei as a threat . Bei still held the role of Prince of Dongdan , and moved back there after relinquishing his imperial claim . In order to break any potential power base Bei might form in Dongdan , Emperor Taizong ordered that the capital of Dongdan and all of its people move to what is now <unk> . Prince Bei himself was placed under surveillance by the Emperor . In 930 Prince Bei fled to the Later Tang , where he became an honored guest of Emperor Mingzong , who went as far as to bestow upon Prince Bei the Emperor 's own surname of Li ( 李 ) . There are two conflicting accounts of Prince Bei 's death : he was assassinated either in 936 by Emperor Mo of Later Tang in retaliation for the Khitans ' support in overthrowing the Tang and replacing it with the Later Jin , or in 937 by Emperor Gaozu of Later Jin ( Shi Jingtang ) as a show of loyalty to Emperor Taizong of Liao . 
 After Emperor Mingzong died in 933 , the Later Tang began to crumble from its own succession crisis . Mingzong 's son and successor Li <unk> ruled for only five months before he was killed in 934 in a coup led by his adoptive brother Li <unk> ( Emperor Mo of Later Tang ) . Prince Bei , who was still an honored guest at the Tang court at the time , wrote to his brother Emperor Taizong ( Yelü Deguang ) , advising him to invade the Tang . Instead , Taizong lent military support to a rebellion led by Shi Jingtang , a Tang governor and son @-@ in @-@ law of the former Emperor Mingzong . With Khitan help , in 936 Shi Jingtang succeeded in replacing the Later Tang with his own Later Jin . After some negotiation with the more powerful Khitans , he ceded sixteen border prefectures stretching from modern @-@ day Datong ( Shanxi province ) to the coast of the Bohai Sea east of what is now Beijing , to the Liao . Since the Sixteen Prefectures contained numerous strategic passes and fortifications , the Khitans now had unrestricted access to the plains of northern China . Shi Jingtang also agreed to treat Emperor Taizong of Liao as his own father , a move that symbolically elevated Taizong and the Liao to a superior position . 
 The relationship between the Liao and the Later Jin soured after the death of Shi Jingtang in 942 and the elevation to the throne of Shi <unk> , also known as Emperor <unk> of Later Jin . The new emperor surrounded himself with anti @-@ Khitan advisers , and in 943 he expelled the Liao envoy from the Jin capital of Kaifeng and seized the property owned by Khitan merchants in the city . By the end of the following year Emperor Taizong had launched an invasion of the Jin . Although the invasion took three years and the Liao faced several setbacks , by the end of 946 Emperor Taizong had secured the surrender of the head of the Later Jin forces and was able to march into Kaifeng unopposed . Emperor Taizong celebrated his victory with the adoption of the dynastic name " Greater Liao " . The invading Liao forces , who had not brought adequate supplies for their invasion , began looting the newly conquered territory and imposed high taxes on the ethnic Chinese population in the formerly Jin lands . This sparked a series of rebellions that culminated in 947 with the establishment of the Later Han by the former Jin governor Liu <unk> . After occupying Kaifeng for only three months , Emperor Taizong and the Liao were forced to retreat north . During the retreat Emperor Taizong died of a sudden illness , just south of modern @-@ day <unk> , Hebei . 
 The death of Taizong set up a second succession crisis , again instigated by Empress Dowager Yingtian and fueled by the conflict between Chinese primogeniture and Khitan succession customs . Yelü Ruan , oldest son of Prince Bei and nephew of Emperor Taizong , proclaimed himself Emperor while still in Hebei . Emperor Taizong raised Yelü Ruan , following Yelü Bei 's departure for the Later Tang , and the relationship between uncle and nephew was close . Yelü Ruan accompanied the emperor during his invasion of the Later Jin , and he earned the reputation as a capable warrior and commander , and as one of courteous and noble @-@ minded disposition . Empress Dowager Yingtian supported Emperor Taizong 's younger brother , Yelü Lihu , for the throne instead . The Empress Dowager sent two successive armies to face Yelü Ruan , who defeated them both . Ultimately Lihu , who the Khitan nobility viewed as cruel and spoiled , was unable to gain enough support to further challenge Yelü Ruan , and after a peace was brokered by a cousin of the Yelü clan , Yelü Ruan formally assumed the role of emperor and the title of Emperor Shizong of Liao . Emperor Shizong promptly exiled both Empress Dowager Yingtian and Yelü Lihu from the capital , ending their political ambitions . Emperor Shizong 's rule would be characterized by a series of rebellions from within his extended family . Although he would rule for only four years before being killed in 951 in a rebellion led by one of his nephews , Emperor Shizong oversaw a refinement of his grandfather 's dual system of government , which brought the structure of the Southern Administration closer to the model used by the Tang dynasty . Emperor Shizong would be succeeded by Emperor Taizong 's son Yelü Jing , also known as Emperor <unk> of Liao . Emperor <unk> , who died in 969 , would be the second and the last of the emperors to succeed Abaoji who was not a direct descendant of Yelü Bei . 
 = = = Emperor Shengzong and the height of Liao power = = = 
 The reign of Emperor Shengzong from 982 to 1031 represented the height of the Liao dynasty 's power . Shengzong oversaw successful military campaigns against the Chinese Song dynasty and the Korean Goryeo Dynasty , and both campaigns secured long @-@ term peace agreements with terms favorable to the Liao . In 990 Liao emperor recognizes a " king of Xia " . 
 = = = = Goryeo – Khitan Wars = = = = 
 When Abaoji conquered the Balhae state in 926 , most of the population was relocated to what is now Liaoning , China . At least three groups remained in the former Balhae territory , one of which formed the state of Ding 'an . Despite launching two invasions , in 975 and 985 , the Liao forces were unable to defeat the Ding 'an . Unable to eliminate the threat , and weary of Jurchen groups also inhabiting the region , the Liao established three forts with military colonies in the Yalu River valley area . 
 With military action in close proximity to Goryeo territory , coupled with a cancelled Liao invasion of Goryeo in 947 and a strong diplomatic and cultural relationship between the Goryeo and Song dynasties , Liao @-@ Goryeo relations were exceedingly poor . Both Liao and Goryeo saw each other as posing a military threat ; the Khitans feared that Goryeo would attempt to foment rebellions among the Balhae population in Liao territory , while Goryeo feared invasion by the Liao . The Khitans did invade Goryeo in 992 , sending a force that the Liao commander claimed to be 800 @,@ 000 strong , and demanding that Goryeo cede to territories along the Yalu River . Goryeo appealed for assistance from the Song dynasty , with which they had a military alliance , but no Song assistance came . The Khitans made steady southward progress before reaching the Ch 'ongch 'on River , at which point they called for negotiations between Liao and Goryeo military leaders . While the Liao initially demanded total surrender from Goryeo , and Goryeo initially appeared willing to consider it , the Korean negotiator was eventually able to convince the Khitans to accept a resolution in which the Goryeo dynasty became a tributary state to the Liao dynasty . By 994 , regular diplomatic exchanges between Liao and Goryeo began , and the relationship between Goryeo and Song irrevocably chilled . 
 The peace did not last two decades . In 1009 the Goryeo general Gang Jo murdered King <unk> of Goryeo and put King Hyeonjong of Goryeo on the throne with the intention of serving as the boy 's regent . The Liao immediately sent an army of 400 @,@ 000 men to Goryeo to punish Gang Jo ; however , after an initial period of military success and the breakdown of several attempts at peace negotiations , Goryeo and Liao entered a decade of continuous warfare . In 1018 the Khitans faced the most significant military defeat in the dynasty 's history , but by 1019 they had already assembled another large army to march on Goryeo . At this point both sides realized that they could not defeat each other militarily , so in 1020 King Hyeonjong resumed sending tribute to the Liao , and in 1022 the Liao officially recognized the legitimacy of King Hyeonjong 's reign . Goryeo would remain a vassal , and the relationship between Liao and Goryeo would remain peaceful until the end of the Liao dynasty . 
 = = = = The Song dynasty and the Chanyuan Treaty = = = = 
 In 951 , the Later Zhou emerged , the last of the five short @-@ lived dynasties making up the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period . The founding emperor of the Later Zhou died in 954 and was succeeded by his adopted son , who would rule with the name Emperor Shizong of Later Zhou . Shizong believed that the Liao dynasty was poised to invade the Zhou , and in 958 he launched a preemptive military campaign against the Liao , aiming to take the sixteen prefectures ceded to the Liao by Emperor Gaozu of Later Jin in 938 . Emperor Shizong died in 959 , before his army had even met the Liao forces . In 960 the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Later Zhou palace guard , Zhao Kuangyin , usurped the throne , then occupied by Emperor Shizong 's seven @-@ year @-@ old son , and proclaimed himself the founder of the Song dynasty . 
 Relations between the Liao and the Song were initially peaceful , with the two dynasties exchanging embassies in 974 . Following the collapse of the Tang dynasty , several territories formed small , independent states that were never reunified during the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period . Additionally , several additional territories that were controlled by military governors during the Tang dynasty had fallen under the control of local warlords following the Tang collapse . Rather than focus on reclaiming land from the Liao dynasty , Zhao Kuangyin , who would take the title Emperor Taizu of Song , focused on reclaiming these smaller break @-@ off territories . He would die in 976 having reestablished control over all but one of these territories , the Northern Han kingdom . Despite the Northern Han 's status as a protectorate of the Liao dynasty , Emperor Taizu of Song launched an invasion of the kingdom in 976 , only months before his death . The Northern Han received assistance from the Liao , and the invasion was repelled . Emperor Taizong of Song , brother of the founding emperor and the second emperor of the Song dynasty , launched a second invasion in 979 . The Northern Han again received Liao assistance , but this invasion was successful ; the Northern Han crumbled , and the Song were able to assume control of the territory . Emperor Taizong of Song immediately followed this victory with an attempted invasion of the sixteen prefectures , but the <unk> and <unk> Song troops were thoroughly routed by the Liao in the Battle of <unk> River . 
 Over the next two decades , the relationship between the Liao and Song continued to deteriorate . The Liao were continuously informed of Song attempts to create military alliances with other groups sharing a border with the Liao , and minor border skirmishes were common . Beginning in 999 Emperor Shengzong of Liao led a series of campaigns against the Song that , while generally successful on the battlefield , failed to secure anything of value from the Song . This changed in 1004 when Emperor Shengzong led a campaign that rapidly worked its way to right outside of the Song capital of Kaifeng by only conquering cities that quickly folded to the Liao army , while avoiding protracted sieges of the cities that resisted heavily . Emperor Zhenzong of Song marched out and met the Liao at Chanyuan , a small city on the Yellow River . In January 1005 the two dynasties signed the Chanyuan Treaty , which stipulated that the Song would give the Liao 200 @,@ 000 bolts of silk and 100 @,@ 000 ounces of silver each year , that the two emperors would address each other as equals , that they would finalize the location of their disputed border , and that the two dynasties would resume cordial relations . While the sums ( referred to as gifts by the Song and as tributes by the Liao ) were later increased to 300 @,@ 000 bolts of silk and 200 @,@ 000 ounces of silver per year out of Song fears that the Liao might form a military alliance with the Western Xia , no major wars were fought between the Liao and Song for over a century following the signing of the treaty . By signing the treaty the Song dynasty functionally ceded its claim over the sixteen prefectures . 
 = = = Imperial infighting = = = 
 Emperor Shengzong died in 1031 , leaving behind instructions that named his son Yelü <unk> as heir . Yelü <unk> , known historically by the name Emperor Xingzong of Liao , became the Emperor of the Liao dynasty at the age of fifteen , and his reign immediately became plagued with courtly infighting . Emperor Xingzong 's mother was a low @-@ ranking consort , Nuou Jin , but he was raised by Emperor Shengzong 's wife , Empress Ji Dian . Nuou Jin quickly moved to marginalize Ji Dian and her supporters , fabricating a coup and using it to justify exiling Ji Dian and executing most of her supporters in several months of purges . Nuou Jin eventually sent assassins to kill Ji Dian ; however , Ji Dian instead committed suicide . 
 With her rival for power dead , Nuou Jin declared herself the regent and began personally conducting duties normally within the purview of the emperor . When it became clear that Emperor Xingzong was unhappy with his mother 's grab for power , Nuou Jin plotted to replace the emperor with another of her sons , Zhong Yuan , whom Nuou Jin raised herself . Zhong Yuan informed the emperor of their mother 's plans , however , and the emperor promptly exiled Nuou Jin . 
 For the remainder of his reign , Emperor Xingzong would have to compete for power with his mother , whose supporters still held key postings , and whose influence was so great that she was eventually allowed to return to the capital and undergo a ceremony to symbolically de @-@ exile herself . Zhong Yuan , for his part , would be rewarded for revealing his mother 's plot by being given a succession of higher- and higher @-@ ranking positions , culminating with a governorship outside of the capital . Historian Frederick W. Mote explains the importance of this factional infighting and its relation to the Liao dynasty 's downfall by stating that it " shows to what extent the succession issue within the imperial clan still was the source of weakness in the leadership of the state . It wasted people , diverted energies , and deflected the attention of the rulers from the tasks of governing . " 
 Emperor Xingzong died in 1055 . His eldest son , Yelü <unk> ( who would later be known by the name Emperor Daozong of Liao ) , assumed the throne having already gained experience in governing while his father was alive . Unlike his father , Emperor Daozong did not face a succession crisis . While both Ji Dian and Zhong Yuan remained alive , and both had the political influence to interfere with the succession process , neither did . 
 While Emperor Daozong 's reign started off strong , it too was eventually plagued by factional infighting , aggravated by the emperor 's own general weakness . The emperor 's first major error was in ordering the execution of Xiao A La , a loyal minister and close friend of the emperor , whom the emperor was nonetheless convinced to execute by a rival minister . The 14th @-@ century History of Liao speculates that had Xiao A La not been killed , two major incidents that came to dominate Emperor Daozong 's reign would have been avoided . The first of these incidents was a rebellion in 1063 , when several high @-@ ranking members of the Yelü clan , led by a grandson of Emperor Shengzong , attempted to assassinate Emperor Daozong while he was on a hunting trip . He was saved with the assistance of troops led by his mother , Empress Dowager Ren Yi , and he retaliated by executing all of the people involved in the plot , as well as their immediate families . 
 This major change in leadership solidified the power of the chancellor Yelü Yixin and his ally Yelü <unk> , a chancellor and military leader . When Yelü <unk> died in 1072 , Yelü Yixin began to view Emperor Daozong 's son and heir apparent , Prince Jun , as the only possible threat to Yelü Yixin 's power , and set in motion plans to eliminate the prince . He first eliminated Prince Jun 's mother , the emperor 's wife , by fabricating evidence that she had an affair with a palace musician . Believing Yelü Yixin 's trap , Emperor Daozong ordered his wife to commit suicide . Yelü Yixin then fabricated a coup by implicating his own enemies within the court of planning to depose of Emperor Daozong and place Prince Jun on the throne . While the emperor was initially unmoved , Yelü Yixin eventually convinced him to exile his son by creating a false confession . Prince Jun was immediately exiled , at which point Yelü Yixin sent assassins to eliminate the prince and his wife , preventing both the prince from being returned to power and Yelü Yixin 's plot from being discovered . Yelü Yixin 's treachery was eventually discovered when , in 1079 , he attempted to convince the emperor to leave the new heir at the palace during a hunting trip . When other members of the court protested that the young boy would be in mortal peril if left behind with Yelü Yixin , the emperor finally saw through Yelü Yixin . By 1080 Yelü Yixin was stripped of his rank and sent to a low @-@ ranking post outside of the capital . Shortly afterwards he was executed . 
 Aside from the machinations of Yelü Yixin , the only other event of note from Emperor Daozong 's rule was a war fought between 1092 and 1102 between the Liao and a Mongolian , possibly Tatar tribe , group known as the Zubu . The Zubu were located at the northwest border of Liao territory and had fought several wars with the Liao when the Liao tried to expand in that direction . In 1092 the Liao attacked several other tribes in the northwest , and by 1093 the Zubu attacked the Liao , striking deep into Khitan territory . It took until 1100 for the Liao to capture and kill the Zubu chieftain , and another two years to fight off the remaining Zubu forces . The war against the Zubu was the last successful military campaign waged by the Liao dynasty . 
 = = = Rise of the Jin and fall of the Liao = = = 
 The 12th century saw the rapid rise of the Jurchen people , which culminated in 1115 with the foundation of the Jin dynasty by the Jurchen warlord Aguda . The Jurchens , led by Aguda , captured the Liao dynasty 's supreme capital in 1120 and its central capital in 1122 . The Liao emperor Tianzuo fled the southern capital Nanjing ( today 's Beijing ) to the western region , and his uncle Prince Yelü Chun then formed the short @-@ lived Northern Liao in the southern capital , but died soon afterwards . In 1125 , the Jurchens captured Emperor Tianzuo and ended the Liao dynasty . 
 In 1124 , just before the final conquest of the Liao dynasty , a group of Khitans led by Yelü Dashi fled northwest to the border area and military garrison of <unk> ( Zhenzhou ) , in modern @-@ day northern Mongolia . Yelü Dashi convinced the people there , around 20 @,@ 000 Liao cavalry and their families , to follow him and attempt to restore the Liao dynasty . Yelü Dashi proclaimed himself emperor in 1131 , after which he moved further west into modern Kazakhstan and then occupied the <unk> city of <unk> ( in modern Kyrgyzstan ) . After a failed attempt in 1134 to reclaim the territory formerly held by the Liao , Dashi decided instead to stay where he was and establish a permanent Khitan state in Central Asia . The state , known as the Qara Khitai or the Western Liao dynasty , controlled several key trading cities , was multicultural , and showed evidence of religious tolerance . The state survived for nearly a century before being conquered by the Mongol Empire in 1218 . 
 An analysis by F. W. Mote concluded that at the time of the Liao dynasty 's fall , " the Liao state remained strong , capable of functioning at reasonable levels and possessing greater resources of war than any of its enemies " and that " one cannot find signs of serious economic or fiscal breakdown that might have impoverished or crippled its ability to respond " . Mote also concluded that acculturation did not lead to the replacement of traditional Khitan values with Chinese culture , and that the Khitan commoners were " supremely able and willing to fight " , which Mote pointed to as evidence that Khitan society remained strong . Mote instead attributes the fall of the Liao to the leadership ability of Aguda and to the actions of the Khitan Yelü and Xiao clans , which used early defeats at the hand of Aguda as a pretext for plotting the overthrow of Emperor <unk> . Historian Jacques Gernet disagrees with Mote , writing that " by the middle of the eleventh century the Khitan had lost their combative spirit and adopted a defensive attitude to their neighbors , building walls , ramparts for their towns , and fortified posts . " Gernet attributes this change to the influence of Buddhism , which abhors violence , as well as to Chinese wealth and culture in general . Like Mote , Gernet attributes the ultimate downfall of the Liao to the interference by the ruling clans , and he additionally credits a series of droughts and floods , as well as attacks by the Jurchen tribes on the north @-@ east edge of Liao territory , with weakening the Liao to a critical level . 
 = = Government = = 
 At its height , the Liao dynasty controlled what is now Shanxi , Hebei , Liaoning , Jilin , Heilongjiang , and Inner Mongolia provinces in China , as well as portions of the Korean peninsula , portions of the Russian Far East , and much of the country of Mongolia . The peak population is estimated at 750 @,@ 000 Khitans and two to three million ethnic Chinese . 
 = = = Law and administration = = = 
 The Liao employed two separate governments operating in parallel with one another : a Northern Administration in charge of Khitan and other nomadic peoples , most of whom lived in the northern side of Liao territory , and a Southern Administration in charge of the Chinese populace that lived predominantly in the southern side . When Abaoji first established the system , these two governments did not have strict territorial boundaries , but Emperor Shizong established formally delineated boundaries for the two administrations early in his reign . The newly delineated Northern Administration had large Chinese , Balhae , and Uighur populations , and was given its own set of parallel northern and southern governments . 
 The governments of the Northern Administration and the Southern Administration operated very differently . The Northern Administration operated under a system which Twitchett and Tietze called " essentially a great tribal leader 's personal retinue " . Many of the governmental appointments dealt with tribal affairs , herds , and retainers serving the imperial house , and most powerful and high @-@ ranking positions dealt with military affairs . The overwhelming majority of officeholders were Khitans , mainly from the imperial Yelü clan and the Xiao consort clan . The Southern Administration was more heavily structured , with Twitchett and Tietze calling it " designed in imitation of a T 'ang model " . Unlike the Northern Administration , many of the low- and medium @-@ ranked officials in the Southern Administration were Chinese . 
 The Liao dynasty was further divided into five " circuits " , each with a capital city . The general idea for this system was taken from the Balhae , although no captured Balhae cities were made into circuit capitals . The five capital cities were Shangjing ( <unk> ) , meaning Supreme Capital , which is located in modern @-@ day Inner Mongolia ; Nanjing ( 南京 ) , meaning Southern Capital , which is located near modern @-@ day Beijing ; Dongjing ( <unk> ) , meaning Eastern Capital , which is located near modern @-@ day Liaoning ; Zhongjing ( <unk> ) , meaning Central Capital , which is located in modern @-@ day Hebei province near the <unk> river ; and Xijing ( <unk> ) , meaning Western Capital , which is located near modern @-@ day Datong . Each circuit was headed by a powerful viceroy who had the autonomy to tailor policies to meet the needs of the population within his circuit . Circuits were further subdivided into administrations called fu ( <unk> ) , which were metropolitan areas surrounding capital cities , and outside of metropolitan areas were divided into prefectures called zhou ( <unk> ) , which themselves were divided into counties called xian ( <unk> ) . 
 Despite these administrative systems , important state decisions were still made by the emperor . The emperor met with officials from the Northern and Southern Administrations twice a year , but aside from that the emperor spent much of his time attending to tribal affairs outside of the capital cities . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 = = = Spoken and written languages = = = 
 The Khitan spoken language is most closely related to the Mongolic language family ; some broader definitions of the Mongolic family include Khitan as a member . More broadly , Khitan is an Altaic language , although scholars are divided on the question whether the Altaic is a true language family or linguistic area in which originally distinct languages have influenced each other over a long period . Khitan shares some terms with the Altaic but non @-@ Mongolic Turkic spoken by the Uighur peoples , who shared the steppes of North Asia with the Khitans for several hundred years . 
 Prior to their conquest of north China and the establishment of the Liao dynasty , the Khitans had no written language . In 920 the first of two Khitan scripts , the Khitan large script , was developed . A second script , the Khitan small script , was developed in 925 . Both scripts are based on the same spoken language , and both contain a mix of logographs and phonographs . Despite the similarities to Chinese characters , the Khitan scripts were functionally different from Chinese . 
 Few documents written in either the Khitan large or small script survive to this day . Most surviving specimens of both Khitan scripts are epitaph inscriptions on stone tablets , as well as a number of inscriptions on coins , mirrors and seals . Only a single manuscript text in the Khitan large script is known ( Nova N 176 ) , and no manuscripts in the Khitan small script are known . The Liao emperors could read Chinese , and while there were some Chinese works translated into Khitan during the Liao dynasty , the Confucian classics , which served as the core guide to the administration of government in China , are not known to have been translated into Khitan . 
 = = = Status of women = = = 
 The status of women in the Liao dynasty varied greatly , with the Khitan Liao ( like many other nomadic societies ] ] having much a more egalitarian view towards women than the Han Chinese did . Han Chinese living under the Liao dynasty were not forced to adopt Khitan practices , and while some Han Chinese did , many did not . 
 Unlike Han society , which had a strict separation of responsibilities along gender lines , and placed women in a subservient role to men , the Khitan women of the Liao dynasty performed many of the same functions that the Khitan men did . Khitan women were taught how to hunt , and managed family herds , flocks , finances , and property when their husbands were at war . Upper @-@ class women were able to hold governmental and military posts . 
 The sexual freedoms of Liao also stood in stark contrast from those of the Han Chinese . Women from the upper Liao classes , like those of the Han Chinese upper classes , had arranged marriages , in some cases for political purposes . However women from the lower classes of the Liao did not have arranged marriages , and would attract suitors by singing and dancing in the streets . The songs served as self @-@ advertisements , with the women telling of their beauty , familial status , and domestic skills . Virginity was not a requirement for marriage among the Liao , and many Liao women were sexually promiscuous before marriage , which stood in sharp contrast from the beliefs of the Han Chinese . Khitan women had the right to divorce their husbands and were able to remarry after being divorced . 
 Abduction of marriage @-@ age women was common during the Liao dynasty . Khitans men of all social classes participated in the activity , and the abductees were both Khitan and Han . In some cases , this was a step in the courtship process , where the woman would agree to the abduction and the resulting sexual intercourse , and then the abductor and abductee would return to the woman 's home to announce their intention to marry . This process was known as <unk> ( <unk> ) . In other cases , the abduction would be non @-@ consensual and would result in a rape . 
 = = = Marriage practices = = = 
 In Liao custom betrothal was seen as being equally serious to , if not more serious than , marriage itself , and was difficult to annul . The groom would pledge to work for three years for the bride 's family , pay a bride price , and lavish the bride 's family with gifts . After the three years , the groom would be allowed to take the bride back to his home , and the bride would usually cut off all ties with her family . 
 Khitan marriage practices differed from those of the Han Chinese in several ways . Men from the elite classes tended to marry women from the generation their senior . While this did not necessarily mean that there would be a large gap in ages between husband and wife , it was often the case . Among the ruling Yelü clan , the average age that boys married was sixteen , while the average age that girls married was between sixteen and twenty @-@ two . Although rare , ages as young as twelve were recorded , for both boys and girls . A special variety of polygamy known as <unk> , in which a man would marry two or more women who were sisters , was practiced among the Liao elite . Polygamy was not restricted only to <unk> , with some men having three or more wives , only some of whom were sisters . <unk> continued throughout the length of the Liao dynasty , despite laws banning the practice . Over the course of the dynasty , the Liao elite moved away from polygamy and towards the Han Chinese system of having one wife and one or more concubines . This was done largely to smooth over the process of inheritance . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 By the time Abaoji assumed control over the Khitans in the early tenth century , a majority of the Khitan population had adopted Buddhism . Buddhism was practiced throughout the length of the Liao dynasty . Monasteries were constructed during the reign of the first emperor , Taizu , and Buddhism was especially prominent during the reigns of Emperors Shengzong , Xingzong , and Daozong . 
 Buddhist scholars living during the time of the Liao dynasty predicted that the mofa ( <unk> ) , an age in which the three treasures of Buddhism would be destroyed , was to begin in the year 1052 . Previous dynasties , including the Sui and Tang , were also concerned with the mofa , although their predictions for when the mofa would start were different from the one selected by the Liao . As early as the Sui dynasty , efforts were made to preserve Buddhist teachings by carving them into stone or burying them . These efforts continued into the Liao dynasty , with Emperor Xingzong funding several projects in the years immediately preceding 1052 . 
 Evidence from excavated Liao burial sites indicates that animistic or shamanistic practices were fused with Buddhism and other practices in marriage and burial ceremonies . Both animal and human sacrifices have been found in Liao tombs , alongside indications of Buddhist practice . Indications of Daoist , zodiac , and Zoroastrian influences have also been found in Liao burial sites . 
 During the reign of the Liao dynasty the <unk> Mosque was designed by <unk> , the son of a local Imam . 
 = = = Cultural legacy = = = 
 The influence of the Liao dynasty on subsequent culture includes a large legacy of statuary art works , with important surviving examples in painted wood , metal , and three @-@ color glazed <unk> ceramics . The music and songs of the Liao dynasty are also known to have indirectly or directly influenced Mongol , Jurchen , and Chinese musical traditions . 
 The rhythmic and tonal pattern of the ci ( <unk> ) form of poetry , an important part of Song dynasty poetry , uses a set of poetic meters and is based upon certain definitive musical song tunes . The specific origin of these various original tunes and musical modes is not known , but the influence of Liao dynasty lyrics both directly and indirectly through the music and lyrics of the Jurchen Jin dynasty appears likely . At least one Han Chinese source considered the Liao ( and Jurchen ) music to be the vigorous and powerful music of horse @-@ mounted warriors , diffused through border warfare . 
 Another influence of the Liao cultural tradition is seen in the Yuan dynasty 's <unk> ( <unk> ) theater , its associated orchestration , and the qu ( <unk> ) and <unk> ( <unk> ) forms of Classical Chinese poetry . One documented way in which this influence occurred was through the incorporation of Khitan officers and men into the service of the Mongol forces during the first Mongol invasion of 1211 to 1215 . This northern route of cultural transmission of the legacy of Liao culture was then returned to China during the Yuan dynasty . 
 = Squidward Tentacles = 
 Squidward Tentacles is a fictional character voiced by actor Rodger Bumpass in the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants . Squidward was created and designed by marine biologist and animator Stephen Hillenburg . He first appeared on television in the series ' pilot episode " Help Wanted " on May 1 , 1999 . 
 Although his name has the word " Squid " in it and he has six arms ( Hillenburg designed Squidward with six arms , believing that " it was really just simpler for animation to draw him with six legs instead of eight " . ) , Squidward is an anthropomorphic octopus . He lives in a moai between SpongeBob SquarePants ' and Patrick Star 's houses . The character is portrayed as ill @-@ tempered , pretentious , and cynical who strongly despises his neighbors for their constant boisterous , noisy behavior . However , the pair are unaware of Squidward 's antipathy towards them and see him as a friend . Squidward works as a cashier at the Krusty Krab restaurant , a job that he is apathetic towards . 
 The character 's critical reception from professionals and fans has been positive . Squidward has appeared in many SpongeBob SquarePants publications , toys , and other merchandise . He appears in the 2004 full @-@ length feature film The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie and in its sequel which was released in 2015 . 
 = = Role in SpongeBob SquarePants = = 
 Squidward is depicted as a bitter , very unfortunate , desperate , curt , arrogant , turquoise octopus . He lives in the underwater city of Bikini Bottom in a moai situated between SpongeBob SquarePants ' pineapple house and Patrick Star 's rock . Squidward detests his neighbors for their perpetual laughter and boisterous behavior , though SpongeBob and Patrick are oblivious to Squidward 's animosity towards them and regard him as a friend . 
 Squidward lives in a constant state of self @-@ pity and misery ; he is unhappy with his humdrum lifestyle and yearns for celebrity status , wealth , hair , and a glamorous and distinguished career as a musician or painter with a passion for art and playing the clarinet . However , he is left to endure the lowly status as a fast @-@ food cashier at the Krusty Krab restaurant . Squidward resents his job and is irritated by his greedy employer Mr. Krabs and by having SpongeBob as a colleague . 
 Squidward longs for peace but his wishes remain unsatisfied . He believes he is talented and deserves a higher social status . The populace of Bikini Bottom do not consider him talented , and frequently boo him and walk out on his performances . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Creation and design = = = 
 Stephen Hillenburg first became fascinated with the ocean and began developing his artistic abilities as a child . During college , he majored in marine biology and minored in art . After graduating in 1984 , he joined the Ocean Institute , an ocean education organization , where he had the idea to create a comic book titled The Intertidal Zone , which led to the creation of SpongeBob SquarePants . In 1987 , Hillenburg left the Institute to pursue a career in animation . 
 Several years after studying experimental animation at the California Institute of the Arts , Hillenburg met Joe Murray , creator of Rocko 's Modern Life , at an animation festival . Murray offered Hillenburg a job as a director of the series . Martin Olson , one of the writers for Rocko 's Modern Life , read The Intertidal Zone and encouraged Hillenburg to create a television series with a similar concept . At that point , Hillenburg had not considered creating his own series , but soon realized that this was his chance . Shortly after production on Rocko 's Modern Life ended in 1996 , Hillenburg began working on SpongeBob SquarePants . 
 Hillenburg used some character designs from his comic book . He designed " SpongeBob 's grumpy next door neighbor " as an octopus because the species ' large head ; octopi , he said , " have such a large bulbous head and Squidward thinks he 's an intellectual so of course , he 's gonna have a large bulbous head . " Hillenburg drew Squidward with six tentacles because " it was really just simpler for animation to draw him with six legs instead of eight " . Show writer and storyboard artist Vincent Waller said : 
 Squidward is hard to draw — he has a very odd @-@ shaped head . Fortunately , his emotions are pretty even , but to get a whole lot of big emoting out of him is a challenge . His nose splits everything in half , so it 's always like , ' OK , how am I going to work this and still make it read ? ' 
 Hillenburg thought of making jokes with Squidward ejecting ink but retired it because , according to him , " it always looks like he 's pooping his pants " . 
 Conflicting statements from Hillenburg and Nickelodeon 's official website have led to some doubt over whether the character is an octopus or a squid . Hillenburg named him Squidward because the name <unk> — in the words of Squidward 's voice actor Rodger Bumpass — " just didn 't work " . The sound of Squidward 's footsteps is produced by rubbing hot water bottles . The footsteps , and those of the rest of the main characters , are recorded by the show 's foley crew . Sound designer Jeff Hutchins said that footstep sounds " [ help ] tell which character it is and what surface they 're stepping on " . Bumpass inspired the idea of having Squidward ride a recumbent bicycle ; Bumpass owns one of these bicycles , which he rides around Burbank , California . Bumpass described it as his " little inside joke " . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 Squidward 's voice is provided by actor Rodger Bumpass , who voices several other SpongeBob SquarePants characters , including Squidward 's mother . While creating the show and writing its pilot episode in 1997 , Hillenburg and the show 's then @-@ creative director Derek Drymon were also conducting voice auditions . Mr. Lawrence , who had worked with Hillenburg and Drymon on Rocko 's Modern Life , was Hillenburg 's first choice for the role . Hillenburg had invited Lawrence to audition for all the show 's characters . Instead of Squidward , Hillenburg decided to give Lawrence the part of Plankton , the series ' villain . 
 According to Bumpass , Squidward was " a very nasally , monotone kind of guy " . He said the character became interesting to perform because of " his sarcasm , and then his frustration , and then his apoplexy , and so he became a wide spectrum of emotions " . Tom Kenny , the voice of SpongeBob , describes Bumpass recording his lines in the studio , saying , " I love watching Rodger ... He 's right next to me " . According to Kenny , when Bumpass " goes apoplectic " as Squidward while recording , his head turns red , " and you 're afraid he 's going to have an embolism " . 
 Several of the show 's crew praise Bumpass for his performance and similitude to the character . Kenny called Bumpass " brilliant " and said , " [ he ] is sort of like Squidward " . Staff writer Kent Osborne said , " I remember thinking about how much Rodger talks and acts like Squidward . That 's why it 's such a good voice — he 's so connected to it " . However , Bumpass said , " I 'm not him and he 's not me , but what I 'm required to do for him and what I am enabled to do for him is what makes it like me . It fits my particular talents and skills very well . So in that respect , yeah , he is me , but I am not the cranky , sarcastic , underachieving kind of guy that he is . He 's easy to fall in , I will say that . " 
 Squidward 's voice has been compared to that of Jack Benny 's . Kenny said , " To me , there 's something just so funny about that Jack @-@ Benny @-@ loyal @-@ to @-@ nobody character that Rodger Bumpass does such a great job of playing [ ... ] Squidward " . Arthur Brown , author of Everything I Need to Know , I Learned from Cartoons ! , said that Squidward " sounds a lot like Jack Benny " . Bumpass repudiated the relationship , saying " Jack Benny , no . Although he does have this observational sarcasm he occasionally brought out . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Squidward has received positive reception from critics and fans . SpongeBob 's voice actor Tom Kenny named Squidward his favorite character on the show . He said , " He has an extra dimension where SpongeBob and Patrick 's capacity of play <unk> him , but he 's also jealous of it . When he tries to participate , he just fails utterly because he doesn 't believe in it . " Staff writer Casey Alexander said , " Squidward is the character I relate to the most . In an exaggerated way , he 's the most human character . If I knew a human like SpongeBob , I probably would react to him like Squidward does " . American singer Pharrell Williams , who says he is a fan of the show , said that " Squidward is my favorite , though . If he was a human , I would hang out with him . " 
 Bill Treadway of DVD Verdict said that Squidward is " a cross between Bert [ of Sesame Street ] , Woody Allen , and Roger Addison [ of Mr. Ed ] ... but he has some heart , if you can find it " . Treadway called him " the straight man for his neighbor 's antics " . Film critic A. O. Scott of The New York Times said , in his review of The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie , that Squidward is one of his favorite secondary characters on the show , along with Sandy Cheeks and Mrs. Puff . He wrote , " I was sorry to see [ them ] pushed to the margins " . Also from the same publication , television critic Joyce Millman said that Squidward has " the nasal bitchiness of Paul Lynde and the artistic pretensions of Felix Unger . " Millman further wrote , " Hmmm , Squidward is one gay squid , I think . " 
 " Band Geeks " , a second season episode that focuses on Squidward , is often considered by many critics and fans alike as one of the show 's best episodes . Writing for The Washington Post , Michael Cavna ranked " Band Geeks " as the fifth best episode of SpongeBob SquarePants . In his review , Cavna said , " Squidward 's mix of artistic aspiration in the face of goading , humiliation and unrelenting sub @-@ mediocrity made this a kids ' episode that adults can experience on a whole ' nother level . " On a less positive note , Squidward was listed among Common Sense Media 's " 10 Worst TV Role Models of 2012 " . Author Sierra <unk> said that the character 's selfishness is his " worst offense " , called Squidward " the mean and nasty cashier at the Krusty Krab " and said that " [ he ] is nice only when he wants something " . 
 At the 39th Daytime Emmy Awards in 2012 , Bumpass was nominated for his vocal performance as Squidward in the Outstanding Performer in the Animated Program category — the first cast member to be nominated in this category . The award was won by June Foray of The Garfield Show . Bumpass has said he was proud of the certificate he received for the nomination , but " there wasn 't really a competition because one of the other nominees was June Foray and she is royalty in the animation world ... There was no way any of the other three guys had a chance . In fact , if any of us had one , there would have been a riot in that studio [ The Beverly Hilton ] . " He said he was " happy to lose to June Foray " and " very pleased and grateful to get a nomination " . 
 = = In other media = = 
 Squidward has been included in various SpongeBob SquarePants @-@ related merchandise , including board games , books , plush toys , and trading cards . Alongside the television series , Squidward appears in issues of SpongeBob Comics ( which were first published in February 2011 ) , in many SpongeBob SquarePants video games , and in various theme parks and theme park parades ( including Sea World and Universal 's Superstar Parade , respectively ) . In 2004 , Squidward appeared in the first feature @-@ length film adaptation of the show , The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie , which was released on November 19 , 2004 , and was financially successful , grossing over US $ 140 million worldwide . He also appears in the film 's sequel , which was released in theaters on February 6 , 2015 . 
 Episode " The Sponge Who Could Fly " was adapted in 2009 as a stage musical at the Liverpool Empire Theatre , and later in South Africa . Actor Charles Brunton originated the role of Squidward , later recalling that he loved the character , and the " fun [ of ] trying to re @-@ create a well established cartoon character into a live performance on stage . " Brunton prepared for the role by buying nine DVDs of the series , acting out Squidward 's part in each episode , in his bedroom . He said , " it took ages to perfect the voice and the way he used his arms " . Brunton 's performance and the musical were well received by most critics . A critic from The Public Reviews wrote , " Charles Brunton as Squidward really stole the show for us , his character was nailed to perfection , from his comic acting , voice and mannerisms this was a faultless performance " . In his review for The Northern Echo , Viv Hardwick said , " Charles Brunton makes a convincing Squidward " . The role was played by Chris van Rensburg in South Africa . 
 In 2012 , Squidward became the center of a " <unk> " ( a term describing urban legends or scary stories that have become Internet phenomena ) called " Squidward 's Suicide " , which alleged the existence of a lost episode of SpongeBob SquarePants in which Squidward kills himself . It was originally uploaded to YouTube but was immediately removed . The alleged episode consists of " strange and upsetting noises in the background " and " quick flashes of dead children and gore " . Show writer Casey Alexander debunked the actuality of the alleged lost episode , saying it is " 100 % hoax " . 
 = Do the Bartman = 
 " Do the Bartman " is a pop rap song from the 1990 Simpsons album The Simpsons Sing the Blues . It was performed by The Simpsons cast member Nancy Cartwright ( the voice of Bart Simpson ) , with backing vocals from Michael Jackson , alongside additional vocals from Dan Castellaneta ( voice of Homer Simpson ) . It was produced and written by American recording artist Bryan Loren , and released as a single on November 20 , 1990 . 
 Even though it received a lot of radio airplay in the United States , " Do the Bartman " was never officially released as a single in the United States . It topped the charts in Australia , Ireland , New Zealand , Norway , and the United Kingdom . Additionally , it reached the top 10 in Sweden and the Netherlands , and was certified gold in the United Kingdom . A music video , which was directed by Brad Bird , was released for the song in 1991 . The video became a hit on the American network MTV and received a nomination at the 1991 MTV Video Music Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 The album The Simpsons Sing the Blues was released in September 1990 . The first single from it was the rap song " Do the Bartman " , performed by Bart Simpson 's voice actor Nancy Cartwright and released on November 20 , 1990 . Rumors began spreading in the summer of 1990 that Michael Jackson would write a song for Bart on the album . This song was reported early on to be " Do the Bartman " , but executive producer James L. Brooks issued a press release in September 1990 apologizing for the misunderstanding and stating that song was actually written by one of Jackson 's friends , Bryan Loren . 
 However , The Simpsons creator Matt Groening later stated during an appearance at the 1998 World Animation Celebration convention in Pasadena , California that " Do the Bartman " was actually co @-@ written and co @-@ produced by Jackson , but he could not receive credit for it because he was under contract to another record label . Groening told a crowd at the convention that had gathered for a " The Simpsons tribute " that it had " always [ been ] amazing to me that no one ever found out that Michael Jackson wrote that song . [ ... ] He was a big fan of the show . " 
 Jackson was a fan of The Simpsons , especially Bart , and had called the producers one night offering to write Bart a number one single and do a guest spot on the show , which is how " Do the Bartman " came about . Jackson eventually guest @-@ starred in the episode " Stark Raving Dad " ( season three , 1991 ) under the pseudonym John Jay Smith . He also wrote a song for that episode called " Happy Birthday Lisa " , which was later included in the album Songs in the Key of Springfield . Bryan Loren has stated that Jackson had provided background vocals for " Do the Bartman " . 
 In July 2015 , when Bryan Loren was selling the publishing and songwriting rights for the song , Loren stated that " despite Matt Groening 's repeated confessions , I am the sole writer of the song " . Loren stated that Jackson 's contributions included back up vocals , providing the title " Do the Bartman " and that Jackson insisted his own name to be mentioned in the lyrics . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Critical reviews of the song were mostly positive . Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly described it as " not bad , " and commented that Bart 's high voice " echoes the beats nicely . " The Daily Vault 's Benny <unk> liked that the song disengaged itself from the album 's " blues tag " and incorporated more " contemporary elements " into its sound . He added that he thought the song had a " catchy beat " and an " infectious chorus . " The Long Beach Press @-@ Telegram 's Patricia Smith called " Do the Bartman " a " surprisingly funky tune . " Monika Bartyzel of Cinematical , however , thought the song was a " cheesy number . " 
 " Do the Bartman " and its music video have become study material for sociology courses at the University of California Berkeley , where it is used to " examine issues of the production and reception of cultural objects , in this case , a satirical cartoon show " , and to figure out what it is " trying to tell audiences about aspects primarily of American society , and , to a lesser extent , about other societies . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 While the song was never officially released as a single in the United States , it did top the charts in Australia , Ireland , New Zealand , Norway , and the United Kingdom . In the latter country , the song spent three weeks at the top of the UK Singles Chart , and became Britain 's seventh best @-@ selling song of 1991 . " Do The Bartman " has shipped at least 400 @,@ 000 units in the United Kingdom and was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry on February 1 , 1991 . The song 's success in the United Kingdom was remarkable , given that at that time The Simpsons was airing only on British satellite television station Sky One . It would be five years before it was first on terrestrial television in Britain , airing on BBC One and later BBC Two . 
 In Ireland , " Do The Bartman " spent nine weeks at number one on the Irish Singles Chart from January 24 , 1991 to March 24 , 1991 . Only seven singles have ever managed a longer run at number one in that country . The song also charted at number @-@ one on New <unk> RIANZ Singles Chart on the issue date of January 25 , 1991 , and peaked at number @-@ one on the chart again , for a total of two weeks , from February 8 , 1991 to February 15 , 1991 . 
 In March 1991 , " Do the Bartman " became the first single to reach number one in Australia that was not available on 7 inch vinyl . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video features the typical plot of Bart rebelling against authority when he decides to put his own spin on a rigidly choreographed dance presentation at Springfield Elementary School . The music video for " Do the Bartman " was directed by Brad Bird , with dance choreography by Michael Chambers . Nobody from the staff of The Simpsons wanted to direct it because they were busy doing the show , but Bird finally agreed to do it after having been asked four times . He had a very short amount of time to finish the video because it was supposed to coincide with the release of The Simpsons Sing the Blues . 
 The entire music video was storyboarded in only two days in the United States . Bird then got on a plane to Budapest , Hungary , where the video was animated by Varga Studio . They thought the video was going to be animated as simply as the original The Simpsons shorts , shown on The Tracey Ullman Show , so when Bird told them that it was going to be done in full animation with no repeated scenes , they " went into deep shock " . The animators added the wraparound at the beginning to set Bart against the crowd and put the video in " some sort of context . " 
 The video was nominated for Best Special Effects at the 1991 MTV Video Music Awards . It was the number one music video on rotation on American MTV network between January and March 1991 . Following the death of Michael Jackson on June 25 , 2009 , the music video was broadcast by the Fox network on June 28 , 2009 — ahead of a rerun of the episode " Wedding for Disaster " — and featured a title card paying tribute to Jackson . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Track listing = = 
 7 " single : 
 " Do the Bartman " ( 7 " House Mix / Edit ) – 3 : 54 
 " Do the Bartman " ( LP edit ) – 3 : 59 
 CD single : 
 " Do the Bartman " ( 7 " House Mix / Edit ) – 3 : 54 
 " Do the Bartman " ( LP edit ) – 3 : 59 
 " Do the Bartman " ( Bad Bart House Mix ) – 4 : 49 
 " Do the Bartman " ( a cappella ) – 3 : 44 
 = Broad Ripple Park Carousel = 
 Broad Ripple Park Carousel , also known as White City Carousel and Children 's Museum Carousel , is an antique carousel in The Children 's Museum of Indianapolis . It was installed in 1917 at an amusement park near the White River in Indianapolis , Indiana , where it remained until the building housing it collapsed in 1956 . The ride 's mechanism was destroyed , but the animals were relatively unscathed and put into storage by the park 's owners , the Indianapolis Department of Parks and Recreation . The animals were carved by the Dentzel Carousel Company some time before 1900 but were assembled by the William F. Mangels carousel company , which also supplied the engine powering the ride . 
 The Children 's Museum of Indianapolis acquired its first two carved animals from the ride in 1965 , and the last few wooden animals in 1973 . The museum planned to sell some to finance the restoration of others until the director of the museum , Mildred Compton , was convinced by carousel enthusiasts that the museum should instead restore all the animals and recreate the working carousel . Restoration of the carved animals began in 1966 and was only finished with the restoration of the entire carousel in 1977 . No space had been allocated for the display of such a large exhibit in the museum 's planned new building , which meant some re @-@ designing was necessary to allow its installation on the fifth floor . A 1919 Wurlitzer organ model 146B , a type manufactured only for carousels , was also installed . As restored , the carousel is 42 feet ( 13 meters ) wide and has a total of 42 animals , including – as well as the usual horses – goats , giraffes , deer , a lion , and a tiger . It was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1987 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Broad Ripple Park Carousel was installed in 1917 in an amusement park on the outskirts of Indianapolis , Indiana . The White City Amusement Park had been established in 1906 in what is now Broad Ripple Village , alongside the White River . In 1908 a fire caused damage throughout the park , and only the swimming pool remained unscathed . The park closed for three years until its purchase by the Union Traction Company , which restored it and operated it for eleven years . The carousel was installed during the Union Traction Company 's ownership . The park was sold in May 1922 to the new Broad Ripple Amusement Park Association , and renamed Broad Ripple Park . In 1927 the park was sold again , and changed hands once more in 1938 . The Board of Parks Commission of Indianapolis bought the property on May 18 , 1945 , paying $ 131 @,@ 500 ( approximately $ 1 @.@ 73 million as of 2016 ) for the 60 @-@ acre ( 24 @-@ hectare ) tract , and turned the property into a general @-@ use park , destroying all rides it could not sell . The board 's original plan was to sell the carousel and the narrow @-@ gauge railway rides . Only the carousel remained in Indianapolis after it was unsold ; the steam locomotive is now at the Indiana Transportation Museum at <unk> , Indiana . 
 = = = Installation = = = 
 The carousel was commissioned by William Hubbs , who had it installed in White City Amusement Park in 1917 . Built on a Mangel @-@ Illions mechanism , it used animals carved by the Dentzel carousel company of Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , sometime before 1900 . The carousel was assembled by the William F. Mangels carousel company in 1917 . It was probably not the first carousel in the park , as there are indications of a previous ride that came from Hartford , Connecticut . 
 Nothing is known of the history of the animals before their installation in the 1917 carousel assembly . During the 1960s newspaper reports stated that it was believed that the animals had arrived in Indianapolis in 1917 , imported from Germany by two brothers named Mangels , but later research revealed the animals were manufactured by the Dentzel carousel company . Also included in the installation were oil paintings on the canopy over the animals and mechanism . 
 Part of the installation appears to have involved the retrofitting of some animals to fit the Mangels mechanism . During this process some of the animals , which were carved in stationary or standing positions and thus not meant to be " jumpers " ( animals that moved up and down ) , were modified to allow them to move . 
 = = = Park usage = = = 
 Between 1917 and 1938 the carousel was located near the White City park pool , in an enclosed building with numerous large windows . In 1938 , after the park was purchased by William McCurry , the ride was enclosed within an <unk> pavilion with a domed roof and moved to the area of the park set aside as a children 's playground . The carousel was operated as a concession , which one operator , William Hubbs , held for almost 10 years . 
 The park district does not appear to have moved the carousel after taking over in 1945 , as a 1955 newspaper article noted it was still in the same spot it had occupied for 38 years . The carousel was again operated as a concession within the park , this time by the wife of Everett DuBois , the park superintendent . Like Hubbs , Mrs. DuBois operated the carousel for almost 10 years . Although the district did not change the ride 's location , it noted in 1955 that the equipment was showing its age . In 1955 the park district attempted to paint over the oil paintings on the canopy , which had deteriorated . The Indianapolis Art League objected , and volunteered to restore the original paintings rather than have them painted over with Disney characters . 
 The domed pavilion housing the mechanism collapsed in 1956 , destroying the mechanism and the sweeps that supported the animals . The park district disposed of the destroyed mechanical parts and stored the animals . In 1961 the giraffes , along with other animals from the carousel , were used in a Christmas display at University Park in Indianapolis . During this time , discussions began between the park district and the Indianapolis Zoological Society about the possibility of the Zoological Society acquiring the animals for use in its children 's zoo section . In April 1962 newspaper reports stated that the animals were to be donated to the zoo , for installation in the main zoo ; the zoo planned to purchase a smaller merry @-@ go @-@ round for the children 's zoo . The animals were apparently still being offered to the zoo in December 1963 , as a newspaper story announced that the park district had just given the zoo authorization to use the carousel parts , and volunteers were being sought to restore the animals . The president of the Zoological Society described the animals as " bigger and more realistically colored , and more intricately detailed , sturdier , and they have more different kinds of animals than that aluminum junk they throw out today " . 
 = = = Acquisition by the museum = = = 
 In 1965 The Children 's Museum of Indianapolis , then located in a building at 30th and Meridian Streets , acquired two horses from the carousel . Mildred Compton , the museum director , had seen the carousel in Broad Ripple Park before 1952 , and hoped to secure the surviving animals , but the park district was initially unwilling to part with more than two , as the district was using five or six animals in the annual Christmas displays at Monument Circle . During the first half of 1966 , the two horses were refinished by a museum volunteer . Both were stripped of old paint , one was repainted , and the other was refinished with lemon oil to feature the carvings on the animal . Compton obtained real horse tails from an Indianapolis slaughterhouse to replace the lost originals . By September 1966 the two horses were ready for display in the museum 's front entrance . 
 The park district allowed the museum to use one of the surviving giraffes in a booth at a fall festival held at the Indianapolis Museum of Art in 1968 . The museum subsequently acquired most of the remaining animals in 1969 , after a search through the storage building containing the animals . The animals and parts of animals had to be searched for in corners and under boxes in the park district storage building . Besides a large number of horses , 2 more giraffes , a lion , and a tiger were found . Photographs of the animals were sent to Frederic Fried , an expert in carousels , who confirmed that the animals were made in the United States , not Germany , probably before 1900 . He also confirmed that they were carved by the Dentzel company . 
 The museum intended to keep a few of the animals and sell the others to finance its operations , but Mildred Compton returned from a visit to the 1973 National Carousel Roundtable convinced that it should instead restore all of them and recreate the working carousel in its planned new building . But no space had been allocated to allow the display of such a large exhibit , requiring the plans to be adjusted . Columns required in the original layout were removed to allow the carousel 's installation on the fifth floor . 
 While plans were under way to secure funding for the restoration of the carousel , efforts were made to find some missing animals . By studying old photographs of the carousel , it was determined there had been three deer or stags which had not been found in the park district storage building . No one at the park district knew of their whereabouts , and some employees believed the animals had disintegrated . As well as the missing deer , two horses were missing . The museum contacted local newspapers , which published stories on the efforts to restore the carousel . The reports mentioned the missing animals , and that the museum was trying to locate them . An anonymous tip received in December 1973 revealed the deer were used in the annual Christmas Gift and Hobby Show , where they served as escorts for Santa Claus . Compton was able to secure the animals from the park district for the museum . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 The mechanical parts were assembled in the fifth @-@ floor area in November 1975 , using a non @-@ original Mangel @-@ Illions mechanism . A Wurlitzer carousel organ , which had belonged to an amusement park in San Francisco , was added . Before it was installed in the Children 's Museum , the organ was refurbished and rebuilt by <unk> <unk> of Plainfield , Indiana , in 1976 . 
 An artist from Pennsylvania recreated the upper outside panels in the style of the carousels of the period around the time of World War I. The carvings on the panels were provided by Allen and Rita Orre of Ohio and the International Amusement Devices Company of Ohio ; the mirrors were produced by an Indianapolis glass firm . The scenery panels were initially some discovered Dentzel company panels , and these were used in 1976 and 1977 while replica Mangels @-@ Illions @-@ style panels were built in the museum 's shops . 
 The animals were restored between 1975 and 1977 by Bill and Caroline Von Stein of Cincinnati , Ohio . The Von Steins were experienced with other types of museum conservation work , but had never restored carousel animals . Because of the animals ' poor condition , no attempt was made to restore them to their original paintwork ; instead , the restorers were allowed to use their judgment on color choices and other decorations . The museum 's only requirements were that they use reasonably natural decorative schemes and no high @-@ gloss paint . 
 = = = Changes since initial restoration = = = 
 The original engine propelling the carousel was a belt @-@ driven mechanism , but after the initial restoration it was exchanged for a fluid drive provided by the Kissell Brothers Amusement Rides company of Cincinnati , Ohio , who suggested the platform for the carousel be improved . To provide crowd control , a pavilion was built over the carousel and a ticket booth was installed . Neither was based on any extant buildings , but each was a composite of several other structures . The animals are removed one at a time from the carousel for routine maintenance and refurbishment , which is carried out in the museum 's own shops . 
 The carousel was designated a National Historic Landmark on February 27 , 1987 , and the National Historic Landmarks Program assessed its condition as " satisfactory " in 2008 . The carousel is one of the largest displayed artifacts in the museum , and is available to be ridden by visitors . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The carousel features a QR code as part of the museum 's involvement in the <unk> project . Visitors may scan the code with a suitable mobile device and will be served the Wikipedia article about it , in whatever language their device is set to use , if available . 
 = = Carousel composition = = 
 The carousel is one of the three oldest surviving Dentzel menagerie carousels . Thirty @-@ one of its 42 wood @-@ carved animals are horses , 17 standing and 14 jumping . There are also three goats , three giraffes , three deer , one lion , and one tiger . The single lion and tiger are typical of Dentzel @-@ created carousels , as are the three giraffes ; Gustav Dentzel 's love of that animal resulted in all of his carousels including at least one row of giraffes . The animals are arranged in three circles around the central mechanism , alternating leaping or jumping horses with stationary animals . Typical for a Mangels @-@ Illions manufactured carousel , there are 18 jumping animals , all but one of which is original ; the horse that could not be found in 1975 was replaced with another Dentzel horse . Although the animals were not originally carved to display jewels , at some point they were so displayed at the amusement park , and thus the museum restored the animals on the outside circle with jewels . 
 The mechanism powering the ride is a 40 @-@ foot ( 12 @-@ meter ) diameter Mangels @-@ Illions manufactured carousel , but it is uncertain whether this exactly matches the original Mangels @-@ Illions mechanism . The whole assembly has a diameter of 42 feet ( 13 meters ) . The organ , a 1919 Wurlitzer carousel organ model 146B , is of a type designed specifically for carousels . 
 = Bernard Quatermass = 
 Professor Bernard Quatermass is a fictional scientist , originally created by the writer Nigel Kneale for BBC Television . An intelligent and highly moral British scientist , Quatermass is a pioneer of the British space programme , heading the British Experimental Rocket Group . He continually finds himself confronting sinister alien forces that threaten to destroy humanity . 
 The role of Quatermass was featured in three influential BBC science fiction serials of the 1950s , and again in a final serial for Thames Television in 1979 . A remake of the first serial appeared on BBC Four in 2005 . The character also appeared in films , on the radio and in print over a fifty @-@ year period . Kneale picked the character 's unusual surname from a London telephone directory , while the first name was in honour of the astronomer Bernard Lovell . 
 The character of Quatermass has been described by BBC News Online as Britain 's first television hero , and by The Independent newspaper as " A brilliantly conceived and finely crafted creation ... [ He ] remained a modern ' Mr Standfast ' , the one fixed point in an increasingly dreadful and ever @-@ shifting universe . " In 2005 , an article in The Daily Telegraph suggested , " You can see a line running through him and many other British heroes . He shares elements with both Sherlock Holmes and Ellen MacArthur . " 
 = = Character = = 
 Little is revealed of Quatermass 's early life during the course of the films and television series in which he appears . In The Quatermass Experiment , he at one point despairs that he should have stuck to his original career as a surveyor . 
 In Nigel Kneale 's 1996 radio serial The Quatermass Memoirs , it is revealed that the Professor was first involved in rocketry experiments in the 1930s , and that his wife died at a young age . The unmade prequel serial Quatermass in the Third Reich , an idea conceived by Kneale in the late 1990s , would have shown Quatermass travelling to Nazi Germany during the 1936 Berlin Olympics and becoming involved with Wernher von Braun and the German rocket programme , before helping a young Jewish refugee to escape from the country . According to The Quatermass Memoirs , during World War II Quatermass conducted top secret work for the British war effort , which he subsequently refused ever to discuss . 
 By 1953 Quatermass is the head of the British Experimental Rocket Group , which has a programme to launch a manned rocket into space from a base in <unk> , Australia . Although Quatermass succeeds in launching a three @-@ man crew , the rocket vastly overshoots its projected orbit and returns to Earth much later than planned , crash @-@ landing in London . Only one of the crew , Victor Carroon , remains , and he has been taken over by an alien presence , eventually forcing Quatermass to destroy him and the other two crewmembers who have been absorbed into him in a climax set in Westminster Abbey . 
 Despite this trauma , Quatermass continues with his space programme , and by Quatermass II ( 1955 ) is actively planning the establishment of Moon bases . In this serial we see his daughter , Paula Quatermass , who works as an assistant at the Rocket Group , but there is no sign of a wife or other children . In the fourth episode of the serial he mentions that he never reached his twenty @-@ fifth wedding anniversary , tying in with The Quatermass Memoirs ' later assertion of his wife 's early death . 
 At the beginning of the third serial , Quatermass and the Pit ( 1958 – 59 ) , Quatermass 's funding is being cut back and the Rocket Group is being handed over to military control , much to his disgust . Command is to be handed over to Colonel Breen and Quatermass senses that he is being forced out : however , after the events of the serial , Breen is dead , Quatermass has helped to save the world , and London is in chaos . 
 It is not clear what happens to the Rocket Group immediately after this : the next time Quatermass is seen on screen ( Quatermass , also released internationally as The Quatermass Conclusion and Quatermass IV , 1979 ) he has long been retired , living in retreat in the Scottish Highlands . He has recently become the guardian of his teenaged granddaughter , Hettie , after her parents were killed in a road accident in Germany . After Hettie runs away from home he travels to London in search of her , and finds a dystopian world there . Quatermass and the scientist Joe Kapp establish that an alien force is causing the collapse of society and Quatermass forms a plan to drive the intruder away by the detonation of a nuclear bomb . He presses the button to detonate it himself , with Hettie 's help , and they are killed in the blast as the planet is saved . 
 = = History = = 
 Nigel Kneale conceived the character of Quatermass in 1953 , when he was assigned in his capacity as a BBC television staff drama writer to create a new six @-@ part serial to run on Saturday nights in July and August . Kneale initially named his leading character Professor Charlton , but during the writing process decided he wanted something more striking and memorable . A native of the Isle of Man , he was inspired by the fact that surnames beginning with " Qu " were common on the island . The eventual name was picked from a London telephone directory ; there was a family of that name who traded as <unk> in the city 's East End . The surname has its origins as a measurement of land assigned in the division of England by the Normans following their conquest of the country under William the Conqueror in 1066 . The Professor 's first name , Bernard , was in honour of the astronomer Bernard Lovell , founder of the Jodrell Bank observatory . 
 = = = In television ( 1950s ) = = = 
 The director assigned to the serial , which was eventually named The Quatermass Experiment , was Rudolph Cartier . A few months beforehand he had directed a play entitled It Is Midnight , Dr. Schweitzer for the BBC , and he offered the role of Quatermass to one of the stars of that play , André Morell . Morell considered the offer but declined the part , which Cartier then offered to another actor who had appeared in It Is Midnight , Dr. Schweitzer , Reginald Tate , who accepted . 
 The serial was a success , with the British Film Institute later describing it as " one of the most influential series of the 1950s . " The following year the BBC 's Controller of Programmes , Cecil McGivern — who had initially feared that viewers would not accept such an unusual name for the leading character — noted in reference to the impending launch of the rival ITV network that : " Had competitive television been in existence then , we would have killed it every Saturday night while [ The Quatermass Experiment ] lasted . We are going to need many more ' Quatermass Experiment ' programmes . " 
 A sequel , Quatermass II , was accordingly commissioned in 1955 , but Reginald Tate died of a heart attack only a month before production was due to begin . With very little time to find a replacement , John Robinson was picked as the only suitable actor available . Robinson was uncomfortable about taking over from Tate and with some of the technical dialogue he was required to deliver , and his performance has been criticised as " robotic " , although others such as Andrew Pixley in Time Screen Magazine praised Robinson for doing compelling work after the initial episode of the serial . 
 By the summer of 1957 , Kneale was working on the scripts for a third and final BBC serial . Titled Quatermass and the Pit and again produced and directed by Cartier , this was eventually broadcast in December 1958 and January 1959 . John Robinson was no longer available to play Quatermass , so the role was offered instead to Alec Clunes . Clunes turned down the part , and it was offered once more to André Morell , who this time accepted . Morell has been praised by several reviewers as having given the definitive portrayal of Quatermass . The serial itself has been praised by the BBC 's own website as " simply the first finest thing the BBC ever made . It justifies licence fees to this day . " Despite this success , Kneale was unsure about whether the character would ever return , later telling an interviewer : " I didn 't want to go on repeating because Professor Quatermass had already saved the world from ultimate destruction three times , and that seemed to me to be quite enough . " 
 Of the TV serials , Quatermass II and Quatermass and the Pit have been preserved in full . Only the first two episodes of The Quatermass Experiment now exist . 
 = = = In film = = = 
 At roughly the same time as Quatermass II was being transmitted by the BBC , Hammer Film Productions released their film adaptation of the first serial in British cinemas . Directed by Val Guest , it was retitled The Quatermass Xperiment , and starred American actor Brian Donlevy as part of a deal to help the film find US distribution . Kneale , who had little involvement with the film , was unimpressed with this casting . " I may have picked Quatermass 's surname out of a phone book , but his first name was carefully chosen : Bernard , after Bernard Lovell , the creator of Jodrell Bank . Pioneer , ultimate questing man . Donlevy played him as a mechanic , a creature with a completely closed mind . " Val Guest has praised Donlevy 's performance , saying that " he gave it absolute reality . " 
 Despite Kneale 's reservations about the casting , The Quatermass Xperiment was the highest @-@ grossing film Hammer had made up to that point in their history , and has since been described by one academic as " the key British science fiction film of the 1950s . " Hammer were keen to make an immediate follow @-@ up , and wanted to use Quatermass in their 1956 film X the Unknown ; however , Kneale refused them the rights , and they created their own substitute character , Doctor Adam Royston . They did release an adaptation of Quatermass II in 1957 , called Quatermass 2 and this time with Kneale 's involvement in the script . To the writer 's displeasure , Donlevy returned as Quatermass . 
 Hammer also purchased the film rights to Quatermass and the Pit ( released in the USA as Five Million Years to Earth ) , as it had done with the previous two TV serials , although they did not release their version until 1967 . This time the film was directed by Roy Ward Baker and starred Scottish actor Andrew Keir , after Morell had been offered and declined the chance to play the part again . Keir 's performance was well @-@ received , particularly in contrast to Donlevy 's portrayal . The Guardian newspaper wrote in 1997 that : " Keir also made many films ... most gratifyingly , perhaps , the movie version of Quatermass and the Pit ( 1967 ) , when he finally replaced the absurdly miscast Brian Donlevy . " 
 Soon after the release of the Quatermass and the Pit film , Kneale was approached by Hammer about writing a fourth Quatermass story directly for them , but the idea came to nothing . 
 Possible remakes of one or more of the Hammer film adaptations were also mooted at various points during the 1990s , with Dan O 'Bannon scripting a potential new version of The Quatermass Experiment in 1993 , but again nothing was eventually filmed . In February 2012 Simon Oakes , president of the revived Hammer Films , announced that a new Quatermass film was in active development . 
 = = = In television ( 1970s onwards ) = = = 
 By the early 1970s Kneale was once again regularly writing for the BBC , who announced plans to produce a fourth Quatermass serial in 1972 . This ultimately was not made by the BBC , but Kneale 's scripts were produced in 1979 as a four @-@ part serial for Thames Television , titled Quatermass . This time John Mills played Quatermass in an expensive and high @-@ profile production , which was screened on the ITV network . The production company Euston Films also released a 100 @-@ minute film version titled The Quatermass Conclusion or Quatermass IV , for distribution abroad . There was , however , little interest among film distributors , and it received only a limited theatrical release . 
 Kneale was not keen to return to the character following this , telling one interviewer , " I blew him up ... and I don 't feel inclined to invent a ' Son of Quatermass ' either . " However , in the late 1990s he conceived an idea for a prequel serial , entitled Quatermass in the Third Reich set in Germany in the 1930s . The idea was submitted to the BBC , who turned it down . 
 In 2005 , the digital television channel BBC Four produced a new version of The Quatermass Experiment , transmitted live as the original had been . Jason Flemyng starred as Quatermass . The Times 's television reviewer , Sarah Vine , commented of this production , " Jason Flemyng as Quatermass made a surprisingly good fist of things ... the live performance lent the drama an edge that might have been lost in re @-@ takes . " 
 = = Other media = = 
 In addition to the character 's various television and film appearances , Quatermass was also seen in a variety of other media between the 1950s and the 1990s . In 1955 Kneale was invited by the publishers of the Daily Express to write a new prose Quatermass story for serialisation in their newspaper ; as he was unable to think of a new storyline , they suggested he simply adapt Quatermass II , which he agreed to do . The serialisation ran in the Daily Express from 5 December 1955 to 20 December 1955 , although Kneale was forced to draw it to a rapid conclusion when the paper lost interest in the project and instructed him to complete the story as soon as possible . 
 A script book for The Quatermass Experiment , including some photographs from the production , was released by Penguin Books in 1959 . This was followed by similar releases of Quatermass II and Quatermass and the Pit , both published in 1960 . All three of these releases were reprinted by Arrow Books in 1979 with new introductions by Kneale , to tie @-@ in with the television transmission of the fourth and final serial . 
 Arrow Books also released a novelisation of the 1979 Quatermass serial , written by Kneale . This was written during production , and contained many additional scenes and extra background detail not included in the original scripts . Kneale offered many of these new scenes to the producers of the television version , but by this stage it was too late for them to be incorporated . 
 In 1995 , BBC Radio producer Paul Quinn approached Kneale with the idea of making a new radio series about Quatermass , and the resulting project was produced and aired as the five @-@ part serial The Quatermass Memoirs on BBC Radio 3 in the spring of 1996 . The serial had three strands : a monologue from Kneale recounting the historical environment in which he created and wrote the original 1950s serials ; archive material from the original productions and contemporary news broadcasts ; and a dramatised strand set shortly before the 1979 serial , with Quatermass being visited in retreat in Scotland by a reporter eager to write his life story . Of the actors who had previously played Quatermass , only Keir and Mills were still alive ; Keir took the role , his final professional performance before his death the following year . The Quatermass Memoirs was repeated several times on digital radio station BBC7 from 2003 , and the serial was released on CD in 2006 . 
 A live theatrical production of Quatermass and the Pit was staged , with the permission of Kneale , outdoors in a quarry at the village of Cropwell Bishop in Nottinghamshire in August 1997 . The adaptation was written by Peter Thornhill and mounted by Creation Productions , with David Longford starring as Quatermass . 
 All of the various film and surviving television productions featuring Quatermass have been released on DVD . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Nigel Kneale explained in a 1990s interview the background that had led him to formulate Quatermass and the other characters of the original serial in 1953 . " I wanted to write some strong characters , but I didn 't want them to be like those horrible people in those awful American science fiction films , chewing gum and stating the obvious . Not that I wanted to do something terribly ' British ' , but I didn 't like all the flag @-@ waving you got in those films . I tried to get real human interest in the stories , and some good humour . " 
 Writing in 2005 , the television history lecturer Dr Catherine Johnson felt that in the original three 1950s serials , Quatermass as a character represented the championing of science and rationality over the supernatural and the fantastic . " As a leading scientific innovator , Quatermass is invested with scientific and moral authority . Over the three serials , this authority is tested and undermined ... Despite this , the narrative structure of all three serials works to reinforce the authority invested in Quatermass and in science . Although scientific enterprise is responsible for disastrous consequences in the first two Quatermass serials , it is only through science that the alien invasions are overcome ... He is invested with the narrative authority to understand and explain the fantastic events depicted . " 
 The writer and critic Kim Newman went further , explaining in a 2003 television documentary on Nigel Kneale 's career that he believed Quatermass to be not only a representation of science but of humanity itself . Referring to the conclusion of The Quatermass Experiment , he commented that : " It almost boils down to an editorial speech by Quatermass representing humanity , or the humane aspects of humanity . He talks to the monster , and so the monster is defeated by an intellectual argument or an emotional appeal . " Like Kneale , he contrasted this to American science @-@ fiction productions , where the alien adversary would be defeated by " it being blown up or electrocuted , or having the entire firepower of the army turned against it . " Hammer had altered their film version of the story so that the creature is in fact killed by being electrocuted . 
 In contrast to Newman 's idea of Quatermass as the embodiment of humanity , writer and lecturer Peter Hutchings in his essay " We are the Martians " sees Quatermass as an isolated character . " In the 1950s Quatermass stories , Quatermass himself is someone who , while working to protect the nation , remains a curiously isolated figure , bereft of anything resembling a meaningful relationship . ( In the 1979 Quatermass , he has acquired a granddaughter ; possibly connected with this is the fact that here he seems a much weaker figure who can only defeat the aliens through the sacrifice of the lives of both himself and his granddaughter ) . " Hutchings also compared this to American productions of the era : " The standard , if not clichéd , figures of the clean @-@ cut square @-@ jawed hero and his girl , which are present in some form or other in most US sf films of this period ... are absent . " 
 = = Outside references = = 
 = = = Doctor Who = = = 
 The BBC science @-@ fiction series Doctor Who has often been heavily influenced by the various Quatermass serials , and despite Kneale 's dislike of it ( " It sounded a terrible idea and I still think it was , " he commented in 1986 ) and his refusal to write for it , unofficial references to Quatermass have appeared in the programme and its spinoffs . Serials directly influenced include The Web of Fear , The Invasion , Spearhead from Space , The Ambassadors of Death , Inferno , The Seeds of Doom and Image of the <unk> , as well as the 2007 " The Lazarus Experiment " , which echoes the first serial 's climax in Westminster Abbey , with the use of Southwark Cathedral . Former Doctor Who script editor and producer Derrick Sherwin admitted on a DVD documentary that the idea of setting more serials on contemporary Earth in the early 1970s was to recall a Quatermass feel . 
 In episode three of the 1988 serial Remembrance of the Daleks , which is set in 1963 , military scientific advisor Dr Rachel Jensen remarks to her colleague Alison , " I wish Bernard was here . " Alison replies , " British Rocket Group 's got its own problems . " 
 The 1994 Doctor Who novel Nightshade is about an actor who starred in a thinly disguised version of Quatermass , discovering that the events of the serials are becoming reality . The fictional Professor Nightshade was also mentioned in subsequent novels . Author Mark Gatiss described the Nightshade serial in his notes accompanying the e @-@ book release as " a TV series that isn 't quite Quatermass and isn 't quite Doctor Who " , adding " I was utterly obsessed by Quatermass at that time " . 
 The 1997 Doctor Who novel The Dying Days , set in its year of release , features in one chapter an elderly character introduced halfway through a sentence as " <unk> " , and subsequently referred to as " Professor " and " Bernard " during his brief appearance . Author Lance Parkin confirmed in his notes accompanying the later e @-@ book release that this was a deliberate cameo from Quatermass , specifically the John Mills version from the final serial . 
 The 2005 Doctor Who episode " The Christmas Invasion " featured the British Rocket Group , although the organisation was only identifiable by a logo not clearly seen on screen and never referred to in dialogue . It was , however , heavily referenced in a tie @-@ in website for the episode created by the bbc.co.uk Doctor Who <unk> . 
 In the 2008 Doctor Who novel Beautiful Chaos , the Doctor briefly mentions being invited to the Royal Planetary Society by " Bernard and Paula " . In the 2009 television episode " Planet of the Dead " , " Bernard " is used as the name for a unit of measurement , and it is explained that this is in reference to Quatermass — whether as a fictional or a real person is not stated . 
 Neil Cross , the writer of the 2013 Doctor Who episode " Hide " , has stated in interviews that when he was working on his initial ideas for the episode , he took inspiration from the Quatermass serials , and even intended for the character of Bernard Quatermass to appear in the story . However , it was not possible to gain copyright clearance to use the character . 
 = = = Other references = = = 
 Quatermass also appears in a short segment of the 2007 graphic novel The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen : Black Dossier , in which he takes his niece and nephew to visit an interplanetary zoo . Here he is identified as Uncle Bernard , and is drawn to resemble George Bernard Shaw . 
 The song " Mars Within " , the first track of Bruce Dickinson 's solo album Tyranny of Souls , features the line " Professor Quatermass , where are you ? " 
 Quatermass appears in story written by Roman Leary published in the 2009 Tales of the <unk> , Volume 6 
 = = Parodies and homages = = 
 In February 1959 the BBC radio comedy series The Goon Show broadcast a parody of Quatermass and the Pit , entitled " The Scarlet Capsule " . Harry Secombe played his regular character in The Goon Show , Neddie <unk> , in turn playing " Professor Ned <unk> , OBE . " This was followed later in the same year by a spoof on another BBC radio comedy show , That Man Chester , which launched a regular strand entitled " The Quite @-@ a @-@ Mess Three Saga " , with Deryck <unk> as " Professor Quite @-@ a @-@ Mess " . However , the " Quite @-@ a @-@ Mess " name and references were dropped after only three of the episodes under pressure from Kneale , who felt that a 13 @-@ week spoof would be to the detriment of the original character . 
 In the early 1970s , a British progressive rock group named both themselves and their first album " Quatermass " . 
 A television spoof appeared in a 1986 episode of the BBC sketch show The Two Ronnies , which featured a sketch entitled " It Came From Outer Hendon " , written by David Renwick . This spoof starred Ronnie Corbett as " Professor Martin <unk> " . 
 The film director John Carpenter wrote the screenplay for his 1987 film Prince of Darkness under the pseudonym " Martin Quatermass " . Carpenter had previously worked with Nigel Kneale on the 1982 film Halloween III : Season of the Witch . 
 In Joe Dante 's 1990 film Gremlins 2 : The New Batch , in a corridor of the Clamp Tower , one of the door nameplates is for " Dr. Quatermass " . 
 Goa trance musicians Jason Gill & Simon Washington formed a group named Quatermass in 1995 . 
 In the last episode of The Mask : Animated Series entitled " The <unk> Cometh " ( 1997 , guest featuring Ace Ventura ) , there is a character named Professor Quatermass . 
 The DVD release of the 2004 remake of Dawn of the Dead includes a bonus feature in the form of a simulated newscast covering the rise of zombies across America . A doctor is interviewed about the zombies being dead people who have come back to life — his name is Dr. Quatermass . 
 = Stephen ( song ) = 
 " Stephen " is a song by American recording artist and songwriter Kesha , taken from her debut studio album Animal ( 2010 ) . The song was written by Kesha in collaboration with David Gamson , Pebe Sebert , Oliver Leiber . It was produced by Gamson with additional production done by Leiber . The song 's instrumentation was by Gamson , with the exception of the accordion , which was played by Kesha . Kesha wrote the song about a boy that she had been stalking and who had refused to call the singer . 
 Musically , Stephen is a dance @-@ pop song that incorporates elements of country music . The song received some positive reviews from music critics upon its release . After the release of Animal for download , Stephen charted on the lower regions of the South Korea Gaon International Chart . A music video for the song was released on the repackaging of the singer 's debut album , Animal + Cannibal . 
 = = Writing and inspiration = = 
 Stephen was written by Kesha Sebert , in collaboration with her mother Pebe Sebert , David Gamson , and Oliver Leiber . The song was produced by Gamson with additional production by Leiber . Gamson played all the instruments on the song , with the exception of the accordion which was performed by Kesha . The song 's recording was commenced at ACME Recording , Long Island , California , and at <unk> Studios , Hollywood , California , by Gamson . Kesha told Rolling Stone that Stephen was one of her favorite tracks on the album . She explained that the song stemmed from her experiences with a man that she had been " stalking since [ she ] was 15 . " It was written when the singer was sixteen , in collaboration with her mother . She found David Gamson to produce the song . " He does all the keyboard stuff , he 's amazing , a crazy cynical genius guy , and he liked my voice and my thing , and I really liked his thing , so we decided to work together " she explained . 
 Kesha was inspired to write the song after continual rejection from the protagonist in the song , Stephen , who refused to call the singer . She told MTV " I wrote [ it ] about this guy that I 've been stalking since I was , like , 15 , but he 's a total loser , so I don 't want to glorify him in any way , but I 'm really excited for the song . " In February 2010 , after the release of the song , Stephen attended one of the singer 's concerts . Speaking to Total Access on <unk> The Wave , the singer recalled the experience saying " he came to see my show at this huge gay bar in New York and it was totally off the chain . He gets up on stage , takes all his clothes off except his underwear and starts making out with a tranny . I was like , ' Wait a minute , have I been barking up the wrong genre of tree ? ' " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Stephen " is a song composed in the dance @-@ pop genre that also incorporates elements of country music . According to digital sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony @-@ ATV Music Publishing , the song is written in the key of D major and the tempo moves at 100 beats per minute at a moderately fast rate . Kesha 's vocal range in the song spans from the lower note of E3 to the higher note of D5 . The lyrics begin with Kesha singing " Stephen , Stephen , why won 't you call me ? . " The song 's lyrics depict the tale of the singer stalking her then crush , Stephen , who ultimately would not call the singer . " Stephen " opens with layered a cappella harmonies , later transitioning into a dominantly driven pop song . According to the singer , " Stephen " showcases her more vulnerable side and encompasses humor throughout its lyrics : " ' Stephen ' shows the vulnerable side of me but it 's still a funny pop song . It 's me saying I 'm totally obsessive and in love with this guy , but he 's blowing me off in a pretty funny way . " 
 Fraser McAlpine of BBC called the song " a vulnerable ode to an unreliable crush . " Daniel Brockman of The Phoenix thought that the song 's lyrics were " an ode to forcing your sexual advances on your high @-@ school history teacher . " According to Andrew Burgess of musicOMH , the song " tells the story of that one guy Ke $ ha can 't bag : ' What the hell ? I can charm the pants off anyone else , but you . ' " Ann Powers of the Los Angeles Times felt that the song was experimental , comparing it to the group Animal Collective . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Stephen received positive comments from music critics . Fraser McAlpine of BBC Music used Stephen as an example of the songs on Animal ( 2010 ) that exemplified the singer 's vocals , saying it had " beautiful layered a cappella harmonies . Sure , it tumbles into clunky pop straight afterwards , but then , that also seems to be what she does : beautiful things are bashed against ugly things , pretty melodies ruined by silly noises , emotional lyrics stuffed with buzzwords . " Daniel Brockman of The Boston Phoenix wrote of the album that " in a post – ' Birthday Sex ' pop landscape , there 's plenty of room for dumb if it 's done well . " He described Stephen as " an ode to forcing your sexual advances on your high @-@ school history teacher . " Ann Powers of the Los Angeles Times listed the song as one of those that exemplified the album 's more experimental side , calling it a " country @-@ in @-@ space " rendition . 
 musicOMH 's writer Andrew Burgess wrote that the album was composed of " obligatory ballads " and used Stephen as an example , saying it has " Kansas @-@ style vocal harmonies " . His consensus regarding the album 's ballads was that " Perhaps Ke $ ha is , in fact , a more complex and multi @-@ faceted party girl than she seems like on the surface . " Digital Spy commented that the Kesha uses the album " to show her vulnerable side " and that " she admits she can 't take rejection on the country @-@ tinged ' Stephen ' . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 A music video for " Stephen " was directed by the production team Skinny . The video was released on the deluxe <unk> of her debut album Animal , under its re @-@ release entitled Animal + Cannibal . It was later uploaded to the singer 's Vevo account on April 4 , 2011 . The video is composed of still shots that show the singer " going to some extreme lengths to show ' Stephen ' how much she 's feeling him . " The video opens with the singer looking through a scrapbook ; following this the video then proceeds into depicting the singer 's interactions with the protagonist . The video 's first setting is located at a bar where the singer gets into a verbal altercation with the man 's girlfriend . Kesha , who later leaves with the then unconscious man , takes him back to her house to takes pictures of him and later cuts off some of his hair for her shrine . The singer then duct @-@ tapes the man and locks him in her closet ; which he later escapes from . Following this , the singer is distraught and then builds another man out of a dummy , and using the hair she had clipped earlier , proceeds to bring the dummy to a bar , getting into another altercation with it and later leaving it in the street – ending the video . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Stephen " – 3 : 32 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded by David Gamson at ACME Recording , Long Island , California ; and at <unk> Studios , Hollywood , California . 
 Personnel 
 Songwriting – Kesha Sebert , David Gamson , Pebe Sebert , Oliver Leiber 
 Production – David Gamson , Oliver Leiber 
 Instruments and programming – David Gamson 
 Accordion – Kesha 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Animal , Kemosabe Recordings , via RCA Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Animal , " Stephen " debuted and peaked at number at eighty @-@ nine on the issue date of January 3 , 2010 , on the South Korea Gaon International Songs Chart . The song was the ninth highest debuting album track from its parent album . 
 = Richie Powell = 
 Richard Powell ( September 5 , 1931 – June 26 , 1956 ) was an American jazz pianist , composer , and arranger . He was not assisted in his musical development by Bud , his older and better known brother , but both played predominantly in the bebop style . 
 After early work around Philadelphia and New York City , Richie Powell played in the bands of Paul Williams ( 1951 – 52 ) and Johnny Hodges ( 1952 – 54 ) . He switched in the spring of 1954 to being pianist and arranger for the quintet co @-@ led by trumpeter Clifford Brown and drummer Max Roach . This band toured extensively across the U.S. for two years , and released both studio and concert recordings , including the Grammy Hall of Fame inductee Clifford Brown & Max Roach . 
 Powell , his wife , and Brown were killed in a car crash when traveling overnight from Philadelphia to Chicago . Powell was beginning to achieve recognition at the time of his death , but he never had the chance to record as a leader . He had a playful piano style , and was fond of using musical quotations . His relatively heavy touch and use of left @-@ hand fourths influenced fellow pianist McCoy Tyner . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Powell was born in New York City on September 5 , 1931 . He was the youngest of three sons , after William , Jr . , and Bud , seven years Richie 's elder . Their parents were William , Sr. and Pearl Powell . The family was musical : William , Sr. was a stride pianist ; William , Jr. led bands as a trumpeter and violinist ; and pianist Bud became one of the leaders of bebop . 
 One account of why Richie took up the piano is that he pestered drummer Max Roach , who lived nearby , for drum lessons , and Roach , eventually fed up , suggested that he play the piano instead . Bud did not assist his brother at all in his musical endeavors ; instead , according to a biographer of saxophonist Jackie McLean , " it was an excellent but now forgotten pianist named Bob Bunyan who taught Richie Powell chords on the piano . Richie would study with Bunyan , and then go home and watch his brother practice . [ ... ] Richie and Jackie became tight friends and used to rehearse together " . Richie also studied music with Mary Lou Williams , and attended the City College of New York . 
 = = Later life and career = = 
 From 1949 to 1951 Powell worked around Philadelphia and New York City . He then played in the bands of Paul Williams ( 1951 – 52 ) and Johnny Hodges ( 1952 – 54 ) . With Williams ' R & B @-@ oriented band he recorded four tracks late in 1952 that were released as singles . Powell also played on a medley track for a 1954 Hodges album , Used to Be Duke . 
 Powell was with Hodges ' band in Los Angeles in the spring of 1954 when Roach needed a new pianist for the quintet that he co @-@ led with trumpeter Clifford Brown . Powell was offered , and accepted , the job . He also became arranger for the quintet . They performed and rehearsed a lot , then had several recording sessions that August for EmArcy Records , which resulted in their first album , Brown and Roach Incorporated . In the same month , Powell was involved as pianist for some tracks at a session arranged for singer Dinah Washington that featured a studio audience . In September the quintet played for a fortnight at the Black Hawk in San Francisco , then began a tour of the eastern United States the following month . The band 's saxophonist , Harold Land , reported that , when touring , " Richie was a little busy with the ladies . He had harems in almost every city " . 
 Further recording sessions for Powell with Brown and Roach took place in New York during January and February 1955 . The tracks cut in January , with arrangements by Neal Hefti , were released as Clifford Brown with Strings . The February sessions yielded the albums Study in Brown , and , combined with tracks from the previous year , Clifford Brown & Max Roach . The latter was added to the Grammy Hall of Fame in 1999 . At the Newport Jazz Festival in July 1955 Powell played with Roach and others as backing for Washington . Recordings made of the Brown – Roach quintet at the same event were released decades later . 
 The quintet with Sonny Rollins , who replaced Land on tenor saxophone , recorded what became their last official album early in 1956 . Clifford Brown and Max Roach at Basin Street contained playing at even faster tempos than on their earlier album releases . Several of the tunes were composed by Powell ; on one , " Time " , Powell played celeste in addition to his usual piano . Another was " Gertrude 's Bounce " , which Powell said was named following his admiration for the way in which artist Gertrude Abercrombie walked . The third of his originals , " Powell 's <unk> " , was " a modal composition , with Brown and Rollins improvising on the scale rather than on the usual chord changes " , a form popularized three years later by Miles Davis . 
 The band continued touring in 1956 , including to Toronto . In late February or early March , Powell and Rollins , traveling together near Philadelphia , were involved in a crash that destroyed Powell 's car , but they were not seriously injured . The quintet recorded under the leadership of Rollins in March for Prestige ; this was released as Sonny Rollins Plus 4 . They also had live national CBS Radio broadcasts from the Basin Street club in April and May . Two years of exposure with the Brown – Roach ensemble meant that Powell was beginning to achieve some recognition in his own right . 
 On June 26 , 1956 , Powell and his wife , Nancy , together with Brown , were traveling overnight by car from Philadelphia to Chicago . On the Pennsylvania Turnpike outside Bedford , in heavy rain , Nancy lost control of the vehicle , which crashed off the road and rolled down an embankment . All three were killed instantly . Nancy was 19 ; Brown , 25 ; and Powell , 24 . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Although he also played swing and R & B , Powell was known as a bebop player . This included using right @-@ hand single @-@ note lines . In his playing with Brown and Roach , he was fond of inserting musical quotes , including from nursery rhymes and opera . 
 Powell usually played as part of a rhythm section in ensembles , so there are few recorded examples of him in smaller bands . In one 1954 session he recorded a trio version of " I 'll String Along with You " , on which he used " heavily chorded patterns with intriguing flourishes . " Another exception to Powell being in a supporting role is his extended introductory section to a 1954 Hodges recording of " Autumn in New York " . On this track , in the words of critic Marc Myers six decades later , Powell 's playing was " regal , bouncy and appropriately lush , with shades of Erroll Garner , Al Haig and Richie 's brother , Bud . [ ... ] In ' Autumn in New York ' , we clearly hear a dramatic , playful pianist who was fast becoming an extraordinary talent . " 
 = = Influence = = 
 Pianist McCoy Tyner , who grew up close to the Powell brothers in Philadelphia , was influenced by their relatively heavy keyboard touch and their liking of percussive piano sounds . Tyner also got some of his inspiration for chord voicings from hearing Richie 's use of left @-@ hand fourths . Tyner 's voicings became the norm for young jazz pianists . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Powell did not make any recordings as a leader . 
 Bootlegs and other unofficial recordings are not included . 
 = = = Albums as sideman = = = 
 = Max Bentley = 
 Maxwell Herbert Lloyd " Max " Bentley ( March 1 , 1920 – January 19 , 1984 ) was a Canadian ice hockey forward who played for the Chicago Black Hawks , Toronto Maple Leafs , and New York Rangers in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) as part of a professional and senior career that spanned 20 years . He was a two @-@ time Art Ross Trophy winner as the NHL 's leading scorer , and in 1946 won the Hart Trophy as most valuable player . He played in four All @-@ Star Games and was twice named to a post @-@ season All @-@ Star team . 
 Bentley was one of six hockey @-@ playing brothers , and at one point played with four of his brothers with the Drumheller Miners of the Alberta Senior Hockey League . In 1942 – 43 , he made NHL history when he played on the league 's first all @-@ brother line with Doug and Reg . He played five seasons in Chicago with Doug before a 1947 trade sent him to the Maple Leafs in one of the most significant transactions in NHL history to that point . Bentley won three Stanley Cup championships with the Maple Leafs before spending a final NHL season with the Rangers in 1953 – 54 . He then returned to his home in Saskatoon to finish his playing career . Considered one of the best players of his era , Bentley was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1966 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bentley was born March 1 , 1920 , in Delisle , Saskatchewan . He was the youngest of six boys , and one of thirteen children . His father Bill was a native of Yorkshire , England who emigrated to the United States as a child and became a speed skating champion in North Dakota before settling in Delisle . He became mayor and helped build the town 's covered skating rink . All of the Bentley children were athletes , and all six brothers played hockey . Bill Bentley believed that all six boys could have played in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) , though responsibilities on the family farm resulted in the eldest four boys spending the majority of their careers playing senior hockey on the Canadian Prairies . 
 His father taught Bentley to play hockey on their farm , where the family patriarch believed the daily chores would give his children the strength to have strong shots . Bentley 's father also taught him to use his speed to elude bigger and stronger opponents as he weighed only 155 pounds fully grown . He played two years in Rosetown , Saskatchewan between 1935 and 1937 where he led the Saskatchewan Intermediate league in scoring as a 16 @-@ year @-@ old . He moved onto the Drumheller Miners of the Alberta Senior Hockey League ( <unk> ) in 1937 , leading that league in scoring while playing on a line with brothers Roy and Wyatt . The trio were joined in Drumheller by Doug and Reg for the 1938 – 39 season . The family operated a gas station in town when not playing hockey . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Chicago Black Hawks = = = 
 While playing for Rosetown , Bentley attended a tryout camp for the Boston Bruins . Believing him too small to play in the NHL , the Bruins sent him home . He then traveled to Montreal for a tryout with the Canadiens . The team advised him to see a doctor who stated he had a heart condition , and that if he did not quit hockey , he would be dead within a year . Bentley chose to continue playing , but developed into a hypochondriac following the diagnosis . He constantly complained of aches , pains and ailments , and carried so many drugs and medications he was known as a " walking drug store " . 
 He played two years of senior hockey in Drumheller , and one more with the Saskatoon Quakers in the Saskatchewan Senior Hockey League ( <unk> ) before playing his first professional games with the Providence Reds of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) in 1940 – 41 . He caught the attention of the Chicago Black Hawks , and while the team was impressed with his play , they wanted him to start with their American Hockey Association ( AHA ) affiliate in Kansas City . Bentley initially refused , and considered retiring . He was convinced to report by Kansas City 's coach , Johnny Gottselig , and played only five games before injuries in Chicago led the Black Hawks to request a call @-@ up . Gottselig sent Bentley up , reuniting him with brother Doug who had joined Chicago in 1939 . Max played his first NHL game on November 21 , 1940 , against the Bruins . He scored his first goal on December 1 against the New York Rangers . 
 In his third NHL season , 1942 – 43 , Bentley scored 70 points to finish third in the league in scoring . He finished three points behind brother Doug , who won the scoring title . Max tied an NHL record by scoring four goals in one period of a 10 – 1 victory over the Rangers on January 28 , 1943 . He added three assists in the game , tying the league record at the time for points in one game with seven . He was called for only one penalty during the season , and as a result was voted the winner of the Lady Byng Trophy as the league 's most sportsmanlike player . 
 World War II had decimated the rosters of all NHL teams , and with the Black Hawks searching for players , Max and Doug convinced the team to sign their brother Reg . The trio made history on January 1 , 1943 , when they became the first all @-@ brother line the NHL had seen . Two nights later , Max and Doug assisted on Reg 's first , and only , NHL goal , the only time in league history that a trio of family members recorded the goal and assists on a scoring play . While Max and Doug were established NHL stars , Reg played only 11 games in his NHL career . 
 Bentley 's career was interrupted in 1943 when he joined the Canadian Infantry Corps . He was briefly stationed in Victoria , British Columbia , where he completed the 1942 – 43 season playing with the Victoria Navy team then spent the following two years stationed in Calgary where he played with the Calgary Currie Army team in the Canadian military leagues . He led the Alberta league in goals and points with 18 and 31 respectively in 1943 – 44 . 
 Following the war , Bentley returned to the Black Hawks where he was reunited with his brother Doug and joined on a line by Bill Mosienko . The trio , who were all small and exceptionally fast , were dubbed the " Pony Line " and emerged as one of the top scoring lines in the league . Max led the league in scoring with 61 points , and was awarded the Hart Trophy as the league 's most valuable player . He was the first Black Hawk to ever win the award . 
 Bentley again led the league in scoring in 1946 – 47 , recording 72 points in 60 games . He won the title on the final night of the season , finishing one point ahead of Montreal 's Maurice Richard . In doing so , he became only the third player in NHL history to win consecutive scoring titles after Charlie Conacher and Sweeney Schriner , both of whom accomplished the feat in the 1930s . He then played in the 1st National Hockey League All @-@ Star Game on October 13 , 1947 , for the NHL All @-@ Stars , a 4 – 3 victory over the Toronto Maple Leafs . 
 = = = Toronto Maple Leafs = = = 
 Three weeks later and six games into the season , the Maple Leafs completed a deal to acquire Bentley . He was sent to Toronto with Cy Thomas in exchange for Gus Bodnar , Bud Poile , Gaye Stewart , Ernie Dickens and Bob <unk> , on November 2 , 1947 . The trade sent shockwaves throughout the league . The five players sent to Chicago essentially formed an entire starting unit ; NHL President Clarence Campbell stated he was " astounded " by the deal , and stated it ranked with the Maple Leafs ' purchase of King Clancy in 1930 as one of the most significant transactions in league history . The trade was still being discussed weeks later as observers throughout the league attempted to assess which team received the better deal . Bentley was initially disappointed to leave his brother in Chicago , but quickly adapted to Toronto where he was immediately popular . 
 With the Leafs , Bentley challenged for his third consecutive scoring title . He eventually finished fifth with 54 points , seven behind Elmer Lach 's league @-@ leading 61 . The Leafs finished in first place in the regular season standings , then went on to win the Stanley Cup in a four @-@ game sweep over the Detroit Red Wings in the 1948 Stanley Cup Finals . Bentley was overjoyed , stating : " I waited a long time for this . A Stanley Cup championship at last ! " 
 Bentley and the Leafs struggled in the 1948 – 49 regular season . He fell to 41 points on the year – 31 less than his total of two seasons previous – while the Leafs finished fourth out of six teams . The team recovered in the playoffs , eliminating the Red Wings in four consecutive games for the second year in a row to win the team 's third consecutive Stanley Cup . Bentley scored the third goal in a 3 – 1 win in the deciding contest . 
 The Leafs ' championship streak came to an end in 1949 – 50 but Bentley showed a modest improvement offensively , leading the team with 23 goals . He contemplated retiring and returning to Saskatchewan , but chose to return to Toronto for the 1950 – 51 season . He finished the season with significantly improved scoring totals , finishing third in the league with 62 points , behind Maurice Richard 's 66 , and Gordie Howe 's league @-@ record 86 . The Leafs faced the Canadiens in the 1951 Stanley Cup Finals , which was won by Toronto in five games . Bentley finished with 13 points in the playoffs , tying him with Richard for the league lead . 
 After finishing the 1951 – 52 season with 41 points , Bentley contemplated his future in hockey . He mused about an opportunity to coach the Calgary Stampeders of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) and stated a desire to play again with his brother Doug , but ultimately returned to Toronto . He only played in 36 games in 1952 – 53 after suffering a back injury , but reached 500 career points on November 5 , 1952 , with two goals against the Rangers . 
 = = = New York and Saskatoon = = = 
 Following the season , the New York Rangers offered Max and Doug Bentley the opportunity to play together again . The Rangers acquired both players in cash transactions over the summer . Max finished the season with 32 points in 54 games , while Doug played only 20 games . Bentley 's rights reverted to the Maple Leafs in the fall of 1954 when he refused to report to the Rangers for the 1954 – 55 NHL season . From the Leafs , he demanded a C $ 20 @,@ 000 contract , more than the team was willing to pay . He was initially placed on the suspended list by Toronto after he refused to report to training camp and attempted to purchase his release from the team . Bentley expressed a desire to leave the NHL and play for the WHL 's Saskatoon Quakers , where Doug had become coach . The Maple Leafs ultimately supported Bentley 's request . At the time he was granted his release , he was second amongst all active players with 245 goals , behind only Richard . 
 He joined the Quakers in November 1954 to great excitement in Saskatoon . Bentley finished the season with 41 points in 40 games . He began the 1955 – 56 season with Saskatoon , but retired on November 15 , 1955 , due to recurring back problems . He played his final game on that night , scoring his final goal in an 8 – 3 victory over the Winnipeg Warriors . 
 In 1956 , Bentley joined his brother Doug in hockey management when the brothers launched a new Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League ( SJHL ) team in Saskatoon . He attempted to get into coaching , first offering his services to the WHL 's Vancouver Canucks in the winter of 1961 , before going south to coach the Burbank Stars of the California Hockey league in 1962 . His nephew Bev and son Lynn played with him in Burbank , while Doug was the player @-@ coach of the rival Long Beach Gulls . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Max Bentley was known for his speed , passing and puck handling skills . He learned his trade with his brothers as they constantly played street hockey in the summers and on the ice in the winters . Bentley 's father flooded a sheet of ice that was the length of a regulation NHL hockey rink but much narrower , forcing the boys to develop the ability to maintain control of the puck while making fast , hard turns to reach the net . He was nicknamed the " <unk> Doodle Dandy from Delisle " in reference to his ability to skate around opponents who often found that the only way to stop him was via rough play . Bentley was able to score from nearly any angle , an ability that confounded even his brother Doug . Long @-@ time prairie hockey promoter Bill Hunter said Bentley was " a phenomenal hockey player , an absolute artist with the puck " . Opponents occasionally attempted to use Bentley 's hypochondria against him , making remarks on how he looked ill in a bid to distract him during the game . 
 Bentley was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1966 , two years after his brother Doug . One year later , Max and Doug were inducted together into the Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame . The Hockey News ranked him 48th on its 1998 list of the top 100 players of all time . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In addition to hockey , Bentley and his brothers played baseball in the summers . Representing their hometown of Delisle , they participated in regional tournaments and were repeat winners . Bentley played summer baseball throughout the 1950s , and was a member of the Saskatoon Gems of the Western Canada Senior League . He was also a long @-@ time curler , often playing with his brothers , son and nephews . 
 The majority of Bentley 's time away from the hockey rink was spent on the family farm outside Delisle . The <unk> operated a large farm , raising cattle and growing wheat , and Max tended to return to the farm to recuperate during hockey seasons when he felt he needed to rest up . He and his wife Betty had a son , Lynn , who was also a hockey player and a younger son , Gary . Bentley died at his home in Saskatoon on January 19 , 1984 , at the age of 63 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = S & M ( song ) = 
 " S & M " is a song by Barbadian singer Rihanna from her fifth studio album , Loud ( 2010 ) . The song was released on January 21 , 2011 , as the fourth single from the album . The American songwriter Ester Dean wrote " S & M " in collaboration with the producers Stargate and Sandy Vee . Backed by bass beats , a keyboard and guitars , it is an uptempo hi @-@ NRG @-@ Eurodance track with lyrics that revolve around sexual intercourse , sadomasochism , bondage , and fetishes . 
 Critical response to " S & M " was mixed : some critics praised its sound and composition while others criticized its overtly sexual lyrics . After it reached number two on the United States ' Billboard Hot 100 chart , a remix that features Britney Spears was released . When combined with sales of the solo version , it became Rihanna 's tenth and Spears ' fifth number @-@ one single on the chart . It has been certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . " S & M " peaked at number one in Australia , Canada , Hungary , Israel , and Poland in addition to the United States while peaking within the top five in France , Germany , Ireland , Spain , and the UK . 
 To promote " S & M " , Rihanna performed a shortened version at the 31st Brit Awards and sang the remix with Spears at the 2011 Billboard Music Awards . Melina Matsoukas directed the song 's music video , which was , in part , Rihanna 's response to disparaging critics . It portrays softcore sadomasochist acts and fetishes . The music video was banned in many countries and restricted to nighttime television in others . Critics complimented Rihanna 's sensuality and the vibrant colors . Photographer David LaChapelle filed a lawsuit alleging that the video incorporates ideas from his photographs . Rihanna and LaChapelle settled the case for an undisclosed sum of money . 
 = = Concept and development = = 
 " S & M " was written by Ester Dean in collaboration with the song 's producers , Stargate and Sandy Vee . Dean explained its conception and the sexually suggestive lyrics to Gail Mitchell of Billboard : " The first thing that came to me was ' Come on , come on . ' I 'm thinking , ' I don 't know what in the hell this is about to be . ' And I remembered I 'd seen something that said , ' Sticks and stones may break my bones . ' Then came ' But chains and whips excite me . ' When people have a great track that speaks to me , it feels like it already has a story in it " . Rihanna told Rolling Stone about her interest in bondage and other sadomasochism activities , themes central to " S & M " : " I like to take charge , but I love to be submissive ... being submissive in the bedroom is really fun . You get to be a little lady , to have somebody be macho and in charge . " 
 " S & M " was recorded during Rihanna 's Last Girl on Earth Tour : the instrumental parts for the song were recorded by Eriksen and Miles Walker at Roc the Mic Studios in New York City and the Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles , and by Vee at The Bunker Studios in Paris . Rihanna 's vocals were recorded by Kuk Harrell and were produced by Harrell , Josh Gudwin and Marcos Tovar ; Bobby Campbell assisted in the singer 's vocal recording . Veronika Bozeman provided additional vocal production . The song was mixed by Vee at The Bunker Studios and by Phil Tan at The Ninja Beat Club in Atlanta , Georgia ; additional and assistant engineering was carried out by Damien Lewis . All instrumental production was completed by Eriksen , Hermansen and Vee . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " S & M " is an uptempo hi @-@ NRG @-@ Eurodance song that lasts four minutes and three seconds . The song is composed in the key of E @-@ flat minor using common time and a moderate dance tempo of 128 beats per minute . Instrumentation is provided by synthesizers , a keyboard and a guitar . Chris Ryan of MTV described the song as a " steady @-@ rocking dance track , with ominous , snarling keyboard sounds . " 
 During the track , Rihanna 's vocal range spans one octave , from the low note of B3 to the high note of B4 . Proposing illicit acts , she uses a " sexually aggressive tone " in her vocal performance . The lyrics are about sex , sadomasochism , bondage and BDSM fetishes , including the sexual fantasies and turn @-@ ons of its protagonist . The song opens with the hook , " Na , na , na , c 'mon " . During the chorus the lyrics include , " ' Cause I may be bad , but I 'm perfectly good at it / Sex in the air , I don 't care , I love the smell of it . " In the song , Rihanna describes herself as " bad " and openly praises her own sexual prowess ; lyrics include , " Sticks and stones may break my bones / But chains and whips excite me . " Rihanna told Spin magazine that the lyrics are metaphoric . She said that she thought the song was mainly about having confidence in one 's identity , and about being impervious to rumors and criticism . According to Jake Conway of Q Magazine at Yale , the lyrics are guilty of " divesting sex of emotion " and re @-@ envisaging violence as fetish ; he went on to say that Rihanna pays homage to the sexual acts in an empowered dance and club mood . Chris Ryan described the song as being about " dirty , naughty , illicit bedroom activities " . 
 = = Release and remixes = = 
 " S & M " was the fourth single from the album Loud to be released in the US and the third in other countries . It was sent to contemporary hit and rhythmic radio stations in the US on January 23 , 2011 , and to urban playlists on February 27 , 2011 . The single was released on iTunes Stores throughout Europe and South America on February 11 , 2011 . In Argentina , Brazil and certain territories throughout Europe , the song was released as an extended play ( EP ) on February 18 , 2011 ; this consisted of the single version of " S & M " and two remixes by Audé and Samson . On February 28 , 2011 , a compilation was released worldwide as a digital package consisting of remixes by disc jockeys Audé , Samson and Joe Bermudez . " S & M " was released as a CD single in Germany on March 18 , 2011 . On April 11 , 2011 , the remix single featuring Britney Spears was made available to download worldwide . In the United Kingdom , " S & M " was deemed too explicit for daytime airplay ; it was edited to remove references to sex , chains and whips , and was renamed " Come On " for BBC Radio 1 . 
 A remix of " S & M " featuring rapper J. Cole was released on the internet on January 17 , 2011 . After the release of the song 's album version , Rihanna asked her followers on Twitter about potential collaborators , of which Spears was the most popular choice . Twitter messages between the two artists caused speculation that they had recorded a remix of the song . The remix , featuring guest vocals by Spears , was released on April 11 , 2011 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " S & M " received mixed responses from music critics . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine described " S & M " as an ode to sadomasochism that compares to Janet Jackson 's The Velvet Rope . Conner felt that " S & M " , as well as other Loud tracks " What 's My Name ? " and " Skin " , were songs which allowed Rihanna to boast about how good she is in certain situations , as she did on Rated R. He chose the lyrics " I may be bad / but I 'm perfectly good at it ... Chains and whips excite me " as an example of her <unk> . USA Today 's Steve Jones opined that " Loud 's pulsating opener , ' S & M , ' makes it clear from the jump where [ Rihanna is ] headed as she acknowledges that ' chains and whips excite [ her ] ' " , while Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly called " S & M " an " explicitly carnal opener " with " late @-@ night @-@ Cinemax naughtiness " . 
 Jake Conway of Q Magazine at Yale agreed , writing that the lyrics of " S & M " display why the singer continues to be one of the most provocative recording artists in the music industry , highlighting how she " turns the tables on abusive ex @-@ lover Chris Brown . " Digital Spy 's Nick Levine gave the song a rating of four stars out of five , and wrote that the song makes the listener as " up @-@ for it " as Rihanna herself ; he went on to say that " S & M " consists of " ear @-@ <unk> " hooks , synths and pounding beats . James Skinner of BBC Music wrote that Loud lacked the " chart @-@ friendly moments " of Rated R and criticized the overtly sexual lyrics which he found " at odds with " the flirtatious appeal for which Rihanna was aiming . Skinner described the singer 's vocal delivery as " forced " and criticized her for not projecting a " daring " or convincing sound on " S & M " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " S & M " made its first chart appearance in the United Kingdom on November 15 , 2010 , at number 55 . It peaked at number three on March 5 , 2011 , where it remained for three consecutive weeks . It was more successful on the UK R & B Chart , where it was number one for five consecutive weeks . The song the second @-@ biggest selling R & B or hip hop single of 2011 in the UK : by December that year , " S & M " had sold 643 @,@ 000 copies in the UK and was certified platinum by the BPI . Elsewhere in Europe , " S & M " was a commercial success and peaked within the top three in many countries . 
 " S & M " debuted on the Australian Singles Chart at number 87 on November 29 , 2010 , upon the release of Loud . When it was released as a single , it returned to the singles chart at number 27 on January 30 , 2011 . The song peaked at number one on February 13 , 2011 , for five non @-@ consecutive weeks . It has since been certified four times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association , denoting shipments of over 280 @,@ 000 copies of the single . The song debuted on the New Zealand Singles Chart at number six on February 7 , 2011 . It peaked at number two the following week for two consecutive weeks , and returned to its peak position again in its fifth week on the chart . " S & M " was subsequently certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand , denoting sales of over 15 @,@ 000 copies . 
 In the US , the song debuted at number 53 on the Billboard Hot 100 on December 4 , 2010 . The issue of Billboard published on April 30 , 2011 reported that the album version of " S & M " and its official remix featuring Spears had sold a combined total of 293 @,@ 000 downloads in the previous week ; it replaced Katy Perry 's " E.T. " on the Hot 100 . " S & M " became Rihanna 's tenth US number @-@ one single on the chart , tying her with Janet Jackson in fourth place for female soloists who have topped that chart ; with only four years , eleven months and two weeks between her first and tenth number one on the chart , Rihanna achieved the milestone faster than any other solo artist . It became Spears ' fifth number @-@ one single on the Hot 100 . " S & M " became Rihanna 's eighth number @-@ one song on the Pop Songs chart and she became the artist with the most number one songs in the chart 's nineteen @-@ year history . The song was number one on the Dance Club Songs chart , and number 33 on the Hot Latin Songs chart . It debuted at number 80 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs in the February 26 , 2011 issue of Billboard , and peaked at number 59 . " S & M " peaked at number 24 on the Adult Pop Songs chart , and at number 14 on the Latin Pop Songs chart . The song has been certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , and has sold 3 @,@ 837 @,@ 000 digital copies in the US as of June 2015 . " S & M " ranked at number 15 on Billboard 's " Best of 2011 – Pop Songs " chart , and number two on its " Best of 2011 – Dance / Club Songs " chart . In Canada , the song peaked at number one for the week of April 21 , 2011 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and synopsis = = = 
 The director Melina Matsoukas filmed the music video for " S & M " in Los Angeles on January 15 and 16 , 2011 . Matsoukas told Billboard that the video was inspired by Rihanna 's " sadomasochist relationship with the press ... it isn 't just about a bunch of whips and chains . " On January 27 , 2011 , a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes clip was posted on Rihanna 's YouTube channel , and the full music video premiered on Vevo on February 1 , 2011 . 
 As the video opens , Rihanna is dragged into a press conference , where she is covered with plastic wrap and taped to a wall . Microphones and gagged reporters surround her . In an outdoor scene , she wears a cream @-@ colored latex dress and leads a gagged Perez Hilton around by a dog leash . Rihanna is then shown seated and surrounded by CCTV surveillance cameras ; her chair begins to rotate , and she stands and begins to whip reporters , who are taped to the wall of the room . She then rolls on the floor , her hands and feet bound with rope . As the bridge of the song approaches , Rihanna wears a white latex bikini and rabbit ears , while images of headlines are projected against her body and the wall behind her . After the chorus , she appears in a newsroom . Reporters take photographs of her while she sprawls across a desk wearing a pink latex dress . Scenes of Rihanna and others in bondage gear are interspersed with images of the singer wearing a feather boa and a tube top with " censored " printed across it . The video then alternates between previous scenes and images in which Rihanna eats bananas , strawberries and cream , and jewel @-@ covered ice cream . In the final scene , she lies on a newsroom desk , with a smiley face emblem over one eye and a Rolling Stones tongue logo over her mouth . 
 = = = Reception and ban = = = 
 The music video was generally well received . A journalist for The Huffington Post wrote , " Rihanna is perfectly good at being bad – and this video proves it " , while a reviewer for OK ! called the video " red @-@ hot , kinky and totally tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek " . Willa Paskin of New York similarly described it as a " goofy " take on the S & M @-@ themed music videos typical of Madonna and Lady Gaga , while Matthew Perpetua of Rolling Stone described the video as a " visual onslaught of candy @-@ colored <unk> " that viewers would enjoy despite its bright colors and sexually suggestive activities . Brad Wete of Entertainment Weekly stated that Rihanna delivered the risque video he was expecting based on the song 's lyrical content , and Jason Lipshutz of Billboard praised the video 's " exquisite set pieces that offer a twisted take on hardcore sexuality " . 
 The video was immediately banned in eleven countries due to its overtly sexual content . It was " flagged for content " by users on YouTube , which restricts access to its users under the age of 18 . Rihanna responded to the news via Twitter , writing , " They watched ' Umbrella ' ... I was full nude " . An unrestricted version of the video was later uploaded to Rihanna 's official website . Melina Matsoukas responded to the news in an interview with MTV News , stating : " When I go out to make something , I kind of go out with the intention to get it banned – [ well ] not to get it banned ... but to make something provocative ... it 's making an effect and people are having a dialogue about it , so , to me , that 's successful . " 
 = = = Copyright infringement lawsuits = = = 
 The video was involved in further controversy when photographer David LaChapelle sued Rihanna , Island Def Jam and related parties for copyright infringement . LaChapelle alleged that the video infringed upon eight of his photographs published between 1997 and 2010 in GQ , i @-@ D , Vogue Italia and elsewhere . The lawsuit , which claimed unspecified damages , alleged that the video was " directly derived " from LaChapelle 's pictures , copying their " composition , total concept , feel , tone , mood , theme , colors , props , settings , decors , wardrobe and lighting " . The lawsuit included claims of trade dress infringement under the Lanham Act , unfair competition under New York state law and unjust enrichment , all of which were later dismissed . Judge Shira A. Scheindlin of New York 's Southern District Court denied a motion to dismiss the copyright violation allegations , noting similarities between the works : 
 Both works feature : hot @-@ pink and white striped walls ; two single @-@ hung windows in the middle of the back wall ; windows with glossy hot @-@ pink casings and interior framework , with opaque panes exhibiting a half @-@ vector pattern of stripes against a yellow background ; a solid hot @-@ pink ceiling ; hot @-@ pink <unk> ; a hot @-@ pink couch under the windows ; women wearing frizzy red wigs ; a woman posed on top of a piece of furniture ; black tape wrapped around a man ; and a generally frantic mood ... [ Both works are ] well @-@ lit and intensely saturated , with all of the details in sharp focus and almost no shadows . 
 In August 2011 , a judge agreed that the " ' pink room scene ' , which shows Rihanna dominating a man in front of pink and white striped walls , was very similar to LaChapelle 's " Striped Face " photograph ; the judge pinpointed a scene where Rihanna is seen against a blue background , wearing pink latex and placing a sweet on her tongue . " Rihanna and LaChapelle settled the case out of court for an undisclosed sum . After the case , LaChapelle said the lawsuit was " not personal , it 's strictly business " , and that " musicians commonly pay to sample music or use someone 's beats and there should be no difference when sampling an artist 's visuals . " In June 2011 , German photographer Philipp Paulus sued Rihanna and her record labels , alleging further copyright violations with regard to a scene in the music video where Rihanna wears an expansive dress and is taped to the wall with a plastic sheet in front of her . According to Paulus , Rihanna and Matsoukas appropriated the image from his photographic series <unk> . 
 = = Live performances and covers = = 
 Rihanna first performed " S & M " at the BRIT Awards on February 15 , 2011 , as part of a medley which incorporated two of her previous singles from Loud , " Only Girl ( In the World ) " and " What 's My Name ? " . Rihanna had planned to perform " S & M " only , to coincide with its release as a single in the United Kingdom , but she was instructed by the BRIT Awards corporation to " tone down the sexual references in the song 's lyrics " . The singer was reported to be angered at being requested to change her act and that she was asked to consider performing a different song instead . She changed the arrangement because the BRIT Awards corporation wanted to avoid complaints similar to those received following the finale of the seventh series of The X Factor , on December 11 , 2010 . Rihanna was criticized for wearing a provocative outfit and for performing a suggestive dance routine on The X Factor , branded as " disgusting " , before the watershed , a system in the United Kingdom which does not allow adult content to be broadcast before 9 pm . 
 Rihanna opened the Billboard Music Awards with a performance of the " S & M " remix with Spears on May 22 , 2011 , at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas . Rihanna and Spears wore bondage @-@ style bodysuits ; Rihanna 's outfit was white , and she wore PVC thigh @-@ high boots . Spears wore a black outfit , a mask and rabbit ears ; both singers wore handcuffs . Rihanna began the performance seated and provocatively opened her legs as she simulated whipping sounds . The singers closed the performance with pole dancing , a pillow fight and a kiss on the cheek . Billboard magazine declared the performance as one of the 15 Awesome Performances at the Billboard Music Awards . Rihanna performed " S & M " on May 27 , 2011 , on NBC 's Today show 's " Summer Concert Series " , along with " Only Girl ( in the World ) " , " What 's My Name ? " and " California King Bed " . She gave an interview about the album and about her controversial performance at the Billboard Music Awards with Spears . When Rihanna was asked if she was surprised at the controversial reaction the performance prompted , she responded : 
 It was cool . Nothing popped out . We didn 't make out . I mean , I didn 't really hear [ that it was controversial ] , but I went up to Twitter to see what my fans thought about it and they were really enjoyed seeing [ me and Britney Spears ] up there together , so I mean , there will be some people who will think that that was too sexy but you 're always gonna find that , you know . People will always talk whether you 're doing bad or good . You just have to do you . " 
 The song was included on the set list of the Loud Tour , which began with the stage decorated as a stylized S & M set . The singer performed Prince 's " Darling Nikki " with three semi @-@ nude female dancers whom she spanked , groped and pretended to smack with a cane . " Darling Nikki " then transitioned into " S & M " and she took off her white tuxedo , revealing a white bondage corset and handcuffs . " S & M " was featured on the set list of Spears ' Femme Fatale Tour ( 2011 ) , as part of a medley with " ... Baby One More Time " . Rihanna performed " S & M " at Radio 1 's Hackney Weekend on May 24 , 2012 , as the third song on the set list . The song was included on most of Rihanna 's 777 Tour in November 2012 ; a seven @-@ date and seven @-@ day @-@ long promotional tour in support of the release of her seventh studio album , Unapologetic . 
 In 2011 , " S & M " was featured at the beginning of the seventeenth episode of the American police procedural drama TV series , Hawaii Five @-@ 0 . Lee Latchford @-@ Evans of the British group Steps covered the song as part of a medley with Maroon 5 and Christina Aguilera 's song " Moves like Jagger " in his solo section of The Ultimate Tour ( 2012 ) . In the 2012 musical comedy film Pitch Perfect , " S & M " was sung a cappella by Ester Dean , Alexis Knapp , Anna Kendrick , Rebel Wilson , Anna Camp and Brittany Snow . The ensemble 's performance of the song appears on the film 's soundtrack as part of a medley , " Riff Off " . " Riff Off " was released as a single in 2012 and reached number 86 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart . The soundtrack also became the number one album on the US Top Soundtracks . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Loud , Def Jam Recordings , SRP Records . 
 Management 
 ASCAP / BMI 
 Stargate and Miles Walker both appear on behalf of 45th & 3rd Music LLC 
 Stargate 's management : Tim Blacksmith and Danny D. 
 Sandy Vee appears on behalf of Empire Artist Management 
 Kuk Harrell appears on behalf of Suga <unk> Music , Inc . 
 Recording locations 
 Music recording – Roc the Mic Studios ( New York ) ; Westlake Recording Studios ( Los Angeles ) ; The Bunker Studios ( Paris ) 
 Mixing – The Bunker Studios ( Paris ) ; The Ninja Beat Club ( Atlanta ) 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Radio and release history = = 
 = Major League Baseball ( video game ) = 
 Major League Baseball is a sports video game released in 1988 for the Nintendo Entertainment System . It is notable for being one of the first video games licensed by Major League Baseball , although it was not endorsed by the Major League Baseball Players Association . Without the backing of the Players Association , the game could not name the actual players , although it was able to use their numbers , thus accurately portraying the contemporary teams and their rosters . In doing so , it became the first baseball game for the Nintendo Entertainment System to carry official Major League Baseball licensing and lineups . 
 Major League Baseball was developed by Atlus and published by LJN . It featured many facets of realistic gameplay and a focus on managerial details , which stressed the importance of choosing a well @-@ balanced team . Despite its graphical limitations , it was considered a three @-@ dimensional game at the time and was featured in the first issue of Nintendo Power as compared the system 's other baseball games of the era . 
 = = Development = = 
 Prior to 1988 there had been two games released with the official endorsement of Major League Baseball . In 1980 Mattel Electronics released Major League Baseball ( also known as Super Challenge Baseball and Big League Baseball ) for the Atari 2600 and the Intellivision . This version was developed by <unk> Technological Consulting . Four years later MicroLeague was licensed to develop and publish MicroLeague Baseball for the Amiga , Atari ST , Commodore 64 , and PC . This version contained contemporary and classic teams and players and MicroLeague released extra disks that featured additional lineups . 
 In 1988 Atlus signed on to develop an " official " Major League Baseball game for the Nintendo Entertainment System , which would be a first for that particular console . In 1987 Tengen had released R.B.I. Baseball for the NES , which contained a Major League Baseball Players Association license , but no endorsement from Major League Baseball itself . This meant that , while the players were named in this version , the team names and logos were absent and replaced by generic place references such as Boston or St. Louis . An earlier version for the console , entitled Baseball was released in 1985 and contained no endorsement from either organization . American company LJN agreed to be the publisher and David Rolfe was brought on board as the game 's programmer . Rolfe had previously been a publisher with Activision and had been a chief contributor to the foundations of the Intellivision . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Officially licensed by Major League Baseball , the game features all twenty @-@ six teams that existed in 1987 . Additionally , the lineups and the player numbers are accurate to the team rosters that year . Since the game did not have the endorsement of the Major League Baseball Players Association at the time , the team members are only listed by number , not name . In addition to their numbers the players are represented by their statistics , abilities , throwing arm , and even placement in the batting order . 1988 's Major League Baseball was therefore the first NES game to be officially endorsed by Major League Baseball and to feature accurate contemporary lineups , albeit without the actual player names attached to their numbers . 
 Managerial decisions are a focus and game players are allowed to select their own lineups , although the game lacks Sabermetrics statistics due to the limitations of the era . Instead , the " manager " must make their decisions based on data such as player 's average and home run totals . They also have the ability to change and decide who will be a pinch @-@ hitter and who will be a substitute pitcher . One is even allowed to pick out a designated hitter . The game prohibits one from putting out more team members in a certain part of the field than would normally be allowed , which makes deciding which player will be used where a part of the experience . 
 There are three modes that can be played with teams from either the American League or the National League : regular season games , All @-@ star games or the World Series ( interleague ) . The World Series rounds , however , are only one match each , which is not accurate to the real World Series . Due to the licensing , the teams even appear complete in their official uniforms and colours and also have all the options that a real baseball player would have , including bunting , pitching out , base stealing and throwing errors . 
 = = = Gameplay limitations = = = 
 In Major League Baseball , the pitcher is unable to move around the pitcher 's mound and many are also able to perform the feat of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) pitches . The ball 's physics have been called into question , with the ball stopping on a dime after three or less bounces . The game 's camera system does not function properly and , when a ball is hit , the outfield camera follows the ball looking upwards , making it impossible for the game player to see where their fielders are . The ball can also be thrown and get stuck in the well between the stands and the field on an overthrow of a baseman , and cause inside the park home runs , which would not happen within a real game ( in that case a ground rule double and / or error would be scored instead ) . Another bug allows players to go into the stands past the wall with the ball if they enter at certain points in foul territory . 
 There are also gameplay issues when the player takes their turn to bat . The AI is not developed and , when the player hits a pitch , it nearly always takes the longest possible route to the ball , making runs easier to score . It also lacks the capability to throw out a runner who is returning to a base ( instead of advancing ) or perform a double play after catching a fly ball . Furthermore , the batter can only move vertically , not horizontally , in the batter 's box . 
 = = Technology = = 
 = = = Graphics = = = 
 The graphics themselves were considered to be three @-@ dimensional given the constraints of the technology at the time . All the players are Caucasian and each one 's batting stance is exactly the same . The game view is always top down ; when batting or pitching , it is centered above the catcher , behind the batter and with an overhead look of the pitcher . In the outfield , there is an aerial view of a portion of the field , with the team members represented by tiny sprites and an inset with red dots representing where the players are on base . Although the official colors are intact , the actual symbols on their uniforms are absent . The crowd is represented by a series of colored dots . 
 = = = Music and sound effects = = = 
 There are a limited number of effects and , aside from brief ballpark jingles , there is no real background music present during the game . For example , the charge fanfare is played at random points and the introductory screen begins with a different baseball tune while the player is loading up and selecting his team , along with a home run fanfare . Generic sound effects include the bat cracking upon contact with the ball , the sound of the ball flying through the air during a pitch , bouncing and throwing effects , and a stream of crowd noises . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Major League Baseball was featured in the first issue of Nintendo Power and compared to R.B.I. Baseball and Bases Loaded , although the magazine did not pass any judgment on which game was superior . Allgame 's review of Major League Baseball rated it three stars out of five , the same rating it gave to R.B.I. Baseball and half a star lower than it awarded to Bases Loaded . 
 = 2001 American Memorial = 
 The 2001 American Memorial was a Championship Auto Racing Teams ( CART ) motor race held on September 15 , 2001 , at the EuroSpeedway <unk> in <unk> , Germany . It was the 16th round of the 2001 CART season and the first race in the series to be held in Europe . Originally known as the German 500 , the race 's name was changed by CART in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks . Kenny Bräck won the race for Team Rahal ; his teammate Max Papis finished in second place , and Patrick Carpentier was third . 
 The season points leader entering the race , Gil de Ferran , was awarded the pole position when qualifying was cancelled after a practice session was rained out . Bräck took the lead early in the race , and built a seven @-@ second advantage before going off course while trying to lap another car . Carpentier took his place after the lap 64 incident , and held the lead until Tony Kanaan passed him on lap 95 . After passing Carpentier for second , Alex Zanardi moved ahead of Kanaan after a series of pit stops between laps 121 to 123 . Zanardi held the top spot entering his final scheduled pit stop with 12 laps remaining . 
 Upon leaving the pits , Zanardi lost control of his car , which turned sideways onto the circuit . Alex Tagliani crashed into Zanardi 's car , splitting the chassis into two pieces . The crash led to the amputation of both of Zanardi 's legs . The rest of the race was run under a caution flag , and Bräck , who had moved into second place before Zanardi 's pit stop , secured the victory . Zanardi and Tagliani were taken to a Berlin hospital ; Zanardi had a fractured pelvis and a concussion in addition to his amputations , while Tagliani was not severely injured . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The German 500 was the first CART race ever to be held in Europe . It was the beginning of a two @-@ week European stretch for the series ; the Rockingham 500 was held at Rockingham Motor Speedway in Corby , England one week later . EuroSpeedway chairman Hans <unk> Fischer hoped for a crowd of 70 @,@ 000 at the track , which had a capacity of 90 @,@ 000 . 
 Entering the German 500 , Gil de Ferran held the lead in the season 's points standings with 115 points . Bräck and Hélio Castroneves were joint second on 110 points , and Michael Andretti was fourth , seven points further back . 
 Four days before the race , the September 11 attacks took place , causing most major American sporting events scheduled on the same weekend as the German 500 to be postponed , including National Football League ( NFL ) and Major League Baseball games , and a NASCAR Winston Cup Series race , the New Hampshire 300 , at New Hampshire Motor Speedway . The Italian Grand Prix , a Formula One race , was held that weekend . According to Ronald Richards , the vice president of CART , the series decided to continue with the race prior to the cancellation of that week 's NFL games , a decision followed by other American leagues . Richards acknowledged that " We wish we would have had the input regarding the NFL 's decision prior to making our decision . " 
 In remembrance of the September 11 attacks ' victims , and in a desire to avoid criticism for holding the German 500 so soon afterward , CART changed the race 's name to the American Memorial . The series also held tributes on the day of the race , and made a $ 500 @,@ 000 donation to the World Trade Center Relief Fund , matching the event 's prize fund . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 The first day of practice for the American Memorial was scheduled on September 13 , but was cancelled because of rain . Practice was held the following day , and Tony Kanaan of Mo Nunn Racing recorded the fastest lap of 34 @.@ 624 seconds . Teammate Zanardi had a lap of 34 @.@ 991 seconds for the second @-@ fastest time ; he was followed by Carpentier , Bräck , and Bruno Junqueira . 
 As of September 13 , Andretti was unable to travel to Germany from his Nazareth , Pennsylvania residence , since his planned September 11 flight had been grounded . Andretti was able to arrange a charter flight to Germany and landed in Dresden the next day . 
 Due to the rainout and the racers ' lack of familiarity with the EuroSpeedway , CART cancelled qualifying for the American Memorial . The starting grid was determined by drivers ' order in the season points standings . The pole position went to de Ferran , though due to the lack of qualifying , he was not awarded a point in the standings as was customary for pole winners . Bräck earned second position since he held a tie @-@ breaker over Castroneves , who started third , and Andretti began the race in fourth . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 On race day , a 30 @-@ minute warm @-@ up session was held before the event began ; Kanaan again posted the fastest time ( 35 @.@ 288 ) , followed by Zanardi and Paul Tracy . The 154 @-@ lap race began at 1 : 56 p.m. local time ; Bräck immediately took the lead , and Andretti went into second coming out of the first turn . They remained the top two in lap 20 , with Dario Franchitti in third . Six laps later , Andretti passed Franchitti to reclaim second when the latter was unable to pass a slower car . Drivers near the lead begin making their first round of pit stops on lap 35 , and continued doing so through lap 40 . By lap 60 , Bräck had built a lead of more than seven seconds . Carpentier had moved into second place , and Andretti , Tagliani , and Franchitti rounded out the top five . Bräck relinquished his lead on lap 64 , when he went off course while attempting to lap Junqueira . The first caution flag of the day came out , but not before Carpentier took the lead as Bräck regained control of his car and re @-@ entered the track in second place . Pit stops took place during the caution , with Carpentier , Bräck , and Andretti still in the top three positions . 
 Green flag racing resumed on lap 70 , and Kanaan began moving toward the front of the field ; he passed Andretti for third place on lap 73 , and took second from Bräck four laps later . The second caution of the race occurred on lap 80 , when Junqueira and Tora Takagi collided ; <unk> spun off the track , but was able to continue . Andretti and Franchitti pitted during the caution , and the green flag came out on lap 85 . Kanaan passed Carpentier on lap 95 , and Zanardi went into second shortly afterward , as Carpentier tried conserving fuel to complete the race with one fewer pit stop than the other contenders . Kanaan , Zanardi , and Bräck pitted from laps 105 to 113 , and Andretti inherited the lead . Franchitti suffered a " mechanical problem " on lap 116 , becoming the first driver to retire from the race . More pit stops occurred from laps 121 to 123 , and Zanardi claimed the lead over Kanaan . The two contested the lead , and Kanaan was two @-@ tenths of a second behind Zanardi when he pitted for the final time on lap 141 . Bräck moved up to second , and was followed by Carpentier and Tagliani . 
 Zanardi went onto pit road for his last stop on lap 142 . When attempting to re @-@ enter the track , " he seemed to accelerate too early " , according to the Associated Press ' recap . Zanardi could not control his vehicle 's rear end , and the car slid sideways onto the track , after having gone through grass . After Carpentier veered up the track to narrowly miss Zanardi 's car , Tagliani drove straight into it at an estimated speed of 200 miles per hour . The impact split Zanardi 's chassis into two pieces and littered the circuit with debris . The drivers were taken by airlift to the Klinikum Berlin @-@ Marzahn hospital . Following the accident , the last 12 laps were run under a caution flag . There was one further retirement , on lap 153 ; Christian Fittipaldi pitted due to a fire in the back of his car and dropped out . Bräck won the race , finishing ahead of Papis and Carpentier , who were second and third respectively . Andretti took fourth place , followed by Oriol Servia in fifth , Takagi in sixth , and Kanaan in seventh . De Ferran , Scott Dixon , and Tracy rounded out the top ten . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 According to CART physician Dr. Steve <unk> , Zanardi 's diagnosis when he left the track was " extremely critical " . His life had been endangered by the crash ; last rites were given to him afterward . Upon arriving at Klinikum Berlin @-@ Marzahn , Zanardi underwent a three @-@ hour operation in which his legs were both amputated above his knees . He also fractured his pelvis and suffered a concussion , and lost over 75 percent of his blood . Tagliani had a sore back as a result of the accident , and was released from the hospital after one day . On September 17 , one of Zanardi 's doctors said that his life was not in danger , although he had been placed under an induced coma in an attempt to prevent trauma shock . Doctors took Zanardi off the coma three days later , and left Klinikum Berlin @-@ Marzahn on October 30 . 
 Johnny Herbert , who had previously been Zanardi 's teammate in Formula One , said of the incident , " It 's a big shock to everybody . You have accidents , yes , but you don 't expect something this gruesome . " Laz Denes , a spokesman for Zanardi 's Mo Nunn Racing team , said the impact was " immense , almost harder than anything I 've ever seen . " According to Denes , the point of contact " was about 12 inches past the cockpit , " and he called Zanardi 's survival a " miracle " . Tagliani commented several days after the crash that Zanardi was constantly in his thoughts . During his hospital stay , Zanardi contacted Tagliani and told him that he was not at fault . 
 With his victory , Bräck claimed the lead in the points competition ; with five races left in the season , he had 131 points . De Ferran was in second , 11 points behind Bräck , and Andretti was five points further back . 
 In 2002 , the German 500 was not held after the EuroSpeedway filed for insolvency . The race returned to EuroSpeedway the following year , as did Zanardi , who ran 13 laps to represent those that he never completed in 2001 . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Standings after the race = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for the drivers ' standings . 
 = Code of Honor ( Star Trek : The Next Generation ) = 
 " Code of Honor " is the fourth episode of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation , originally aired on October 12 , 1987 , in broadcast syndication . The episode was written by Katharyn Powers and Michael Baron , and was directed by Russ Mayberry . Mayberry was replaced part way through the filming of the episode with first assistant director Les Landau . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the crew of the Starfleet starship Enterprise @-@ D. In this episode , while the ship is visiting the planet Ligon II to retrieve a vaccine , crewman Tasha Yar ( Denise Crosby ) is abducted by the leader of the Ligonians . The race abide by a strict code of honor , and their leader seeks to use Yar as a pawn to increase his own personal power . 
 Powers and Baron pitched a story based on a reptilian race following a code of honor similar to the bushido code of the Samurai . This was developed into the final story , which was described as having a " 1940s tribal Africa " theme by staff writer Tracy Tormé . The episode wasn 't well received amongst the cast and crew , but Maurice Hurley thought that the basic premise held promise . The episode was received negatively by reviewers after the series ending , including being described by one as " quite possibly the worst piece of Star Trek ever made " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Enterprise arrives at the planet Ligon II to acquire a vaccine needed to combat an outbreak of <unk> fever on <unk> IV . The crew , possessing little information on the <unk> culture , finds it follows strict customs of status similar to ancient Africa . Specifically , while the men in their culture rule society , the land itself is controlled by the women . Lutan ( Jessie Lawrence Ferguson ) , the <unk> leader , transports up to the Enterprise to provide a sample of the vaccine , and is impressed by Lt. Tasha Yar 's status as head of security . Yar further demonstrates her aikido skills against a holographic opponent for Lutan on the holodeck . After a tour of the ship , Lutan and the Ligonians abduct Yar as they transport back to the surface . Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) demands that Lutan return Yar , considering the kidnapping an act of war , but receives no response from the planet . After consultation with his officers , Picard determines that Lutan took Yar in a " counting coup " as a show of heroism . Picard contacts Lutan in a more peaceful manner , who grants permission for the Enterprise crew to beam down to the planet and promises to return Yar after a banquet in his honor . 
 Lutan announces at the banquet that he wishes to make Yar his " First one " , surprising not only the Enterprise crew but also Yareena ( Karole Selmon ) who was already Lutan 's " First one . " Yareena challenges Yar to a fight to the death to claim back the position . When Picard objects to the fight , Lutan refuses to give the Enterprise the rest of the vaccine unless Yar participates . The crew investigates the combat ritual and find that the weapons used are coated with a lethal poison , and also that it is Yareena 's wealth to which Lutan owes his position . Picard prepares to have Yar beamed to the Enterprise should she be harmed in the battle . As the match progresses , both Yareena and Yar are equally skilled , but Yar eventually lands a strike on Yareena . Yar quickly covers Yareena and orders the transport of both of them to the Enterprise against the demands of Lutan . Aboard the ship , Dr. Beverly Crusher ( Gates McFadden ) reaches Yareena moments after death , but is able to counteract the poison and revive the woman 's body . When Lutan demands to know the fate of Yareena , Crusher reveals that Yareena died , thus ceding the match to Yar and breaking the " first one " bond . Yareena is now free to select a new mate ; she chooses <unk> ( James Louis Watkins ) , one of Lutan 's bodyguards , and effectively strips Lutan of his position of power . <unk> lets Yar go and gives the Enterprise their full supply of vaccine . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writer Katharyn Powers was invited to pitch a story for The Next Generation as she was friends with Star Trek writer D. C. Fontana . Alongside her writing partner Michael Baron , Powers pitched a story involving a reptilian race called the " <unk> " who followed a code of honor similar to that of the samurai . However , the script and the aliens went through several changes before making it to the screen . Powers would go on to write the Season 1 episode " Emancipation " for Stargate SG @-@ 1 , which held similar themes to " Code of Honor " . The African theme of the episode was brought in by director Russ Mayberry , who had the Ligonians race cast entirely from African @-@ American actors . Mayberry was fired during production by the show 's creator Gene Roddenberry , and First Assistant Director Les Landau completed the episode . Star Trek novel author Keith DeCandido later recalled that this was because of the casting itself , while cast member Wil Wheaton ( Wesley Crusher ) thought that it was because Mayberry was racist towards the guest stars after they were cast . 
 Staff writer Tracy Tormé was not pleased with the " 1940s tribal Africa " theme of the aliens , and because the combat scene towards the end of the episode resembled the Kirk versus Spock fight in The Original Series episode " Amok Time " . Fellow Star Trek writer Maurice Hurley said that it was " a good idea , but the execution just fell apart . Again , if you take that script and if the actors had been told to give it a different twist , that show would have been different . But it became too baroque and fell apart . But the concept of having a guy say ' I have to have somebody kill my wife and this is the person ' is a good idea . " Some of the cast , including Jonathan Frakes , sought to prevent the episode from being re @-@ aired . In an interview with Entertainment Weekly in 2012 , Patrick Stewart agreed with fans that considered the season 2 episode " The Measure of a Man " to be " the first truly great episode of the series " , stating that the first season " had several quite weak episodes " ; referring to " Code of Honor " in particular he said , " I can think of one very early on that involved a race of black aliens that we all felt quite embarrassed about . " 
 The episode also saw the first appearance of the black and yellow grid structure of the empty holodeck . However , the interface unit used by Yar , which resembled a corded phone , was not seen again , with crew members using vocal commands to program the holodeck in future episodes . Captain Picard showed pride in his French heritage in this episode . This character quirk was only repeated in the following episode " The Last Outpost " before being removed from the character . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Code of Honor " aired in broadcast syndication during the week commencing October 17 , 1987 . It received Nielsen ratings of 9 @.@ 5 , reflecting the percentage of all households watching the episode during its timeslot . This was the lower than ratings received by the two episodes preceding it , but higher than the 8 @.@ 9 received by the following episode , " The Last Outpost " . 
 Several reviewers re @-@ watched the episode following the end of the series . Cast member Wil Wheaton reviewed it in April 2008 for AOL TV . He couldn 't remember actually appearing in the episode , and it was the first time since it was originally broadcast that he had seen it . He said that it wasn 't good , but that it was " not as overtly racist as I recalled . I mean , it 's certainly not as racist as " Angel One " is sexist , and if the Ligonians hadn 't been arbitrarily determined to be entirely African American , it wouldn 't have even been an issue . " He said that the episode is an example of the type of episodes in the first season that would have resulted in the show being cancelled mid @-@ season if it hadn 't been so well supported by the fans and run directly into syndication . James Hunt , whilst writing for Den of Geek , differed from Wheaton 's assessment and asserted that the episode was racist . He said that " this isn 't just bad television , it 's openly offensive , and it seems to do its best effort to undo some of the most important lessons the original series imparted some 25 years after we 're supposed to have learned them . " Overall , he said that this was " quite possibly the worst piece of Star Trek ever made " . 
 Zack Handlen reviewed the episode for The A.V. Club in April 2010 . He said that the aliens in the episode were " one note " , and overall " Code of Honor " didn 't generate any emotional investment . He gave the episode a score of C − , summing it up as " I 'm not sure I 'd believe a great show could come out of TNG after watching ' Code ' , but I could at least say it had promise without sounding like a complete tool . " Keith DeCandido watched " Code of Honor " for Tor.com in May 2011 . He thought the episode was riddled with clichés , and says that the episode only seems racist because of the casting even though the script didn 't call for it . " If the Ligonians had been played by white people , none of the dialogue would change , and nobody would call it racist " , he said and gave it a score of two out of ten . Michelle Erica Green of TrekNation thought the episode was very slowly paced , and that the fight scene at the end was " clunky and awkward " , suggesting that this had something to do with the opposition of the cast and crew to the episode overall . She thought there were several plot holes , including why sickbay couldn 't replicate the vaccine , and that the only redeeming quality of the episode was the beginning of the friendship between Data and La Forge . 
 Jamahl Epsicokhan on his website " Jammer 's Reviews " , gave the episode half a star out of four , describing it as " absolutely terrible " . He thought that it represented a story closer to that of The Original Series saying , " It employs every cliche in the TOS rulebook , including goofy alien customs , a hand @-@ to @-@ hand fight to the death , clever captain trickery , and silly gender roles played stupidly . The fight to the death is particularly inept ; stunt sequences have rarely looked so cheesy . One of Trek 's worst episodes . " 
 = = Home media release = = 
 The first home media release of " Code of Honor " was on VHS cassette was on September 5 , 1991 in the United States and Canada . The episode was later included on the Star Trek : The Next Generation season one DVD box set , released in March 2002 , and was released as part of the season one Blu @-@ ray set on July 24 , 2012 . 
 = Eric McCormack = 
 Eric James McCormack ( born April 18 , 1963 ) is a Canadian @-@ American actor , musician , and writer . Born in Toronto , he began his acting career performing in high school plays . He left Ryerson University in 1985 to accept a position with the Stratford Shakespeare Festival , where he spent five years performing in numerous play productions . 
 For much of the late 1990s , he lived in Los Angeles and had minor roles . He made his feature film debut in the 1992 science @-@ fiction adventure film The Lost World . McCormack appeared in several television series , including Top Cops , Street Justice , Lonesome Dove : The Series , <unk> , and Ally McBeal . McCormack later gained worldwide recognition for playing Will Truman in the American sitcom Will & Grace , which premiered in September 1998 . His performance earned him a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series in 2001 . 
 Aside from appearing in television , he made his Broadway debut in the 2001 production of The Music Man and starred in the 2005 film The Sisters . Following the series conclusion of Will & Grace in 2006 , McCormack starred as the leading role in the New York production of Some Girl ( s ) . He starred in the television miniseries The Andromeda Strain ( 2008 ) and returned to television in 2009 in the TNT drama Trust Me , which was cancelled after one season . Also in 2009 , McCormack was cast in the science @-@ fiction movie Alien Trespass . In addition , he starred as Dr. Daniel Pierce for three seasons of the TNT crime drama Perception , and provided the voice of " Lucky " on The Hub 's Pound Puppies . 
 = = Early life = = 
 McCormack was born in Toronto , Ontario , Canada , the son of Doris ( 1932 @-@ 2006 ) , a homemaker , and Keith McCormack , an oil company financial analyst . He is the oldest of three siblings . McCormack has Scottish ancestry . McCormack states while he was growing up , he was shy and did not play sports . McCormack attended Stephen Leacock Collegiate Institute High School in Scarborough , Ontario . There , he enrolled in theatre and performed in high school productions of Godspell and Pippin , and decided to pursue a career in acting . McCormack recalls after performing in Godspell , his feelings towards becoming an actor solidified . " ... I remember after the first performance of that ... I knew where to fit in . That was the beginning of my life as an actor . It changed me in that the concept of any other options disappeared . From that moment there was no question . I knew exactly what I was going to do . I 'm lucky that way . " He admits that he never felt cool growing up . " I was a bit of an outsider , but I discovered theatre very early on , which got me through . " He then transferred to Sir John A. Macdonald Collegiate Institute in Scarborough , where he went to school with David Furnish . He graduated in 1982 . 
 McCormack enrolled at Ryerson University School of Theatre in Toronto to further improve his acting . He left Ryerson in 1985 , several months before graduating , to accept a position with the Stratford Shakespeare Festival in Stratford , Ontario , where he spent five seasons performing . " It was all I wanted , to be a classical actor for the rest of my life , but during the last couple of years I was there , I started to realise that it wasn 't for me . Perhaps I didn 't have to give my Hamlet before I died , that the world might be an OK place without my Hamlet , in fact . " McCormack appeared in the productions A Midsummer Night 's Dream , Henry V , Murder in the Cathedral and Three Sisters . McCormack later performed with the Manitoba Theatre Centre in a production of Burn This , as well as with Toronto 's Royal Alexandra Theatre in Biloxi Blues . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early work = = = 
 McCormack made his Canadian television debut in the 1986 movie The Boys from Syracuse . McCormack moved to Los Angeles , California , and made his US television debut in a 1991 episode of the CBS crime series Top Cops . He appeared in the 1992 theatrical film The Lost World , based on Conan Doyle 's novel of the same name and starred in The Lost World sequel , Return to the Lost World , also released in 1992 . By 1993 , he landed a recurring role as a detective in the crime drama Street Justice . Also in 1993 , McCormack appeared in the television movie Double , Double , Toil and Trouble , playing Mary @-@ Kate and Ashley Olsen 's father . 
 He played the role of Colonel Francis Clay Mosby in 42 episodes of the Western television series Lonesome Dove : The Series ( 1994 ) and Lonesome Dove : The Outlaw Years ( 1995 ) . McCormack commented that it was a " fantastic role " . In an interview with The Guardian in 2003 , McCormack admitted to auditioning " two or three times " for the part of Ross Geller , which ultimately went to David Schwimmer , for the situation comedy Friends . In 1995 , he appeared in the television film The Man Who Wouldn 't Die . He was cast in the 1997 made @-@ for @-@ television movie Borrowed Hearts , where he portrayed a selfish businessman who learns to love , and in the HBO film Exception to the Rule , in which he played a cheating husband . 
 Also in 1997 , he had minor roles in the comedy shows <unk> , Veronica 's Closet , and Ally McBeal . Originally , McCormack was scheduled to appear as a series regular in the NBC sitcom Jenny , but was fired after the pilot due to the network cutting his character . 
 = = = Will & Grace = = = 
 McCormack received his break @-@ through role in 1998 when he was cast as gay lawyer Will Truman on the NBC sitcom Will & Grace . McCormack said that when the part came along , he was convinced he was right for the role . " At the end of the audition , Max Mutchnick , co @-@ creator and executive producer of the show ] said ' That was perfect . Just to let you know , you never have to be more gay than that . ' " He explained that when he first read the script , " what hit me immediately was that this was me . I mean , sexual orientation aside , Will was so much like me . He 's a great host , he 's relatively funny and he has great friends and he 's a good friend to them ... the gay issue just wasn 't really a big thing . " The show debuted on September 21 , 1998 and was watched by almost 8 @.@ 6 million American viewers . Will & Grace quickly developed a loyal audience , with the show and McCormack receiving strong reviews . John Carman of the San Francisco Chronicle commented that McCormack and costar Debra Messing ( who played Will 's best friend Grace Adler ) worked " nicely " together . Kay McFadden of The Seattle Times also praised McCormack , Messing , and the supporting cast as " very funny " . For this performance , he earned four Emmy Award nominations ( 2000 , 2001 , 2003 , 2005 ) , one of which resulted in a win ( 2001 ) , for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series . In addition , he received five Golden Globe Award nominations . 
 Also in 1998 , McCormack appeared in Stephen <unk> 's comedy film Holy Man . The film was critically and financially unsuccessful . The following year he starred in the comedy movie Free Enterprise ( 1999 ) , a movie about two filmmakers ( McCormack and Rafer Weigel ) obsessed with actor William Shatner and Star Trek . Film critic Kevin Thomas of the Los Angeles Times wrote that McCormack and Weigel " both make a strong impression " . In 2000 , McCormack appeared in the ABC television movie The Audrey Hepburn Story , portraying actor Mel Ferrer . 
 During the 2001 Broadway season , McCormack briefly portrayed Professor Harold Hill ( replacing Craig Bierko ) in the Susan Stroman revival of The Music Man at the Neil Simon Theatre . In August 2002 , as part of the Hollywood Bowl 's summer concert series , he reprised the role of Harold Hill for a one @-@ night only appearance in which he and other actors recreated the songs from the production . McCormack hosted the fourth episode of the 28th season of the sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live on November 2 , 2002 . In 2004 , he had a recurring role as Ray Summers on Showtime 's comedy drama Dead Like Me . The following year , McCormack starred in the film The Sisters , based on Anton Chekhov 's play Three Sisters . The film premiered at the 2005 Tribeca Film Festival . 
 Will & Grace 's eighth and final season ended with the series finale on May 18 , 2006 . The finale garnered 18 million American viewers , making it the most @-@ watched entertainment telecast in six years . 
 = = = After Will & Grace = = = 
 Following the end of Will & Grace , McCormack starred on the New York stage opposite Fran Drescher , Judy Reyes , Brooke Smith , and Maura Tierney , in Neil LaBute 's Off Broadway play Some Girl ( s ) at the Lucille Lortel Theatre . He plays a writer who is ready to settle down and marry , but decides to visit four ex @-@ girlfriends first . For his performance , McCormack received critical reviews . New York Times contributor Ben Brantley , in review of the production , wrote : " Playing a thoughtless , woman @-@ despising heterosexual , Mr. McCormack isn 't much different from when he was playing a thoughtful , woman @-@ worshiping homosexual . As in Will & Grace , he <unk> every other line for maximum comic spin and punctuates his dialogue by earnestly furrowing his features " . Brantley went on to say that McCormack 's interpretation of the character is " certainly a more slickly sustained performance " than the one delivered by David Schwimmer in 2005 . Melissa Rose Bernardo of Entertainment Weekly commented that McCormack and Maura Tierney " have incredible chemistry " . 
 In the same year , McCormack produced the Lifetime comedy Lovespring International , a show that revolves around six employees at Lovespring International , a dating agency located in California as an " elite Beverly Hills " company . The series debuted to ambivalent reviews , with Matthew Gilbert of The Boston Globe commenting that Lovespring International is " a lively little cable exercise in over @-@ the @-@ top characters , bad taste , satire , and political incorrectness . " The show was cancelled that same year . 
 In 2008 , McCormack co @-@ starred in the A & E television miniseries The Andromeda Strain , a remake of the 1971 movie based on the novel by Michael Crichton . In the miniseries , he played Jack Nash , a television reporter who battles an addiction to cocaine . The Andromeda Strain received mixed reviews , and McCormack 's performance was criticized . Joanna Weiss of the Boston Globe wrote , " The presence of Eric McCormack , as an intrepid TV reporter , is especially extraneous ( no disrespect to intrepid reporters ) . " Robert Bianco of USA Today commented , " The central cast is completed by ... poor Eric McCormack as a crusading , coke @-@ addicted journalist who spends the second half of the movie playing Rambo in the desert . Let 's just say McCormack does the best he can with what he 's given , and leave it at that . " On September 5 , 2008 , McCormack made a guest appearance in the seventh season and 100th episode of the television series Monk , where he played an unctuous host of a television crime docudrama . 
 In January 2009 , McCormack returned to television in the TNT drama Trust Me , co @-@ starring Tom Cavanagh . The series , set around a fictional advertising firm , starred McCormack as Mason McGuire , the firm 's newly promoted creative director , and deals with his best friend 's ( Cavanagh ) unpredictable behavior . In an interview with USA Weekend , McCormack revealed he was not afraid of being typecast . McCormack 's decision to do the show was due to " great writing " . The show debuted on January 26 , 2009 , and was watched by almost 3 @.@ 4 million viewers . Trust Me debuted to very positive reviews , with Tim Goodman of the San Francisco Chronicle writing , " ... the series is surprisingly solid . " Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times wrote that McCormack and Cavanagh " manage to keep their characters sharply defined but low @-@ key . They are opposites but not in an ash @-@ smudged , Windex @-@ wielding Felix and Oscar way . " The series , however , was cancelled after one season , due to poor ratings . 
 McCormack starred in the science @-@ fiction film Alien Trespass ( 2009 ) , in which he played Doctor Ted Lewis , who gets possessed by an alien marshal , <unk> , after he crash @-@ lands on Earth . When asked about his interpretation on the character , McCormack commented that his first instinct was to make Ted Lewis more alien , sounding like Spock . The film was critically and financially unsuccessful . 
 In May 2009 , he portrayed " El Gallo " in Reprise Theatre Company 's revival of the 1960s musical The <unk> at UCLA 's Freud Playhouse . McCormack had a supporting role in Richard Loncraine 's comedy My One and Only , which was released in August 2009 . 
 On September 30 , 2009 , he guest @-@ starred on the police procedural drama Law & Order : Special Victims Unit in the second episode of its 11th season playing an owner of a dating website . In addition , McCormack had a recurring role in season five of the comedy series The New Adventures of Old Christine , in which he played a therapist and love interest for Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus 's character , Christine . 
 McCormack portrayed con artist Clark Rockefeller in the Lifetime television movie Who Is Clark Rockefeller ? , which premiered on March 13 , 2010 . To prepare for the role , he read everything on the case , including coverage of the case and Rockefeller 's jailhouse interview . Who Is Clark Rockefeller ? received mixed reaction , but McCormack 's performance was favored by critics , with Variety 's Brian Lowry concluding , " ... the real kitsch factor resides in Eric McCormack 's performance as the suave charmer , which adds an element of high camp to the proceedings . " 
 In June 2010 , McCormack received the NBC Universal Canada Award of Distinction at the Banff TV Festival . In October 2010 , McCormack received a star on Canada 's Walk of Fame . 
 In October 2010 , it was reported that McCormack would star in a new TNT television drama , Perception , playing a crime @-@ solving neuroscientist named Dr. Daniel Pierce , who works with the federal government to solve cases using his knowledge and imaginative view of the world . Perception premiered on July 9 , 2012 . McCormack also serves as producer for the show . He also provides the voice of " Lucky " on The Hub 's Pound Puppies series , which premiered October 10 , 2010 
 In February 2015 , he guest @-@ starred on an episode of NBC 's The Mysteries of Laura which stars Debra Messing , his former co @-@ star on Will & Grace . 
