 = = Other projects = = 
 McCormack has set up his own production company called Big Cattle Productions to develop ideas for television . The projects produced by the company include Lovespring International and Imperfect Union . In 2003 , it was confirmed that he would write , direct , and star in the romantic comedy What You Wish For . 
 McCormack recorded a song , " The Greatest Discovery " , which was written by Elton John and Bernie Taupin in 1970 , for the 2006 album Unexpected Dreams – Songs From the Stars . He also wrote and sang a song called " Living with Grace " for the 2004 soundtrack to Will & Grace with piano music provided by Barry Manilow . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 McCormack has been married to Janet Leigh Holden , whom he met on the set of Lonesome Dove , since August 1997 . They have a son , Finnigan Holden McCormack , born on July 1 , 2002 , in Los Angeles . McCormack maintains residences in Los Angeles and Vancouver . He became a US citizen in 1999 and holds dual Canadian and US citizenship . 
 McCormack is involved in many Los Angeles and Canadian @-@ based charitable organizations including Project Angel Food . The Wellness Community West Los Angeles Tribute to the Human Spirit Awards dinner presented an award to McCormack for his breast cancer awareness advocacy . He shared with the audience how his comedy helped his mother , Doris McCormack , endure her breast cancer treatments . Doris was honored at the Lifetime 's Breast Cancer Heroes Luncheon in 2004 . He serves as an honorary board member of the Multiple <unk> Research Foundation ( <unk> ) and was given the <unk> Spirit of Hope Award in October 2006 . 
 McCormack sang both the American and Canadian national anthems at the 2004 NHL All @-@ Star game in Minnesota . McCormack is a supporter of same @-@ sex marriage and attended a march in Fresno , California , on May 30 , 2009 , after the Supreme Court of California upheld a ban on same @-@ sex marriage approved by voters in November by ballot Proposition 8 . 
 McCormack identifies as a Democrat . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Pathlight School = 
 Pathlight School is a special school for high @-@ functioning children with autism , located in Ang Mo Kio , Singapore . Founded in 2004 , it is run by the non @-@ profit Autism Resource Centre , and comprises one half of the national educational provision for autistic children . The school coaches students in social and life skills , teaches them mainstream curriculum subjects and prepares them for employment , in an autism friendly environment . With more than 500 pupils enrolled , the school is noted for its achievements in special education in Singapore . 
 = = History = = 
 In 2003 , the Autism Resource Centre ( ARC ) launched a project to provide comprehensive support for autistic Singaporeans , which included plans to set up the first autism @-@ focused special school in Singapore . The ARC collaborated with the Rainbow Centre over a period of five months to renovate the temporary campus , recruit school staff , decide on the school values and develop the school programmes . After opening in 2004 with 10 teachers and 41 students , Pathlight School conducted charity walks , merchandise sales and other events to raise funds for the introduction of more programmes for an expanding intake . In 2007 , two teachers from Pathlight School won the inaugural Most Outstanding Special Education Teacher Award and Most Innovative Special Education Teacher Award , given by the Singaporean Ministry of Education and National Council of Social Service . In 2009 , the Autism Association of Singapore launched a second autism @-@ focused special school , Eden School , and the two schools formed a partnership . The following year , Pathlight School moved to its permanent campus and announced plans to develop student internship programmes , build an information technology centre , and set up a lifelong learning club for alumni . 
 = = Campus = = 
 The permanent campus of Pathlight School at Ang Mo Kio Avenue 10 , which was constructed by W Architects and cost S $ 34 million to build , spans 1 @.@ 6 hectares ( 0 @.@ 016 km2 ; 0 @.@ 0062 sq mi ) . Its facilities include 45 classrooms , four computer labs , three courtyards , an industrial kitchen and a multi @-@ purpose area , as well as special art , music and design rooms . The campus was designed to offer students " dignity " and an autism friendly environment . For example , the walls and floors have a simple colour scheme , to avoid triggering sensory overload , while the taps in the canteen are slightly different from each other to help students learn to adopt less rigid routines . Due to limited facilities , some academic lessons , known as satellite classes , are conducted by Pathlight teachers at nearby mainstream schools , including Chong Boon Secondary School , Pierce Secondary School and Bishan Park Secondary School . In 2014 / 2015 will be introduced Yio Chu Kang Secondary School 
 As of 2012 , they introduced two campuses as Primary 1 to 4 and Vocational Track were in Campus 1 while Primary 5 to 6 and Secondary School were in Campus 2 . 
 In 2013 , Primary 4 was moved to Campus 2 and in 2015 the Primary 3 were moved to Campus 2 and for Secondary School moved to Campus 1 . 
 = = Programmes = = 
 Unlike most special schools in Singapore , which place little emphasis on academics , Pathlight School uses the same academic curriculum as mainstream primary and secondary schools . The sole exception is that mother tongue lessons are replaced with classes covering social and life skills . The school accommodates the needs of students with smaller class sizes , staff trained to handle autistic children , more visual teaching methods , more predictable environments and individual education plans for each student . Satellite classes and special events give students regular opportunities to interact with neurotypical ( non @-@ autistic ) peers from mainstream schools ; exceptional students are allowed to attend classes with mainstream students for some subjects . To prepare students for employment , Pathlight School runs computing courses , a design studio and a cafe staffed by students . The school also produces book compilations of thoughts written by students , conducts exhibitions of student artwork and sells merchandise made by students , to help students develop useful skills , raise funds for the school and raise awareness of autism . In addition , Pathlight School has hosted autism events such as the <unk> Learning Congress 2010 , where over 20 international experts shared their best practices in autism care with about 560 delegates . 
 If you 're taking N or O level , they will have 2 @-@ year programme , which will be taking 2 years in Secondary 4 for Express ( E ) and Normal Technical ( NT ) while Secondary 5 for Normal Academic ( NA ) . We will be breaking up into half on course and will be sitting in the second year . So Express and Normal Technical will be 5 @-@ year course . While Normal Academic will be 6 @-@ year course 
 = = Students = = 
 As of 2010 , Pathlight School had an enrolment of over 500 students , of whom about 40 % had their school fees of S $ 500 subsidised . The school caters to autistic Singaporeans aged six to 18 , who are able to access the mainstream curriculum because they are high @-@ functioning , but would have difficulty learning in a mainstream school . Most students take mainstream national examinations , such as the <unk> and O Levels , with results comparable to students from mainstream schools , and some enter mainstream tertiary institutions . About 10 % of students take a vocational track and may transfer to Eden School , which caters to lower @-@ functioning autistic children and focuses on vocational training . Students from Pathlight School have participated in — and won — national competitions such as the National Youth Business Challenge 2010 . 
 In 2015 , the student enrolment had been upsized to 1 @,@ 000 students which their students had been growing and growing . From 2016 onwards , the Secondary school , Express course had been increased to five years and Normal Academic Course had been increased to six years for better understanding and Normal Technical will stayed the same . 
 = = Management = = 
 Pathlight School is run by the Autism Resource Centre , a non @-@ profit organisation that also offers early intervention , therapy and training for autistic Singaporeans . The school employs 81 staff , including teachers , therapists and autism consultants , and the school board is headed by founder , ARC president and Member of Parliament Denise Phua . Operating costs of the school are paid by the Ministry of Education and National Council of Social Service , while other costs , estimated at S $ 5 million per year , are funded through fees , donations , merchandise sales and fundraising events . Under the partnership between Pathlight School and Eden School , the two schools have a centralised admission system and share various resources ; together , they form the national provision of education for children across the autism spectrum . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 However , since the MRT stations were not near and only passes by , you can take 45 , 55 , 261 and <unk> in both campuses . Except the Townsville Primary School Stop does not serve <unk> . 55 will be accessed to Bishan MRT Station while 261 will be accessed to Ang Mo Kio MRT Station . Since no bus entered to Ang Mo Kio Street 44 for <unk> 2 , they have to walk . 
 = Laundry Service = 
 Laundry Service ( Spanish : Servicio de Lavandería ) is the fifth studio album by Colombian singer @-@ songwriter Shakira , globally released on 13 November 2001 by Epic Records . It is her first album to be primarily recorded in English . After the release of her fourth studio album Dónde Están los Ladrones ? , which became a success in Latin America , Shakira was encouraged by American singer Gloria Estefan to record songs in English as she believed the singer had the potential to crossover into the English @-@ language pop market . Shakira was initially hesitant to undertake the project , but later decided to learn English well enough to be able to write songs in the language herself . The title of the album was chosen to reflect Shakira 's views on love and music . It was also released as Servicio de Lavandería in Hispanic regions in January 2002 . Musically , Laundry Service is primarily a pop rock record but it also experiments with a variety of other musical styles , including Andean music , dance @-@ pop , Middle Eastern music , rock and roll and tango . The lyrical theme of the album is mostly based around love and romance . Every song on the album was written and produced by Shakira . 
 Six singles were released from the album . The lead single " Whenever , Wherever " became an international success and reached number one on record charts of countries like Australia , Austria , France , Germany , Italy and Spain . Follow @-@ up single " Underneath Your Clothes " repeated its success , topping the charts of Australia , Austria , and Belgium . Both singles charted inside the top ten in the United Kingdom and United States . The third single " Objection ( Tango ) " became a top ten hit in most countries around the world . Spanish @-@ language singles " Te Dejo Madrid " and " Que Me Quedes Tú " performed well in Hispanic regions , becoming hits in Spain and on the Latin record charts in the United States , respectively . " The One " was a moderate commercial success and became the last single to be released from Laundry Service . Shakira embarked on the Tour of the Mongoose in 2002 and 2003 to promote the album . It was her first major worldwide tour and visited numerous countries and cities . 
 Upon its release , Laundry Service received favourable to mixed reviews from music critics . Many critics complimented Shakira 's incorporation of different musical styles in the production and her originality , while some critics argued that the album sounded too generic . Shakira 's vocal talent also attracted praise . Laundry Service topped the charts of countries including Australia , Austria , Belgium , Canada and Switzerland , while reaching the top five in other countries like Argentina , France , Germany , Spain and the United Kingdom . In the United States , Laundry Service peaked at number three on the Billboard 200 chart . The album received numerous record certifications in various countries , including quintuple @-@ platinum certifications in Australia , Canada , Spain and Switzerland . It was also certified multi @-@ platinum in the United Kingdom and the United States , proving to be a successful crossover for Shakira . Globally , Laundry Service was the seventh best @-@ selling album in 2002 . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 In 1998 , Shakira released her second major label studio album Dónde Están los Ladrones ? ( Where Are the Thieves ? ) , which became a success in Latin America and received record certifications in various countries like Argentina , Colombia , Chile , Mexico and Spain . The rock en español @-@ influenced latin pop album drew comparisons to the work of Canadian @-@ American singer songwriter Alanis Morissette and " cracked the lucrative US market wide open " , spending a total of 11 weeks atop the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart . It became Shakira 's first album to receive a platinum certification from the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . Dónde Están los Ladrones ? spawned the Arabian @-@ styled single " Ojos Así " ( " Eyes Like Yours " ) , which became a hit and was deemed the " signature track " of the album . 
 The success of Dónde Están los Ladrones ? prompted American singer Gloria Estefan , whose husband Emilio Estefan was managing Shakira at that time , to persuade Shakira to attempt to crossover into the mainstream pop industry . However , Shakira was initially hesitant to record songs in English as it was not her first language , so Estefan offered to translate " Ojos Así " into English in order to show her that " it could translate well . " Shakira then began translating the song herself and showed it to Estefan , who responded " Quite honestly , I can 't do this better ! . " As Shakira wanted to have full control over her recordings , she decided to learn English better to enable her to write her own songs . Wanting to find a method to express her " day @-@ to @-@ day stories in English " , Shakira bought rhyming dictionaries , started analysing the lyrics of songs by Bob Dylan , reading poetry and the work of authors like Leonard Cohen and Walt Whitman and took English lessons from a private tutor . The first song she wrote was " Objection ( Tango ) " and in an interview with <unk> , she revealed that writing songs in English proved to be challenging for her : " I prayed and asked God to send me a good song today , and I remember I started writing the song [ ' Objection ( Tango ) ' ] a couple of hours after . I wrote the music and lyrics at the same time , and when that happens it 's really magical to me . " After completing " Objection ( Tango ) " , Shakira decided to write ten more songs and began setting up portable recording studios in the rural region of Uruguay . She wrote various songs with a " dictionary in one hand and a thesaurus in the other . " Shakira collaborated with various writers and producers on the album including Estefan , Lester Mendez , Luis Fernando Ochoa and Tim Mitchell . Being " more in control than ever " , Shakira closely supervised the development of the album . The singer also served as the primary producer of the album . 
 Shakira 's record label at that time , Epic Records , opposed the decision to release and commission Laundry Service as they " wanted her just to throw a couple of songs in English on a Latin record . " Estefan argued with Tommy Mottola , then head of Sony Music Entertainment ( the parent company of Epic Records ) , and convinced him to release the album , arguing that an " American audience " would not buy a Spanish record simply due to its inclusion of a few English tracks . In an interview with Latina , she said " I got in the trenches there with Tommy [ Mottola ] - I fought for that . Because they didn 't believe it . Just like they told us [ her and Emilio during the Miami Sound Machine days ] . They were trying to think in the box and I wanted to take her out of the box . And fortunately , Tommy , whom I love and adore and is a good friend , he really listened to me . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 Although primarily a pop rock album , Laundry Service also draws influences from a variety of musical genres . The singer credited this to her mixed ethnicity , saying " I am a fusion . That 's my persona . I 'm a fusion between black and white , between pop and rock , between cultures - between my Lebanese father and my mother 's Spanish blood , the Colombian folklore and Arab dance I love and American music . " Arabian and Middle Eastern elements , which had a high influence on Dónde Están los Ladrones ? , are also present in Laundry Service , most prominently on " Eyes Like Yours " ( Ojos Así ) . Musical styles from different South American countries surface on the album . Tango , a style of fast @-@ paced ballroom dance that originated in Argentina , is evident on " Objection ( Tango ) " , which also combines elements of rock and roll . The uptempo track features a guitar solo and a bridge in which Shakira delivers rap @-@ like vocals . " Whenever , Wherever " blends pop rock with Andean music and contains instrumentation from <unk> and the charango - traditional instruments generally associated with the genre . 
 A few songs are also influenced by dance @-@ based genres ; the " feisty " " Rules " is laced with new wave and " Ready for the Good Times " is inspired by disco music . The power ballad " Underneath Your Clothes " has Shakira delivering " racked " vocals and features brass instrumentation influenced by English rock band The Beatles . It contains a melody similar to the one in " Eternal Flame " , a 1989 song by American all @-@ female band The Bangles . Similarly , the tune of " The One " , another power ballad on the album , is similar to that of " Michelle " , a 1965 song by The Beatles . " Fool " and " Poem to a Horse " are more directly influenced by rock music . The former received comparisons to the work of Alanis Morissette while the latter also displays indie elements and contains instrumentation from a soul music @-@ styled horn section and guitar riffs similar to the one present in songs by American grunge band Nirvana . Laundry Service also contains four Spanish tracks : " Que Me Quedes Tú " ( " That You Remain With Me " ) , " Te Dejo Madrid " ( " I Leave You Madrid " ) , " Suerte " ( " Luck " ) and " Te Aviso , Te Anuncio ( Tango ) " ( " I 'm Warning You , I 'm Announcing to You " ) ; the latter two are Spanish translations of " Whenever , Wherever " and " Objection ( Tango ) " , respectively . 
 The lyrics of most songs in Laundry Service are based on issues and themes related to love , as they had been written after Shakira began a relationship Antonio de la Rúa , the son of former Argentine president Fernando de la Rúa . " Underneath Your Clothes " is an " ode " to the positivity one gains when pursuing a relationship with a good person . Shakira shows an " important side " in " The One " , which is a song about how " you love your guy so much that you ’ re actually going to learn to cook " and contains lines like " To buy more thongs and write more happy songs , it always takes a little help from someone . " In " Rules " , she aims to make her lover realise that he is " condemned " to her and lists " all the things your new boy can do . " Songs like " Objection ( Tango ) " and " Fool " also deal with issues related to love but in a different manner . The former is dramatic and humorous in approach as Shakira commands her partner to end a love triangle and choose between her and the other lady ; it was described as a " hell @-@ hath @-@ no @-@ fury it 's @-@ her @-@ or @-@ me steam train . " In the song , Shakira asserts that " Next to her cheap silicon I look minimal / That ’ s why in front of your eyes I 'm invisible " , which a reviewer commented was a " brave statement in these days of suspiciously ripe teenybop flesh peddlers [ sic ] . " " Fool " discusses how Shakira continues to try to build up a relationship with a " shitty [ sic ] , self @-@ absorbed man " even after suffering a " soul @-@ crushing defeat . " 
 = = Release = = 
 The album was globally released on 13 November 2001 in nations including Australia , France , Italy , Switzerland and the United States . In Latin American countries like Mexico , the album was released as Servicio de Lavandería on January 2002 . In the United Kingdom , Laundry Service was released on 11 March 2002 . On 12 November 2002 , a limited edition version of the album entitled Laundry Service : Washed and Dried was released ; this version of the album features three additional remixes and a bonus disc which contains multimedia content related to " Objection ( Tango ) " . 
 Shakira chose to entitle the album " Laundry Service " as she wanted to represent her " two great passions : love and music " , which she compared to soap and water , saying " The reason I named it " Laundry Service " is because I 've spent the year dedicated to my two great passions : love and music . Those two elements are like soap and water . It was a deep cleansing , almost like being reborn . " The artwork of the album was also designed by Shakira and shows a close @-@ up of the back of a blonde @-@ haired Shakira ; a star and the name of the album are seen tattooed on her arm . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Whenever , Wherever " was released as the lead single from Laundry Service in early October 2001 . The song was commercially successful , peaking at number one in countries including Australia , Austria , France , Germany Italy , and more than 14 countries worldwide . In the United States , " Whenever , Wherever " became Shakira 's first single to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and peaked at number six . It stood as the singer 's highest peaking single on the chart until " Hips Don 't Lie " reached number one in 2006 . " Whenever , Wherever " narrowly missed peaking atop the chart in the United Kingdom by reaching number two . " Suerte " , the Spanish @-@ language version of the song , was also released and peaked at number one in Spain and on the US Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart . " Whenever , Wherever " attained numerous record certifications around the world , including multi @-@ platinum certifications in Australia , Belgium , and Switzerland , platinum certifications in the United Kingdom , and a diamond certification in France . The accompanying music video of the song , which features Shakira belly dancing in various locations , was directed by Francis Lawrence and became popular on music video television channel MTV . 
 " Underneath Your Clothes " was released as the second single from the album in May 2002 . The song peaked atop the charts in Australia , Austria , and Belgium ; it was certified platinum in the three countries . In other countries , it became a top five hit . " Underneath Your Clothes " entered the top ten of the US Billboard Hot 100 chart , peaking at number nine , while in the United Kingdom it reached number three . The accompanying music video for " Underneath Your Clothes " was directed by Herb Ritts and depicts Shakira 's life on tour . Shakira 's then boyfriend Antonio de la Rua makes an appearance in the video and this led to music retailer Tower Records Argentina banning sales of her albums in the country . The reason behind the ban was that Antonio de la Rua 's father Fernando de la Rúa , who was the President of Argentina at that time , had resigned " in the midst of profound economic and political turmoil in the country , " and the decision to ban sales of Shakira 's albums was a " direct protest against Antonio De la Rua -- not Shakira . " 
 " Objection ( Tango ) " was released as the third single in July 2002 . Although it was not a commercial success as big as " Whenever , Wherever " or " Underneath Your Clothes " , the song performed well nonetheless . " Objection ( Tango ) " became a top ten hit in most countries and reached the top five in Australia and Netherlands . The song was certified platinum in Australia and gold in France . It became the last single from Laundry Service to chart on both the US Billboard Hot 100 and the UK Singles Chart , on which it peaked at numbers 55 and 17 , respectively . Directed by Dave Meyers , the music video for " Objection ( Tango ) " features Shakira fighting her unfaithful lover and his mistress . 
 " Te Dejo Madrid " was released as the fourth single from the album in August 2002 . It peaked at number seven in Spain but performed poorly on the Latin record charts in the United States , peaking at number 45 on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart . Spanish bullfighter Julián López Escobar , better known by his stage name El Juli , filed a lawsuit against Shakira for using scenes of one of his performances in the music video for " Te Dejo Madrid " without his permission . " Que Me Quedes Tú " was released as the fifth single in November 2002 and peaked at number 10 on the Spanish Singles Chart . It became a success on the Latin record charts in the United States , topping both the Billboard Hot Latin Songs and Latin Pop Airplay charts . " The One " was released as the final single from the album in March 2003 . It was a moderate chart success and reached the top 20 in most countries . " The One " became the only single from the album to not appear on any US Billboard chart . The music video for " The One " was directed by Esteban Sapir and Ramiro <unk> and shows Shakira singing the song while walking outside in the rain . 
 = = Tour = = 
 To promote Laundry Service , Shakira embarked on the Tour of the Mongoose from 2002 to 2003 . The tour was the singer 's first worldwide tour and visited 50 cities and 30 countries , with its kick @-@ off concert show held in San Diego , California . Various brands and franchises co @-@ sponsored the tour , including international clothing brand Reebok and soft drink brand Pepsi . Seven buses and ten trailers were also employed to transport all the staff members . A stage covering 350 square meters was set up and preparations to arrange 280 @,@ 000 watts of sound and light were made . A " solid nine @-@ piece band " was hired to provide live instrumentation . Regarding the title of the tour , Shakira explained her decision to name it after the mongoose , saying : 
 " It 's called the Tour of the Mongoose , and the mongoose is basically one of the few animals who can defeat the most venomous snakes with just one bite . And that 's why I decided to name my tour that way , because I think that if we all have a little mongoose inside that can defeat the hatred and the resentment and the prejudice of everyday , we can probably win the battle . " 
 Likewise , the theme of the tour was highly influenced by Shakira 's political views , and this was prominently seen during the performance of " Octavo Día " , a song from Dónde Están los Ladrones ? , during which a film showing puppet caricatures of George W. Bush , then @-@ President of the United States , and Saddam Hussein , then @-@ President of Iraq , playing chess with their moves being controlled by the Grim Reaper . During the opening of the concert shows , a " massive " stage curtain showing a " mongoose and a cobra preparing for battle " split and a giant cobra slowly began rising from the centre of the stage to reveal Shakira , who wore " black leather pants and a black bikini top " and performed barefoot . Shakira incorporated belly dancing moves in her performances and often played various instruments throughout the shows herself , including the harmonica . Eight songs from Laundry Service were included on the setlist of the tour . A more afro @-@ punk oriented version of " Objection ( Tango ) " was performed and featured instrumentation from bongos . As an intro to " Rules " , Shakira played the harmonica , guitar , and drums . She also played an electric guitar during the performance of " Fool " . " Whenever , Wherever " was included in the encore segment of the shows and was " made to feel even more celebratory by the massive amount of confetti shot on the crowd midway through . " Shakira also performed covers of " Dude Looks Like a Lady " , a song by American hard rock band Aerosmith , and " Back in Black " , a song by Australian hard rock band AC / DC . Many performances made use of pyrotechnics and " six @-@ foot flames that shot from the stage . " 
 In 2004 , a live album of the tour was released as Live & Off the Record . Aside from recording of the performances , the album included an hour @-@ long documentary that shows Shakira " touring the world and doing such fun things as blowing bubbles , getting massages , and being serenaded by a mariachi band . " A promotional CD single featuring the live performances of " Poem to a Horse " and " Whenever , Wherever " was also released to promote Live & Off the Record . The live album was certified platinum in France and gold in the United States . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Critical reception towards Laundry Service ranged from favourable to mixed , with critics expressing different opinions regarding the production and composition of the album . Alex Henderson from AllMusic commended Shakira 's songwriting abilities in English , calling it a " challenge that she handles impressively well . Shakira , it turns out , sings quite convincingly in English , " and also praised her different mixes of musical styles , saying " Like Shakira 's Spanish @-@ language albums , this self @-@ produced CD is enjoyably eclectic ; she successfully combines pop / rock with everything from tango on " Objection ( Tango ) " and Andean music on " Whenever , Wherever " to Middle Eastern music on " Eyes Like Yours " . He concluded that " Dónde Están los Ladrones ? remains Shakira 's most essential album , but Laundry Service is an excellent English @-@ language debut for the South American vocalist . " A critic from Billboard also favoured the presence of various musical styles on the album and commented that " Laundry Service finds the 24 @-@ year @-@ old artist unafraid of merging musical flavors , " and complimented Shakira 's vocal talent . Similarly , the Entertainment.ie review of the album deemed the lyrical content " surreal " and the production " no less bizarre [ ... ] imposing breakneck tangos , twanging guitar solos and bizarre raps onto a familiar soft rock template . " They felt that Laundry Service could not be called a " great album " , reasoning that the " The line between fascinatingly strange and <unk> weird is a thin one , and Laundry Service crosses it far too often , " but also stated that " Even so , Shakira 's star quality can hardly be denied - and in today 's increasingly conformist pop industry that deserves at least two cheers . " Alexis Petridis from The Guardian lauded Shakira 's originality , opining that " In an age of personality @-@ free pop idols , Shakira 's glorious eccentricity makes her a true star , " and commented that " Every song contains at least one non sequitur so eccentric that it could be the work of 1970s rock surrealist Captain Beefheart " and " The music on Laundry Service gives the lyrics a run for their money in the oddball handicap . " Although he felt that the use of samples on various songs " displays an attitude to plagiarism that Noel Gallagher would consider cavalier " and that " no one could claim Laundry Service was a groundbreaking work of art , " he concluded that " its ramshackle production and <unk> lyrics are striking and unique . And these days , it 's hard not to find any pop record that provokes those adjectives rather cheering . " Music critic Robert Christgau termed Laundry Service " the Cher album Cher never made " and attributed this to Shakira 's blend of Middle Eastern styles in her music ; he commented that the " stylistic appetite of this Colombian superstar is pure rock en Español " and appreciated Shakira 's confident songwriting . Christgau also noted Shakira 's strong vibrato and constant changing of timbre in her vocals . Lisa Oliver from Yahoo ! Music said that Shakira 's experimentation with different styles yield " results ranging from corking to <unk> , " but experienced difficulty with the formatting of the CD , saying " the biggest problem with ' Laundry Service ' is the anti @-@ copying device that renders the CD useless in anything other than a conventional CD player [ ... ] A shame then , because this Latino hottie could dilate the musical pupils of even the most ardent homebody if only they could get off the computer long enough to hear it . " 
 David Browne from Entertainment Weekly , however , called the album a " the ultimate in crossover nightmares " and opined that Shakira 's incorporation of different musical genres made it sound confusing , saying " Its wan ska @-@ pop , faux @-@ country ballads , and generic rock barely betray a Spanish accent or any musical heritage . ( She can 't decide if she wants to sound like Alanis or Shania ) " . Matt Cibula from PopMatters gave a more mixed view in his review of Laundry Service ; he complimented some of the lyrics of the songs but expressed disappointment in Shakira 's production of the album , writing it off as " generic " . He felt that the album was " extremely safe " and speculated that the reason behind the album 's " generic " sound was due to the <unk> ' involvement , saying " when I read that she 's [ Gloria Estefan ] helping you with lyrics and he 's [ Emilio Estefan ] ' executive producer ' , and I hear the unmistakable hum of ' <unk> ' in the background [ sic ] . " Ernesto Lechner from Rolling Stone complimented the singer 's voice as a " wild and beautiful instrument [ ... ] capable of delivering scorching moments of musical passion , " but commented that the involvement of a " battalion of producers and songwriters " led to Shakira sounding " downright silly " on Laundry Service and also criticised " her efforts to spice things up with obvious touches of Latin American folklore . " 
 = = Accolades = = 
 Laundry Service garnered Shakira a number of awards . At the 2002 American Latino Media Arts Awards ( ALMA Awards ) ceremony , the album won the award for " Album of the Year " and Shakira won the award for " Outstanding Female Performer " . At the inaugural MTV Video Music Awards Latin America ( <unk> ) ceremony in 2002 , Shakira won a total of five awards , which included " Artist of the Year " , " Video of the Year " ( for " Suerte " ) , " Female Artist of the Year " , " Pop Artist of the Year " and " Best Artist - North Latin America " . At the inaugural Premios Oye ! in the same year , the album received a nomination in the category of " Record of the Year " , while Shakira won the awards for " International Female Artist of the Year " and " Latin Pop Female Artist of the Year " . At the 2002 Premio Lo Nuestro ceremony , Shakira won the " Premio del Pueblo " ( " People 's Choice Award " ) in the category of " Pop / Rock " for Laundry Service . At the 2003 NRJ Music Awards , Laundry Service was announced as the winner of " Best International Album " and Shakira was named the " Best International Female Artist " . The album was also nominated for " International Album of the Year " at the 2003 Juno Awards . Latina magazine included Shakira on their list of " 10 Latinas Who Broke Barriers " in 2013 , writing " This <unk> has used her singing talent , her energetic spirit , and of course , her sultry dance moves to become one of the most successful crossover artists of all time . " " Laundry Service " was listed on " The Definitive 200 albums of all time " <unk> by the National Association of Recording Merchandisers in association with the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In Austria , Laundry Service entered the Ö3 Austria Top 40 albums chart at number five and peaked at number one , spending a total of 71 weeks on the chart . The album was certified double @-@ platinum by the IFPI Austria for selling 80 @,@ 000 units . In the Dutch @-@ speaking Flanders region of Belgium , it reached number one on the Ultratop chart , while it peaked at number five in the French @-@ speaking Wallonia region of the country . After debuting at number 40 on the Finnish Albums Chart , Laundry Service quickly ascended to number one and charted for a total of 49 weeks . By 2007 , the album had gone triple @-@ platinum in the country and had sold a total of 90 @,@ 140 units . In France , Laundry Service debuted at number nine on the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique ( SNEP ) albums chart and peaked at number five for three weeks ; its stay on the chart lasted for 89 weeks . It was certified double @-@ platinum by the SNEP for sales of 600 @,@ 000 units . It remained as Shakira 's greatest certified album in the country until her ninth studio album Sale el Sol was certified diamond in 2011 . In Germany , it peaked at number two on the Media Control chart and charted for 31 weeks . Bundesverband Musikindustrie ( BVMI ) certified Laundry Service quintuple @-@ gold in Germany for shipments of 750 @,@ 000 units . In Hungary , it peaked at number four on the MAHASZ chart and was her highest charting album in the country until Sale el Sol reached the same position in 2010 . The album was certified platinum in Hungary for selling 30 @,@ 000 copies . 
 After debuting at number three on the Italian Albums Chart , Laundry Service ascended to number two the following week but was kept from attaining the top position by Alanis Morissette 's 2002 album Under <unk> Swept . In Spain , Servicio de <unk> reached number two on the PROMUSICAE albums chart . It also charted in 2005 in the country along with Shakira 's fifth and sixth studio albums Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 and Oral Fixation , Vol . 2 , respectively . The album has been certified quintuple @-@ platinum by PROMUSICAE for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 units . In Sweden , Laundry Service debuted atop the Sverigetopplistan chart and stayed on the top position for three weeks . It was certified double platinum by IFPI Sweden in 2003 . In Switzerland , the album entered the Schweizer Hitparade chart at number 81 and peaked at number one , spending a total of 84 weeks on the chart . Laundry Service was later certified quintuple @-@ platinum by the IFPI for selling 200 @,@ 000 units in Switzerland . In the United Kingdom , Laundry Service debuted at number three on the UK Albums Chart . It later peaked at number two . The album was certified double @-@ platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for shipments of 600 @,@ 000 copies . By 2002 , Laundry Service had sold more than four million copies in Europe alone and thus was certified quadruple @-@ platinum by IFPI Europe . 
 In Australia , Laundry Service became Shakira 's first album to chart on the ARIA Albums Chart after debuting at number two . It later peaked at number one for two weeks and in total it spent 54 weeks on the charts . Consequently , it became the second best @-@ selling album of the year 2002 in the country , behind only American rapper Eminem 's album The Eminem Show . The Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) certified Laundry Service quintuple @-@ platinum for shipments of 350 @,@ 000 units , making it Shakira 's most successful album in the country . The album also performed well in New Zealand , peaking at number four on the national albums chart and appearing on the chart for 47 weeks . By 2003 , Laundry Service had been certified triple @-@ platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for shipping 45 @,@ 000 units . 
 In Canada , the album peaked atop the Billboard Canadian Albums Chart and is Shakira 's only album to reach number one in the country . Eventually , Laundry Service was certified quintuple @-@ platinum by Music Canada for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 albums . In the United States , Laundry Service debuted and peaked at number three on the Billboard 200 chart , selling 200 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . It stayed on the chart for a total of 61 weeks . The album also debuted and peaked at number six on the Billboard Top Internet Albums chart . After around six months since its release , Laundry Service had been certified triple @-@ platinum by the RIAA for shipments of 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 units in the United States . It is Shakira 's best @-@ selling album in the country , with sales of 3 @,@ 526 @,@ 000 units as of March 2014 . According to the IFPI , Laundry Service was the seventh best @-@ selling album in the world in 2002 . 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 The commercial success of the album led to Shakira being deemed one of the most successful Latin crossover artists of all time , with Steve Huey from AllMusic calling her " Latin pop 's biggest female crossover artist since Jennifer Lopez " and " an instant pop sensation , thanks to her quirky poetic sense and a sexy video image built on her hip @-@ shaking belly dance moves . " The success of the album also received considerable backlash , with many calling Shakira a " sellout " . This negative response was further heightened by the fact that Shakira , who was a natural brunette , had bleached her hair blonde at the time of the release of the album , which many viewed as a tactic to " fit into the US market . " Regarding this backlash , Shakira said , " I know my Latin people find this difficult . And I want [ my success ] to be good news to my country . But it 's typical that when you see somebody who is so close to you growing , you feel that the very word ' growing ' is synonymous with leaving . My hair is a coincidence . I dyed it more than two and a half years ago . " On the other hand , many viewed Shakira 's crossover success as a " strong cultural statement " as her musical style was representative of her mixed ethnicity . 
 In 2002 , the singer was interviewed by Nobel Literature Prize @-@ winning Colombian novelist and journalist Gabriel García Márquez , who was " astonished by her fantastical work @-@ rate " and said that " Shakira 's music has a personal stamp that doesn 't look like anyone else 's and no one can sing or dance like her , at whatever age , with such an innocent sensuality , one that seems to be of her own invention . " In the United States and the United Kingdom , Shakira drew comparisons to American pop singer Britney Spears as they looked similar in appearance and sported " bleached blonde curls and butter @-@ wouldn 't @-@ melt smiles for the kids down the front . " However , critics argued that the Shakira 's vocal style was very different from Spears ' , with Ted Kessler from The Observer calling the former an " operatic diva " and writing that " as soon as she opens her mouth , she slips into gear and motors powerfully past Britney 's breathy bump <unk> . " In 2009 , Julia Llewellyn Smith from The Daily Telegraph commented that " Shakira makes comparable Spanish @-@ English ' crossover ’ acts such as Jennifer Lopez and Enrique Iglesias seem like minnows . " In an interview with Latina magazine in 2011 , Gloria Estefan was asked whether she felt another crossover artist like Shakira could emerge in her lifetime , to which she responded , " I 'm always hopeful that somebody , any Latino , is going to succeed in what they do . And of course in music , undoubtedly . " Shakira 's crossover success also inspired other Latin artists to foray into the English language market and many compared Mexican singer Paulina Rubio 's attempt to crossover with her English @-@ language debut album Border Girl to that by Shakira . 
 Shakira 's ability to belly dance came into attention and gathered coverage during this period , especially due to the music video of the lead single " Whenever , Wherever " . The song also became famous for one of its lines in which Shakira sings " Lucky that my breasts are small and humble , so you don ’ t confuse them with mountains " ; it is often cited as an example of the unusual lyrical content of the singer 's songs . According to Steve Huey from AllMusic , many critics were " divided as to the effectiveness of Shakira 's English lyrics , but nearly all agreed on her unique poetic imagery . " <unk> further commented that the song and its video turned Shakira into a " star in the English @-@ speaking world almost overnight . " " Whenever , Wherever " , along with " Underneath Your Clothes " , is considered to be one of Shakira 's signature songs . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 ^ [ a ] signifies a co @-@ producer 
 ^ [ b ] translated the song into English from the original Spanish @-@ language version " Ojos Así " 
 ^ [ c ] remixed by Hani <unk> 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Fancy rat = 
 The fancy rat is a domesticated brown rat ( Rattus norvegicus ) , which is the most common type of pet rat . The name fancy rat derives from the idea of animal fancy ( promotion of domesticated animals ) or the phrase " to fancy " ( to like , or appreciate ) . 
 Fancy rats have their origins as the targets for blood sport in 18th- and 19th @-@ century Europe . Specially bred as pets since then , fancy rats now come in a wide variety of colors and coat types and are bred and raised by several rat enthusiast groups around the world . Fancy rats are commonly sold as pets in stores and by breeders . 
 Domesticated rats are physiologically and psychologically different from their wild relatives , and — when acquired from reputable breeders and shops — pose no more of a health risk than other common pets . For example , domesticated brown rats are not considered a disease threat , while exposure to wild rat populations could introduce pathogens like Salmonella into the home . Fancy rats experience different health risks from their wild counterparts , and thus are less likely to succumb to many of the same illnesses as wild rats . 
 Fancy rats care for themselves , and are thus very affordable compared to even other small pets . This is one of the biggest draws to them . Additionally , fancy rats are quite independent , loyal and easily trained , earning them comparison to both cats and dogs . This comparison is merited given fancy rats are considered more intelligent than any other domesticated rodent . 
 = = History = = 
 The origin of the modern fancy rat begins with the rat @-@ catchers of the 18th and 19th centuries who trapped rats throughout Europe . These rat @-@ catchers would then either kill the rats , or , more likely , sell the rats to be used in blood sport . Rat @-@ baiting was a popular sport until the beginning of the 20th century . It involved filling a pit with several rats and then placing bets on how long it would take a terrier to kill them all . It is believed that both rat @-@ catchers and sportsmen began to keep certain , odd @-@ colored rats during the height of the sport , eventually breeding them and then selling them as pets . The two men thought to have formed the basis of rat fancy are Jack Black , rat @-@ catcher to Queen Victoria , and Jimmy Shaw , manager of one of the largest sporting public houses in London . These two men are responsible for beginning many of the color varieties present today . Black , specifically , was known for taming the " prettier " rats of unusual color , decorating them with ribbons , and selling them as pets . 
 Rat fancy as a formal , organized hobby began when a woman named Mary Douglas asked for permission to bring her pet rats to an exhibition of the National Mouse Club at the Aylesbury Town Show in England on October 24 , 1901 . Her black @-@ and @-@ white hooded rat won " Best in Show " and ignited interest in the area . After Douglas ' death in 1921 , rat fancy soon began to fall back out of fashion . The original hobby formally lasted from 1912 to 1929 or 1931 , as part of the National Mouse and Rat Club , at which point Rat was dropped from the name , returning it to the original National Mouse Club . The hobby was revived in 1976 with the formation of the English National Fancy Rat Society ( NFRS ) . Pet rats are now commonly available in stores and from breeders , and there exist several rat fancier groups worldwide . 
 = = Differences from wild rats = = 
 While domesticated rats are not removed enough from their wild counterparts to justify a distinct subspecies ( compare Canis lupus familiaris ) , there are significant differences that set them apart ; the most apparent is coloring . Random color mutations may occur in the wild , but these are rare . Most wild R. norvegicus are a dark brown color , while fancy rats may be anything from white to cinnamon to blue . 
 <unk> , domesticated pet rats are tamer than those in the wild . They are more comfortable around humans and known to seek out their owners while roaming freely . They have decreased reactions to light and sound , have less cautions to new food , and have better tolerance to overcrowding . Domesticated rats are shown to mate earlier , more readily , and for a longer period of time over their lifespan . Also , domesticated rats exhibit different behaviors when fighting with each other ; while wild rats almost always flee a lost battle , caged rats spend protracted amounts of time in a belly @-@ up or boxing position . These behavioral traits are thought to be products of environment as opposed to genetics . However , it is also theorized that there are certain underlying biological reasons for why some members of a wild species are more receptive to domestication than others , and that these differences are then passed down to offspring ( compare Domesticated silver fox ) . 
 The body structure of domesticated rats differs from that of a wild rat as well . The body of a fancy rat is smaller , with larger ears and a longer tail than that of its undomesticated counterpart . They are generally smaller with sharper facial features as well . 
 Domesticated rats have a longer lifespan than that of wild rats . Because domesticated rats are protected from predators and have ready access to food , water , shelter , and medical care , their average lifespan is around two to three years , in contrast to wild R. norvegicus which average a lifespan of less than one year . However , wild rats generally have larger brains , hearts , livers , kidneys , and adrenal glands than laboratory rats . The fancy rat and wild rat also both face a multitude of differing health concerns ; the former is at risk of developing a pneumococcal infection from exposure to humans , while the latter may harbor tapeworms after coming in contact with carriers like cockroaches and fleas . 
 = = Social behavior = = 
 Generally speaking , rats are quite sociable and function best with at least one cage mate . It is generally ill @-@ advised to keep a singular rat unless there are severe behavioral problems , such as those that can be seen in some older males . The earlier rats are introduced to one another , the better and oftentimes , rat breeders will encourage new owners to take two or more rats of the same gender from the same litter for starters . 
 Particularly with males , there can be some fighting in the beginning , but once an alpha rat has been determined , the rats should get along well . Within two weeks to a month , the rats will most likely have adjusted and become friendlier with each other . Rats are generally very friendly to other cage mates , particularly with females . They will even sometimes help or take care of other sick rats . 
 Generally when two or more rats from the same litter are of the same sex they live together with no disruptions but with the occasional friendly tussle and play fight . Although it is possible that rats from different litters can be integrated together , the integration process can be easy or hard . Several measures have to be taken to provide security for both rats . Techniques for integration include bringing them to neutral ground so they do not become territorial . The process of integrating is easiest with two rats of young age , generally less than six months old . The process of integrating is most difficult with two or more adult male rats , as adult males are the least likely to accept new cage mates , especially after an alpha has been established . Unless there is an issue integrating rats together , owners should always keep them in a group of at least three , as rats live in packs and a pack starts with three animals . 
 = = Varieties = = 
 As in other pet species , a variety of colors , coat types , and other features that do not appear in the wild have either been developed , or have appeared spontaneously . Any individual rat may be defined one or more ways by its color , coat , marking , and non @-@ standard body type . This allows for very specific classifications such as a ruby @-@ eyed cinnamon Berkshire rex Dumbo . 
 = = = Coloring = = = 
 While some pet rats retain the agouti coloring of the wild brown rat ( three tones on the same hair ) , others have solid colors ( a single color on each hair ) , a trait derived from the black rat . Agouti @-@ based colors include agouti , cinnamon , and fawn . Black @-@ based colors include black , beige , and chocolate . 
 Eye color is considered a subset of coloring , and coat color definitions often include standards for the eyes , as many genes which control eye color will also affect the coat color or vice versa . The American Fancy Rat and Mouse Association ( AFRMA ) lists black , pink , ruby , and odd @-@ eyed ( two different @-@ colored eyes ) as possible eye colors , depending on the variety of rat shown . Ruby refers to eyes which at a glance appear black but which are on closer observation a deep , dark red . 
 Color names can vary for more vaguely defined varieties , like lilac and fawn , while the interpretations of standards can fluctuate between ( and even within ) different countries or clubs . 
 = = = Markings = = = 
 Further dividing the varieties of fancy rats are the many different markings . Pet rats can appear in any combination of colors and markings . The markings are typically in reference to the patterns and ratios of colored hair versus white hair . Two extremes would be a self ( completely solid , non @-@ white color ) and a Himalayan ( completely white except blending into colored areas at the nose and feet , called points , as in a Himalayan cat 's markings ) . 
 Markings have a strict standard , with detailed terminology , for showing in fancy rat pet shows . However , many domestic rats are not closely bred to any color standard ; many of those found in pet shops will have <unk> from a formal breeding perspective , which are defined as variations in markings that are not recognized as conforming to a breed standard published by a rat fancier organisation . 
 Commonly recognized standards include : 
 Berkshire – colored top , white belly 
 Hooded – color runs in a saddle , a single , unbroken line from full head down the spine and possibly partly down the tail 
 Capped – color on full head only 
 Blazed - Colored head ( Capped ) or body ( Irish , Berkshire or self ) , with a triangular wedge of white fur over the face . 
 Variegated – Any form of mismatched , oddities in fur . Can be anything from broken or spotted hood or a <unk> blaze . 
 Irish or English Irish – In England , the Irish is standardized by the NFRS as an equilateral triangle of white with a side that begins at the chest , or between the front legs , and where the point ends mid length . In the United States and elsewhere , clubs like the AFRMA distinguish this marking as the English Irish and allow for another standardized Irish in which the rat may have white of an even or symmetrical nature anywhere along its underside . 
 Other marking varieties include spotted or Dalmatian ( named for the spotted Dalmatian dog ) , <unk> , masked , and Siamese ( typically a gradient of color along the body , darkest at the base of the tail and nose as in Siamese cats ) , and <unk> or <unk> ( an Australian variety which has a solid color stripe on the belly or a color marking there that corresponds to markings on top ) . 
 = = = Body type = = = 
 Two of the most prominent and standardized physical changes applied to rats through selective breeding are the development of the Manx and Dumbo . The Dumbo , whose origins are in the United States , is characterized by having large , low , round ears on the sides of its head , and was named for resemblance to the fictional Dumbo the Elephant . The Manx rat is tailless due to a genetic mutation , and was named for the Manx cat , which shares this feature , though not necessarily due to the same mutation . 
 = = = Coat types = = = 
 There is a relatively small variety of coats in relation to the number of colors and markings , and not all are internationally standardized . The most common type is the normal or standard , which is allowed variance in coarseness between the sexes ; males have a coarse , thick , rough coat , while females ' coats are softer and finer . Other standardized coats include : rex , in which all the hairs are curly , even the whiskers ; velveteen , a softer variation of the rex ; satin or silky coat , which is extra @-@ soft and fine , with a sheen ; and Harley , characterized by wispy long straight hairs . Remaining coat types are not defined by the hair itself , but rather by the lack of it , such as hairless rats . 
 = = = = Hairless rats = = = = 
 Hairless rats are a coat variety characterized by varying levels of hair loss . Hairless rats , bred from curly @-@ coated <unk> , range from having areas of very short fur to being completely bare . Hairless rats are genetically produced by breeding different combinations of the genes that cause Rex coats . Since rex is a dominant trait , there only needs to be one rex parent to produce curly rex @-@ coated offspring . However , when two copies of the trait are present , by breeding two <unk> together , the coat is affected differently — causing hairlessness , and earning the colloquial name , " double @-@ rex " . One subset of semi @-@ hairless rats , Patchwork rats , constantly lose hair and regrow it in different " patches " several times throughout their life . 
 = = = Ethics of selective breeding = = = 
 There is controversy among rat fanciers in regard to selective breeding . On one hand , breeding rats to " conform " to a specific standard or to develop a new one is a large part of what the fancy was founded on . On the other hand , the process results in many rats who do not " conform " , and are then either given away , sold as food , or killed — referred to as culling . 
 There are concerns as to whether breeding hairless and tailless rats is ethical . The tail is vital for rats ' balance and for adjusting body temperature . <unk> rats have greater risk of heat exhaustion , poor bowel and bladder control , falling from heights , and can be at risk for life @-@ threatening deformities in the pelvic region like hind leg paralysis and megacolon . Similarly , hairless rats are less protected from scratches and the cold without their coat . Groups such as the NFRS prohibit the showing of these varieties at their events and forbid advertisement through affiliated services . 
 = = = Availability = = = 
 Because R. norvegicus and related species are seen as pests , their intentional import into foreign countries is often regulated . For example , the importation of foreign rodents is prohibited in Australia , and so various coat types , colors , and varieties have been bred separately from foreign lines , or are just not obtainable within that country ( for example , hairless and <unk> @-@ eared fancy rats do not exist in Australia ) . In other areas , like the Canadian province of Alberta , which is considered rat @-@ free , the ownership of domestic fancy rats outside of schools , laboratories , and zoos is illegal . 
 = = Health = = 
 Human @-@ raised R. norvegicus are more prone to specific health risks and diseases than their wild counterparts , but they are also far less likely to succumb to certain illnesses that are prevalent in the wild . The major considerations for susceptibility include exposure , living conditions , and diet . 
 Rats that live their entire lives indoors usually are able to avoid disease @-@ causing bacteria such as Salmonella and Pseudomonas aeruginosa ; the latter is absent in treated water . They may also more easily avoid vectors like cockroaches , beetles , and fleas which are essential for the spread of endemic typhus and intestinal parasites like the Rat tapeworm . Additionally , pet or laboratory rats enjoy the intrinsic benefits of having a consistent and well @-@ balanced diet , along with access to medical care . 
 While living indoors decreases the risk of contracting certain diseases , living in close quarters with other rats , being unable to always seek proper protection from environmental factors ( e.g. temperature , humidity ) , being fed an unhealthy diet , and the stresses inherently associated with living in an unnatural habitat can all adversely affect a rat 's health to make them more prone to specific conditions . Specifically , <unk> 's disease , <unk> infections ( e.g. Giardia <unk> ) , and <unk> are usually seen in stressed or young rats . Additionally , pet rats are exposed to Streptococcus pneumoniae , a zoonotic disease caught from humans , not the same bacteria associated with strep throat . A human @-@ associated fungus , Pneumocystis carinii ( also found in almost all domesticated animals ) is usually asymptomatic in the rat , unless the rat 's immune system is compromised by illness . If this occurs the infection can develop into pneumonia . 
 Several diseases , like Rat <unk> Infection ( <unk> ) , Sendai virus , and Murine Respiratory <unk> ( MRM , Mycoplasma <unk> ) , are prevalent simply because their highly contagious natures work in tandem with the way rats are kept in laboratories , pet stores , and by breeders . It should be noted , however , that MRM is far less likely to occur in laboratory rats than in those kept as pets . 
 Pet rats can also develop pituitary tumors if they are given high @-@ calorie diets , and ringtail if they are placed in areas with low humidity or high temperatures . Staphylococcus spp. are a mostly benign group of bacteria that commonly reside on the top of the skin , but cuts and scratches from social and hierarchical fighting can open up the pathways for them to cause ulcerative dermatitis . 
 There is some evidence that spayed female rats ( " does " ) are less likely to develop mammary and pituitary tumors than non @-@ spayed females . Research into prevention of common diseases and health issues in rats is on @-@ going . Dietary changes are among the main suggestions for improved health and longevity in fancy rats , such suggestions included are feeding rat @-@ friendly <unk> in moderation to reduce the risk of cancers , heart disease and stroke . 
 = = = Risks to owners = = = 
 Keeping rats as pets can come with the stigma that rats supposedly transmit dangerous diseases to their owners . One fear is that all rats carry plague , when in fact R. norvegicus is not among the list of species considered a threat . In 2004 , an outbreak of salmonella in the United States was connected to people who owned pet rats . However , it has been determined that a pet rat 's initial exposure to salmonella , along with many other zoonotic rat diseases , typically indicates exposure to wild rodent populations , either from an infestation in the owner 's home , or from the pet 's contaminated food , water , or bedding . 
 Another risk to rat owners is Rat @-@ bite fever . This is a rare disease among domesticated rats and is most often found in rats from large chain pet stores who breed their stock of rats in masses ( usually with the intention of being snake food rather than pets ) or from breeders who fail to take good care of their rats . This disease is fairly unnoticeable in the rat , but is characterized by the swelling of the site of the bite or scratch where it was contracted , a fever , vomiting and body aches . It is contracted by being bitten or scratched by an infected rat . 
 = = Fiction = = 
 In fiction , pet brown rats are often depicted as tamed rather than domesticated , akin to when a character befriends a wolf . As tamed pets , they have been portrayed in roles that vary from evil to ambiguous to lovable . 
 Samantha Martin , a professional animal trainer for films , commercials , and music videos , has claimed that rats are one of the easiest animals to train due to their adaptability , intelligence , and focus . 
 The short novel <unk> 's Notebooks by Stephen Gilbert was the basis for the films Willard ( 1971 ) and Ben ( 1972 ) , and a 2003 remake of the first film . Here , the protagonist befriends the rats found in his home and builds up a close relationship , only to have it end tragically . While these movies generally emphasize the popular perception of malevolence — they kill people , cats , and ransack grocery stores — other wild rats who become pets are portrayed in more neutral to positive ways ; the television show , House , briefly featured " Steve McQueen " , the pet rat of the titular character . 
 In many versions of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles franchise , the master and adoptive father of the turtles is Splinter , who was once the pet rat of ninja <unk> Yoshi and learned his martial arts skills by imitating his owner . 
 In the 1996 point @-@ and @-@ click adventure game Phantasmagoria : A Puzzle of Flesh , the protagonist Curtis Craig owns a pet rat named Blob , which is seen various times in the game and is even involved in one of the many puzzles that the player must decipher . 
 = = = Organisations = = = 
 American Fancy Rat and Mouse Association ( USA ) ( AFRMA ) 
 The National Fancy Rat Society ( UK ) ( NFRS ) 
 Rat and Mouse Club of America ( USA ) ( <unk> ) 
 The Midlands Rat Club ( UK ) ( MRC ) 
 Rat Club ( NZ ) ( RC ) 
 = Mauritania at the 2012 Summer Olympics = 
 Mauritania competed at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London , which was held from 27 July to 12 August 2012 . The country 's participation at London marked its eighth appearance in the Summer Olympics since its debut in the 1984 Summer Olympics . The delegation included two track and field athletes , Jidou El Moctar and Aicha Fall , who were selected to the team by wildcard places , as the nation had no athletes that met either the " A " or " B " qualifying standards . Moctar was selected as flag bearer for the opening ceremony while a LOCOG Games Maker carried it for the closing ceremony . Neither of the two athletes progressed beyond the heats . 
 = = Background = = 
 Mauritania participated in eight Summer Olympic games between its debut in the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles , United States and the 2012 Summer Olympics in London . Mauritania would participate in the Summer Olympics from 27 July to 12 August 2012 . The Mauritania National Olympic Committee ( NOC ) selected two athletes via wildcards . Usually , an NOC would be able to enter up to 3 qualified athletes in each individual event as long as each athlete met the " A " standard , or 1 athlete per event if they met the " B " standard . However , since Mauritania had no athletes that met either standard , they were allowed to select two athletes , one of each gender , as wildcards . The two athletes that were selected to compete in the London games were Jidou El Moctar , in the Men 's 200 meters and Aicha Fall in the Women 's 800 meters . Moctar was flag bearer for the opening ceremony and a LOCOG Games Maker held it for the closing ceremony . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 Making his Summer Olympics debut , Jidou El Moctar was notable for carrying the Mauritania flag at the opening ceremony . He qualified for the Summer Olympics via a wildcard , as his best time , 23 @.@ 16 seconds , was 2 @.@ 51 seconds slower than the " B " qualifying standard for his event , the 200 meters . He competed on 7 August in Heat 1 against seven other athletes . He ran a time of 22 @.@ 94 seconds , finishing last but achieving a personal best time . Kazakhstan 's Vyacheslav Muravyev ranked ahead of him with a time of 21 @.@ 75 seconds in a heat led by eventual gold medalist of the event , Jamaica 's Usain Bolt ( 20 @.@ 39 seconds ) . Overall , Moctar ranked 53rd out of 55 athletes competing and was 2 @.@ 31 seconds behind the slowest athlete that progressed to the semi @-@ finals . Therefore , that was the end of his competition . 
 Competing at her first Summer Olympics , Aicha Fall qualified for the London Games as a wildcard , as she had set no time for her event , the 800 meters . She was to compete in the 2012 World Junior Championships in Athletics 800 meters but did not start the event . She competed on August 8 in Heat 5 against seven other athletes . She posted a time of 2 minutes and 27 @.@ 97 seconds , finishing sixth and setting a national record in the process . She placed ahead of Palestine 's <unk> Sawalha ( 2 minutes and 29 @.@ 16 seconds ) and behind Canada 's Melissa Bishop ( 2 minutes and 09 @.@ 33 seconds ) in a heat led by Ukraine 's <unk> Lupu ( 2 minutes and 8 @.@ 35 seconds ) . Overall , Fall was 24 @.@ 12 seconds behind the slowest athlete that progressed to the semi @-@ finals and therefore did not advance . 
 Key 
 Note – Ranks given for track events are within the athlete 's heat only 
 Q 
 = Qualified for the next round 
 q = 
 Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or , in field events , by position without achieving the qualifying target 
 NR 
 = National record 
 N / A = 
 Round not applicable for the event 
 Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round 
 Men 
 Women 
 = The Lord of the Rings : The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II = 
 The Lord of the Rings : The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II is a real @-@ time strategy video game developed and published by Electronic Arts . It is based on the fantasy novels The Lord of the Rings and The Hobbit by J. R. R. Tolkien and its live @-@ action film trilogy adaptation . It is the sequel to Electronic Arts ' 2004 title The Lord of the Rings : The Battle for Middle @-@ earth . The Windows version of the game was released on March 2 , 2006 and the Xbox 360 version was released on July 5 , 2006 . Along with the standard edition , a Collector 's Edition of the game was released , containing bonus material and a documentary about the game 's development . The online servers were shut down for Windows in 2010 and Xbox 360 in 2011 , however Windows users may still play online using Virtual Private Network programs . 
 The story for The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II is divided into Good and Evil Campaigns . The Good Campaign focuses on Glorfindel , an Elf who is alerted to a planned attack on the Elven sanctuary of Rivendell . With help from the Dwarves and other Good forces , the Elves attempt to eliminate Sauron and his army to restore peace in Middle @-@ earth . In the Evil Campaign , Sauron sends the Mouth of Sauron and the Nazgûl to muster wild Goblins . With his army , Sauron moves forward with his plan to destroy the remaining Good forces in the North . 
 The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II received generally favorable reviews from video game critics . Reviews praised the game 's integration of the Lord of the Rings universe into a real @-@ time strategy title , while criticism targeted the game 's unbalanced multiplayer mode . The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II received numerous awards , including the Editors ' Choice Award from IGN . At the end of March 2006 , The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II reached fourth in a list of the month 's best @-@ selling PC games . A Windows expansion pack for the game was released on November 28 , 2006 , called The Rise of the Witch @-@ king , which features a new faction known as Angmar , new units , and several gameplay improvements . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II is a real @-@ time strategy game . Similar to its predecessor , the game requires that the player build a base with structures to produce units , gather resources , research upgrades , and provide defenses . Units are used to attack the enemy and defend the player 's base . Players win matches by eliminating all enemy unit producing structures . Unlike the first game , the player can build an unlimited number of structures anywhere on the map , allowing for more freedom in base building and unit production . Players can build walls to defend their base ; however , the walls can only be constructed within a certain proximity to the players fortress . They can also construct arrow and catapult towers on building plots around a fortress to provide defensive support and basic protection . Along with this , each factions ' fortress is uniquely equipped with a special power reached only by purchasing necessary upgrades . The game 's HUD , called the <unk> , shows the player 's hero units and their abilities , a mini @-@ map , and objectives . 
 Units are classified into one of several classes : infantry , ranged , pikemen , cavalry , or siege . Each unit class has unique strengths and weaknesses , emphasizing the importance of properly matching up units in battle to increase their effectiveness . Hero units are unique in that only one of each can be created ; they consist of characters from the novel , such as Aragorn , Legolas , Gimli , Saruman , Nazgûl , Mouth of Sauron , Arwen and Shelob , or are created via the game 's Hero Creator ( only accessible via the PC version ) . If the player kills Gollum , a non @-@ player character , they are rewarded with the One Ring . The item can be used to summon one of two ring heroes for a price of 10 @,@ 000 resources , Galadriel and Sauron , depending on the player 's faction . Ring heroes have extremely strong armor and powerful attacks , making them among the game 's most over @-@ powered units . 
 The War of the Ring mode carried over from the first game in the series combines turn @-@ based strategy elements with real @-@ time skirmishes . Middle @-@ earth is divided into territories ; players can construct buildings to produce troops only in a claimed territory . During each turn , the player can move their armies into neutral and enemy territories to take control of them . While neutral territories are conquered by simply entering them , enemy territories must be wrested from the other player by defeating them in a skirmish . Troops can be garrisoned in conquered territories to defend against enemy attacks . When the player chooses to attack another territory , or one of their territories is being invaded by an enemy , they can either simulate the match and let the computer determine the outcome , or play the match by commanding the units in real time . The winner of the skirmish gains the territory , and all surviving units gain experience points . To win the game , players must either control the enemy 's capital territory , or take over a given number of territories in Middle @-@ earth . 
 The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II introduces three new factions with unique units and heroes : Goblins , Dwarves , and Elves . Rohan and Gondor are combined into one faction called Men of the West . Along with Mordor and Isengard from the first game , there are six playable factions . The troops of Gondor provide a solid offense and defense with standard infantry and archers , and the Rohirrim of Rohan act as elite cavalry . The Elven archers are effective at inflicting damage from a distance , and their support units , the Ents , can perform a combination of melee and siege attacks , they are often considered the strongest defensive faction due to their strong missile units and powerful ' <unk> arrows ' . Although slow and expensive , Dwarven infantry , pikemen , and axe @-@ throwers are very powerful and well @-@ armored allowing them to prevail in even the longest clashes with enemy troops . A collection of wild creatures and beasts of Middle @-@ earth make up the Goblin faction , this includes goblins , trolls , spiders , and dragons , which are effective in large numbers . Their only advantage is that the goblin archer and soldier units are cheap to make at only 75 resources and build faster than other basic infantry . Isengard troops are highly trained Uruk @-@ hai under Saruman 's command . <unk> are used by Isengard as one @-@ man armies that move extremely fast and deal significant damage ( particularly to enemy buildings and heroes ) . Additionally , Isengard is the only Evil faction that can build walls . Mordor forces are a mixture of Orcs , Men , Trolls , <unk> , and Sauron 's lieutenants . Mordor Orcs have tough armor , making them useful for absorbing enemy damage while stronger units attack enemies . Trolls contribute greatly to the Mordor offensives , having strong melee attacks and the ability to throw boulders or wield trees like swords . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Set in the regions of northern Middle @-@ earth , the game focuses on the events of the War in the North . For the sake of gameplay , the game takes several liberties with Tolkien 's works and the film trilogy . Some characters were altered in their appearances , abilities , and roles ; for instance , a combat role in the game is given to Tom Bombadil , a merry and mysterious hermit who appears in The Lord of the Rings but does not take part in the war . In addition , Tolkien 's earlier novel The Hobbit lends several elements to the game , including characters such as the Giant Spiders from Mirkwood . The story for The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II is divided into Good and Evil Campaigns . Both campaigns focus on the battles fought by the newly introduced factions : the Elves , Dwarves , and Goblins . The player goes through nine fixed missions in either easy , medium , or hard difficulty mode . Narrated cut scenes provide plot exposition between missions . 
 The Evil Campaign follows an alternative version of the War in the North . Sauron sends the Mouth of Sauron and the Nazgûl to the North to muster wild Goblins . His lieutenants lead the Goblin army and launch an assault on the Elven forest of <unk> . Despite heavy resistance , the forest is overrun , with <unk> slain and Galadriel having fled to Rivendell ; even Caras <unk> collapses under the sheer force of the massive invasion . The Mouth peers eagerly into the captured Mirror of Galadriel for his next attack , as his Goblins celebrate their triumph over the Elves amidst the ruins of the once @-@ mighty ancient stronghold . Another group of Goblins , led by the Goblin King Gorkil , attacks the Grey Havens by land and sea . The Elven port is destroyed and captured , and the march across Eriador begins ; Hobbits of the Shire are chosen as the next target . Gorkil 's horde manages to crush the Hobbits and burn their country to the ground , but Saruman 's servant <unk> Wormtongue , suddenly appears with a large army of Isengard Uruks and claims the land for his master . The Goblins annihilate the well @-@ trained army and kill Wormtongue , taking the Shire for themselves . 
 Gorkil continues marching west and besieges <unk> , the fortified ruins of the ancient capitol of Arnor . The defenders , consisting of the <unk> and Dwarves led by Glóin , crumble under the relentless Goblin attacks , and Eriador falls under Goblin control . Sauron launches a concurrent campaign east of the Misty Mountains . The orcs from Dol Guldur eliminate the Elves and the Ents that guard the Forest Road in Mirkwood , defeating the Elven lord Thranduil . After the fall of Mirkwood , the Mouth of Sauron leads his horde to Withered Heath to recruit the Dragon Lord Drogoth , after destroying the Dwarves in the area . To finally rid Sauron and Middle Earth of the Dwarves , The Mouth of Sauron attacks the human city of Dale and the Dwarven stronghold of Erebor , led by King Dain . For the final battle against the Good factions in the North , the Goblin horde and Sauron 's forces from Mordor converge at Rivendell , the last surviving stronghold against Sauron in Middle @-@ earth . Eagles , the Dead Men of <unk> , Galadriel and her surviving Elves , and the remnants of the Fellowship of the Ring arrive to help Arwen and Elrond , but Sauron ( having attained full power through recovering the One Ring from the dead Frodo ) and all his gathered forces enter the battle and completely destroy the remaining Good forces in the North . 
 The Good Campaign opens after the Fellowship of the Ring has set out on their mission to <unk> the One Ring of Power , with Elrond and Glóin planning the War in the North . The Elven hero Glorfindel discovers an impending attack on the Elven sanctuary of Rivendell . Thanks to the early warning , Elrond 's forces in Rivendell manage to repel the Goblins ' attacks . Following the battle , Elrond realizes that the Elves and Dwarves must join forces to purge the threat of Sauron 's forces in the North . The next battle takes place in the Goblin capital of <unk> , where the Goblin fortress is destroyed , and Gorkil the Goblin King is killed . After their victory , the heroes are informed that the Goblins , on Sauron 's command , enlisted the service of a Dragon named Drogoth who is laying waste to the Dwarves of the Blue Mountains . The heroes make their way to the Blue Mountains and help the Dwarven army defeat Drogoth and his Goblins . 
 The Grey Havens , an Elven port on the western shores , is attacked by the Corsairs of <unk> , allies of Sauron . The Dwarves , who have been reluctant to ally with the Elves , eventually decide to come to the aid of the Grey Havens . With the Goblins defeated and all of Eriador pacified , the Dwarven @-@ Elven alliance is tested by Sauron 's forces . Mordor 's overwhelming forces besiege the Lake Town of <unk> and the Dwarven city of Erebor . The Dwarven king Dáin leads a small group of Dwarves and men of Dale to defend their homeland and manage to eliminate the Mordor presence in <unk> but are forced to retreat back to Erebor to defend themselves against an overwhelming army led by the Mouth of Sauron . After a long battle against the Mouth of Sauron 's army , Elven reinforcements from Mirkwood led by the Elven king Thranduil arrive and save the Dwarves , defeating the Mouth of Sauron and his army . Elrond leads the first attack , but later , Thranduil , Glorfindel , Glóin , Arwen , and King Dáin all unite under the Dwarven @-@ Elven alliance for a final battle in Dol Guldur , the stronghold of Sauron in Mirkwood , aided by the Ents and Eagles . The Good forces and its three combined armies overcome the defenses and destroy the fortress , eliminating the last threat in the North . 
 = = Development = = 
 Tolkien Enterprises granted the publisher of The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II , Electronic Arts , the rights to develop The Lord of the Games video games based on The Lord of the Rings books on July 22 , 2005 . This agreement was complementary to a separate arrangement made between the two companies in 2001 . That agreement gave Electronic Arts the rights to build video games based on The Lord of the Rings film trilogy . The new deal gives Electronic Arts the opportunity to create video games with original stories tied closely with the Lord of the Rings universe . In the same announcement , Electronic Arts revealed two games that its EA Los Angeles division would be developing with the license : The Lord of the Rings : The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II for Windows — a sequel to The Lord of the Rings : The Battle for Middle @-@ earth — and The Lord of the Rings : Tactics for the PlayStation Portable . 
 On November 10 , 2005 , Electronic Arts announced that Hugo Weaving , who played Elrond in the Lord of the Rings film trilogy , would reprise his role as Elrond and be the lead voiceover talent in The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II . During his voiceover session , he noted , " I always find voice work really fascinating because you are working on one element of your make up as an actor — focusing more intently on one part of your toolbox if you like — in a way so everything seems to go into producing that vocal effect . It really isn ’ t just an effect , because it actually comes from a source which is a true continuation of that character . " 
 On January 13 , 2006 , Electronic Arts reported that an Xbox 360 version of The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II was under development , and it was promised to feature a " unique and intuitive control scheme " developed by video game designer Louis Castle , co @-@ founder of the real @-@ time strategy developer Westwood Studios . Players would be able to play online via the Xbox Live service . Castle was excited to port the game to a console , stating , " Living these cinematic battles in high @-@ definition with stunning surround sound , all from the comfort of your living room couch on the Xbox 360 , is an extraordinary experience . [ ... ] Adding the ability to battle it out with friends via Xbox Live is also really exciting . " 
 The game 's water effects received substantial upgrades because of the large role naval battles play in The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II . The developers endeavored to make the surface of oceans and lakes look realistic by using techniques similar to those applied in films when creating computer @-@ generated ocean water . The digital water simulates deep ocean water by reflecting its surroundings on the surface , and wave technology was used to create large waves along coastlines to immerse the player in the game experience . Lost towns , corals , and fish were added underwater to add to the effect . Water was chosen as the first graphical component of The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II to take advantage of DirectX 9 programmable shaders . These additions were part of an overall Electronic Arts strategy to continue the Lord of the Rings experience that began with the trilogy film series . 
 As cinematic director of The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II , Richard Taylor was responsible for designing the game 's opening and closing sequences , as well as campaign and mission introductions and endings . As the first Electronic Arts video game to be given free rein on material from The Lord of the Rings universe , several lands , characters , and creatures from the books appear visually for the first time in the game 's cut scenes . Taylor considered it essential to use good graphical and audio combinations when telling a story , and he was pleased to have Weaving on the project as the primary storyteller . 
 = = Release = = 
 The game was released by Electronic Arts on March 2 , 2006 for Windows and July 5 , 2006 for Xbox 360 . Electronic Arts released a Collector 's Edition that includes a bonus DVD with supplemental high @-@ definition media such as the full original music score ; in @-@ game cinematics and trailers ; the documentary The Making of The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II ; and The Art of the Game , a gallery featuring hundreds of cinematic paintings and concept art created for the game . 
 It was given generally favorable reviews , receiving an aggregated score of 84 % at Metacritic for its Windows version . Praise focused on its successful integration of the Lord of the Rings franchise with the real @-@ time strategy genre , while criticism targeted the game 's unbalanced multiplayer mode . The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II was given the Editor 's Choice Award from IGN . At the end of its debut month of March 2006 , The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II reached fourth in a list of the month 's best @-@ selling PC games , while the Collector 's Edition peaked at eighth place . In the second month after the game 's release , The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II was the 12th best @-@ selling PC game , despite a 10 % slump in overall game sales for that month . 
 After playing the game , PC Gamer found little fault with it , calling it a very well @-@ balanced game overall . The magazine also was pleased that the game 's " production values [ were ] sky @-@ high " , with which GamesRadar agreed , explaining , " It 's not often you come across an RTS with production values this high ; every part seems to be polished till it shines . " When compared to its predecessor , The Lord of the Rings : The Battle for Middle @-@ earth , GamePro was convinced The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II had improved upon the original in several fundamental ways . GameSpot believed that The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II offered better gameplay and a much broader scope that encompassed more of Middle @-@ earth . 
 Several critics praised the game 's real @-@ time strategy elements and graphics . IGN considered the high quality of The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II proof that Electronic Arts was truly interested in building great real @-@ time strategy games . Despite a few minor issues , GameZone was happy with the gameplay of The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II , believing that the game did a good job of enabling the player to experience the turmoil of the fantasy world . They also admired the game 's conversion for the Xbox 360 version , calling it " one of the best PC @-@ to @-@ console conversions " and praising the developers for a " commendable job of assigning actions to the 360 controller ’ s eight buttons " . The graphics were appreciated by ActionTrip , which found it " really hard not to drool over this game " , commending the game 's design and art team for doing a fabulous job on every location that appeared in the single @-@ player campaign . 
 Playing within the universe of The Lord of the Rings was appealing to a number of reviewers , which found that it generally increased the game 's entertainment value . PC Gamer shared this sentiment , calling Lord of the Rings " arguably the best fantasy universe ever " , and GameZone asked the question , " What self @-@ respecting Tolkien fan can be without this title ? " The results also pleased 1UP.com , which was convinced that fans of The Lord of the Rings could not afford to miss purchasing the game . Game Revolution complimented the game 's merge with the Lord of the Rings universe , observing that the franchise 's mythology and the game 's frenetic battles came together in a very satisfying bundle . The integration of The Lord of the Rings into a video game satisfied Game Informer , and the magazine predicted the game would be " another winner for Electronic Arts " . 
 Despite positive reactions , reviewers brought up several issues with the game . The British video game publication PC Gamer UK was unhappy with the game , claiming that Electronic Arts chose to release a formulaic game because it was a safer choice than taking The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II in another direction . PC Zone agreed with this view , claiming that although the game looked impressive , it took a by @-@ the @-@ numbers approach towards the real @-@ time strategy genre in a " mindless sort of way " , concluding that " in no way is it anywhere near the game we hoped for . " The game 's multiplayer portion disappointed GameSpy , which found it too unbalanced compared to the heroes , whom they considered to be too strong . Eurogamer considered the game to be of average quality , noting that there were no truly redeeming qualities . 
 Electronic Arts announced on July 27 , 2006 that its EA Los Angeles studio would be releasing an expansion pack to The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II titled The Lord of the Rings : The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II : The Rise of the Witch @-@ king . It was slated for release during the 2006 holiday season . The game , produced by Amir Rahimi , promised players the opportunity to fight in wars that precedes the events of the Lord of the Rings novels . The Rise of the Witch @-@ king adds a new single @-@ player campaign , new units , a new faction , and improved features . Its story follows the Witch @-@ king of Angmar 's " ascent to power , his domination of Angmar , and eventual invasion of Arnor , Aragorn 's ancestral home " . The game was sent to manufacturers on November 15 , 2006 , and was released on November 28 . 
 On January 9 , 2011 , Electronic Arts announced that the online game servers would be shut down on January 11 , 2011 for the Xbox 360 format of the game . The PC version of the game was shut down on December 31 , 2010 . Electronic Arts noted that their discontinuation of support for the game was partly because the licensing deal with New Line Cinema ( holders of the Lord of the Rings license ) had expired , which led them to no other option than to shut down all online services for the game . 
 = Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets = 
 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets is the second novel in the Harry Potter series , written by J. K. Rowling . The plot follows Harry 's second year at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry , during which a series of messages on the walls of the school 's corridors warn that the " Chamber of Secrets " has been opened and that the " heir of Slytherin " would kill all pupils who do not come from all @-@ magical families . These threats are found after attacks which leave residents of the school " petrified " ( frozen like stone ) . Throughout the year , Harry and his friends Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger investigate the attacks . 
 The book was published in the United Kingdom on 2 July 1998 by Bloomsbury and in the United States on 2 June 1999 by Scholastic Inc . Although Rowling found it difficult to finish the book , it won high praise and awards from critics , young readers and the book industry , although some critics thought the story was perhaps too frightening for younger children . Much like with other novels in the series , Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets triggered religious debates ; some religious authorities have condemned its use of magical themes , while others have praised its emphasis on self @-@ sacrifice and on the way in which a person 's character is the result of the person 's choices . 
 Several commentators have noted that personal identity is a strong theme in the book , and that it addresses issues of racism through the treatment of non @-@ magical , non @-@ human and non @-@ living characters . Some commentators regard the diary as a warning against uncritical acceptance of information from sources whose motives and reliability cannot be checked . Institutional authority is portrayed as self @-@ serving and incompetent . The book is also known to have some connections to the sixth novel of the series , Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince . 
 The film adaptation of the novel , released in 2002 , became ( at that time ) the seventh highest grossing film ever and received generally favourable reviews . Video games loosely based on Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets were also released for several platforms , and most obtained favourable reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While the Dursley <unk> uncle Vernon , aunt Petunia , and cousin <unk> a potential client for Vernon ’ s drill @-@ manufacturing company <unk> , Harry Potter reminisces upon the events of the previous year , including his enrollment in Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry and confrontation with Lord Voldemort ( the Dark wizard whose reign seemingly ended when he killed Harry ’ s parents and attempted but failed to kill Harry himself ) , and laments the fact that the best friends he made at the institution have not written to him , even for his birthday , on which the novel opens . 
 Just as Harry is starting to anticipate his return to Hogwarts School , an impish house @-@ elf named Dobby arrives out of nowhere to warn Harry against the decision to return to the wizarding world , citing grave danger as the reason and inciting Harry ’ s gravest punishment yet when he smashes a dessert crafted by Petunia for the dinner party and frames it on Harry himself . Ron Weasley arrives with his twin brothers Fred and George to perform a jailbreak in their father Arthur ’ s enchanted Ford Anglia and to deposit him at their family home the Burrow for the remainder of his holidays . Harry and the rest of the <unk> Molly , third eldest son Percy , and daughter <unk> to Diagon Alley , where they are reunited with Hermione Granger and introduced to Lucius Malfoy , father of Harry ’ s school nemesis Draco , and Gilderoy Lockhart , a conceited autobiographer who has been appointed Defense Against the Dark Arts professor . As Harry and Ron plan to depart with the rest for Hogwarts School , the barrier within King ’ s Cross station that separates Muggles from wizards refuses to allow them passage , forcing them to fly Arthur ’ s car to the school , where they crash into a sentient willow tree on the grounds . 
 The crash lands them in hot water with headmaster Albus Dumbledore and Minerva McGonagall , Head of Gryffindor House and the Transfiguration professor , who doesn ’ t expel them in spite of the clear breach of magical law but does assign them to detentions : Ron must clean the school trophies in the trophy room , and Harry must help the lunatic Professor Lockhart with addressing his fan mail . Lockhart ’ s classes turn out to be as obsessed with the man as he is with himself , as proven by a “ hands @-@ on ” training experience with a pack of destructive pixies ( small , bluish creatures that exist to cause mayhem ) , and Harry learns that prejudice exists in the wizarding world by the way of blood status : Those with “ pure ” blood ( only wizarding heritage ) have the advantage over and condescend to those with Muggle parentage . Harry also begins hearing an unnerving voice ( one only he can hear ) seemingly coming from the walls of the school itself , and during a “ death @-@ day party ” for the Gryffindor ghost , the trio happens upon a petrified Mrs. Norris , the cat belonging to school caretaker Argus Filch , and a warning scrawled across one of the walls : “ The chamber has been opened . Enemies of the heir , beware . ” 
 Rumours fly around the school regarding the history of the Chamber of Secrets , and for Harry and his friends , the answer comes by way of Cuthbert Binns , the ghostly professor of History of Magic : The Chamber of Secrets , which houses a terrible monster , was created by one of the school ’ s founders , Salazar Slytherin , after a fundamental disenfranchisement with the others ( Godric Gryffindor , Helga Hufflepuff , and Rowena Ravenclaw ) , believing that students of non @-@ magical parentage should be refused entry to the school . When a <unk> , one of the balls involved in Quidditch , chases after Harry instead of zigzagging toward any player it can hit , breaking his arm , Dobby returns in the middle of the night to visit Harry in the hospital wing , revealing that it was he who charmed the <unk> and sealed the gateway at King ’ s Cross and that the Chamber of Secrets had been opened before . Another attack occurs , this time to a first @-@ year Gryffindor named Colin <unk> who idolizes Harry , and the school enters panic mode , setting up a dueling class for the students ( led by Lockhart and Potions master / Head of Slytherin House Severus Snape ) , during which it is revealed that Harry can speak to snakes . 
 This sparks the rumour mill yet again , as students around the school suspect Harry of being the Heir of Slytherin , and circumstantial evidence to support this theory arrives in the form of another attack , this time on Hufflepuff second @-@ year Justin Finch <unk> and the Gryffindor ghost . Harry , Ron , and Hermione begin to suspect that Draco is behind the attacks , given his family history of remaining well within Slytherin ranks and open hostility toward Muggle @-@ born students , and so Hermione concocts Polyjuice potion , which allows them to become Draco ’ s boorish lackeys , Vincent Crabbe and Gregory Goyle , for an hour to interrogate him . This comes to nothing , as Draco ’ s father only told his son the general facts of the previous opening of the Chamber and that it occurred fifty years previously . Meanwhile , Myrtle Warren , an existentially mopey ghost that haunts a bathroom , unwittingly provides a new clue in the form of a diary deposited in her stall — a diary , moreover , that belonged to Tom Riddle , a student who knows all too well about the Chamber , having been witness to a fellow student ’ s death fifty years ago . The culprit , he reveals to Harry , was none other than Rubeus Hagrid , now gamekeeper for Hogwarts School ; when Hermione is attacked next , alongside a Ravenclaw prefect , the school is put on lockdown , and Dumbledore and Hagrid are forced to leave the premises . 
 Fortunately for Harry and Ron , Hagrid left a set of instructions : to follow the spiders currently fleeing into the Forbidden Forest , which they do , only to find the monster blamed for the attacks fifty years before , a massive spider named Aragog , who explains to the duo that the real monster is one that spiders fear above all others . Hermione provides the last set of clues that inform them of the monster ’ s identity : It is a basilisk , which is a giant serpent ( hence Harry ’ s ability to understand it ) that kills with a stare ( although no one is dead because of various devices through which they indirectly saw the monster ) and which spiders ( such as Aragog and his offspring ) fear above all others . Harry figures out from hints Aragog dropped that a student who died during the previous attacks is Myrtle , and when Ginny is apparently taken by the monster into the Chamber , they discover that the entrance is in the bathroom they ’ ve been using to make Polyjuice Potion . Harry , Ron , and Lockhart enter the Chamber , but the <unk> professor ( who reveals that he ’ s a fraud ) causes a rockfall upon attempt to modify the boys ’ memories with Ron ’ s damaged wand , and Harry must enter alone . He arrives to find Ginny in a weakened state being watched over by a shadowy , ghostly Riddle , who explains that he is the boy who will become Voldemort in the future before setting the basilisk upon Harry ; Harry defeats the monster and destroys the diary , which makes Riddle disappear . 
 Harry , Ron , Ginny , and Lockhart return to the main castle and reunite with McGonagall , Dumbledore , and Mr. and Mrs. Weasley . Ginny , whose <unk> by Voldemort caused all of the petrification and troubles over the course of the year , is given a reprieve by Dumbledore , who reasons that greater wizards have been duped by Voldemort before and takes great interest in the qualities of the diary , which Harry gives to him . Lucius Malfoy bursts in after this meeting , demanding to know why and how Dumbledore has returned to the school and accompanied by Dobby , revealing the family to whom he is enslaved . The house @-@ elf also provides Harry with unspoken cues regarding the diary ’ s ownership : While it was Tom Riddle ’ s , it had been in the Malfoys ’ possession , and Harry returns it , devising a scenario involving his own sock that frees Dobby from the Malfoys ’ employment . The petrified students are cured , the end @-@ of @-@ year exams are cancelled ( much to Hermione ’ s chagrin ) , Hagrid comes back in the middle of the final feast , and Harry returns to Privet Drive in higher spirits than he last left it . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Rowling found it difficult to finish Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets because she was afraid it would not live up to the expectations raised by Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone ( Harry Potter and the Sorcerer 's Stone in the U.S. ) . After delivering the manuscript to Bloomsbury on schedule , she took it back for six weeks of revision . 
 In early drafts of the book , the ghost Nearly Headless Nick sang a self @-@ composed song explaining his condition and the circumstances of his death . This was cut as the book 's editor did not care for the poem , which has been subsequently published as an extra on J. K. Rowling 's official website . The family background of Dean Thomas was removed because Rowling and her publishers considered it an " unnecessary digression " , and she considered Neville Longbottom 's own journey of discovery " more important to the central plot " . 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets was published in the UK on 2 July 1998 and in the US on 2 June 1999 . It immediately took first place in UK best @-@ seller lists , displacing popular authors such as John Grisham , Tom Clancy , and Terry Pratchett , and making Rowling the first author to win the British Book Awards Children 's Book of the Year for two years in succession . In June 1999 , it went straight to the top of three US best @-@ seller lists , including The New York Times ' . 
 First edition printings had several errors , which were fixed in subsequent reprints . Initially Dumbledore said that Voldemort was the last remaining ancestor of Salazar Slytherin , instead of his descendant . Gilderoy Lockhart 's book on werewolves is entitled Weekends with Werewolves at one point and Wanderings with Werewolves later in the book . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets " was met with near universal acclaim . In The Times , Deborah Loudon described Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets as a children 's book that would be " re @-@ read into adulthood " and highlighted its " strong plots , engaging characters , excellent jokes and a moral message which flows naturally from the story " . Fantasy author Charles de Lint agreed , and considered the second Harry Potter book as good as Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone , a rare achievement among series of books . Thomas Wagner regarded the plot as very similar to that of the first book , based on searching for a secret hidden under the school . However , he enjoyed the parody of celebrities and their fans that centres round Gilderoy Lockhart , and approved of the book 's handling of racism . Tammy <unk> found the book more disturbing than its predecessor , particularly in the rash behaviour of Harry and his friends after Harry withholds information from Dumbledore , and in the human @-@ like behaviour of the <unk> used to make a potion that cures petrification . Nevertheless , she considered the second story as enjoyable as the first . 
 Mary Stuart thought the final conflict with Tom Riddle in the Chamber was almost as scary as in some of Stephen King 's works , and perhaps too strong for young or timid children . She commented that " there are enough surprises and imaginative details thrown in as would normally fill five lesser books . " Like other reviewers , she thought the book would give pleasure to both children and adult readers . According to Philip Nel , the early reviews gave unalloyed praise while the later ones included some criticisms , although they still agreed that the book was outstanding . 
 Writing after all seven books had been published , Graeme Davis regarded Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets as the weakest of the series , and agreed that the plot structure is much the same as in Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone . He described Fawkes 's appearance to arm Harry and then to heal him as a deus ex machina : he said that the book does not explain how Fawkes knew where to find Harry ; and Fawkes 's timing had to be very precise , as arriving earlier would probably have prevented the battle with the basilisk , while arriving later would have been fatal to Harry and Ginny . 
 = = = Awards and honours = = = 
 Rowling 's Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets was the recipient of several awards . The American Library Association listed the novel among its 2000 Notable Children 's Books , as well as its Best Books for Young Adults . In 1999 , Booklist named Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets as one of its Editors ' Choices , and as one of its Top Ten Fantasy Novels for Youth . The Cooperative Children 's Book center made the novel a <unk> Choice of 2000 in the " Fiction for Children " category . The novel also won Children 's Book of the Year British Book Award , and was shortlisted for the 1998 Guardian Children 's Award and the 1998 Carnegie Award . 
 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets won the Nestlé Smarties Book Prize 1998 Gold Medal in the 9 – 11 years division . Rowling also won two other Nestlé Smarties Book Prizes for Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone and Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban . The Scottish Arts Council awarded their first ever Children ’ s Book Award to the novel in 1999 , and it was also awarded Whitaker 's Platinum Book Award in 2001 . In 2003 , the novel was listed at number 23 on the BBC 's survey The Big Read . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets continues the examination of what makes a person who he or she is , which began in the first book . As well as maintaining that Harry 's identity is shaped by his decisions rather than any aspect of his birth , Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets provides contrasting characters who try to conceal their true personalities : as Tammy <unk> puts it , Gilderoy Lockhart " lacks any real identity " because he is nothing more than a charming liar . Riddle also complicates Harry 's struggle to understand himself by pointing out the similarities between the two : " both half @-@ bloods , orphans raised by Muggles , probably the only two <unk> to come to Hogwarts since the great Slytherin . " 
 Opposition to class , death and its impacts , experiencing adolescence , sacrifice , love , friendship , loyalty , prejudice , and racism are constant themes of the series . In Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets Harry 's consideration and respect for others extends to the lowly , non @-@ human Dobby and the ghost Nearly Headless Nick . According to Marguerite Krause , achievements in the novel depend more on ingenuity and hard work than on natural talents . 
 Edward Duffy , an associate professor at Marquette University , says that one of the central characters of Chamber of Secrets is a book , Tom Riddle 's enchanted diary , which takes control of Ginny Weasley – just as Riddle planned . Duffy suggests that Rowling intended this as a warning against passively consuming information from sources that have their own agendas . Although Bronwyn Williams and Amy Zenger regard the diary as more like an instant messaging or chat room system , they agree about the dangers of relying too much on the written word , which can camouflage the author , and they highlight a comical example , Lockhart 's self @-@ promoting books . 
 Immorality and the portrayal of authority as negative are significant themes in the novel . Marguerite Krause states that there are few absolute moral rules in Harry Potter 's world , for example Harry prefers to tell the truth , but lies whenever he considers it necessary – very like his enemy Draco Malfoy . At the end of Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets , Dumbledore retracts his promise to punish Harry , Ron , and Hermione if they break any more school rules – after Professor McGonagall estimates that they have broken over 100 – and lavishly rewards them for ending the threat from the Chamber of Secrets . Krause further states that authority figures and political institutions receive little respect from Rowling . William MacNeil of Griffith University , Queensland , Australia states that the Minister for Magic is presented as a mediocrity . In his article " Harry Potter and the Secular City " , Ken Jacobson suggests that the Ministry as a whole is portrayed as a tangle of bureaucratic empires , saying that " Ministry officials busy themselves with minutiae ( e.g. standardising cauldron thicknesses ) and coin politically correct euphemisms like ' non @-@ magical community ' ( for Muggles ) and ' memory modification ' ( for magical brainwashing ) . " 
 This novel implies that it begins in 1992 : the cake for Nearly @-@ Headless Nick 's 500th <unk> party bears the words " Sir Nicholas De Mimsy <unk> died 31 October 1492 " . 
 = = = Connection to Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince = = = 
 Chamber of Secrets has many links with the sixth book of the series , Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince . In fact , Half @-@ Blood Prince was the working title of Chamber of Secrets and Rowling says she originally intended to present some " crucial pieces of information " in the second book , but ultimately felt that " this information 's proper home was book six " . Some objects that play significant roles in Half @-@ Blood Prince first appear in Chamber of Secrets : the Hand of Glory and the opal necklace that are on sale in <unk> and Burkes ; a Vanishing Cabinet in Hogwarts that is damaged by Peeves the Poltergeist ; and Tom Riddle 's diary , which is later shown to be a Horcrux . Additionally , these two novels are the ones with the most focus on Harry 's relationship with Ginny Weasley . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 The film version of Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets was released in 2002 . Chris Columbus directed the film , and the screenplay was written by Steve Kloves . It became the third film to exceed $ 600 million in international box office sales , preceded by Titanic , released in 1997 , and Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone , released in 2001 . The film was nominated for a Saturn Award for the Best Fantasy Film , According to Metacritic , the film version of Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets received " generally favourable reviews " with an average score of 63 % , and another aggregator , Rotten Tomatoes , gave it a score of 82 % . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Five unique video games by different developers were released between 2002 and 2003 by Electronic Arts , loosely based on the book : 
 = U.S. Route 30 in New Jersey = 
 U.S. Route 30 ( US 30 ) is a U.S. highway running from Astoria , Oregon east to Atlantic City , New Jersey . In the U.S. state of New Jersey , US 30 runs 58 @.@ 26 miles ( 93 @.@ 76 km ) from the Benjamin Franklin Bridge at the Delaware River in Camden , Camden County while concurrent with Interstate 676 ( I @-@ 676 ) southeast to Virginia Avenue in Atlantic City , Atlantic County . Most of the route in New Jersey is known as the White Horse Pike and is four lanes wide . The road runs through mostly developed areas in Camden County , with surroundings becoming more rural as the road approaches Atlantic County . US 30 runs through several towns including Collingswood , Berlin , Hammonton , Egg Harbor City , and Absecon . 
 Most of US 30 in New Jersey follows the White Horse Pike , a turnpike chartered in 1854 to run from Camden to Stratford and eventually toward Atlantic City . In 1917 , pre @-@ 1927 Route 3 was legislated to run from Camden to Absecon on the White Horse Pike , while US 30 was designated in New Jersey in 1926 to connect Camden and Atlantic City via the White Horse Pike . A year later , pre @-@ 1927 Route 3 was replaced by Route 43 , which ran between US 130 near Camden and US 9 ( now Route 157 ) in Absecon , and Route 25 was designated along the portion of US 30 between the Ben Franklin Bridge and US 130 . The segment of US 30 past Route 43 into Atlantic City became Route 56 in 1938 . In 1953 , the state highway designations were removed from US 30 . A freeway was proposed for US 30 in Camden County during the late 1960s , running from Camden to Berlin ; however , it was never built . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Camden County = = = 
 US 30 crosses the Delaware River into New Jersey on the Ben Franklin Bridge from Philadelphia along with I @-@ 676 and the PATCO Speedline . The road continues east into the downtown area of Camden in Camden County as a seven @-@ lane freeway maintained by the Delaware River Port Authority that passes to the north of Campbell 's Field and comes to the westbound toll plaza for the bridge . Past the toll plaza , US 30 splits from I @-@ 676 at an interchange and heads southeast on the six @-@ lane , divided Admiral Wilson Boulevard maintained by the New Jersey Department of Transportation ( NJDOT ) and named for Henry Braid Wilson . This portion , formerly known as Bridge Approach Boulevard , is an early example of a roadway designed for the automobile , and was home to the first drive @-@ in movie theatre . Along Admiral Wilson Boulevard , the route passes under New Jersey Transit 's River Line and interchanges with CR 537 before widening to eight lanes and crossing the Cooper River . The road runs east through urbanized sections of Camden along the north bank of the Cooper River , interchanging with CR 608 . After this interchange , US 30 enters suburban Pennsauken Township and comes to the Airport Circle , which has been modified to include ramps . Here , US 30 meets US 130 and the western terminus of Route 38 and turns south to form a concurrency with US 130 on Crescent Boulevard , a six @-@ lane divided highway that narrows to four lanes . The road crosses the Cooper River into Collingswood , running to the east of Harleigh Cemetery before interchanging with CR 561 and passing under the PATCO Speedline . 
 At the former Collingswood Circle , US 30 splits from US 130 by heading south @-@ southeast on two @-@ lane , undivided White Horse Pike . The road passes homes and some businesses before crossing the Newton Creek into <unk> , where it passes suburban residential and commercial development . US 30 forms the border between <unk> to the west and Haddon Township to the east before heading into Audubon . At the border of Audubon and Haddon Heights , the route crosses CR 551 Spur . In this town , the White Horse Pike reaches an intersection with Route 41 at a modified traffic circle and an interchange with I @-@ 295 within a close distance of each other in Barrington . At this point , the route is four lanes wide , with a short divided portion immediately south of I @-@ 295 . US 30 continues into Lawnside , becoming a four @-@ lane undivided road . It passes under the New Jersey Turnpike , but there is no interchange present between the two roads . Past here , the road enters Magnolia , where it crosses CR 544 . Following this intersection , the route heads through Somerdale before turning more southeast and forming the border between Stratford to the southwest and Somerdale to the northeast . US 30 entirely enters Stratford as it intersects CR 673 and passes near the Lindenwold Station , which is a stop on New Jersey Transit ’ s Atlantic City Line and the terminus of the PATCO Speedline . The White Horse Pike turns back to the south @-@ southeast and forms the border between Laurel Springs to the west and Lindenwold to the east before continuing fully into Lindenwold . The route later turns southeast and enters Clementon . After a turn to the east , US 30 runs along the border of Lindenwold to the north and Clementon to the south and fully enters Lindenwold again prior to the border with Berlin . In Berlin , the White Horse Pike becomes concurrent with CR 534 and then CR 561 a short distance later . US 30 turns to the south @-@ southeast and passes through the downtown area of Berlin as a two @-@ lane road . Past the downtown area , CR 534 and CR 561 split from US 30 at the same intersection , with CR 534 heading east on Jackson Road and CR 561 heading southeast on <unk> Road , and US 30 widens back to four lanes . The White Horse Pike encounters Route 73 and CR 536 Spur at a cloverleaf interchange . 
 Following the interchange , US 30 enters Waterford Township , as it passes near the community of Atco . The road turns south as it passes Atco Lake and continues into more wooded areas with some development , eventually heading south @-@ southeast again . New Jersey Transit ’ s Atlantic City Line runs a short distance to the northeast of the route at this point . US 30 continues through <unk> before it enters Winslow Township . Here , the route intersects CR 536 and forms a short concurrency with that route before it heads to the east . From this point , the road continues into a mix of woodland , farmland , and development . US 30 intersects Route 143 and passes over the Atlantic City Line as it turns southeast . The road makes another turn to the south as it crosses CR 723 . 
 = = = Atlantic County = = = 
 US 30 heads southeast into Hammonton , Atlantic County , continuing through rural areas with increasing development . The road comes to its intersection with the southern terminus US 206 and the northern terminus of Route 54 . A short distance later , the route has a concurrency with CR 542 that begins adjacent to the former <unk> - Kessler Memorial Hospital that closed in 2009 and passes by Hammonton Lake . US 30 turns south @-@ southwest past the CR 542 concurrency before heading south . The route crosses CR 561 and turns southeast again , entering Mullica Township . Here , the White Horse Pike enters more forested areas with a few buildings , running a short distance to the northeast of the Atlantic City Line . Past the intersection with CR 623 in the developed community of Elwood , US 30 becomes a divided highway with grass median and jughandles . This configuration continues until Egg Harbor City , when the median ends . In Egg Harbor City , US 30 passes a mix of homes and businesses , intersecting Route 50 and CR 563 in the center of town . At this point , CR 563 forms a concurrency with US 30 and the two routes continue through more of the town before crossing into Galloway Township at the intersection with CR 674 . The road passes through rural areas with some development , reaching the community of Cologne . In this area , there is a crossroads with CR 614 before CR 563 splits from US 30 by turning south onto Tilton Road . Past Cologne , the road reaches a junction with CR 575 in the developed community of Pomona . 
 Following this intersection , US 30 continues southeast past wooded residential neighborhoods to the northeast , becoming a divided highway again . The route comes to a partial interchange with the Garden State Parkway , with access to and from the northbound direction of the parkway . Past this interchange , the road heads through commercial areas and continues into Absecon . In Absecon , the White Horse Pike widens to six lanes and crosses CR 651 before intersecting US 9 . After passing near the Absecon Station , US 30 crosses Shore Road , which heads north as Route 157 and south as CR 585 . The road turns south , narrowing back to four lanes before entering marshland to the west of Absecon Bay . There is a northbound exit and southbound entrance to CR 646 before US 30 crosses the <unk> Thorofare into Atlantic City , where the name becomes Absecon Boulevard as it turns to the east . Absecon Boulevard crosses Newfound Thorofare before heading south and passing over Duck Thorofare . The road passes by the Jersey @-@ Atlantic Wind Farm and heads southeast across Beach Thorofare . At this point , US 30 widens to six lanes and passes to the north of residential neighborhoods , with maintenance of the road switching from the New Jersey Department of Transportation to the South Jersey Transportation Authority . After crossing the Penrose Canal , the route passes over the tunnel carrying the Atlantic City – Brigantine Connector and intersects the southern terminus of Route 87 , where there is a ramp to the northbound Atlantic City – Brigantine Connector . The road passes areas of development and intersects an access road to the southbound Atlantic City – Brigantine Connector as well as Route 187 . Two blocks later , US 30 ends at the intersection with Virginia Avenue . 
 = = History = = 
 The White Horse Turnpike Company was incorporated January 27 , 1854 with the authority to convert White Horse Road into a turnpike , running from Camden to Stratford and eventually to Atlantic City . By 1913 , maintenance of the White Horse Pike became public . The route of US 30 today in New Jersey was designated as pre @-@ 1927 Route 3 from 1916 to 1927 between Camden and Absecon . On October 30 , 1925 , plans were made for a cross @-@ country route from Salt Lake City , Utah to Atlantic City , New Jersey as part of the U.S. Highway System . This road was designated U.S. Route 30 in 1926 . It entered New Jersey from Pennsylvania in Camden and followed the entire length of pre @-@ 1927 Route 3 to Absecon before continuing into Atlantic City . In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Route 43 replaced the Route 3 designation along US 30 between US 130 and US 9 ( now Route 157 ) in Absecon while Route 25 was designated along with US 30 between the Ben Franklin Bridge and US 130 . In 1938 , the portion of US 30 from the terminus of Route 43 in Absecon into Atlantic City was designated as Route 56 . Prior to the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , spur routes of Route 43 and Route 56 were planned . Route <unk> was planned in 1938 to be a route running from Route 43 in Germania to Route 4 in Northfield ; this was never built as a state highway but the alignment is now followed by CR 563 . Route S56 was legislated in 1945 to be a spur of Route 56 to Brigantine along what had also been legislated as Route S4A ; this road became Route 87 in 1953 . 
 In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , which eliminated several concurrencies between U.S. and state routes , the designations of routes 25 , 43 , and 56 were removed from US 30 . Prior to the completion of I @-@ 676 across the Ben Franklin Bridge in the 1970s , US 30 used Penn Street eastbound and Linden Street westbound to travel between the bridge and Admiral Wilson Boulevard . In the late 1960s , a freeway was proposed for US 30 in Camden County by the Delaware Valley Regional Planning Commission . The freeway , which was to cost $ 40 million , was to run from the Ben Franklin Bridge to I @-@ 295 in Barrington with a $ 16 million extension to the planned Route 90 freeway in Berlin . The segment between Camden and Barrington was to be complete by 1975 while the extension to Berlin was to be finished by 1985 . However , the NJDOT did not build this US 30 freeway . In 2009 , the Collingswood Circle at the eastern end of the US 130 concurrency was replaced with an at @-@ grade intersection with jughandles . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Hap Holmes = 
 Harry George " Hap " Holmes ( February 21 , 1892 – June 27 , 1941 ) was a Canadian professional ice hockey goaltender . As a professional , Holmes won the Stanley Cup four times , with four different teams . He tied the record of his 1914 Stanley Cup winning Toronto Blueshirts teammate Jack Marshall , who also won Cups with four different teams . No other player has duplicated this record . 
 Holmes played as an amateur for three season with the Parkdale Canoe Club of the Ontario Hockey Association ( OHA ) from 1908 to 1911 , before joining the professional Toronto Blueshirts of the National Hockey Association ( NHA ) in 1912 – 13 . Holmes won the first of his four Stanley Cups in 1914 . Although being under contract to the Blueshirts , Holmes joined the Seattle Metropolitans of the Pacific Coast Hockey Association ( PCHA ) for the 1915 – 16 season , winning his second Stanley Cup ( 1917 ) in his second season with the Metropolitans . For the 1917 – 18 season , Holmes ended up playing for the Torontos ( the following year renamed as the Toronto Arenas ) of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) through a series of loans by other teams . Holmes won his third Stanley Cup in his only full season with the Torontos . After playing two games in the 1918 @-@ 19 season for the Toronto Arenas , Holmes would be recalled by the Metropolitans . Holmes played for the Metropolitans for the next six seasons , until the team folded . In the 1924 – 25 season , Holmes joined the Victoria Cougars of the West Coast Hockey League ( WCHL / WHL ) . Holmes played for the Cougars for two seasons , winning the Stanley Cup for his fourth and last time . After the WCHL / WHL league folded , Holmes joined the Detroit Cougars of the NHL , playing with the Cougars for two seasons before retiring . 
 Holmes was a stand @-@ up style goaltender ; later on in his career , Holmes wore a cap when in goal to protect his head from objects thrown by spectators , as it presented a tempting target to them . Holmes coached minor @-@ league teams after his retirement , notably the Toronto Millionaires of the Canadian Professional Hockey League ( CPHL ) and the Cleveland Indians of the International Hockey League ( IHL ) . Holmes died on June 27 , 1941 , near Fort Lauderdale , Florida and was inducted posthumously into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1972 . 
 = = Amateur career = = 
 Harry " Hap " Holmes , alternatively nicknamed " Happy " , started playing ice hockey as an amateur with the Parkdale Canoe Club in the Ontario Hockey Association ( OHA ) in the 1908 – 09 season . He played with Parkdale for three seasons , for 11 regular season games and two playoff games . In his first season with the Parkdale Canoe Club , Holmes lost all three games in which he appeared , giving up 22 goals over that stretch . The following season , Holmes appeared in four games , winning and losing two games apiece . Over the 1909 – 10 season , Holmes gave up 26 goals . In 1910 – 11 , his last season with the Parkdale Canoe Club , he appeared in four regular season games once more , winning three and losing one , while giving up only 12 goals over those games . In the playoffs , Holmes played two games , losing one and tying the other , surrendering nine goals . In the 1911 – 12 season , Holmes appeared in only one exhibition game , as the Toronto Blueshirts were unable to play due to the slow completion of their artificial ice . Holmes played a game for the Toronto Tecumsehs , conceding three goals in a victory . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Toronto Blueshirts = = = 
 Holmes began his professional career playing for the Toronto Blueshirts of the National Hockey Association ( NHA ) in 1912 – 13 . Holmes played with the Blueshirts for three seasons . In his first season with the Blueshirts , Holmes had a 6 – 7 ( win @-@ loss ) record over 15 games with a shutout , and a 4 @.@ 47 goals @-@ against average . The Blueshirts ended up missing the playoffs . In the 1913 – 14 season , Holmes ' second season with the Blueshirts , he won the Stanley Cup for the first time . It was the first time a Toronto @-@ based team won the Stanley Cup . In the NHA playoffs , Holmes won one out of two games , and recorded a 1 @.@ 00 goals @-@ against average and one shutout ; in the Stanley Cup final , Holmes won all three games and finished with a 2 @.@ 59 goals @-@ against average . The next season , the Blueshirts missed the playoffs , as Holmes had only eight victories over 20 games , ending up with a 4 @.@ 18 goals @-@ against average . 
 = = = First stint with the Seattle Metropolitans = = = 
 In the 1915 – 16 season , Holmes signed with the Seattle Metropolitans of the Pacific Coast Hockey Association ( PCHA ) , although he was still under contract to the Blueshirts . In his first season with the Metropolitans , Holmes played 18 games . He finished with a 9 – 9 record , with no shutouts and a 3 @.@ 67 goals @-@ against average . That season , the Metropolitans missed the playoffs . In his sophomore season , Holmes posted a 16 – 8 record over 24 games , with two shutouts and a 3 @.@ 28 goals @-@ against average . In the Stanley Cup finals , Holmes posted a 3 – 1 record with a 2 @.@ 75 goals @-@ against average , en route to the Metropolitans ' only Stanley Cup win . The Metropolitans became the first American @-@ based team to win the Stanley Cup . 
 = = = Torontos / Toronto Arenas = = = 
 In November 1917 , Holmes signed as a free agent with the Montreal Wanderers . The Wanderers , in turn , loaned Holmes back to Seattle on December 12 , 1917 . On January 4 , 1918 , the Metropolitans returned Holmes under loan to the Torontos , now in the newly formed NHL . In his only full season with the Torontos / Arenas , Holmes appeared in 16 regular season games , posting a 9 – 7 record , with a 4 @.@ 73 goals @-@ against average and no shutouts . In the NHL playoffs , Holmes played two games , winning and losing one apiece . In the Stanley Cup finals , Holmes had a 3 – 2 record over five games , with a 4 @.@ 00 goals @-@ against average , en route to Holmes ' third Stanley Cup win . He is the only member of both the Blueshirts ' 1914 Stanley Cup win and the Torontos ' 1917 Stanley Cup win . After playing only two games with the Toronto Arenas the following season , surrendering nine goals in two losses , Holmes was recalled by the Metropolitans on December 27 , 1918 . 
 = = = Second stint with the Seattle Metropolitans = = = 
 In the 1918 – 19 season Holmes appeared in 20 regular season games for the Metropolitans , winning 11 and losing nine , with no shutouts and a 2 @.@ 25 goals @-@ against average . In the PCHA playoffs , Holmes played two games , winning and losing one apiece , and surrendering five goals in total . The Metropolitans made the Stanley Cup finals once more . Playing against the Montreal Canadiens of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) , the series was abandoned tied at two wins apiece , because of the Spanish Influenza pandemic . Montreal could not continue the series because one of their players , Joe Hall , was severely ill with influenza ; however , the Metropolitans did not wish to accept the Cup by default . Hall eventually died on April 5 , 1919 , five days after the end of the series , in a Seattle hospital . The only draw of the series was a scoreless affair ; after playing 20 minutes of overtime , referee Mickey Ion called the game off . 
 In the 1919 – 20 season , Holmes appeared in 22 games , winning 12 games , and losing 10 . He finished the season with four shutouts and a 2 @.@ 46 goals @-@ against average . In the PCHA playoffs , Holmes played two games , surrendering three goals , and ending up with a loss and a win . The Metropolitans made the Stanley Cup finals for the second straight season , playing against the Ottawa Senators of the NHL . The Metropolitans lost , and Holmes posted a 2 – 3 record with a 3 @.@ 00 goals @-@ against average . 
 Holmes played the next four seasons with the Metropolitans , but failed to make the Stanley Cup final . Over that stretch , Holmes and the Metropolitans won about half the games each season . The Metropolitans missed the playoffs in only the 1922 – 23 season . In the 1920 – 21 season , Holmes appeared in 24 games . He posted a 12 – 11 – 1 ( win @-@ loss @-@ tie ) record , with a 2 @.@ 63 goals @-@ against average and no shutouts . In the playoffs , he lost both games he appeared in , and let in 13 goals . The following season , he posted an identical win @-@ loss @-@ tie record in both the regular season . The only difference was a 2 @.@ 60 goals @-@ against average in the regular season , with four shutouts , and the reduction of his playoffs goals @-@ against by 11 goals . In the 1922 – 23 season , Holmes appeared in 30 games , posting a 15 – 15 record , with two shutouts and a 3 @.@ 45 goals @-@ against average ; however , the Metropolitans missed the playoffs that season . In the 1923 – 24 , Holmes ' last with the Metropolitans , he appeared in 30 regular @-@ season games , posting a 14 – 16 record , with two shutouts and a 3 @.@ 26 goals @-@ against average . Despite an extra loss , the Metropolitans made the playoffs that season . Holmes played two games , losing one and tying one , ending up with a 1 @.@ 79 goals @-@ against average . 
 = = = Victoria Cougars = = = 
 In 1924 – 25 , after the Metropolitans folded and the rest of the PCHA merged with the WCHL , Holmes joined the Victoria Cougars . In his first season with the Cougars , Holmes posted a 16 – 12 regular season record , with three shutouts and a 2 @.@ 25 goals @-@ against average . In the WCHL playoffs , Holmes was undefeated in four games . He had two wins and ties each , with one shutout and a 1 @.@ 75 goals @-@ against average . In the Stanley Cup final , Holmes posted a 3 – 1 record with a 2 @.@ 00 goals @-@ against average against the Montreal Canadiens . It was the last time a non @-@ NHL team won the Stanley Cup . It was Holmes ' fourth and last Stanley Cup victory . 
 The following season , Holmes had a 15 – 11 – 4 regular season record , with four shutouts and a 1 @.@ 68 goals @-@ against average . In the WHL playoffs , Holmes nearly duplicated his results from the previous season , posting a 2 – 0 – 2 record , with one shutout and a 1 @.@ 45 goals @-@ against average . In the 1926 Stanley Cup final , the Cougars lost the series 3 – 1 against the Montreal Maroons . That marked the last time a non @-@ NHL team appeared in the Stanley Cup finals , as the WHL folded after the 1926 Stanley Cup final , and its players were absorbed by the NHL . It was Holmes ' seventh and final Stanley Cup final appearance . 
 = = = Detroit Cougars = = = 
 A new NHL franchise in Detroit bought the rights to the Victoria Cougars players , and named the team the Cougars . Holmes played his last two professional seasons with the Detroit Cougars . Holmes , playing for Detroit , posted 17 shutouts in 85 appearances . Detroit failed to make the playoffs in both of Holmes ' seasons with them , as Holmes only won 30 of his 85 appearances . In Holmes ' first season with Detroit , he posted an 11 – 26 – 4 record , over 41 games played . Holmes had six shutouts and overall , his goals @-@ against average that season was 2 @.@ 23 . In the 1927 – 28 season , Holmes ' final one as a professional player , he appeared in all 44 of Detroit 's games . He posted at 19 – 19 – 6 record , with 11 shutouts and a 1 @.@ 73 goals @-@ against average . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 As a player , Holmes wore a baseball cap in net to protect his head from spectators spitting tobacco or throwing other objects at it . Holmes was bald , and as described by the Windsor Star , " his shining bald dome presented a tempting target " . Holmes played a stand @-@ up style , and relied on proper positioning to stop the puck . Holmes ' play was consistent , and he was relaxed and nonchalant in the nets , leading some to describe his play as almost lazy . 
 = = Post @-@ retirement = = 
 After his playing career , Holmes coached minor @-@ league teams . He coached the Toronto Millionaires of the Canadian Professional Hockey League ( CPHL ) to a 19 – 6 – 7 record in the 1928 – 29 season , and the Cleveland Indians of the International Hockey League ( IHL ) to a 24 – 18 – 6 record in the 1930 – 31 season . The American Hockey League ( AHL ) named their award for the top goaltender , the Hap Holmes Memorial Award , after him . Holmes died on June 27 , 1941 . He was inducted posthumously into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1972 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = Bernadette Peters = 
 Bernadette Peters ( born Bernadette Lazzara ; February 28 , 1948 ) is an American actress , singer and children 's book author . Over the course of a career that has spanned five decades , she has starred in musical theatre , films and television , as well as performing in solo concerts and recordings . She is one of the most critically acclaimed Broadway performers , having received nominations for seven Tony Awards , winning two ( plus an honorary award ) , and nine Drama Desk Awards , winning three . Four of the Broadway cast albums on which she has starred have won Grammy Awards . 
 Regarded by many as the foremost interpreter of the works of Stephen Sondheim , Peters is particularly noted for her roles on the Broadway stage , including in the musicals Mack and Mabel , Sunday in the Park with George , Song and Dance , Into the Woods , Annie Get Your Gun and Gypsy . 
 Peters first performed on the stage as a child and then a teenage actor in the 1960s , and in film and television in the 1970s . She was praised for this early work and for appearances on The Muppet Show , The Carol Burnett Show and in other television work , and for her roles in films like Silent Movie , The Jerk , Pennies from Heaven and Annie . In the 1980s , she returned to the theatre , where she became one of the best @-@ known Broadway stars over the next three decades . She also has recorded six solo albums and several singles , as well as many cast albums , and performs regularly in her own solo concert act . In the 2010s , Peters continues to act on stage , in films and on television , where she has been nominated for three Emmy Awards and three Golden Globe Awards , winning once . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Peters was born Bernadette Lazzara to a Sicilian American family in Ozone Park , Queens , New York , the youngest of three children . Her siblings are casting director Donna <unk> and Joseph Lazzara . Her father , Peter , drove a bread delivery truck , and her mother , Marguerite ( née Maltese ) , started her in show business by putting her on the television show Juvenile Jury at the age of three and a half . She appeared on the television shows Name That Tune and several times on The Horn and <unk> Children 's Hour at age five . 
 In January 1958 , at age nine , she obtained her Actors Equity Card in the name Bernadette Peters to avoid ethnic stereotyping , with the stage name taken from her father 's first name . She made her professional stage debut the same month in This is Goggle , a comedy directed by Otto Preminger that closed during out @-@ of @-@ town tryouts before reaching New York . She then appeared on NBC television as Anna <unk> in A Boy Called <unk> , a Kraft Mystery Theatre production , in May 1958 , and in a vignette entitled " Miracle in the Orphanage " , part of " The Christmas Tree " , a Hallmark Hall of Fame production , in December 1958 with fellow child actor Richard Thomas and veteran actors Jessica Tandy and Margaret Hamilton . She first appeared on the New York stage at age 10 as Tessie in the New York City Center revival of The Most Happy Fella ( 1959 ) . In her teen years , she attended the <unk> 's School for Young Professionals , a now defunct private school that several famous people , such as Steven Tyler , attended . 
 At age 13 , Peters appeared as one of the " Hollywood Blondes " and was an understudy for " Dainty June " in the second national tour of Gypsy . During this tour , Peters first met her long @-@ time accompanist , conductor and arranger Marvin Laird , who was the assistant conductor for the tour . Laird recalled , " I heard her sing an odd phrase or two and thought , ' God that 's a big voice out of that little girl , ' " The next summer , she played Dainty June in summer stock , and in 1962 she recorded her first single . In 1964 , she played Liesl in The Sound of Music and Jenny in Riverwind in summer stock at the Mt . Gretna Playhouse ( Pennsylvania ) , and Riverwind again at the Bucks County Playhouse in 1966 . Upon graduation from high school , she started working steadily , appearing Off @-@ Broadway in the musicals The Penny Friend ( 1966 ) and Curley <unk> ( 1967 ) and as a standby on Broadway in The Girl in the Freudian Slip ( 1967 ) . She made her Broadway debut in Johnny No @-@ Trump in 1967 , and next appeared as George M. Cohan 's sister Josie opposite Joel Grey in George M ! ( 1968 ) , winning the Theatre World Award . 
 Peters ' performance as " Ruby " in the 1968 Off @-@ Broadway production of Dames at Sea , a parody of 1930s musicals , brought her critical acclaim and her first Drama Desk Award . She had appeared in an earlier 1966 version of Dames at Sea at the Off @-@ Off @-@ Broadway performance club <unk> Cino . Peters had starring roles in her next Broadway vehicles — Gelsomina in La Strada ( 1969 ) and Hildy in On the Town ( 1971 ) , for which she received her first Tony Award nomination . She played Mabel Normand in Mack and Mabel ( 1974 ) , receiving another Tony nomination . Clive Barnes wrote : " With the splashy Mack & Mabel ... diminutive and contralto Bernadette Peters found herself as a major Broadway star . " Although these had short runs , Peters was singled out for praise by the critics , and the Mack and Mabel cast album became popular among musical theatre fans . She moved to Los Angeles in the early 1970s to concentrate on television and film work . 
 = = Film appearances = = 
 Peters has appeared in 33 feature films or television movies beginning in 1973 , including Mel Brooks ' 1976 film Silent Movie ( for which she was nominated for a Golden Globe Award ) , the musical Annie ( 1982 ) , Pink Cadillac ( 1989 ) , in which she co @-@ starred with Clint Eastwood , and Woody Allen 's Alice ( 1990 ) . 
 Peters starred opposite Steve Martin in The Jerk ( 1979 ) , in a role that he wrote for her , and Pennies From Heaven ( 1981 ) , for which she won the Golden Globe Award as Best Motion Picture Actress in a Comedy or Musical . In Pennies from Heaven , she played Eileen Everson , a schoolteacher turned prostitute . Of her performance in Pennies From Heaven , John DiLeo wrote that she " is not only poignant as you 'd expect but has a surprising inner strength . " Pauline Kael wrote in The New Yorker : " Peters is mysteriously right in every nuance . " Kael further noted that " The dance numbers are funny , amazing , and beautiful all at once ; several of them are just about perfection . " A review of the DVD reissue noted , " Peters brought a cocky attitude and a sexy exuberance to the musical numbers . " 
 Peters appeared with three generations of the Kirk Douglas family in the 2003 film It Runs in the Family , in which she played the wife of Michael Douglas 's character . In May 2006 , she appeared in the movie Come le <unk> ( Wine and Kisses ) with F. Murray Abraham , filmed in Italy , playing a rich American who becomes involved with an Italian family that owns a vineyard . The DVD was released in 2007 in Italy . She starred in a film titled Coming Up Roses , playing a former musical comedy actress with two daughters . The movie , directed by Lisa Albright , was released in 2012 . 
 = = Theatre roles , 1980s to present = = 
 In 1982 , Peters returned to the New York stage after an eight @-@ year absence in one of her few non @-@ musical stage appearances , the Off @-@ Broadway Manhattan Theatre Club production of the comedy @-@ drama Sally and Marsha , for which she was nominated for a Drama Desk Award . She then returned to Broadway as Dot / Marie in the Stephen Sondheim – James Lapine musical Sunday in the Park with George in 1984 , for which she received her third Tony Award nomination . The New York Times theatre critic Frank Rich called her performance " radiant " . She recorded the role for PBS in 1986 , winning a 1987 ACE Award . Her next role was in Andrew Lloyd Webber 's Song and Dance ( 1985 ) , winning her first Tony for Best Leading Actress in a Musical for her performance in the role of Emma . Frank Rich wrote in an otherwise negative review of the show that Peters " has no peer in the musical theater right now . " 
 She then created the role of the Witch in Sondheim @-@ Lapine 's Into the Woods ( 1987 ) . Peters is " considered by many to be the premier interpreter of [ Sondheim 's ] work , " according to writer Alex <unk> . Raymond Knapp wrote that Peters " achieved her definitive stardom " in Sunday in the Park With George and Into the Woods . Sondheim has said of Peters , " Like very few others , she sings and acts at the same time , " he says . " Most performers act and then sing , act and then sing ... Bernadette is flawless as far as I 'm concerned . I can 't think of anything negative . " Peters continued her association with Sondheim by appearing in a 1995 benefit concert of Anyone Can Whistle , playing the role of Fay Apple . Additionally , she appeared in several concerts featuring Sondheim 's work , and performed for him at his 1993 Kennedy Center Honors ceremony . 
 She next starred in the musical adaptation of Neil Simon 's The Goodbye Girl with music by Marvin Hamlisch ( 1993 ) . Peters won her second Tony for her performance as Annie Oakley in the 1999 revival of Annie Get Your Gun opposite Tom <unk> . Among many glowing notices for this role , critic Lloyd Rose of the Washington Post commented : " [ Peters ] banishes all thoughts of Ethel Merman about two bars into her first number , ' Doin ' What Comes Natur <unk> . ' Partly this is because Merman 's Annie was a hearty , boisterous gal , while Peters plays an adorable , slightly goofy gamine ... For anyone who cares about the American musical theater , the chance to see Peters in this role is reason enough to see the show . " Playbill went even further : " Arguably the most talented comedienne in the musical theatre today , Peters manages to extract a laugh from most every line she delivers . " 
 In 2003 , Peters took on the role of Mama Rose in the Broadway revival of Gypsy , earning another Tony nomination . Ben Brantley in his New York Times review wrote , " Working against type and expectation under the direction of Sam Mendes , Ms. Peters has created the most complex and compelling portrait of her long career , and she has done this in ways that deviate radically from the Merman blueprint . " In 2006 , she participated in a reading of the Sondheim - Weidman musical Bounce . In 2007 , Peters participated in a charity reading of the play Love Letters with John <unk> . 
 After an absence from the Broadway stage of six years ( Gypsy closed in 2004 ) , Peters starred in the Broadway revival of Sondheim 's A Little Night Music , as Desiree <unk> from July 2010 to January 2011 . She replaced Catherine Zeta @-@ Jones in the role . The New York Times reviewer wrote of her performance , 
 [ F ] or theater lovers there can be no greater current pleasure than to witness Bernadette Peters perform the show 's signature number , " Send In the Clowns , " with an emotional transparency and musical delicacy that turns this celebrated song into an occasion of transporting artistry . I 'm not sure I 've ever experienced with such palpable force – or such prominent goose bumps – the sense of being present at an indelible moment in the history of musical theater . 
 Peters next appeared in the role of Sally Durant Plummer in the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts production of the Sondheim – Goldman musical Follies in May and June 2011 . Of her performance , one critic wrote : " Peters may not be the most traditional casting for Sally , now an <unk> housewife in Phoenix , but she exquisitely captures the character 's unfathomable sadness and longing . It 's a star turn , for sure , but one that brings attention to itself because of its truthfulness . Not surprisingly , her rendition of ' Losing My Mind ' is simply shattering . " She reprised her role of Sally in the Broadway limited engagement , at the Marquis Theatre , from August 2011 to January 2012 . She received a nomination for the Drama Desk Award , Outstanding Actress in a Musical , for this role . 
 Peters starred in the Sondheim and Wynton Marsalis staged concert revue titled A Bed and a Chair : A New York Love Affair at New York City Center in November 2013 . This collaboration between Encores ! and Jazz at Lincoln Center was directed by John Doyle , with jazzy arrangements of Sondheim 's songs . It also featured Norm Lewis , Jeremy Jordan and Cyrille Aimée . Peters sang " Broadway Baby " , " The Ladies Who Lunch " , " Isn 't He Something ? " , " I Remember " and " With So Little to Be Sure Of " , among others . Jesse Green , in his review in New York Magazine 's Vulture site , commented : " [ W ] hat a wrenching ( and funny ) actress Peters remains , not on top of her voice but through it . " Brantley , in his New York Times review wrote : " As a singer and actress , she just can 't help being ardent , full @-@ throated and sincere . She also reminds us here of her considerable and original comic gifts . " 
 = = = Theatre awards = = = 
 Peters has been nominated for the Tony Award seven times and won twice . She has also been nominated for the Drama Desk Award nine times and won three times , for Annie Get Your Gun , Song and Dance and Dames at Sea . At the 66th Tony Awards ( 2012 ) , Peters was presented with the honorary Isabelle Stevenson Award for " making a substantial contribution of volunteered time and effort on behalf of one or more humanitarian , social service or charitable organizations , regardless of whether such organizations relate to the theatre " , specifically for her work with Broadway Barks . In making the announcement for this award , the Tony official site noted " With a rich generosity of spirit , Bernadette Peters ' devotion to charitable causes is perhaps only outweighed by her much fêted dedication to performing .... Peters ' efforts are held in the highest regard on Broadway and beyond . To quote BC / EFA 's Tom Viola , ' Bernadette 's boundless compassion and generosity represent the best in all of us . ' " 
 = = Television appearances = = 
 Peters was nominated for Emmy Awards for her guest @-@ starring roles on The Muppet Show ( 1977 ) and Ally McBeal ( 2001 ) . On The Muppet Show , Peters sang the song " Just One Person " to Robin the Frog . She was one of the Muppets ' guests when they hosted The Tonight Show in 1979 , again singing " Just One Person " to Robin , and she appeared in other episodes with the Muppets . Peters was also nominated for a Daytime Emmy Award , Outstanding Performer in a Children 's Special , for her work in the 2002 made @-@ for @-@ television movie Bobbie 's Girl . She won the 1987 " CableACE Award " for her role as Dot in the television version of Sunday in the Park with George . 
 She has appeared in many variety shows with stars such as Sonny and Cher and George Burns . She has both performed and presented on the Academy Awards broadcasts in 1976 , 1981 , 1983 , 1987 and 1994 . Peters has been a presenter at the annual Tony Awards ceremony and co @-@ hosted the ceremony with Gregory Hines in June 2002 . She also hosted Saturday Night Live in November 1981 . She made 12 guest appearances on The Carol Burnett Show as well as appearing with Burnett in the made @-@ for @-@ television version of Once Upon a Mattress and the 1982 film Annie . She also performed at the Kennedy Center Honors ceremony for Burnett in 2003 . Peters appeared on The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson and on the day @-@ time talk show Live with Regis and Kelly , both as a co @-@ host and a guest . Peters voiced Rita the stray cat in the " Rita and Runt " segments of the animated series Animaniacs in the 1990s . Peters , as Rita , sang both original songs written for the show and parodies of Broadway musical numbers . She appeared on Inside the Actor 's Studio in November 2000 , discussing her career and craft . 
 Peters has co @-@ starred in a number of television movies , including The Last Best Year ( 1990 ) with Mary Tyler Moore , Rodgers and Hammerstein 's Cinderella ( 1997 ) with Brandy ( receiving a nomination for the " Golden Satellite Award " for her role ) , and Prince Charming ( 2003 ) with Martin Short . She co @-@ starred in her own television series , All 's Fair , with Richard Crenna in 1976 – 77 . She played a young , liberal photographer , who becomes romantically involved with an older , conservative columnist . Although Peters was praised for her charismatic performance , the show ran for only one season . Peters was nominated for a Golden Globe award as Best TV Actress – Musical / Comedy . In March 2005 , she made a pilot for an ABC situation comedy series titled Adopted , co @-@ starring with Christine Baranski , but it was not picked up . Peters appeared in the Lifetime television movie Living Proof , which was first broadcast on October 18 , 2008 . She played the role of Barbara , an art teacher with breast cancer , who is initially reluctant to participate in the study for the cancer drug Herceptin . Andrew Gans of Playbill wrote , " Peters is able to choose from an expansive emotional palette to color the character , and her performance ... is moving , humorous and ultimately spirit @-@ raising " . 
 Peters ' television work also includes guest appearances on several television series . She appeared as the sharp @-@ tongued sister of Karen Walker ( Megan Mullally ) on the penultimate episode of the NBC series Will & Grace , " Whatever Happened to Baby Gin ? " ( May 2006 ) ; as a defense attorney on the NBC series , Law & Order : Special Victims Unit ( November 2006 ) ; as a judge on the ABC series Boston Legal ( May 2007 ) ; and as an accident victim in Grey 's Anatomy ( September 2008 ) . Of her role in Grey 's Anatomy , TV Guide wrote : " Peters is especially fine as she confronts a life spinning out of control . I 'd make her an early contender for a guest @-@ actor Emmy nomination . " In January , February and May 2009 , she appeared in the ABC series Ugly Betty in five episodes as Jodie <unk> , a magazine mogul running the <unk> ( Young Editors Training Initiative ) program that Betty and Marc are in . Her appearance at the Adelaide Cabaret Festival in June 2009 was filmed and broadcast in Australia later that month . 
 Peters first appeared in the NBC series Smash in the March 2012 episode " The Workshop " , as Leigh Conroy , Ivy 's mother , a retired Broadway star , who feels competitive because of her daughter 's blossoming career . She visits the workshop and sings Everything 's Coming Up Roses ( from Gypsy ) at the urging of the workshop cast . She also appeared in the season 1 finale , " Bombshell " ( May 2012 ) , to celebrate Ivy 's presumed role as Marilyn , in " The Parents " episode ( April 2013 ) , where , as Leigh , she sings an original Marc Shaiman and Scott Wittman song , " Hang the Moon " , and in the episodes " Opening Night " ( April 2013 ) and " The Phenomenon " ( May 2013 ) . 
 Since 2014 , Peters has played Gloria , the chairwoman of the orchestra board in Mozart in the Jungle , a web video series by Amazon Studios based on Blair Tindall 's memoir of the same name . The show was picked up for a second season . She was a guest star in the 2014 Bravo television series Girlfriends ' Guide to Divorce , playing the mother of the character played by Janeane <unk> . The episode she appeared in is titled " Rule # 21 : Leave <unk> to Children " . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 Peters has recorded six solo albums and several singles . Three of her albums have been nominated for the Grammy Award . Peters ' 1980 single " Gee Whiz " , remaking Carla Thomas ' 1960 Memphis soul hit , reached the top forty on the U.S. Billboard pop singles charts . She has recorded most of the Broadway and off @-@ Broadway musicals she has appeared in , and four of these cast albums have won Grammy Awards . 
 Peters ' debut album in 1980 ( an LP ) , entitled Bernadette Peters contained 10 songs , including " If You Were The Only Boy " , " Gee Whiz " , " <unk> " , " Should 've Never Let Him Go " , " Chico 's Girl " , " Pearl 's a Singer " , " Other Lady " , " Only Wounded " , " I Never Thought I 'd Break " and " You 'll Never Know " . The original cover painting by Alberto Vargas , pictured at left , was one of his last works , created at the age of 84 . According to The New York Daily News , Peters " persuaded him to do one last ' Vargas Girls ' portrait ... She just went to his California retreat , asked him to do one more , he looked at her and said , ' You ARE a Vargas girl ! ' " She kept the original painting . The original title planned for the album was Decades . Rolling Stone wrote of her debut album : 
 Her next solo album , Now Playing ( 1981 ) , featured songs by Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller , Carole Bayer Sager and Marvin Hamlisch , and Stephen Sondheim ( for example , " Broadway Baby " ) . Bernadette Peters was re @-@ released on CD in 1992 as Bernadette , with the 1980 Vargas cover art , and included some of the songs from Now Playing . In 1996 , she was nominated for a Grammy Award for her best @-@ selling album , I 'll Be Your Baby Tonight , which includes popular songs by John Lennon , Paul McCartney , Lyle Lovett , Hank Williams , Sam Cooke and Billy Joel , as well as Broadway classics by Leonard Bernstein and Rodgers and Hammerstein . The live recording of her 1996 Carnegie Hall concert , Sondheim , Etc . - Bernadette Peters Live At Carnegie Hall , also was nominated for a Grammy Award . 
 Peters ' next studio album , in 2002 , Bernadette Peters Loves Rodgers and Hammerstein , consisted entirely of Rodgers and Hammerstein songs , including two that she often sings in her concerts , " Some Enchanted Evening " and " There Is Nothin ' Like a Dame " . This album , which reached position 14 on the Billboard " Top Internet Albums " chart , was her third album in a row nominated for a Grammy Award . It formed the basis of her Radio City Music Hall solo concert debut in June 2002 . Her last solo album , titled Sondheim Etc . , Etc . Live At Carnegie Hall : The Rest of It , was released in 2005 . It consists of all of the songs ( and patter ) from her 1996 Carnegie Hall concert that were not included in the earlier recording . 
 Additionally , Peters has recorded songs on other albums , such as " Dublin Lady " on John Whelan 's Flirting with the Edge ( Narada , 1998 ) . On the Mandy Patinkin Dress Casual 1990 album , Patinkin and Peters recorded the songs from Stephen Sondheim 's 1966 television play , Evening Primrose . On the tribute album Born to the Breed : A Tribute to Judy Collins Peters sings " Trust Your Heart " . 
 In The New York Times review of the 1986 Broadway cast recording of Song and Dance ( titled Bernadette Peters in Andrew Lloyd Webber 's ' Song & Dance ' ) , Stephen Holden wrote that the recording was " a personal triumph for a singer and actress who is rapidly establishing herself as the first lady of the Broadway musical . Performing material whose music borders on kitsch and whose lyrics and story suggest a verbose soap opera , Miss Peters nevertheless projects an astounding emotional generosity and conviction . Almost singlehandedly she turns the inconsequential erotic misadventures of Emma ... into a touching romantic fable about love and its defenses and the loss of innocence . ... Miss Peters has always oozed a <unk> Shirley Temple @-@ like sweetness and vulnerability . This quality , which used to seem more like an adorable child @-@ star affectation than a deep @-@ seated trait , has proved to be an essential ingredient of Miss Peters 's personality . A delivery that once seemed coy and cutesy has deepened and ripened into an honesty and compassion that pour out in singing that is childlike but also resilient . " 
 In 2003 , Andrew Gans wrote in Playbill.com of Peters ' recording sessions for Gypsy : " What is it about her voice that is so moving ? Part womanly and part girlish , it is a powerful instrument , not only in volume ( though that is impressive ) but in the wealth of emotion it is able to convey . ... her voice – that mix of husky , sweet , rounded , vibrato @-@ filled tones – induces a response that spans the emotional scale . " Of her " Rose 's Turn " , Gans wrote : " ... her rendition of this song may be the highlight of a career already filled with many highlights : She has taken a song that has been delivered incredibly by others and brought it to a new level . " Of her performance on the recording of Follies ( 2011 ) , Steven Suskin wrote in Playbill.com : " This is a fine Sally , the sort of Sally you 'd expect to get from an actress like – well , Bernadette Peters . The performance on the CD is compelling ; either this is simply the magic of the recording studio or Peters has changed what she does and how she does it . " 
 = = Concert performances = = 
 Peters has been performing her solo concert in the United States and Canada for many years . She made her solo concert debut at Carnegie Hall in New York City in 1996 , devoting the second half to the work of Stephen Sondheim . She performed a similar concert in London , which was taped and released on video , and also aired on U.S. Public Television stations in 1999 . She continues to perform her solo concert at venues around the U.S. , such as the Adrienne <unk> Center for the Performing Arts in Miami , and with symphony orchestras such as the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra , the Dallas Symphony , and the Los Angeles Philharmonic at Walt Disney Hall . 
 In a review of her 2002 Radio City Music Hall concert , Stephen Holden of The New York Times described Peters as " the peaches @-@ and @-@ cream embodiment of an ageless storybook princess ... inside a giant soap bubble floating toward heaven . A belief in the power of the dreams behind Rodgers and Hammerstein 's songs , if not in their reality , was possible . " Peters made her solo concert debut at Lincoln Center in New York City in 2006 . Holden , reviewing this concert , noted , " Even while swiveling across the stage of Avery Fisher Hall like a voluptuous Botticelli Venus in Bob Mackie spangles ... she radiated a preternatural innocence .... For the eternal child in all of us , she evokes a surrogate childhood playmate " . Peters was the headliner at the 2009 Adelaide Cabaret Festival in Adelaide , Australia . The Sunday Mail wrote that Peters showed " the verve , vigour and voice of someone half her age . " 
 Peters ' concert performances often benefit arts organizations or help them to mark special occasions , such as her performance on an overnight cruise on the Seabourn Odyssey in a benefit for the Adrienne <unk> Center for the Performing Arts in Miami in 2009 . She was one of the performers to help celebrate the Center 's grand opening in 2006 . She headlined The Alliance of The Arts Black Tie Anniversary Gala at Thousand Oaks Civic Arts Plaza in Thousand Oaks , California , on November 21 , 2009 . She had helped to celebrate the opening of the Arts Plaza with concerts fifteen years earlier . In 2015 , Peters performed in the concert Sinatra : Voice for a Century at Lincoln Center , a fundraiser for the new David Geffen Hall in celebration of Frank Sinatra 's 100th birthday . She sang " It Never Entered My Mind " . It was hosted by Seth MacFarlane and featured the New York Philharmonic Orchestra , Sting , Billy Porter , Sutton Foster and Fantasia Barrino . PBS plans to broadcast it as part of its " Live from Lincoln Center " series in December 2015 . 
 Since 2013 , she has been touring intermittently with her cabaret act , An Evening with Bernadette Peters , and a concert series , " Bernadette Peters in Concert " . In April 2014 she gave concert performances in Australia . The reviewer for The Sydney Morning Herald wrote : " Perhaps it is a matter of personality as much as voice : a natural warmth and an instinct for never exaggerating the emotional content of a song . Whatever the case , it is easy to see and hear why , for 30 years , Bernadette Peters has probably been musical theatre 's finest performer . ... She even breathed new life into ' Send In the Clowns ' . ... Rather than make it emotionally swollen ( as so many do ) , Peters contracted it , delicately squeezing out its essence like toothpaste from a near @-@ empty tube . " Her 2016 concert plans include UK engagements at the Royal Festival Hall , Manchester Opera House and Edinburgh Playhouse . 
 = = Children 's books = = 
 Peters sings four songs on the CD accompanying a 2005 children 's picture book Dewey Doo @-@ it Helps <unk> Fly Again , the proceeds of which benefit the Christopher Reeve Foundation . Her co @-@ star from Sunday in the Park with George , Mandy Patinkin , also sings on the CD . 
 To support the animal adoption charity that she co @-@ founded with Mary Tyler Moore , Broadway Barks , Peters has written three children 's books , illustrated by Liz Murphy . The first is about a scrappy dog , named after her dog Kramer , and the pleasure of adopting a pet . Titled Broadway Barks , the book is published by Blue Apple Books ( 2008 ) . Peters wrote the words and music to a lullaby , titled " Kramer 's Song " , which is included on a CD in the book . The book reached # 5 on The New York Times Children 's Best Sellers : Picture Books list for the week of June 8 , 2008 . 
 Her second children 's book is the story of a pit bull , named after Peters ' dog Stella . The character would rather be a pig ballerina , but she learns to accept herself . Titled Stella is a Star , the book includes a CD with an original song written and performed by Peters and was released in April 2010 by Blue Apple Books . According to Publishers Weekly , " Turning the pages to Peters ' spirited narration , which is provided in an accompanying CD , makes for a more rewarding reading experience . The story and disc end with a sneakily affecting self @-@ esteem anthem , which , like the familiar tale itself , is buoyed by the author 's lovely vocals . " Peters introduced the book at a reading and signing where she also sang part of the song , at the L.A. Times Festival of Books , Los Angeles , California , on April 24 , 2010 . 
 The third book , released in 2015 , titled Stella and Charlie Friends Forever , is about her rescue dog Charlie joining her household , and how Charlie got along with her older dog , Stella . 
 = = Other activities = = 
 Broadway Barks 
 Peters contributes to various charitable , celebratory and civic efforts . In 1999 , Peters and Mary Tyler Moore co @-@ founded Broadway Barks , an annual animal adopt @-@ a @-@ thon held in New York City . Each July , she and Moore act as co @-@ hosts and presenters for the Broadway Barks event . Peters held a concert , " A Special Concert for Broadway Barks Because Broadway Cares " , at the Minskoff Theatre , New York City , on November 9 , 2009 as a benefit for both Broadway Barks and Broadway Cares / Equity Fights AIDS . The concert raised an estimated $ 615 @,@ 000 for the two charities . Also in support of Broadway Barks , Peters has appeared on the daytime talk show Live With Regis and Kelly . 
 Other 
 Peters serves on the Board of Trustees of Broadway Cares / Equity Fights AIDS and participates in that organization 's events , such as the annual Broadway Flea Market and Grand Auction , and the " Gypsy of the Year " competition . She is also a member of the Board of Directors of Standing Tall , a non @-@ profit educational program offering an innovative program for children with multiple disabilities , based in New York City . Her late husband was the Director and Treasurer of Standing Tall . The 1995 benefit concert Anyone Can Whistle and Peters ' " Carnegie Hall " 1996 concert were benefits for the Gay Men 's Health Crisis . 
 In 2007 , Peters helped the Broadway community celebrate the end of the stagehand strike in a " Broadway 's Back " concert at the Marquis Theatre . In 2008 , she was one of the participants in a fund @-@ raiser for the Westport Country Playhouse , and in the opening ceremony and dedication of the renovated TKTS discount ticket booth in Times Square . That year , she also presented New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg with the Humanitarian Award at the Breast Cancer Research Foundation awards . On March 8 , 2009 , she helped celebrate the last birthday of Senator Ted Kennedy ( singing " There Is Nothin ' Like a Dame " ) in a private concert and ceremony held at the Kennedy Center , hosted by Bill Cosby , with many Senators , Representatives , and President Barack and First Lady Michelle Obama in attendance . On November 19 , 2009 , she helped to celebrate the opening of The David Rubenstein Atrium at Lincoln Center . 
 On February 8 , 2010 , Peters was one of the many to honor Angela Lansbury at the annual Drama League of New York benefit , singing " Not While I 'm Around " . In March 2010 , Peters helped Stephen Sondheim celebrate his 80th birthday in the Roundabout Theatre Company " Sondheim 80 " benefit . She was one of the Honorary Chairs . She had been part of the Roundabout Theatre 's Sondheim gala for his 75th birthday . In 2012 , Peters became a Patron of The Stephen Sondheim Society . 
 She performed at the Olivier Awards ceremony in 2014 , singing the song " Losing My Mind " . A review in The Arts Desk read : " The tradition of bringing over a Broadway baby or two ... presumably explained a late appearance by a still @-@ luminous Bernadette Peters , who reached the very high note at the end of ' Losing My Mind ' often not attempted by interpreters of that particular Sondheim song . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Peters and Steve Martin began a romantic relationship in 1977 that lasted approximately four years . By 1981 , her popularity led to her appearing on the cover and in a spread in the December 1981 issue of Playboy Magazine , in which she posed in lingerie designed by Bob Mackie . 
 Peters married investment adviser Michael Wittenberg on July 20 , 1996 at the Millbrook , New York home of long @-@ time friend Mary Tyler Moore . Wittenberg died at age 43 on September 26 , 2005 in a helicopter crash in Montenegro while on a business trip . 
 Peters has a mixed @-@ breed dog named Charlie . Her mixed @-@ breed dog Kramer , the model of a character in her first children 's book , died in 2012 , and her American pit bull terrier Stella , the inspiration for her second book , died in 2013 . She adopted all three from shelters . 
 = = Honorary awards = = 
 Peters has received many honorary awards , including a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1987 . She was named the Hasty Pudding Woman of the Year in 1987 . Other honors include the Sarah Siddons Award for outstanding performance in a Chicago theatrical production ( 1994 ) ; the American Theatre Hall of Fame at the Gershwin Theatre in New York City ( 1996 ) , as the youngest person so honored ; The Actors ' Fund Artistic Achievement Medal ( 1999 ) ; an Honorary Doctorate from Hofstra University ( 2002 ) ; the Hollywood Bowl Hall of Fame in 2002 and the National Dance Institute 2009 Artistic Honoree . 
 She was the recipient of the " Sondheim Award " , presented by the Signature Theatre in 2011 . In 2012 , New Dramatists , an organization that supports beginning playwrights , presented Peters with their Lifetime Achievement Award , stating : " She has brought a new sound into the theatre and continues to do so , in surprising and miraculous ways . By some sleight of magic , her singularity always manages to bring out the best and richest in the work of her composers and writers . " In 2013 the Drama League gave Peters its Special Award of Distinguished Achievement in Musical Theatre Award for " her contribution to the musical theatre . " Peters was the Centennial Honoree at the Drama League Centennial Gala in 2015 . A musical tribute was presented by many of Peters ' costars over the years , including the original and current casts of Dames at Sea . The League said that Peters " exemplifies the absolute best of what American musical theater can be . " She received the 2016 John Willis Award for Lifetime Achievement in the Theatre , presented at the Theatre World Awards on May 23 , 2016 . 
 = = Work = = 
 = = = Stage ( selected ) = = = 
 = = = Filmography = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Concerts = = = 
 Major concerts 
 Various venues , summer of 1989 : 10 @-@ city concert tour with Peter Allen . 
 Hollywood Bowl , Los Angeles , California on September 6 and 7 , 1996 ( solo concert ) . 
 Carnegie Hall , New York City on December 9 , 1996 ( solo concert with guest singers / dancers , recorded on CD ) . 
 Sydney Opera House , Sydney , Australia on January 7 and 8 , 1998 ( solo concert ) . 
 Royal Festival Hall , London on September 17 , 1998 ( solo concert with guest singers / dancers , recorded on video ) . 
 Radio City Music Hall , New York City on June 19 , 2002 ( solo concert with guest singers ) . 
 Lincoln Center ( Avery Fisher Hall ) , New York City , on May 1 , 2006 ( solo concert ) . 
 Adelaide Cabaret Festival , Adelaide , Australia , on June 6 and 7 , 2009 ( solo concert ) . Peters headlined , and the concert was televised on June 27 , 2009 on Foxtel . A DVD of the concert was released in Australia in June 2010 . 
 Benefit concert , " Bernadette Peters : A Special Concert for Broadway Barks Because Broadway Cares " , Minskoff Theatre , New York City on November 9 , 2009 . 
 Other notable concerts 
 " Sondheim : A Celebration at Carnegie Hall " – June 10 , 1992 ( broadcast on PBS Great Performances in 1993 ) , singing " Not a Day Goes By " and " Sunday " 
 " Hey Mr. Producer ! The Musical World of Cameron MacKintosh " – June 7 , 1998 , singing , among others , " Unexpected Song " , " Being Alive " and " You Gotta Have a Gimmick " 
 Hollywood Bowl Sondheim Concert – July 8 , 2005 , performing in the " Opening Doors Medley " and " Being Alive " . 
 " Sondheim : The Birthday Concert " , the New York Philharmonic at Lincoln Center 's Avery Fisher Hall , a celebration of Sondheim 's 80th birthday – March 15 and 16 , 2010 . Peters sang " Move On " with Mandy Patinkin and " Not a Day Goes By " . 
 = = = Discography = = = 
 Solo recordings 
 Bernadette Peters ( 1980 ) MCA . Billboard 200 # 114 ( retitled and expanded as Bernadette in a 1992 CD reissue ) 
 " Gee Whiz ! " ( " Look at His Eyes " ) ( 1980 ) Billboard Hot 100 # 31 ( single ) 
 Now Playing ( 1981 ) MCA US Billboard 200 # 151 
 I 'll Be Your Baby Tonight ( 1996 ) Angel Records – Grammy Award nominee 
 Sondheim , Etc . – Bernadette Peters Live At Carnegie Hall ( 1997 ) Angel Records – Grammy Award nominee 
 Bernadette Peters Loves Rodgers and Hammerstein ( 2002 ) Angel Records – Grammy Award nominee 
 Sondheim Etc . , Etc . Live At Carnegie Hall : The Rest of It ( 2005 ) Angel Records 
 " Kramer 's Song " ( 2008 ) Blue Apple Books ( single ) 
 " Stella 's Song " ( 2010 ) Blue Apple Books ( single ) 
 Cast recordings 
 George M ! – Sony ( 1968 ) 
 Dames At Sea – Columbia Masterworks ( 1969 ) 
 Mack and Mabel – MCA ( 1974 ) 
 Sunday in the Park with George – RCA Records ( 1984 ) – Grammy Award winner ( Best Cast Show Album , 1985 ) 
 Song and Dance – The Songs – RCA Victor ( 1985 ) 
 Into The Woods – RCA Victor Records ( 1988 ) – Grammy Award winner ( Best Musical Cast Show Album , 1989 ) 
 The Goodbye Girl – Columbia Records ( 1993 ) 
 Anyone Can Whistle Live At Carnegie Hall – Columbia Records ( 1995 ) 
 Annie Get Your Gun The New Broadway Cast Recording – Angel Records ( 1999 ) – Grammy Award winner ( Best Musical Show Album , 2000 ) 
 Gypsy The New Broadway Cast Recording – Angel Records ( 2003 ) – Grammy Award winner ( Best Musical Show Album , 2004 ) 
 Sherry ! – Studio Cast Recording – Angel Records ( 2004 ) 
 Legends Of Broadway @-@ Bernadette Peters Compilation ( 2006 ) – Sony Masterworks Broadway ( Original versions of songs from Dames At Sea , Annie Get Your Gun , Anyone Can Whistle , Sunday in the Park with George , Mack and Mabel , Song and Dance , Into The Woods and Gypsy ) 
 Follies – PS Classics ( 2011 ) 
 Other recordings 
 Dress Casual – selections from Evening Primrose with Mandy Patinkin – CBS Records ( 1990 ) 
 Sondheim – A Celebration at Carnegie Hall ( Concert Cast ) – RCA Victor Broadway ( 1992 ) 
 Hey Mr. Producer ! : The Musical World of Cameron Mackintosh – Philips Records ( 1998 ) 
 Flirting with the Edge – John Whelan – Narada ( 1998 ) 
 Dewey Doo @-@ It Helps <unk> Fly Again – Randall Fraser Publishing ( 2005 ) 
 Born to the Breed : A Tribute to Judy Collins – Wildflower Records ( 2008 ) – " Trust Your Heart " 
 " Eloise Stories " – audiobook , Simon & Schuster Audio ( 2015 ) 
 = = Awards and Nominations = = 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = Domhnall mac Raghnaill = 
 Domhnall mac Raghnaill was a Hebridean noble in the late 12th- and early 13th @-@ century . He is the eponymous progenitor of Clan Donald ( Clann <unk> , " Children of Donald " ) . For this reason some traditions accumulated around him in the Later Middle Ages and Early Modern period . Despite his role as the historical figurehead of one of the world 's most famous kindreds and surnames , there is almost no contemporary evidence yielding certain information about his life . 
 His place in the genealogical tradition of the MacDonalds is the only reason for believing in his existence , a genealogical tradition that not all historians have accepted . Beyond his actual existence , there is little that is certain . Three entries in Irish annals may discuss him , though he is never named ; a praise poem surviving from the Early Modern period may be descended from a poem originally written for him ; a miracle in a Manx chronicle may or may not have Domhnall as its subject ; and a doubtful charter surviving from a similarly late era was allegedly issued by him . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Domhnall was , reputedly , the son of Raghnall ( fl . 1192 ) son of Somhairle ( died 1164 ) . The 17th @-@ century History of the Macdonalds by Hugh MacDonald of Sleat claimed that Domhnall 's father Raghnall had married a daughter or sister of the early 14th @-@ century hero Thomas Randolph , Earl of Moray . Sellar suggested that this tradition may have derived from a garbled version of reality . Perhaps , Sellar argued , his mother was a daughter of William fitz Duncan . The latter was another famous Earl of Moray , but one who lived in the 12th- rather than the 14th @-@ century . 
 In a charter to Paisley Abbey Domhnall 's father Raghnall is given a wife named <unk> ( <unk> ? ) , though there is no direct proof that this was the name of Domhnall 's mother . Domhnall 's father Raghnall , carrying the legacy of his own father Somhairle , was a powerful Argyll and Hebridean magnate who , depending on context , bore the titles " King of the Isles " , " Lord of Argyll and Kintyre " , and " lord of the Hebrides ( Inchegal ) . His father 's legacy was such that he became the ancestor figure of both Clann Ruaidhri and Clan Donald . 
 = = Possible evidence of life = = 
 = = = Annals of Ulster = = = 
 There are no certain contemporary notices of Domhnall , and Domhnall 's existence is not explicitly attested in any reliable contemporary source datable to any particular year . However , in 1212 , Domhnall may have been one of the " sons of Raghnall " who suffered some kind of military defeat at the hands of the men of the Isle of Skye . The Annals of Ulster , reporting for the year 1209 , recorded that : 
 A battle was fought by the sons of Raghnall , son of Somhairle , against the men of Skye , wherein slaughter was inflicted upon them . 
 A similar report from the same source has the " sons of Raghnaill " join in a raid on the Irish city of Derry led by Tomás Mac <unk> , brother of Alan , Lord of Galloway . Under the year 1212 it related that : 
 Tomás Mac <unk> , with the sons of Raghnall , son of Somhairle , came to Derry of St. Colum @-@ Cille with six and seventy ships and the town was greatly destroyed by them and Inis @-@ <unk> was completely destroyed by them and by the Cenél Conaill . 
 Two years later , a similar raid by Tomás is mentioned by the same source , though the only " son of Raghnall " reported as present that time was Domhnall 's older brother , Ruaidhri mac Raghnaill . 
 = = = Domhnall mac Raghnaill , <unk> Mall = = = 
 A recently rediscovered poem — though from a 17th @-@ century manuscript written by Niall MacMhuirich — was addressed to one Domhnall mac Raghnaill , <unk> Mall ( " Domhnall mac Raghnaill , of the Stately Gaze " ) . It is possible that this may refer to the same Domhnall mac Raghnaill , a claim made by its recent editor . The poem gives little information . Besides associating him with Lennox , a quatrain addressed him as : 
 Gall is a word that originally meant " Foreigner " or " Norseman " ( later " <unk> " ) , and might be meant to refer to someone from the region of Innse Gall , i.e. from the Hebrides . It is not clear who Gofraidh or Amhlaibh Fionn are , but they may refer to some of the Norse @-@ Gaelic rulers of Mann and Dublin , possibly Amhlaibh Conung and Gofraidh <unk> . 
 = = = Miracle from the Manx chronicle = = = 
 The Chronicle of the Kings of Man related a story that may have involved Domhnall . In 1249 , according to the text , following the death of Haraldr Óláfsson King of Mann , the new ruler Haraldr Guðrøðarson persecuted one of the old king 's favourite vassals . This persecuted vassal , described as an " aged man " , was named as <unk> , i.e. Domhnall . Domhnall and his young son were subsequently imprisoned . Owing to the intervention of St Mary , Domhnall and his son managed to escape , and brought their thanks and story to the Abbey of St Mary of Rushen , the monastic house at which the Chronicle was kept . 
 = = = Possible charter = = = 
 There is a charter allegedly issued by Domhnall to Paisley Abbey , found in the cartulary of that abbey . In this charter Domhnall is given no title , instead merely described by his genealogy : <unk> filius <unk> <unk> <unk> , " Domhnall , son of Raghnall , son of Somhairle " . This charter is thought by some historians to be spurious , mainly because the witness list and wording of the charter are , in the words of Alex Woolf , " suspiciously similar " to those in a genuine charter of Domhnall 's son Aonghus Mór . Presumably , the explanation is that the monks of Paisley Abbey at some later stage may have thought it in their interest to replicate Aonghus Mór 's charter in order to add the authority of the founder of Clan Donald to their land rights . 
 = = Death = = 
 In 1247 Maurice fitz Gerald , Justiciar of Ireland , invaded the territory of <unk> Ó Domhnaill , King of <unk> Chonaill , defeating and killing this Irish king at the Battle of Ballyshannon . According to the Annals of Loch Cé , one of <unk> 's allies who died at Ballyshannon was a Mac Somhairle , a " Descendant of Somhairle " : 
 Mac Somhairle , king of Argyll , and the nobles of the Cenel @-@ Conaill besides , were slain . 
 The Irish historian Seán Duffy suggested that this " Mac Somhairle " was Domhnall mac Raghnall . Duffy 's main argument is that the 17th @-@ century Book of Clanranald relayed a tradition that Domhnall had been invited by the Irish at Tara to come " to take the headship of the Western Isles and the greater part of the Gaels " . 
 McDonald believed that this " Mac Somhairle " referred to Donnchadh mac <unk> , while Sellar thought that the clear favourite for this " Mac Somhairle " should be Domhnall 's older brother Ruaidhri . Alex Woolf more recently offered an extended case for the latter view , arguing on a number of grounds that Ruaidhri is by far the best candidate . 
 Assuming that Domhnall is not the " dead man at Ballyshannon " , the date of Domhnall 's death cannot be fixed . MacDonald tradition placed it in 1289 , a tradition usually rejected by modern historians as falling far too late . R. Andrew McDonald suggested that Domhnall 's death must have taken place before 1263 , when King Haakon collected the allegiance of Aonghus Mór in the Hebrides . Alex Woolf argued that it very likely must have occurred before February 1256 , when Domhnall 's son Aonghus Mór made a grant to Paisley Abbey is his own name as " Lord of Islay " , suggesting at the very least that Domhnall had retired . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Domhnall 's main legacy is being the eponymous founding figure of the famous MacDonald kindred of Islay . Early modern MacDonald tradition thought of Domhnall as a " Lord of the Isles " , like his descendants . One such tradition related that King Alexander II of Scotland sent a messenger to Domhnall , requesting that he hold the Isles from Alexander rather than the " King of Denmark " ; Domhnall was said to have responded that his predecessors 
 Had their rights of the Isles from the crown of Denmark , which were renewed by the present king thereof . 
 This anachronistic portrayal of the struggle between King Haakon IV of Norway and the Scottish crown for overlordship of the western seaboard of Scotland , giving Domhnall such a senior role , does not fit with the contemporary evidence . When it was written down , Denmark ruled Norway and the MacDonalds were well established as the rulers the Isles . However , during most of his life Domhnall was probably subordinate to his older brother , Ruaidhri mac Raghnaill , and as Alex Woolf has said " there is little or no explicit contemporary evidence that Domhnall was a significant figure during his lifetime " . 
 Nevertheless , Domhnall appears to have left his son Aonghus Mór a lordship of respectable size centred on Islay , while his reputedly younger son Alasdair Mór appears to have been left lands in Kintyre . According to a praise @-@ poem written for this son , the realm the latter inherited from Domhnall included " every house from Mull to Kintyre " ( <unk> teach ó <unk> go <unk> ) . 
 = Ayyubid dynasty = 
 The Ayyubid dynasty ( Arabic : <unk> al @-@ <unk> ; Kurdish : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) was a Muslim dynasty of Kurdish origin , founded by Saladin and centered in Egypt . The dynasty ruled much of the Middle East during the 12th and 13th centuries CE . Saladin had been the vizier of Fatimid Egypt before he brought an end to Fatimid rule in 1171 . In 1174 , he proclaimed himself sultan following the death of the Ayyubids ' former master , Zengid ruler Nur al @-@ Din . The Ayyubids spent the next decade launching conquests throughout the region and by 1183 , the territories under their control included Egypt , Syria , northern Mesopotamia , Hejaz , Yemen , and the North African coast up to the borders of modern @-@ day Tunisia . Most of the Kingdom of Jerusalem fell to Saladin after his victory at the Battle of Hattin in 1187 . However , the Crusaders regained control of Palestine 's coastline in the 1190s . 
 After the death of Saladin , his sons contested control over the sultanate , but Saladin 's brother al @-@ Adil eventually established himself as sultan in 1200 and all of the later Ayyubid sultans of Egypt descended from him . In the 1230s , the Ayyubid emirs of Syria attempted to assert their independence from Egypt and remained divided until Sultan as @-@ Salih Ayyub restored Ayyubid unity by taking over most of Syria , except Aleppo , by 1247 . By then , local Muslim dynasties had driven out the Ayyubids from Yemen , the Hejaz , and parts of Mesopotamia . After his death in 1249 , as @-@ Salih Ayyub was succeeded in Egypt by al @-@ Mu 'azzam <unk> . However , the latter was soon overthrown by the Mamluk generals who had successfully repelled a Crusader invasion of the Nile Delta . This effectively ended Ayyubid power in Egypt and a number of attempts by the emirs of Syria , led by an @-@ Nasir Yusuf of Aleppo , to wrest back control of Egypt failed . In 1260 , the Mongols sacked Aleppo and conquered the remaining territories of the Ayyubids soon after . The Mamluks , who forced out the Mongols after the destruction of the Ayyubid dynasty , maintained the Ayyubid principality of Hama until deposing its last ruler in 1341 . 
 During their relatively short tenure , the Ayyubids ushered in an era of economic prosperity in the lands they ruled and the facilities and patronage provided by the Ayyubids led to a resurgence in intellectual activity in the Islamic world . This period was also marked by an Ayyubid process of vigorously strengthening Sunni Muslim dominance in the region by constructing numerous madrasas ( schools of Islamic law ) in their major cities . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The progenitor of the Ayyubid dynasty , Najm ad @-@ Din Ayyub bin Shadhi , belonged to a Kurdish tribe whose ancestors settled in the town of Dvin , in northern Armenia . He belonged to the tribe of <unk> , itself a branch of the <unk> tribe . The <unk> were the dominant Kurdish group in the Dvin district . They were a member of the political @-@ military elite of the town . 
 Circumstances became unfavorable in Dvin when Turkish generals seized the town from its Kurdish prince . Shadhi left with his two sons Najm al @-@ Din Ayyub and Asad ad @-@ Din Shirkuh . His friend <unk> al @-@ Din Bihruz — the military governor of northern Mesopotamia under the Seljuks — welcomed him and appointed him governor of Tikrit . After Shadhi 's death , Ayyub succeeded him in governance of the city with the assistance of his brother Shirkuh . Together they managed the affairs of the city well , gaining them popularity from the local inhabitants . In the meantime , Imad ad @-@ Din Zangi , the ruler of Mosul , was defeated by the Abbasids under Caliph al @-@ <unk> and Bihruz . In his bid to escape the battlefield to Mosul via Tikrit , Zangi took shelter with Ayyub and sought his assistance in this task . Ayyub complied and provided Zangi and his companions boats to cross the Tigris River to safely reach Mosul . 
 As a consequence for assisting Zangi , the Abbasid authorities sought punitive measures against Ayyub . Simultaneously , in a separate incident , Shirkuh killed a close confidant of Bihruz on charges that he had sexually assaulted a woman in Tikrit . The Abbasid court issued arrest warrants for both Ayyub and Shirkuh , but before the brothers could be arrested , they departed Tikrit for Mosul in 1138 . When they arrived in Mosul , Zangi provided them with all the facilities they needed and he recruited the two brothers into his service . Ayyub was made commander of Ba <unk> and Shirkuh entered the service of Zangi 's son , Nur ad @-@ Din . According to historian Abdul Ali , it was under the care and patronage of Zangi that the Ayyubid family rose into prominence . 
 = = = Establishment in Egypt = = = 
 In 1164 , Nur al @-@ Din dispatched Shirkuh to lead an expeditionary force to prevent the Crusaders from establishing a strong presence in an increasingly anarchic Egypt . Shirkuh enlisted Ayyub 's son , Saladin , as an officer under his command . They successfully drove out <unk> , the vizier of Egypt , and reinstated his predecessor Shawar . After being reinstated , Shawar ordered Shirkuh to withdraw his forces from Egypt , but Shirkuh refused , claiming it was Nur al @-@ Din 's will that he remain . Over the course of several years , Shirkuh and Saladin defeated the combined forces of the Crusaders and Shawar 's troops , first at <unk> , then at a site near Giza , and in Alexandria , where Saladin would stay to protect while Shirkuh pursued Crusader forces in Lower Egypt . 
 Shawar died in 1169 and Shirkuh became vizier , but he too died later that year . After Shirkuh 's death , Saladin was appointed vizier by the Fatimid caliph al @-@ <unk> because there was " no one weaker or younger " than Saladin , and " not one of the emirs obeyed him or served him " , according to medieval Muslim chronicler Ibn al @-@ Athir . Saladin soon found himself more independent than ever before in his career , much to the dismay of Nur al @-@ Din who attempted to influence events in Egypt . He permitted Saladin 's elder brother , Turan @-@ Shah , to supervise Saladin in a bid to cause dissension within the Ayyubid family and thus undermining its position in Egypt . Nur al @-@ Din satisfied Saladin 's request that he be joined by his father Ayyub . However , Ayyub was sent primarily to ensure that Abbasid suzerainty was proclaimed in Egypt , which Saladin was reluctant to undertake due to his position as the vizier of the Fatimids . Although Nur al @-@ Din failed to provoke the Ayyubids into rivalry , the extended Ayyubid family , particularly a number of local governors in Syria , did not entirely back Saladin . 
 Saladin consolidated his control in Egypt after ordering Turan @-@ Shah to put down a revolt in Cairo staged by the Fatimid army 's 50 @,@ 000 @-@ strong Nubian regiments . After this success , Saladin began granting his family members high @-@ ranking positions in the country and increased Sunni Muslim influence in Shia Muslim @-@ dominated Cairo by ordering the construction of a college for the Maliki school of jurisprudence of Sunni Islam in the city , and another for the Shafi 'i school , to which he belonged , in al @-@ Fustat . In 1171 , al @-@ <unk> died and Saladin took advantage of this power vacuum , effectively taking control of the country . Upon seizing power , he switched Egypt 's allegiance to the Baghdad @-@ based Abbasid Caliphate which adhered to Sunni Islam . 
 = = = Expansion = = = 
 = = = = Conquest of North Africa and Nubia = = = = 
 Saladin went to Alexandria in 1171 – 72 and found himself facing the dilemma of having many supporters in the city , but little money . A family council was held there by the Ayyubid emirs of Egypt where it was decided that al @-@ Muzaffar Taqi al @-@ Din Umar , Saladin 's nephew , would launch an expedition against the coastal region of Barqa ( Cyrenaica ) west of Egypt with a force of 500 cavalry . In order to justify the raid , a letter was sent to the Bedouin tribes of Barqa , rebuking them for their robberies of travelers and ordering them to pay the alms @-@ tax ( zakat ) . The latter was to be collected from their livestock . 
 In late 1172 , Aswan was besieged by former Fatimid soldiers from Nubia and the governor of the city , Kanz al @-@ Dawla — a former Fatimid loyalist — requested reinforcements from Saladin who complied . The reinforcements had come after the Nubians had already departed Aswan , but Ayyubid forces led by Turan @-@ Shah advanced and conquered northern Nubia after capturing the town of Ibrim . Turan @-@ Shah and his Kurdish soldiers temporarily lodged there . From Ibrim , they raided the surrounding region , halting their operations after being presented with an armistice proposal from the <unk> @-@ based Nubian king . Although Turan @-@ Shah 's initial response was hawkish , he later sent an envoy to <unk> , who upon returning , described the poverty of the city and of Nubia in general to Turan @-@ Shah . Consequently , the Ayyubids , like their Fatimid predecessors , were discouraged from further southward expansion into Nubia due to the poverty of the region , but required Nubia to guarantee the protection of Aswan and Upper Egypt . The Ayyubid garrison in Ibrim withdrew to Egypt in 1175 . 
 In 1174 , Sharaf al @-@ Din <unk> , a commander under al @-@ Muzaffar Umar , conquered Tripoli from the Normans with an army of Turks and Bedouins . 
 = = = = Conquest of Arabia = = = = 
 In 1173 , Saladin sent Turan @-@ Shah to conquer Yemen and the Hejaz . Muslim writers Ibn al @-@ Athir and later al @-@ Maqrizi wrote that the reasoning behind the conquest of Yemen was an Ayyubid fear that should Egypt fall to Nur al @-@ Din , they could seek refuge in a faraway territory . In May 1174 , Turan @-@ Shah conquered <unk> from a Kharijite dynasty and executed its leader Mahdi Abd al @-@ Nabi , and later that year Aden was taken from the Shia Banu Karam tribe . Aden became the principal maritime port of the dynasty in the Indian Ocean and the principal city of Yemen , although the official capital of Ayyubid Yemen was Ta <unk> . The advent of the Ayyubids marked the beginning of a period of renewed prosperity in the city which saw the improvement of its commercial infrastructure , the establishment of new institutions , and the minting of its own coins . Following this prosperity , the Ayyubids implemented a new tax which was collected by galleys . 
 Turan @-@ Shah drove out the Hamdanid rulers of Sana 'a , conquering the mountainous city in 1175 . With the conquest of Yemen , the Ayyubids developed a coastal fleet , al @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> , which they used to guard the sea coasts under their control and protect them from pirate raids . The conquest held great significance for Yemen because the Ayyubids managed to unite the previous three independent states ( <unk> , Aden , and Sana 'a ) under a single power . However , when Turan @-@ Shah was transferred from his governorship in Yemen in 1176 , uprisings broke out in the territory and were not quelled until 1182 when Saladin assigned his other brother <unk> Sayf al @-@ Islam as governor of Yemen . 
 From Yemen , as from Egypt , the Ayyubids aimed to dominate the Red Sea trade routes which Egypt depended on and so sought to tighten their grip over the Hejaz , where an important trade stop , Yanbu , was located . To favor trade in the direction of the Red Sea , the Ayyubids built facilities along the Red Sea @-@ Indian Ocean trade routes to accompany merchants . The Ayyubids also aspired to back their claims of legitimacy within the Caliphate by having sovereignty over the Islamic holy cities of Mecca and Medina . The conquests and economic advancements undertaken by Saladin effectively established Egypt 's hegemony in the region . 
 = = = = Conquest of Syria and Mesopotamia = = = = 
 Although still nominally a vassal of Nur al @-@ Din , Saladin adopted an increasingly independent foreign policy . This independence became more publicly pronounced after Nur al @-@ Din 's death in 1174 . Thereafter , Saladin set out to conquer Syria from the Zengids , and on November 23 he was welcomed in Damascus by the governor of the city . By 1175 , he had taken control of Hama and Homs , but failed to take Aleppo after besieging it . Control of Homs was handed to the descendants of Shirkuh in 1179 and Hama was given to Saladin 's nephew , al @-@ Muzaffar Umar . Saladin 's successes alarmed Emir Saif al @-@ Din of Mosul , the head of the Zengids at the time , who regarded Syria as his family 's estate and was angered that it was being usurped by a former servant of Nur al @-@ Din . He mustered an army to confront Saladin near Hama . Although heavily outnumbered , Saladin and his veteran soldiers decisively defeated the Zengids . After his victory , he proclaimed himself king and suppressed the name of as @-@ Salih Ismail al @-@ Malik ( Nur al @-@ Din 's adolescent son ) in Friday prayers and Islamic coinage , replacing it with his own name . The Abbasid caliph , al @-@ <unk> , graciously welcomed Saladin 's assumption of power and gave him the title of " Sultan of Egypt and Syria " . 
 In the spring of 1176 , another major confrontation occurred between the Zengids and the Ayyubids , this time at the Sultan 's Mound , 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) from Aleppo . Saladin again emerged victorious , but Saif al @-@ Din managed to narrowly escape . The Ayyubids proceeded to conquer other Syrian cities in the north , namely Ma <unk> al @-@ Numan , A <unk> , <unk> 'a , and Manbij , but failed to capture Aleppo during a second siege . An agreement was laid out , however , whereby <unk> , the governor of Aleppo , and his allies at Hisn Kayfa and Mardin , would recognize Saladin as the sovereign of the Ayyubids ' possessions in Syria , while Saladin allowed for <unk> and as @-@ Salih al @-@ Malik to continue their rule over Aleppo . 
 While Saladin was in Syria , his brother al @-@ Adil governed Egypt , and in 1174 – 75 , Kanz al @-@ Dawla of Aswan revolted against the Ayyubids with the intention of restoring Fatimid rule . His main backers were the local Bedouin tribes and the Nubians , but he also enjoyed the support of a multitude of other groups , including the Armenians . <unk> or possibly in coordination , was an uprising by Abbas ibn <unk> who overran Qus along the Nile River in central Egypt . Both rebellions were crushed by al @-@ Adil . For the rest of that year and throughout early 1176 , <unk> continued his raids in western North Africa , bringing the Ayyubids into conflict with the Almohads who ruled the Maghreb . 
 In 1177 , Saladin led a force of some 26 @,@ 000 soldiers , according to Crusader chronicler William of Tyre , into southern Palestine after hearing that most of the Kingdom of Jerusalem 's soldiers were besieging Harim north of Aleppo . Suddenly attacked by the Templars under Baldwin IV of Jerusalem near Ramla , the Ayyubid army was defeated at the Battle of Montgisard , with the majority of its troops killed . Saladin encamped at Homs the following year and a number of skirmishes between his forces , commanded by Farrukh Shah , and the Crusaders occurred . Undeterred , Saladin invaded the Crusader states from the west and defeated Baldwin at the Battle of Marj <unk> in 1179 . The following year , he destroyed the newly built Crusader castle of <unk> at the Battle of Jacob 's Ford . In the campaign of 1182 , he sparred with Baldwin again in the inconclusive Battle of Belvoir Castle in Kawkab al @-@ Hawa . The Ayyubid na 'ib ( deputy governor ) of Yemen , Uthman al @-@ <unk> , conquered the greater part of Hadramaut in 1180 , upon Turan @-@ Shah 's return to Yemen . 
 In May 1182 , Saladin captured Aleppo after a brief siege ; the new governor of the city , Imad al @-@ Din Zangi II , had been unpopular with his subjects and surrendered Aleppo after Saladin agreed to restore Zangi II 's previous control over Sinjar , al @-@ Raqqah , and <unk> , which would thereafter serve as vassal territories of the Ayyubids . Aleppo formally entered Ayyubid hands on 12 June . The day after , Saladin marched to Harim , near the Crusader @-@ held Antioch and captured the city when its garrison forced out their leader , <unk> , who was then briefly detained and released by al @-@ Muzaffar Umar . The surrender of Aleppo and Saladin 's allegiance with Zangi II had left Izz al @-@ Din al @-@ Mas 'ud of Mosul the only major Muslim rival of the Ayyubids . Mosul had been subjected to a short siege in the autumn of 1182 , but after mediation by the Abbasid caliph an @-@ Nasir , Saladin withdrew his forces . Mas 'ud attempted to align himself with the Artuqids of Mardin , but they became allies of Saladin instead . In 1183 , <unk> too switched allegiance to the Ayyubids . Mas 'ud then sought the support of Pahlawan ibn Muhammad , the governor of Azerbaijan , and although he did not usually intervene in the region , the possibility of Pahlawan 's intervention made Saladin cautious about launching further attacks against Mosul . 
 An arrangement was negotiated whereby al @-@ Adil was to administer Aleppo in the name of Saladin 's son al @-@ Afdal , while Egypt would be governed by al @-@ Muzaffar Umar in the name of Saladin 's other son Uthman . When the two sons were to come of age they would assume power in the two territories , but if any died , one of Saladin 's brothers would take their place . In the summer of 1183 , after ravaging eastern Galilee , Saladin 's raids there culminated in the Battle of al @-@ <unk> in the Jezreel Valley between him and the Crusaders under Guy of Lusignan . The mostly hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting ended indecisively . The two armies withdrew to a mile from each other and while the Crusaders discussed internal matters , Saladin captured the Golan Plateau , cutting the Crusaders off from their main supplies source . In October 1183 and then on 13 August 1184 , Saladin and al @-@ Adil besieged Crusader @-@ held Karak , but were unable to capture it . Afterward , the Ayyubids raided Samaria , burning down Nablus . Saladin returned to Damascus in September 1184 and a relative peace between the Crusader states and the Ayyubid empire subsequently ensued in 1184 – 1185 . 
 Saladin launched his last offensive against Mosul in late 1185 , hoping for an easy victory over a presumably demoralized Mas 'ud , but failed due to the city 's unexpectedly stiff resistance and a serious illness which caused Saladin to withdraw to Harran . Upon Abbasid encouragement , Saladin and Mas 'ud negotiated a treaty in March 1186 that left the Zengids in control of Mosul , but under the obligation to supply the Ayyubids with military support when requested . 
 = = = = Conquest of Palestine and Transjordan = = = = 
 Saladin besieged Tiberias in the eastern Galilee on 3 July 1187 and the Crusader army attempted to attack the Ayyubids by way of Kafr Kanna . After hearing of the Crusaders ' march , Saladin led his guard back to their main camp at Kafr <unk> , leaving a small detachment at Tiberias . With a clear view of the Crusader army , Saladin ordered al @-@ Muzaffar Umar to block the Crusaders ' entry from Hattin by taking a position near <unk> , while <unk> and his troops were stationed at a hill near al @-@ <unk> . On 4 July the Crusaders advanced toward the Horns of Hattin and charged against the Muslim forces , but were overwhelmed and defeated decisively . Four days after the battle , Saladin invited al @-@ Adil to join him in the reconquest of Palestine . On 8 July the Crusader stronghold of Acre was captured by Saladin , while his forces seized Nazareth and Saffuriya ; other brigades took Haifa , Caesarea , Sebastia and Nablus , while al @-@ Adil conquered Mirabel and Jaffa . On 26 July Saladin returned to the coast and received the surrender of Sarepta , Sidon , Beirut , and Jableh . In August , the Ayyubids conquered Ramla , Darum , Gaza , Bayt Jibrin , and Latrun . Ascalon was taken on 4 September . In September – October 1187 , the Ayyubids besieged Jerusalem , taking possession of it on 2 October after negotiations with Balian of Ibelin . 
 Karak and Mont Real in Transjordan soon fell , followed by Safad in the northeastern Galilee . By the end of 1187 the Ayyubids were in control of virtually the entire Crusader kingdom in the Levant with the exception of Tyre , which held out under Conrad of Montferrat . In December , an Ayyubid army consisting of the garrisons of Saladin and his brothers from Aleppo , Hama , and Egypt besieged Tyre . Half of the Muslim naval fleet was seized by Conrad 's forces on 29 December , followed by an Ayyubid defeat on the shoreline of the city . On 1 January 1188 , Saladin held a war council where a withdrawal from Tripoli was agreed . 
 While they fought the Crusaders in the Levant , the Ayyubids under Sharaf al @-@ Din wrested control of Kairouan from the Almohads in North Africa . 
 = = = = Third Crusade = = = = 
 Pope Gregory VIII called for a Third Crusade against the Muslims in early 1189 . Frederick Barbarossa of the Holy Roman Empire , Philip Augustus of France , and Richard the Lionheart of England formed an alliance to reconquer Jerusalem . Meanwhile , the Crusaders and the Ayyubids fought near Acre that year and were joined by the reinforcements from Europe . From 1189 to 1191 , Acre was besieged by the Crusaders , and despite initial Muslim successes , it fell to Richard 's forces . A massacre of 2 @,@ 700 Muslim inhabitants ensued , and the Crusaders then planned to take Ascalon in the south . 
 The Crusaders , now under the unified command of Richard , defeated Saladin at the Battle of Arsuf , allowing for the Crusader conquest of Jaffa and much of coastal Palestine , but they were unable to recover the interior regions . Instead , Richard signed a treaty with Saladin in 1192 , restoring the Kingdom of Jerusalem to a coastal strip between Jaffa and Beirut . It was the last major war effort of Saladin 's career , as he died the next year , in 1193 . 
 = = = Quarrels over the sultanate = = = 
 Rather than establishing a centralized empire , Saladin had established hereditary ownership throughout his lands , dividing his empire among his kinsmen , with family members presiding over semi @-@ autonomous fiefs and principalities . Although these princes ( emirs ) owed allegiance to the Ayyubid sultan , they maintained relative independence in their own territories . Upon Saladin 's death , az @-@ Zahir took Aleppo from al @-@ Adil per the arrangement and al @-@ Aziz Uthman held Cairo , while his eldest son , al @-@ Afdal retained Damascus , which also included Palestine and much of Mount Lebanon . Al @-@ Adil then acquired known as al @-@ Jazira ( upper Mesopotamia ) , where he held the Zengids of Mosul at bay . In 1193 , Mas 'ud of Mosul joined forces with Zangi II of Sinjar and together the Zengid coalition moved to conquer al @-@ Jazira . However , before any major results could be achieved , Mas 'ud fell ill and returned to Mosul , and al @-@ Adil then compelled Zangi to make a quick peace before the Zengids suffered territorial losses at the hands of the Ayyubids . Al @-@ Adil 's son al @-@ Mu 'azzam took possession of Karak and Transjordan . 
 Soon , however , Saladin 's sons squabbled over the division of the empire . Saladin had appointed al @-@ Afdal to the governorship of Damascus with the intention that his son should continue to see the city as his principal place of residence in order to emphasize the primacy of the jihad ( holy struggle ) against the Crusader states . Al @-@ Afdal , however , found that his attachment to Damascus contributed to his undoing . Several of his father 's subordinate emirs left the city for Cairo to lobby Uthman to oust him on claims he was inexperienced and intended to oust the Ayyubid old guard . Al @-@ Adil further encouraged Uthman to act in order prevent al @-@ Afdal 's incompetence putting the Ayyubid empire in jeopardy . Thus , in 1194 , Uthman openly demanded the sultanate . Uthman 's claim to the throne was settled in a series of assaults on Damascus in 1196 , forcing al @-@ Afdal to leave for a lesser post at Salkhad . Al @-@ Adil established himself in Damascus as a lieutenant of Uthman , but wielded great influence within the empire . 
 When Uthman died in a hunting accident near Cairo , al @-@ Afdal was again made sultan ( although Uthman 's son al @-@ Mansur was the nominal ruler of Egypt ) , al @-@ Adil having been absent in a campaign in the northeast . Al @-@ Adil returned and managed to occupy the Citadel of Damascus , but then faced a strong assault from the combined forces of al @-@ Afdal and his brother az @-@ Zahir of Aleppo . These forces disintegrated under al @-@ Afdal 's leadership and in 1200 , al @-@ Adil resumed his offensive . Upon Uthman 's death , two clans of mamluks ( slave soldiers ) entered into conflict . They were the <unk> and <unk> , both of which Shirkuh and Saladin had purchased . The <unk> backed al @-@ Adil in his struggles against al @-@ Afdal . With their support , al @-@ Adil conquered Cairo in 1200 , and forced al @-@ Afdal to accept internal banishment . He proclaimed himself Sultan of Egypt and Syria afterward and entrusted the governance of Damascus to al @-@ Mu 'azzam and al @-@ Jazira to his other son al @-@ Kamil . Also around 1200 , a sharif ( tribal head related to the Islamic prophet Muhammad ) , Qatada ibn Idris , seized power in Mecca and was recognized as the emir of the city by al @-@ Adil . 
 Al @-@ Afdal strove to retrieve Damascus a final time , but failed . Al @-@ Adil entered the city in triumph in 1201 . Thereafter , al @-@ Adil 's line , rather than Saladin 's line , dominated the next 50 years of Ayyubid rule . However , az @-@ Zahir still held Aleppo and al @-@ Afdal was given Samosata in Anatolia . Al @-@ Adil redistributed his possessions between his sons : al @-@ Kamil was to succeed him in Egypt , al @-@ Ashraf received al @-@ Jazira , and al @-@ <unk> was given Diyar Bakr , but the latter territory shifted to al @-@ Ashraf 's domain after al @-@ <unk> died . 
 Al @-@ Adil aroused open hostility from the Hanbali lobby in Damascus for largely ignoring the Crusaders , having launched only one campaign against them . Al @-@ Adil believed that the Crusader army could not be defeated in a direct fight . Prolonged campaigns also involved the difficulties of maintaining a coherent Muslim coalition . The trend under al @-@ Adil was the steady growth of the empire , mainly through the expansion of Ayyubid authority in al @-@ Jazira and Armenia . The Abbasids eventually recognized al @-@ Adil 's role as sultan in 1207 . A Crusader military campaign was launched on 3 November 1217 , beginning with an offensive towards Transjordan . Al @-@ Mu 'azzam urged al @-@ Adil to launch a counter @-@ attack , but he rejected his son 's proposal . In 1218 , the fortress of Damietta in the Nile Delta was besieged by the Crusaders . After two failed attempts , the fortress eventually capitulated on 25 August . Six days later al @-@ Adil died of apparent shock at Damietta 's loss . 
 Al @-@ Kamil proclaimed himself sultan in Cairo , while his brother al @-@ Mu 'azzam claimed the throne in Damascus . Al @-@ Kamil attempted to retake Damietta , but was forced back by John of Brienne . After learning of a conspiracy against him , he fled , leaving the Egyptian army leaderless . Panic ensued , but with the help of al @-@ Mu 'azzam , al @-@ Kamil regrouped his forces . By then , however , the Crusaders had seized his camp . The Ayyubids offered to negotiate for a withdrawal from Damietta , offering the restoration of Palestine to the Kingdom of Jerusalem , with the exception of the forts of Mont Real and Karak . This was refused by the leader of the Fifth Crusade , Pelagius of Albano , and in 1221 , the Crusaders were driven out of the Nile Delta after the Ayyubid victory at <unk> . 
 = = = Disintegration = = = 
 = = = = Loss of territories and ceding of Jerusalem = = = = 
 In the east , the <unk> under Jalal ad @-@ Din Mingburnu captured the town of <unk> from al @-@ Ashraf , while the normally loyalist <unk> began to encroach on Ayyubid territorial holdings in Arabia . In 1222 the Ayyubids appointed the <unk> leader Ali Bin Rasul as governor of Mecca . Ayyubid rule in Yemen and the Hejaz was declining and the Ayyubid governor of Yemen , Mas 'ud bin Kamil , was forced to leave for Egypt in 1223 . He appointed Nur ad @-@ Din Umar as his deputy governor while he was absent . In 1224 the local al @-@ Yamani dynasty gained control of Hadramaut from the Ayyubids who had held it loosely due to the troubled situation of their administration in Yemen proper . Following Mas 'ud bin Kamil 's death in 1229 , Nur ad @-@ Din Umar declared himself the independent ruler of Yemen and discontinued the annual tribute payment to the Ayyubid sultanate in Egypt . 
 Under Frederick II , a Sixth Crusade was launched , capitalizing on the ongoing internal strife between al @-@ Kamil of Egypt and al @-@ Mu 'azzam of Syria . Subsequently , al @-@ Kamil offered Jerusalem to Frederick to avoid a Syrian invasion of Egypt , but the latter refused . Al @-@ Kamil 's position was strengthened when al @-@ Mu 'azzam died in 1227 and was succeeded by his son an @-@ Nasir Dawud . Al @-@ Kamil continued negotiations with Frederick II in Acre in 1228 , leading to a truce agreement signed in February 1229 . The agreement gave the Crusaders control over an unfortified Jerusalem for over ten years , but also guaranteed Muslims control over Islamic holy places in the city . Although the treaty was virtually meaningless in military terms , an @-@ Nasir Dawud used it to provoke the sentiments of Syria 's inhabitants and a Friday sermon by a popular preacher at the Umayyad Mosque " reduced the crowd to violent sobbing and tears " . 
 The settlement with the Crusaders was accompanied by a proposed redistribution of the Ayyubid principalities whereby Damascus and its territories would by governed by al @-@ Ashraf , who recognized al @-@ Kamil 's sovereignty . An @-@ Nasir Dawud resisted the settlement , incensed by the Ayyubid @-@ Crusader truce . Al @-@ Kamil 's forces reached Damascus to enforce the proposed agreement in May 1229 . The siege put great pressure on the city , but the inhabitants rallied to an @-@ Nasir Dawud , supportive of al @-@ Mu 'azzam 's stable rule and angered at the treaty with Frederick . After one month , however , an @-@ Nasir Dawud sued for a peaceful outcome and was given a new principality centered around Karak , while al @-@ Ashraf , the governor of Diyar Bakr , assumed the governorship of Damascus . 
 Meanwhile , the Seljuks were advancing towards al @-@ Jazira , and the descendants of Qatada ibn Idris fought with their Ayyubid overlords over control of Mecca . The conflict between them was taken advantage of by the <unk> of Yemen who attempted to end Ayyubid suzerainty in the Hejaz and bring the region under their control which they accomplished in 1238 when Nur al @-@ Din Umar captured Mecca . 
 = = = = Syro @-@ Egyptian divide = = = = 
 Al @-@ Ashraf 's rule in Damascus was stable , but he and the other emirs of Syria sought to assert their independence from Cairo . Amid these tensions , al @-@ Ashraf died in August 1237 after a four @-@ month illness and was succeeded by his brother as @-@ Salih Ismail . Two months later , al @-@ Kamil 's Egyptian army arrived and besieged Damascus , but as @-@ Salih Ismail had destroyed the suburbs of the city to deny al @-@ Kamil 's forces shelter . In 1232 , al @-@ Kamil installed his eldest son as @-@ Salih Ayyub to govern Hisn Kayfa , but upon al @-@ Kamil 's death in 1238 , as @-@ Salih Ayyub disputed the proclamation of younger brother al @-@ Adil II as sultan in Cairo . As @-@ Salih Ayyub eventually occupied Damascus in December 1238 , but his uncle Ismail retrieved the city in September 1239 . Ismail 's cousin an @-@ Nasir Dawud had Ismail detained in Karak in a move to prevent the latter 's arrest by al @-@ Adil II . Ismail entered into an alliance with Dawud who released him the following year , allowing him to proclaim himself sultan in place of al @-@ Adil II in May 1240 . 
 Throughout the early 1240s , as @-@ Salih Ayyub carried out reprisals against those who supported al @-@ Adil II , and he then quarreled with an @-@ Nasir Dawud who had reconciled with as @-@ Salih Ismail of Damascus . The rival sultans as @-@ Salih Ayyub and Ismail attempted to ally with the Crusaders against the other . In 1244 , the breakaway Ayyubids of Syria allied with the Crusaders and confronted the coalition of as @-@ Salih Ayyub and the <unk> at <unk> , near Gaza . A large battle ensued , resulting in a major victory for as @-@ Salih Ayyub and the virtual collapse of the Kingdom of Jerusalem . 
 = = = = Restoration of unity = = = = 
 In 1244 – 1245 , as @-@ Salih Ayyub had seized the area approximate to the modern @-@ day West Bank from an @-@ Nasir Dawud ; he gained possession of Jerusalem , then marched on to take Damascus , which fell with relative ease in October 1245 . Shortly afterward , Sayf al @-@ Din Ali surrendered his exposed principality of Ajlun and its fortress to as @-@ Salih Ayyub . The rupture of the alliance between the <unk> and as @-@ Salih Ayyub ended with the virtual destruction of the former by al @-@ Mansur Ibrahim , the Ayyubid emir of Homs , in October 1246 . With the <unk> defeat , as @-@ Salih Ayyub was able to complete the conquest of southern Syria . His general Fakhr ad @-@ Din went on to subdue an @-@ Nasir Dawud 's territories . He sacked the lower town of Karak , then besieged its fortress . A stalemate followed with neither an @-@ Nasir Dawud or Fakhr ad @-@ Din strong enough to dislodge the other 's forces . A settlement was eventually reached whereby an @-@ Nasir Dawud would retain the fortress , but cede the remainder of his principality to as @-@ Salih Ayyub . Having settled the situation in Palestine and Transjordan , Fakhr ad @-@ Din moved north and marched to Bosra , the last place still held by Ismail . During the siege , Fakhr ad @-@ Din fell ill , but his commanders continued the assault against the city , which fell in December 1246 . 
 By May 1247 , as @-@ Salih Ayyub was master of Syria south of Lake Homs , having gained control over Banyas and Salkhad . With his fellow Ayyubid opponents subdued , except for Aleppo under an @-@ Nasir Yusuf , as @-@ Salih Ayyub undertook a limited offensive against the Crusaders , sending Fakhr ad @-@ Din to move against their territories in the Galilee . Tiberias fell on 16 June , followed by Mount Tabor and Kawkab al @-@ Hawa soon thereafter . Safad with its Templar fortress seemed out of reach , so the Ayyubids marched south to Ascalon . Facing stubborn resistance from the Crusader garrison , an Egyptian flotilla was sent by as @-@ Salih Ayyub to support the siege and on 24 October , Fakhr ad @-@ Din 's troops stormed through a breach in the walls and killed or captured the entire garrison . The city was razed and left deserted . 
 As @-@ Salih Ayyub returned to Damascus to keep an eye on developments in northern Syria . Al @-@ Ashraf Musa of Homs had ceded the important stronghold of <unk> to as @-@ Salih Ayyub the previous winter , perhaps to underline their patron @-@ client relationship . This troubled the Ayyubids of Aleppo who feared it would be used as a base for a military take @-@ over of their city . An @-@ Nasir Yusuf found this intolerable and decided to annex Homs in the winter of 1248 . The city surrendered in August and an @-@ Nasir Yusuf 's terms forced al @-@ Ashraf Musa to hand over Homs , but he was allowed to retain nearby Palmyra and Tell Bashir in the Syrian Desert . As @-@ Salih Ayyub sent Fakhr ad @-@ Din to recapture Homs , but Aleppo countered by sending an army to Kafr Tab , south of the city . An @-@ Nasir Dawud left Karak for Aleppo to support an @-@ Nasir Yusuf , but in his absence , his brothers al @-@ Amjad Hasan and az @-@ Zahir Shadhi detained his heir al @-@ Mu 'azzam Isa and then personally went to as @-@ Salih Ayyub 's camp at al @-@ <unk> in Egypt to offer him control of Karak in return for holdings in Egypt . As @-@ Salih Ayyub agreed and sent the eunuch Badr al @-@ Din <unk> to act as his governor in Karak . 
 = = = Fall = = = 
 = = = = Rise of the Mamluks and fall of Egypt = = = = 
 In 1248 , a Crusader fleet of 1 @,@ 800 boats and ships arrived in Cyprus with the intent of launching a Seventh Crusade against the Muslims by conquering Egypt . Their commander , Louis IX , attempted to enlist the Mongols to launch a coordinated attack on Egypt , but when this failed to materialize , the Crusader force sailed to Damietta and the local population there fled as soon as they landed . When as @-@ Salih Ayyub , who was in Syria at the time , heard of this , he rushed back to Egypt , avoiding Damietta , instead reaching Mansurah . There , he organized an army and raised a commando force which harassed the Crusaders . 
 As @-@ Salih Ayyub was ill and his health deteriorated further due to the mounting pressure from the Crusader offensive . His wife Shajar al @-@ Durr called a meeting of all the war generals and thus became commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Egyptian forces . She ordered the fortification of Mansurah and then stored large quantities of provisions and concentrated her forces there . She also organized a fleet of war galleys and scattered them at various strategic points along the Nile River . Crusader attempts to capture Mansurah were thwarted and King Louis found himself in a critical position . He managed to cross the Nile to launch a surprise attack against Mansurah . Meanwhile , as @-@ Salih Ayyub died , but Shajar al @-@ Durr and as @-@ Salih Ayyub 's Bahri Mamluk generals , including Rukn al @-@ Din Baybars and Aybak , countered the assault and inflicted heavy losses on the Crusaders . Simultaneously , Egyptian forces cut off the Crusader 's line of supply from Damietta , preventing the arrival of reinforcements . As @-@ Salih Ayyub 's son and the newly proclaimed Ayyubid sultan al @-@ Mu 'azzam Turan @-@ Shah reached Mansurah at this point and intensified the battle against the Crusaders . The latter ultimately surrendered at the Battle of <unk> , and King Louis and his companions were arrested . 
 Al @-@ Mu 'azzam Turan @-@ Shah alienated the Mamluks soon after their victory at Mansurah and constantly threatened them and Shajar al @-@ Durr . Fearing for their positions of power , the Bahri Mamluks revolted against the sultan and killed him in April 1250 . Aybak married Shajar al @-@ Durr and subsequently took over the government in Egypt in the name of al @-@ Ashraf II who became sultan , but only nominally . 
 = = = = Dominance of Aleppo = = = = 
 Intent on restoring the supremacy of Saladin 's direct descendants within the Ayyubid family , an @-@ Nasir Yusuf was eventually able to enlist the backing of all of the Syria @-@ based Ayyubid emirs in a common cause against Mamluk @-@ dominated Egypt . By 1250 , he took Damascus with relative ease and except for Hama and Transjordan , an @-@ Nasir Yusuf 's direct authority stood unbroken from the Khabur River in northern Mesopotamia to the Sinai Peninsula . In December 1250 , he attacked Egypt after hearing of al @-@ Mu 'azzam Turan @-@ Shah 's death and the ascension of Shajar al @-@ Durr . An @-@ Nasir Yusuf 's army was much larger and better @-@ equipped than that of the Egyptian army , consisting of the forces of Aleppo , Homs , Hama , and those of Saladin 's only surviving sons , Nusrat ad @-@ Din and Turan @-@ Shah ibn Salah ad @-@ Din . Nonetheless , it suffered a major defeat at the hands of Aybak 's forces . An @-@ Nasir Yusuf subsequently returned to Syria , which was slowly slipping out of his control . 
 The Mamluks forged an alliance with the Crusaders in March 1252 and agreed to jointly launch a campaign against an @-@ Nasir Yusuf . King Louis , who had been released after al @-@ Mu 'azzam Turan @-@ Shah 's murder , led his army to Jaffa , while Aybak intended to send his forces to Gaza . Upon hearing of the alliance , an @-@ Nasir Yusuf immediately dispatched a force to Tell al @-@ Ajjul , just outside Gaza , in order to prevent the junction of the Mamluk and Crusader armies . Meanwhile , the rest of the Ayyubid army was stationed in the Jordan Valley . Realizing that a war between them would greatly benefit the Crusaders , Aybak and an @-@ Nasir Yusuf accepted Abbasid mediation via Najm ad @-@ Din al @-@ <unk> . In April 1253 , a treaty was signed whereby the Mamluks would retain control over all of Egypt and Palestine up to , but not including , Nablus , while an @-@ Nasir Yusuf would be confirmed as the ruler of Muslim Syria . Thus , Ayyubid rule was officially ended in Egypt . After conflict arose between the Mamluks and the Ayyubids reignited , al @-@ <unk> arranged another treaty , this time giving an @-@ Nasir Yusuf control of the Mamluks ' territories in Palestine and al @-@ Arish in Sinai . Instead of placing Ayyubids in charge , however , an @-@ Nasir Yusuf handed Jerusalem to a Mamluk named <unk> while Nablus and Jenin were given to Baibars . 
 For over a year after the settlement with the Mamluks , calm settled over an @-@ Nasir Yusuf 's reign , but on 11 December 1256 he sent two envoys to the Abbasids in Baghdad seeking formal investiture from the caliph , al @-@ Musta 'sim , for his role as " Sultan " . This request was connected to an @-@ Nasir 's rivalry with Aybak , as the title would be useful in future disputes with the Mamluks . However , the Mamluks had sent their envoys to Baghdad previously to precisely ensure that an @-@ Nasir Yusuf would not gain the title , putting al @-@ Musta 'sim in a difficult position . 
 In early 1257 , Aybak was killed in a conspiracy , and was succeeded by his 15 @-@ year @-@ old son , al @-@ Mansur Ali , while Saif ad @-@ Din Qutuz held an influential position . Soon after al @-@ Mansur Ali 's ascendancy rumors of another conspiracy to which an @-@ Nasir Yusuf had an alleged connection emerged . The accused conspirator , al @-@ Mansur Ali 's vizier , Sharaf ad @-@ Din al @-@ Fa <unk> , was strangled by Egyptian authorities . The Bahri Mamluks in Syria led by Baibars pressured an @-@ Nasir Yusuf to intervene by invading Egypt , but he would not act , fearing the Bahri dynasty would usurp his throne if they gained Egypt . 
 = = = = Karak asserts independence = = = = 
 Relations between an @-@ Nasir Yusuf and the Bahri Mamluks grew tense after the former refused to invade Egypt . In October 1257 , Baibars and his fellow Mamluks left Damascus or were expelled from the city and together they moved south to Jerusalem . When the governor <unk> refused to aid them against an @-@ Nasir Yusuf , Baibars deposed him and had al @-@ <unk> Umar , the emir of Karak , pronounced in the khutba at the al @-@ Aqsa Mosque ; over the years , al @-@ <unk> Umar had allowed the political dissidents of Cairo and Damascus , who sought protection from either the Mamluk and Ayyubid authorities , a safe haven within his territory . 
 Soon after gaining Jerusalem , Baibars conquered Gaza and an @-@ Nasir Yusuf sent his army to Nablus in response . A battle ensued and the Mamluks ultimately fled across the Jordan River to the Balqa area . From there they reached <unk> at the southern tip of the Dead Sea where they sent their submission to Karak . Al @-@ Mughith Umar 's new relationship with Baibars solidified his independence from an @-@ Nasir Yusuf 's Syria . To ensure his independence , al @-@ Mughith Umar began to distribute the territories of Palestine and Transjordan among the Bahri Mamluks . The new allies assembled a small army and headed for Egypt . In spite of initial gains in Palestine and al @-@ Arish , they withdrew after seeing how overwhelmingly outnumbered they were by the Egyptian army . Al @-@ Mughith Umar and Baibars were not discouraged , however , and launched an army 1 @,@ 500 regular cavalry to Sinai at the beginning of 1258 , but again were defeated by the Mamluks of Egypt . 
 = = = = Mongol invasion and fall of the empire = = = = 
 The Ayyubids had been under the nominal sovereignty of the Mongol Empire after a Mongol force targeted Ayyubid territories in Anatolia in 1244 . An @-@ Nasir Yusuf sent an embassy to the Mongol capital Karakorum in 1250 , shortly after assuming power . These understandings did not last , however , and the Mongol Great Khan , Möngke , issued a directive to his brother Hulagu to extend the realms of the empire to the Nile River . The latter raised an army of 120 @,@ 000 and in 1258 , sacked Baghdad and slaughtered its inhabitants , including Caliph al @-@ Musta 'sim and most of his family after the Ayyubids failed to assemble an army to protect the city . That same year the Ayyubids lost Diyar Bakr to the Mongols . 
 An @-@ Nasir Yusuf sent a delegation to Hulagu afterward , repeating his protestations to submission . Hulagu refused to accept the terms and so an @-@ Nasir Yusuf called on Cairo for aid . This plea coincided with a successful coup by the Cairo @-@ based Mamluks against the remaining symbolic Ayyubid leadership in Egypt , with strongman Qutuz officially taking power . Meanwhile , an Ayyubid army was assembled at <unk> , just north of Damascus to defend the city against the Mongols who were now marching towards northern Syria . Aleppo was soon besieged within a week and in January 1260 it fell to the Mongols . The Great Mosque and the Citadel of Aleppo were razed and most of the inhabitants were killed or sold into slavery . The destruction of Aleppo caused panic in Muslim Syria ; The Ayyubid emir of Homs , al @-@ Ashraf Musa , offered to ally with Mongols at the approach of their army and was allowed to continue governance of the city by Hulagu . Hama also capitulated without resisting , but did not join forces with the Mongols . An @-@ Nasir Yusuf opted to flee Damascus to seek protection in Gaza . 
 Hulagu departed for Karakorum and left Kitbuqa , a Nestorian Christian general , to continue the Mongol conquest . Damascus capitulated after the arrival of the Mongol army , but was not sacked like other captured Muslim cities . However , from Gaza , an @-@ Nasir Yusuf managed to rally the small garrison he left in the Citadel of Damascus to rebel against the Mongol occupation . The Mongols retaliated by launching a massive artillery assault on the citadel and when it became apparent that an @-@ Nasir Yusuf was unable to relieve the city with a newly assembled army , the garrison surrendered . 
 The Mongols proceeded by conquering Samaria , killing most of the Ayyubid garrison in Nablus , and then advanced south , as far as Gaza , unhindered . An @-@ Nasir Yusuf was soon captured by the Mongols and used to persuade the garrison at Ajlun to capitulate . Afterward , the junior Ayyubid governor of Banyas allied with the Mongols , who had now gained control of most of Syria and al @-@ Jazira , effectively ending Ayyubid power in the region . On 3 September 1260 , the Egypt @-@ based Mamluk army led by Qutuz and Baibars challenged Mongol authority and decisively defeated their forces in the Battle of Ain Jalut , outside of Zir 'in in the Jezreel Valley . Five days later , the Mamluks took Damascus and within a month , most of Syria was in Bahri Mamluk hands . Meanwhile , an @-@ Nasir Yusuf was killed in captivity . 
 = = = Remnants of the dynasty = = = 
 Many of the Ayyubid emirs of Syria were discredited by Qutuz for collaborating with the Mongols , but since al @-@ Ashraf Musa defected and fought alongside the Mamluks at Ain Jalut , he was allowed to continue his rule over Homs . Al @-@ Mansur of Hama had fought alongside the Mamluks from the start of their conquest and because of this , Hama continued to be ruled by the Ayyubid descendants of al @-@ Muzaffar Umar . After al @-@ Ashraf Musa 's death in 1262 , the new Mamluk sultan , Baibars , annexed Homs . The next year , al @-@ Mughith Umar was tricked into surrendering Karak to Baibars and was executed soon after for having previously sided with the Mongols . 
 The last Ayyubid ruler of Hama died in 1299 and Hama briefly passed through direct Mamluk suzerainty . However , in 1310 , under the patronage of the Mamluk sultan al @-@ Nasir Muhammad , Hama was restored to the Ayyubids under the well @-@ known geographer and author Abu al @-@ Fida . The latter died in 1331 and was succeeded by his son al @-@ Afdal Muhammad , who eventually lost the favor of his Mamluk overlords . He was removed from his post in 1341 and Hama was formally placed under Mamluk rule . 
 In southeastern Anatolia , the Ayyubids continued to rule the principality of Hisn Kayfa and managed to remain an autonomous entity , independent of the Mongol Ilkhanate , which ruled northern Mesopotamia until the 1330s . After the breakup of the Ilkhanate , their former vassals in the area , the Artuqids , waged war against the Ayyubids of Hisn Kayfa in 1334 , but were decisively defeated , with the Ayyubids gaining the Artuqids ' possessions on the left bank of the Tigris River . In the 14th century , the Ayyubids rebuilt the castle of Hisn Kayfa which served as their stronghold . The Ayyubids of Hisn Kayfa were vassals of the Mamluks and later the <unk> until being supplanted by the Ottoman Empire in the early 16th century . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Government = = = 
 = = = = Structure = = = = 
 Saladin structured the Ayyubid empire around the concept of collective sovereignty i.e. a confederation of principalities held together by the idea of family rule . Under this arrangement there existed numerous " petty sultans " while one family member , as @-@ Sultan al @-@ Mu 'azzam , reigned supreme . After the death of Saladin , this coveted position became open to whomever was strong enough to seize it . Subsequent rivalry between the Ayyubids of Syria and Egypt reached a point where the rulers of each territory would at times collude with Crusaders against the other . Ayyubid rule differed in these two regions . In Syria , each major city was ruled as a relatively independent principality under an Ayyubid family member , while in Egypt the long tradition of centralized rule enabled the Ayyubids to maintain direct control over the province from Cairo . It was Baghdad , seat of the Caliphate , however , that exercised cultural and political hegemony over the Ayyubid territories , particularly those in Southwest Asia . For instance , the qadi ( " chief justice " ) of Damascus was still appointed by the Abbasids during Ayyubid rule . 
 Political power was concentrated in the Ayyubid household which was not necessarily characterized only by blood relation ; slaves and intimates could acquire great , and even supreme power within it . It was a common occurrence for the mothers of young Ayyubid rulers to act as independent powers or in a few cases , rulers in their own right . Eunuchs exercised substantial power under the Ayyubids , serving as attendants and <unk> within the household or as emirs , governors , and army commanders outside the household . One of Saladin 's most important supporters was the eunuch Baha ad @-@ Din ibn Shaddad who helped him depose the Fatimids , dispossess their properties , and construct the wall of Cairo 's citadel . Following the death of al @-@ Aziz Uthman , he became the regent of his son al @-@ Mansur and effectively ruled over Egypt for a short time before the arrival of al @-@ Adil . Later sultans appointed eunuchs as deputy sultans and even awarded them sovereignty over certain cities , such as Shams al @-@ Din <unk> who was given the Jaziran cities of Amid and Diyar Bakr in 1239 . 
 The Ayyubids had three principal means of recruiting the educated elites whom they needed to administer their cities and towns . Some of these local leaders , known as shaykhs , entered the service of an Ayyubid ruling household and thus their bids for power were supported from Ayyubid household revenues and influence . Others were paid directly out of revenues made from the diwan , a high governmental body of the state . The third method was assignment to the shaykhs of the revenues of charitable endowments , known as <unk> . The Ayyubids , like their various predecessors in the region , had relatively few state agencies by which they could penetrate their cities and towns . To link themselves with the educated elite of their cities , they relied on the political usage of patronage practices . The assignment of waqf revenue to this elite was similar to the assignment of fiefs ( iqta 'at ) to the commanders and generals of the army . In both cases , it enabled the Ayyubids to recruit a dependent , but not administratively subordinate elite . 
 Following their conquest of Jerusalem in 1187 , the Ayyubids under Saladin may have been the first to establish the position of Amir al @-@ Hajj to protect the annual Hajj caravans leaving Damascus for Mecca with the appointment of <unk> ibn Ayyub to the office . 
 = = = = Seat of government = = = = 
 The seat of Ayyubid government from Saladin 's rule from the 1170s up to al @-@ Adil 's reign in 1218 had been Damascus . The city provided a strategic advantage in the constant war with the Crusaders and allowed the sultan to keep an eye on his relatively ambitious vassals in Syria and al @-@ Jazira . Cairo was too remote to serve as a base of operations , but had always served as the economic foundation of the empire . This rendered the city a critical constituent in the repertoire of the Ayyubid possessions . When Saladin was proclaimed sultan in Cairo in 1171 , he chose the Fatimid @-@ built Lesser Western Palace ( part of a larger palace complex in Cairo isolated from the urban sprawl ) as the seat of government . Saladin himself resided in the former Fatimid vizier palace , Turan @-@ Shah took up a former Fatimid prince 's living quarter , and their father occupied the Pearl Pavilion which was situated outside of Cairo overlooking the city 's canal . The successive Ayyubid sultans of Egypt would live in the Lesser Western Palace . 
 After al @-@ Adil I seized the throne in Cairo and with it the sultanate of the Ayyubid oligarchy , the period of rivalry between Damascus and Cairo to become capital of the Ayyubid empire commenced . Under al @-@ Adil and al @-@ Kamil , Damascus continued as an autonomous province whose ruler reserved the right to designate his own heir , but during as @-@ Salih Ayyub 's rule , military campaigns against Syria reduced Damascus to a vassal of Cairo . In addition , Ayyub established new rules both in administration and government in order to centralize his regime ; he conferred the most prominent positions of the state to his close confidants , instead of his Ayyubid relatives . His wife Shajar al @-@ Durr , for example , managed the affairs of Egypt while he was in Syria . Ayyub officially delegated his authority to his dead son Khalil and made al @-@ Durr act formally on Khalil 's behalf . 
 = = = Demographics = = = 
 = = = = Religion , ethnicity and language = = = = 
 By the 12th century , Islam was the dominant religion in the Middle East . It is not certain , however , if it was the religion of the majority outside the Arabian Peninsula . Arabic was the language of high culture and of the urban population , although other languages dating to pre @-@ Islamic rule were still being used to a certain extent . Most Egyptians were speaking Arabic by the time the Ayyubids took power there . 
 Kurdish was the mother tongue of the early Ayyubids , at the time of their departure from Dvin . Sultan Saladin spoke both Arabic and Kurdish , and likely Turkish as well . According to Yasser <unk> , an anthropologist specializing in medieval Islamic culture , the Ayyubid rulers who reigned in the late 12th @-@ century were far removed from their Kurdish origins , and unlike their Seljuq predecessors and their Mamluk successors , they were firmly " Arabized . " Arabic culture and language formed the main component of their identity instead of their Kurdish heritage . Arabic surnames were much more prevalent among the Ayyubids , a tribe that had already been partially assimilated into the Arabic @-@ speaking world before its members came to power , than non @-@ Arabic names . Some exceptions included the non @-@ Arabic surname Turan @-@ Shah . Most of the Ayyubid rulers spoke fluent Arabic and a number of them , such as az @-@ Zahir Ghazi , al @-@ Mu 'azzam Isa and the minor emirs of Hama , composed Arabic poetry . 
 The Arabization of the Ayyubid ruling families differed starkly from the ranks of their armies , which lacked cultural cohesion , with Turks and Kurds dominating the cavalry and nomadic <unk> and Arabs filling the ranks of the infantry . These groups typically settled in the pastoral areas outside of the cities , the centers of cultural life , and as such they were relatively isolated from the Arabic @-@ dominant urban environment . This isolation allowed them to preserve their traditions . It is thought that Saladin spoke Turkish to his military commanders . Like their Fatimid predecessors , the Ayyubid rulers of Egypt maintained a substantial force of mamluks ( military slaves ) . By the first half of the 13th century mamluks were mostly drawn from Kipchak Turks and Circassians and there is strong evidence that these forces continued to speak Kipchak Turkish . 
 The majority of Syria 's population in the 12th century consisted of Sunni Muslims , typically from Arab or Kurdish backgrounds . There were also sizable Muslim communities of Twelver Shias , Druzes , and Alawites . The Ismaili presence was small and most were of Persian origin , having migrated from <unk> . They mostly resided in the mountainous area near the northern Syrian coastline . Large Christian communities existed in northern Syria , Palestine , Transjordan and Upper Mesopotamia . They were Aramaic @-@ speaking and indigenous to the area , mostly belonging to the Syriac Orthodox Church . They lived in villages of Christian or mixed Christian and Muslim population , monasteries , and in small towns where they appear to have been on friendly terms with their Muslim neighbors . Ideologically , they were led by the Patriarch of Antioch . 
 In Yemen and Hadramaut , much of the population adhered to Shia Islam in its Zaydi form . The inhabitants of Upper Mesopotamia were made up of Sunni Muslim Kurds and Turks , although there was a significant Yazidi minority in that region as well . Jews were spread throughout the Islamic world and most Ayyubid cities had Jewish communities due to the important roles Jews played in trade , manufacture , finance , and medicine . In Yemen and some parts of Syria , Jews also lived in rural towns . The Ayyubid emir of Yemen in 1197 – 1202 , al @-@ Malik Mu 'izz Isma 'il , attempted to forcibly convert the Jews of Aden , but this process ceased after his death in 1202 . Within the Jewish community , particularly in Egypt and Palestine , there existed a minority of <unk> . 
 In Egypt , there were large communities of Coptic Christians , <unk> , Turks , Armenians , and Black Africans — the latter two groups had a large presence in Upper Egypt . Under the Fatimids , non @-@ Muslims in Egypt generally prospered , with the exception of Caliph al @-@ Hakim 's reign . However , with Shirkuh 's ascendancy to the vizier position , a number edicts were enacted against the non @-@ Muslim population . With the advent of the Syrian expeditionary force ( consisting of Oghuz Turks and Kurds ) into Egypt , waves of maltreatment of minorities occurred , irrespective of religion . These incidents occurred while Shirkuh and Saladin were viziers to the Fatimid caliph . 
 At the beginning of Saladin 's reign as sultan in Egypt , upon the encouragement of his adviser , Qadi al @-@ Fadil , Christians were prohibited from employment in the fiscal administration , but various Ayyubid emirs continued to allow Christians to serve in their posts . A number of other regulations were imposed , including the bans on alcohol consumption , religious processions , and the ringing of church bells . Conversion of formerly high @-@ ranking Christians and their families to Islam took place throughout the early period of Ayyubid rule . According to historian Yaakov Lev , the persecution of non @-@ Muslims had some permanent effects on them , but nonetheless , the effects were local and contained . To manage Mediterranean trade , the Ayyubids permitted Europeans — mainly Italians , but also French and Catalans — to settle in Alexandria in large numbers . However , in the aftermath of the Fifth Crusade , 3 @,@ 000 merchants from the area were arrested or expelled . 
 The Ayyubids generally employed Kurds , Turks , and people from the Caucasus for the higher @-@ ranking posts of the military and bureaucratic fields . Not much is known about the foot soldiers of the Ayyubid army , but the numbers of cavalrymen are known to have fluctuated between 8 @,@ 500 and 12 @,@ 000 . The cavalry was largely composed of free @-@ born Kurds , Turks , and <unk> whom Ayyubid emirs and sultans purchased as slaves ( mamluks ) . In addition , there existed Arab auxiliaries , former Fatimid units such as the Nubians , and separate Arab contingents — notably from the <unk> tribe , who were largely devoted to the defense of Egypt . Rivalry between Kurdish and Turkish troops occurred occasionally when leading positions were at stake and towards the end of Ayyubid rule , Turks outnumbered Kurds in the army . Despite their Kurdish background , the sultans remained impartial to both groups . 
 = = = = Population = = = = 
 There is no accurate figure for the population of the various territories under Ayyubid rule . Colin <unk> and Richard Jones suggest that in the 12th century , Syria had a population of 2 @.@ 7 million , Palestine and Transjordan had 500 @,@ 000 inhabitants , and Egypt had a population of under 5 million . Josiah C. Russel states that in this same period there were 2 @.@ 4 million people in Syria living in 8 @,@ 300 villages , leaving a population of 230 @,@ 000 – 300 @,@ 000 living in ten cities , eight of which were Muslim cities under Ayyubid control . The largest were Edessa ( pop . 24 @,@ 000 ) , Damascus ( pop . 15 @,@ 000 ) , Aleppo ( pop . 14 @,@ 000 ) , and Jerusalem ( pop . 10 @,@ 000 ) . Smaller cities included Homs , Hama , Gaza , and Hebron . 
 Russel estimated the Egyptian village population to be 3 @.@ 3 million in 2 @,@ 300 villages , a high density for rural populations in the time period . He attributes it to the high productivity of Egyptian soil which allowed for increased agricultural growth . The urban population was much lower , 233 @,@ 100 , consisting of 5 @.@ 7 % of the total Egyptian population . The largest cities were Cairo ( pop . 60 @,@ 000 ) , Alexandria ( pop . 30 @,@ 000 ) , Qus ( pop . 25 @,@ 000 ) , Damietta ( pop . 18 @,@ 000 ) , <unk> ( pop . 13 @,@ 000 ) , and Bilbeis ( pop . 10 @,@ 000 ) . Numerous smaller cities dotted the Nile River . Among the latter were <unk> , Asyut , and Tanta . Cities in Egypt were also densely populated , mainly because of greater urbanization and industrialization than elsewhere . 
 = = = Economy = = = 
 Having pushed the Crusaders out of most of Syria , the Ayyubids generally adopted a policy of peace with them . The war with the Crusaders did not prevent Muslims under Ayyubid governance from developing good commercial relations with European states . This led to fruitful interaction between both sides in different fields of economic activity , particularly in agriculture and trade . 
 Numerous measures were undertaken by the Ayyubids to increase agricultural production . Canals were dug to facilitate the irrigation of agricultural lands throughout the empire . Cultivation of sugarcane was officially encouraged to meet the great demand of it by both the local inhabitants and the Europeans . Several new plants were introduced to Europe in trade with both the Zengids and Ayyubids , including sesame , carob , millet , rice , lemons , melons , apricots , and shallots . 
 The main factor which boosted industry and trade under the Ayyubids was the new interests Europeans developed when they came into contact with the Muslims . Commodities included incense , scents , fragrant oils , and aromatic plants from Arabia and India , as well as ginger , alum , and aloes . Likewise , Europeans developed new tastes in the matter of fashions , clothing , and home furnishing . Rugs , carpets , and tapestries manufactured in the Middle East and Central Asia were introduced to the West through Crusader @-@ Ayyubid interaction . Christian pilgrims visiting Jerusalem returned with Arab reliquaries for the keeping of relics . In addition , eastern works of art in glass , pottery , gold , silver , etc . , were highly prized in Europe . 
 The European demand for agricultural products and industrial commodities stipulated maritime activity and international trade to an unprecedented extent . The Ayyubids played a leading role in this as they controlled sea @-@ trade routes which passed through the ports of Yemen and Egypt via the Red Sea . The trade policy of the Ayyubids placed them in a position of great advantage ; although they cooperated with the Genoans and Venetians in the Mediterranean Sea , they prevented them from having access to the Red Sea . Thus , they kept the trade of the Indian Ocean exclusively in their hands . In the Mediterranean trade , the Ayyubids drew large benefits in the form of taxes and commissions which they learned from the Italians . 
 Upon the development of international trade , the elementary principles of credit and banking were developed . Both Jewish and Italian merchants had regular banking agents in Syria , who transacted business on behalf of their masters . Bills of exchange were also used by them in their dealings with one another and money was deposited in various banking centers throughout Syria . The encouragement of trade and industry provided the Ayyubid sultans with the funds needed for military expenditure as well as for developmental and everyday lifestyle works . Special attention was made to the economic state of the empire under al @-@ Adil and al @-@ Kamil . The latter maintained a strict control over expenditure ; it is said that on his death he left a treasury which was equivalent to the budget of one full year . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Being well @-@ educated themselves , the Ayyubid rulers became munificent patrons of learning and educational activity . Different madrasa @-@ type schools were built by them throughout the empire , not only for education , but also to popularize knowledge of Sunni Islam . According to Ibn Jubayr , under Saladin , Damascus had 20 schools , 100 baths , and a large number of Sufi dervish monasteries . He also built several schools in Aleppo , Jerusalem , Cairo , Alexandria , and in various cities in the Hejaz . Similarly , many schools were built by his successors also . Their wives and daughters , commanders , and nobles established and financed numerous educational institutions as well . 
 Although the Ayyubids were from the Shafi 'i denomination , they built schools for imparting instruction in all four of the Sunni systems of religious @-@ juridical thought . Before the Ayyubid takeover , there were no schools for the Hanbali and Maliki denominations in Syria , but the Ayyubids founded separate schools for them . In the mid @-@ 13th century , Ibn Shaddad counted in Damascus 40 Shafi 'i , 34 Hanafi , 10 Hanbali , and three Maliki schools . 
 When Saladin restored Sunni orthodoxy in Egypt , 10 madrasas were established during his reign , and an additional 25 during the entire Ayyubid period of rule . Each of their locations had religious , political , and economic significance , in particular those in al @-@ Fustat . Most of the schools were dedicated to the Shafi 'i denomination , but others belonged to the Maliki and Hanafi <unk> . The madrasas built near the tomb of Imam al @-@ Shafi 'i were located adjacent to the important centers of pilgrimage and were a major focus of Sunni devotion . About 26 schools were built in Egypt , Jerusalem and Damascus by high @-@ ranking government officials , and unusual for the time , commoners also founded in Egypt about 18 schools , including two medical institutions . 
 Most schools were residential whereby both teachers and students resided as a rule . The teachers appointed were jurists , theologians , and traditionalists who received their salary from endowments to the institutions they taught in . Each student was offered a lodging where he would resort , a teacher to instruct him in whatever art he requested , and regular grants to cover all his needs . <unk> were considered prestigious institutions in society . Under the Ayyubids , it was not possible to obtain a job in the government without receiving an education from a madrasa . 
 = = = Science and medicine = = = 
 The facilities and patronage provided by the Ayyubids led to a resurgence in intellectual activity in different branches of knowledge and learning throughout the territories they controlled . They took special interest in the fields of medicine , pharmacology , and botany . Saladin built and maintained two hospitals in Cairo emulating the well @-@ known Nuri Hospital in Damascus which not only treated patients , but also provided medical schooling . Many scientists and physicians flourished in this period in Egypt , Syria , and Iraq . Among them were Maimonides , Ibn Jami , Abdul Latif al @-@ Baghdadi , al @-@ <unk> , Rashidun al @-@ Suri , and Ibn al @-@ <unk> . Some of these scholars served the Ayyubid household directly , becoming the personal physicians of sultans . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 Military architecture was the supreme expression of the Ayyubid period , as well as an eagerness to fortify the restoration of Sunni Islam , especially in a previously Shia @-@ dominated Egypt by constructing Sunni madrasas . The most radical change Saladin implemented in Egypt was the enclosure of Cairo and al @-@ Fustat within one city wall . Some of the techniques of fortification were learned from the Crusaders , such as curtain walls following the natural topography . Many were also inherited from the Fatimids like machicolations and round towers , while other techniques were developed simultaneously by the Ayyubids , particularly concentric planning . 
 Muslim women , particularly those from the Ayyubid family , the families of local governors , and the families of the ulema ( " religious scholars " ) took an active role in Ayyubid architecture . Damascus witnessed the most sustained patronage of religious architecture by women . They were responsible for the construction of 15 madrasas , six Sufi hospices , and 26 religious and charitable institutions . In Aleppo , the Firdaws Madrasa , known as the most impressive Ayyubid building in Syria , had regent queen <unk> Khatun as its patron . 
 In September 1183 , construction of the Cairo Citadel began under Saladin 's orders . According to al @-@ Maqrizi , Saladin chose the Muqattam Hills to build the citadel because the air there was fresher than anywhere else in the city , but its construction was not so much determined by the salubrious atmosphere ; rather it was out of defensive necessity and example of existing fortresses and citadels in Syria . The walls and towers of the northern section of the citadel are largely the works of Saladin and al @-@ Kamil . Two of Saladin 's towers were totally encased by semi @-@ circular units . Al @-@ Kamil completed the citadel ; he strengthened and enlarged some of the existing towers , and also added a number of square towers which served as self @-@ contained keeps . According to Richard Yeomans , the most impressive of al @-@ Kamil 's structures was the series of massive rectangular keeps which straddled the walls of the northern enclosure . All of al @-@ Kamil 's fortifications can be identified by their embossed , rusticated masonry , whereas Saladin 's towers have smooth dressed stones . This heavier rustic style became a common feature in other Ayyubid fortifications , and can be seen in the Citadel of Damascus and that of Bosra in Syria . 
 Aleppo underwent major transformations in the Ayyubid period , specifically during the reign of az @-@ Zahir Ghazi . Ayyubid architectural achievements focused on four areas : the citadel , the waterworks , fortifications , and the extramural developments . The total rebuilding of the city enclosure began when az @-@ Zahir Ghazi removed the <unk> of Nur ad @-@ Din — which by then outlived its temporary need — and rebuilt the northern and northwestern walls — the most susceptible to outside attack — from Bab al @-@ Jinan to Bab al @-@ Nasr . He parceled out the building of the towers on this stretch of the wall to his princes and military officers ; each tower was identified with a particular prince who inscribed his name into it . Later , az @-@ Zahir Ghazi extended the eastern wall to the south and east , reflecting his desire to incorporate a dilapidated fortress , Qala 'at al @-@ Sharif , outside the city into Aleppo 's enclosure . Bab Qinnasrin was completely rebuilt by an @-@ Nasir Yusuf in 1256 . This gate stands today as a masterpiece of medieval Syrian military architecture . Cumulatively , Ayyubid architecture left a lasting impression in Aleppo . The citadel was rebuilt , the water network was expanded , and streets and quarters were provided fountains and baths . In addition , dozens of shrines , mosques , madrasas , and mausoleums were built throughout the city . 
 The Ayyubid period in Jerusalem following its conquest by Saladin was marked by a huge investment in the construction of houses , markets , public bathes , and pilgrim hostels . Numerous works were undertaken at the Temple Mount . Saladin ordered all the inner walls and pillars of the Dome of the Rock to be covered in marble and he initiated the renovation of the mosaics on the dome 's drum . The mihrab of the al @-@ Aqsa Mosque was repaired and in 1217 , al @-@ Mu 'azzam Isa built the northern porch of the mosque with three gates . The Dome of the Ascension was also built and restoration work was done to the existing free @-@ standing domes of the Temple Mount . 
 = Ontario Highway 59 = 
 King 's Highway 59 , commonly referred to as Highway 59 , was a provincially maintained highway in the Canadian province of Ontario . It connected Long Point Provincial Park in Norfolk County to the town of Shakespeare in Perth County , passing through the city of Woodstock in Oxford County en route . Several smaller towns also lined the highway , notably Courtland , Delhi and Norwich . Highway 59 featured junctions with Highway 3 , Highway 2 , Norfolk County Highway 24 and the concurrent routes of Highway 7 and Highway 8 . 
 Highway 59 was established in 1937 between Highway 3 and Highway 2 . In 1961 , several highways were renumbered , establishing the final alignment of the route and tripling its length . As part of the mass highway transfers performed during the late 1990s , Highway 59 was decommissioned entirely in 1998 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The route of Highway 59 followed what is now Norfolk Highway 59 , Oxford County Road 59 and Perth County Road 107 . The majority of this route travels through rural farmland , which dominates southwestern Ontario , although there are several notable towns encountered along the highway , including Courtland , Delhi , Norwich , Woodstock and Shakespeare . 
 In the south , the highway begins at the entrance to Long Point Provincial Park , an important bird sanctuary that serves as a migratory waypoint before and after birds cross Lake Erie . Several National Wildlife Areas are also located along the surrounding shoreline . The highway passes through he community of Long Point , then curves northwest . It intersects Norfolk County Highway 24 , formerly Highway 24 , midway between Long Point and the town of Langton . It encounters Highway 3 approximately 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) east of Tillsonburg in the community of Courtland where it turns east and travels concurrently with it for 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) to the town of Delhi . At an intersection just west of that town , the route continues northwest to the community of Summerville , then curves north to pass through the town of Norwich . Five kilometres ( 3 mi ) north of there , the route curves west and bisects the community of <unk> . It then curves back to the north and travels straight towards Woodstock . 
 After crossing Highway 401 , the route enters Woodstock , where it is known as Norwich Avenue , Dundas Street and Vansittart Avenue . Dundas Street was also formerly Highway 2 , but it was transferred to the County of Oxford at the same time as Highway 59 . North of Woodstock , Highway 59 proceeds due north through the communities of Perry Lane , Tollgate , Willow Lake , <unk> , Strathallan and Hickson before eventually curving northeast near the Oxford – Perth boundary to pass through the town of Tavistock , turning north . Approximately 6 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) north of Tavistock , the route ends in the town of Shakespeare at an intersection with Highway 7 and Highway 8 . North of this intersection , the roadway continues as Perth County Road 107 . 
 = = History = = 
 Highway 59 was established in 1937 when the Department of Highways ( DHO ) assumed the Delhi – Woodstock Road . This 41 @.@ 0 @-@ kilometre ( 25 @.@ 5 mi ) road was designated on August 25 . The route remained unchanged until the early 1960s , when several highways were renumbered effective December 19 , 1961 . Highway 19 between Woodstock and Shakespeare was redesignated as Highway 59 , while Highway 100 between Thamesford and St. Marys was redesignated as Highway 19 . On July 20 , 1961 , Highway 59 was extended south from Courtland to Long Point Provincial Park along Norfolk County roads 8 and 8A , which the DHO rebuilt in the years prior . A concurrency was also established along Highway 3 between Courtland and Delhi . These extensions nearly tripled the length of the highway to 120 @.@ 1 kilometres ( 74 @.@ 6 mi ) . The route remained this way for nearly four decades . However , on January 1 , 1998 , as part of budget cutbacks , several highways were transferred to local jurisdiction . Highway 59 was transferred the counties of Norfolk , Oxford and Perth , decommissioning the route entirely . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 59 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . 
 = Sealyham Terrier = 
 The Sealyham Terrier is a rare Welsh breed of small to medium @-@ sized terrier that originated in Wales as a working dog . It is principally a white @-@ bodied , rough coated breed , developed in the mid to late 19th century by Captain John Edwardes at Sealyham House , Pembrokeshire . 
 Following the First World War , it surged in popularity and was associated with Hollywood stars and members of the British Royal Family . Its numbers have dropped significantly since then , with the breed listed as a Vulnerable Native Breed by the Kennel Club ; an all time low was recorded in 2008 when only 43 puppies were registered in the United Kingdom . This decline has been blamed on an influx of foreign and designer breeds , and the Sealyham 's reduced usefulness as a working dog . 
 This breed is equally suitable as a family dog or a working terrier , given the right training . It is affected by few breed specific breed disorders , with the only two prevalent conditions being lens luxation and canine degenerative myelopathy . 
 = = History = = 
 The breed was developed between 1850 and 1891 by Captain John Edwardes , at Sealyham House , near <unk> in the Welsh county of Pembrokeshire . Originally the breed was used for pest control , to hunt small game and to eliminate vermin particularly badgers which he usually relocated . The Welsh Corgi , Fox Terrier ( Wire ) , and the now extinct English White Terrier all played a part in the make up of the Sealyham , although Edwardes did not keep records . He wanted a small white dog with a strong jaw , and a wiry coat . The white coat was particularly prized , as it meant that the hunter in the field could distinguish the dogs from the quarry . Edwardes culled weak dogs , and bred the stronger ones . After Edwardes ' death in 1891 , other breeders began to work with Sealyhams , including Fred Lewis who promoted the breed . 
 The breed was shown for the first time in 1903 , and the Sealyham Terrier club was created in 1908 ; the breed was officially recognised by the Kennel Club in 1911 . The Sealyham Terrier now is recognised by all of the major kennel clubs in the English @-@ speaking world . During the early stages of its recognition , the breed was alternatively known as the Welsh Border Terrier , or the Cowley Terrier . The American Sealyham Terrier Club was founded in 1913 . 
 During the 1920s and 1930s , Sir Jocelyn Lucas used the dogs to hunt badgers which he usually relocated . At this time he also used Sealyham Terriers for hunting otters , stoats and squirrels . Deciding that he wanted a better hunting dog than the Sealyhams , bred for conformation showing , he cross @-@ bred the dogs with the Norfolk Terrier . This resulted in an unrecognised breed of dog he called the Lucas Terrier , which he described as " death to rats and rabbits " . 
 The Sealyham surged in popularity after the First World War in the UK and the United States . Within the Hollywood film industry , the Sealyham became a fashionable dog to own by the Hollywood elite . The terrier was owned by actors Humphrey Bogart , Bette Davies , Elizabeth Taylor , and by writer Agatha Christie . Cary Grant owned one which he named Archie Leach – Grant 's real name . Alfred Hitchcock had one of his Sealyham terriers seen in his 1941 film Suspicion . Alfred Hitchcock can also be seen at the start of his 1963 film , The Birds , walking two of his Sealyham Terriers in a cameo appearance , although he also owned a third Sealyham not featured in the movie . The British Royal Family also favoured these dogs ; King George V owned a dog named Jack . In 1959 one Sunday newspaper reported in the UK : " A notice has been posted in Clarence House and Windsor Castle giving explicit instructions that when Princess Margaret has breakfast in bed , her two Sealyhams must be brought to the room along with her breakfast tray . " These two dogs were called Pippin and Johnny , and were looked after by the Queen Mother when Princess Margaret fell ill . In the 1960s , children 's author Maurice Sendak owned a Sealyham named Jennie , which he featured in his 1967 work <unk> <unk> Pop ! . 
 The Sealyham was once one of the more popular terriers , with over 2 @,@ 000 puppies registered in the UK during the 1920s , and one of the best known Welsh breeds . Today , however , the Kennel Club ( UK ) lists the Sealyham as amongst the most endangered native breeds . In 2008 , registrations of new puppies with the Kennel Club dropped to an all time low of 43 , placing it among the bottom three on the list of Vulnerable Native Breeds . In October 2011 , British magazine Country Life highlighted the breed on its front cover , with the heading " SOS : Save our Sealyhams " , and launched a campaign to save the breed . End of year figures for 2011 showed that 49 puppies were registered with the Kennel Club in the UK , keeping them within the bottom three on the list of most endangered breeds . 
 Another notable Sealyham Terrier , Ch . <unk> 's Hidalgo At <unk> , also known as <unk> , won Best In Show at Crufts in 2009 , but his victory was not televised as the BBC had dropped the coverage of the competition earlier that year , following the controversy after the channel showed the documentary Pedigree Dogs Exposed . He had previous won the AKC / <unk> National Championship in the United States in 2007 , and the World Dog Show in 2008 . 
 Harry Parsons , founder of the Working Sealyham Terrier Club , has stated that , " To sustain a breed ... you need between 300 to 500 puppies a year " . The Kennel Club has blamed the decline of the breed on the availability of designer dogs and newer breeds such as the Shih Tzu , and the banning of tail docking which has reduced their ability as working dogs . Paul Keevil , formerly of the Kennel Club 's vulnerable breeds committee explains : " Traditionally , soon after Sealyhams were born , their tails were docked by half their length , because they were small working dogs and they quite often got stuck down holes , meaning that they required short , strong tails for the owner to be able to pull them out . " As of 2010 , the breed is ranked 152nd out of 168 breeds according to registrations by the American Kennel Club . 
 = = Appearance = = 
 Sealyhams measurements vary by breed standard according to particular countries . The Kennel Club breed standard states that the height of a Sealyham Terrier should not exceed 12 inches ( 30 cm ) , measured at the withers or at the top of the shoulder blade . The ideal weight for a Sealyham is 8 kilograms ( 18 lb ) for females , or 9 kilograms ( 20 lb ) for males . 
 They have a white double coat which requires regular brushing with a wire comb in order to prevent matting . It has a dense undercoat , while the outer coat is wiry and weather resistant . Markings on the face can be in a variety of colours including lemon , black , brown , blue , and badger , which is a mix of brown and black . Heavy body markings or patches or excessive ticking on the coat are discouraged . Sealyhams are low to the ground , and in muddy weather their long coats can become quite dirty . Sealyham coats are groomed by hand stripping , in order to keep the coat from becoming too soft . 
 = = Temperament = = 
 Although happy in the company of others , they are fine if left alone . Sealyham Terriers are suited for both the town and country . They can be stubborn , vocal , and boisterous but also full of personality . Whilst they make for loyal family companions , they can be trained to be working dogs , making them excellent <unk> or <unk> . They can also be taught as a puppy to get along with other animals , including cats and birds . 
 Harry Parsons , described his Sealyhams thus : " They make great companions , and the way they bond with their owners is almost magical . I keep six indoors , and if someone rings about an infestation and asks us to go ratting , they will know and are out of the door in a millisecond . If you train them , they 'll retrieve . They 'll do anything to please you . " 
 = = Health = = 
 This is a hardy breed with few breed specific health problems . The main hereditary problem highlighted by the American Sealyham Terrier Club is an eye condition called lens luxation , for which there are DNA tests . Lens luxation is a condition in which the lens slips out of position in the eyeball due to the weakening of the fibers that holds it in place . 
 This in turn blocks the flow of fluids in the eye , leading to a painful increase in intra @-@ ocular pressure glaucoma and often irreparable optic nerve damage , leading to visual field loss and eventual blindness . 
 As of November 2011 , the Kennel Club has not highlighted any specific concerns regarding the breed 's health to conformation show judges . Due to the low numbers of the breed , two of the most prevalent problems facing the breed today is the popular sire effect and the general problem of genetic diversity within the breed . 
 = Blackwater fire of 1937 = 
 On August 18 , 1937 , a lightning strike started the Blackwater fire in Shoshone National Forest , approximately 35 miles ( 56 km ) west of Cody , Wyoming , United States . Fifteen firefighters were killed by the forest fire when a dry weather front caused the winds to suddenly increase and change direction . The fire quickly spread into dense forest , creating spot fires that trapped some of the firefighters in a firestorm . Nine firefighters died during the fire and six more died shortly thereafter from severe burns and respiratory complications and another 38 firefighters were injured . More wildland firefighters were killed in the Blackwater fire than in any other in a United States National Forest in the 103 year interval between the Great Fire of 1910 and the Yarnell Hill Fire of 2013 . 
 The Blackwater fire consumed 1 @,@ 700 acres ( 690 ha ) of old @-@ growth forest dominated by Douglas fir trees on the west slopes of Clayton Mountain . At the time the firestorm occurred , the temperatures were about 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) and the relative humidity was only 6 percent . Though most of the firefighters consisted of Civilian Conservation Corps ( CCC ) employees , they were led by more experienced United States Forest Service ( USFS ) fire managers . Firefighters in the first half of the 20th century used mostly hand tools to suppress wildfires , and all gear was carried by the firefighters or by pack animals . Weather forecasting and radio communication were generally poor or nonexistent . 
 Investigations and analysis of the event led the USFS to develop better ways to provide a more immediate response to combat fires ; one of them was the development of the smokejumper program in 1939 . Additionally , the Ten Standard Firefighting Orders , a standardized set of wildland firefighting principles , were developed in 1957 . A year after the tragedy , survivors and their fellow employees constructed several memorials at the scene of the incident . 
 = = Geographical setting = = 
 Blackwater Creek originates on the north slope of Sheep Mesa at an altitude of 11 @,@ 400 feet ( 3 @,@ 500 m ) in Shoshone National Forest and flows north through Blackwater Canyon . The creek is 12 mi ( 19 km ) long and descends a steep gradient before it empties into the North Fork Shoshone River , across from U.S. Routes 14 / 16 / 20 immediately west of Mummy Cave and 15 mi ( 24 km ) east of the border of Yellowstone National Park . The firestorm deaths occurred on the west slopes of Clayton Mountain , approximately 5 mi ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) south by trail into the canyon . The canyon consists of numerous ravines and small ridges , which form a washboard landscape shaped by extensive erosion of the volcanic igneous rock that constitutes the Absaroka Range . The canyon has moderate to steep slopes with a gradient of 20 to 60 percent . The regional flora is an upper montane mixed @-@ conifer forest dominated by Douglas fir trees . When the fire swept through the area the forest was dense and mature with heavy fuel loads from dead trees , which also had dead limbs extending to the ground , providing a fuel ladder for fire to easily spread into the tree tops . 
 = = Early 20th @-@ century firefighting = = 
 In 1937 , firefighters did not have portable radios for rapid on @-@ scene communication or helicopters to bring supplies and provide water drops . Firefighters had some access to gas @-@ powered portable water pumps ( two were set up on the Blackwater fire ) , but most used backpack pumps that were manually operated and held limited water . <unk> were dug by <unk> using shovels , axes and <unk> ( a tool that could be used as either an axe or a hoe ) . Most firefighters wore cotton and wool clothing , which provided poor protection from flames . Additionally , they did not have fire shelters , which first became available in the 1960s but were not mandatory until 1977 . Later researchers believe the use of shelters might have saved lives depending on where the firefighters were when the firestorm occurred . 
 The steepness and ruggedness of the terrain in Blackwater Canyon meant firefighters had to access the fire on foot , carrying all their supplies . On the Blackwater fire , pack horses were used to ferry supplies from the access roads to an upper base camp . Many of the firefighters were employed by the Civilian Conservation Corps ( CCC ) and had limited training in wildfire suppression and behavior , as the CCC was mainly engaged in construction projects . After a series of severe and deadly forest fire events in the early 20th century , officials established the 10 am rule in 1935 , which recommended aggressive attack on all fires and to have them controlled by 10 am , the day after they are first detected . This was intended to prevent fires from remaining active into the afternoon when the rising temperatures and more turbulent air caused fires to expand and become more erratic . A scientific publication about fire behavior that could be used for widespread training of firefighters first became available in 1951 . 
 = = Fighting the Blackwater fire = = 
 = = = Detection and firefighter response = = = 
 The Blackwater fire was started by a lightning strike on August 18 , 1937 , but it remained undetected until early August 20 , at which time it was estimated to be about 2 acres ( 0 @.@ 81 ha ) in size . By the evening , it had expanded to 200 acres ( 81 ha ) , and 65 firefighters from the United States Forest Service ( USFS ) , which included CCC company 1852 from the Wapiti Ranger District of Shoshone National Forest and employees of the Bureau of Public Roads ( BPR ) , were constructing fire lines along two flanks of the fire . A gas @-@ powered portable pump was delivered and set up using water from Blackwater Creek by midnight . Another pump arrived after that and firefighters installed 2 @,@ 000 ft ( 610 m ) of hose line on the north flank of the fire and another 5 @,@ 000 ft ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) on the west flank . CCC workers from the National Park Service arrived at 2 : 30 am on August 21 and started construction of fire line along the north flank of the fire . Meanwhile , increasing winds had begun expanding the fire to the east . 
 Fire officials believed they needed more manpower , so CCC crews from Bighorn National Forest , 165 mi ( 266 km ) to the east , and other districts of Shoshone National Forest started responding by the morning of August 21 . By 12 : 30 pm , more than 200 firefighters were on duty and involved in digging fire line or in support of the firefighting effort . Along one of the small creeks flowing into Blackwater Creek , a small dam was constructed to pocket water supplies for use in backpack water pumps . Due to a long overnight journey , the CCC members from the Tensleep District of Bighorn National Forest did not commence response to the fire until after noon on August 21 . As they arrived , the Tensleep CCC unit were told to relieve the Wapiti CCC unit that had been fighting the fire since the previous evening . More than 50 firefighters commenced construction of a new fire line along Clayton Creek and Clayton Gulch , a ravine extending east from Blackwater Creek . The construction was led by USFS Rangers Alfred Clayton and Urban Post , and their crews consisted mainly of the Tensleep CCC camp and some from other entities . 
 Radio transmissions from Idaho to a weather service office in Riverton , Wyoming , indicated a dry weather front had pushed through and was heading east . It is believed that forest managers at the Wapiti ranger station received this information , but it did not reach the men on the fire lines because of a lack of radio lines . The USFS did have spotters in an aircraft providing aerial observation of the fire behavior that was radioed to the Wapiti ranger station . At 12 : 40 pm on August 21 , several spot fires were reported near the fire lines by aerial observers . At 1 pm , the weather at Wapiti was 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) with an extremely low relative humidity of 6 percent . Winds blowing generally from the southwest increased to 30 miles per hour ( 48 km / h ) as the dry front approached at 3 : 30 pm . At 3 : 45 pm , they shifted abruptly from southwest to west , causing increased crowning and spot fires over the fire lines . <unk> winds also increased and the fire front started up the drainage heading east . 
 = = = Firefighters trapped by firestorm = = = 
 USFS fire manager Urban Post was leading the Tensleep CCC crews in and passed USFS crew fire crew boss Alfred Clayton , who had only one firefighter with him . Post left six men to assist Clayton and the other firefighter so they could help suppress small fires that were spotting over the fire lines . Post then led his crews east up a ridge but saw more spot fires below where Clayton and his crew were . Clayton also saw the spot fires and moved to suppress them . At 4 pm , the spot fires started to crown and Clayton sent a handwritten note to Post requesting additional manpower . By the time the note reached Post , the firestorm commenced , racing east up the ravines and gullies and trapping Clayton and his crew near the dam they had built . There , Clayton and six others died . The eighth firefighter in his crew was rescued but died later in the hospital . 
 Post led more than 40 firefighters , consisting of USFS , CCC , and BPR employees , up the ridge seeking an opening in the forest to take refuge . Spot fires blew ahead of Post and his crews preventing them from advancing further up the ridge , but they found a rocky outcropping and laid prone on the ground as the fire engulfed them . <unk> together on the outcropping , Post 's men moved around to avoid the flames and USFS employee Paul Tyrrell ( who later died ) used his own body to keep several CCC firefighters from panicking and to shield them from the fire . The flames and heat nevertheless drove five firefighters to charge the flames in an attempt to escape to the other side of the <unk> , but only one of them survived . A total of nine firefighters were killed on the fire lines and six more died later from their burns , while another 38 suffered various injuries . The Blackwater fire is tied for fourth involving the greatest loss of life by firefighters on a wildfire in U.S. history . It killed more professional wildland firefighters in the U.S. than any other in the 103 years between the Great Fire of 1910 and the Yarnell Hill Fire in 2013 . 
 = = = Rescue and body recovery = = = 
 News of the deaths and injuries started reaching the fire camps by 6 pm on August 21 ; by then the fire had calmed down as the dry front had passed and the wind decreased . Post led his party down through the burned area and calls went out for medical assistance . By that night , another 150 firefighters and rescue personnel had reached the fire . Rescue efforts commenced as soon as reports arrived and by the morning of August 22 , almost 500 firefighters and rescue workers were on scene . The fire consumed 1 @,@ 700 acres ( 690 ha ) but was not fully controlled until August 24 . After 7 pm on August 21 , the first fatalities were discovered by a team led by Paul Krueger of the USFS . They came upon a surviving member of Clayton 's crew , finding him badly burned . Before succumbing to his injuries , he was able to direct rescuers to where Clayton and the other crew members were last seen . Post informed the rescue team that two of his party would have to be carried out and his men were too weary to do so ; these two also died at the hospital . The following morning , the bodies of two other members of Post 's crew that had tried to run through the flames were found . The rugged terrain made it necessary for the deceased to be carried out on either stretchers or slung over pack horses . The procession of pack horses carrying the recovered bodies passed through the fire camps where other firefighters were preparing to combat the fire . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Fire investigation and results = = = 
 The fatalities on the Blackwater fire led the federal government to initiate their earliest rigorous investigation on such an event . The USFS investigation of the Blackwater fire incident was led by David Godwin , Assistant Chief of Fire Control for the USFS . His conclusions were that the firefighters were in good physical condition and most had some experience fighting forest fires . Godwin also determined that the managers on the incident were all fully trained and experienced firefighting professionals . Godwin stated that no fault should be assigned to the fire managers as the situation was beyond their control . He indicated that because of the distances involved in getting enough manpower to combat the fire while it was still relatively small ( the Tensleep CCC crews had to travel 165 mi ( 266 km ) ) , the fire was not contained enough to prevent the rapid spread that occurred when the weather front approached . Godwin 's findings indicated that rapid deployment of firefighters was critical to successful fire suppression . These findings were reinforced by A. A. Brown , head of the Division of Fire Control in the Forest Service ’ s Rocky Mountain Region , who studied the fire behavior and the responses to the Blackwater fire . 
 In an era when all fire was considered detrimental and with limited studies that documented the important ecological role of fire , immediate suppression using aggressive attack was considered the best way to protect the forests . Godwin believed that parachuting firefighters from airplanes as soon as fires were detected and as near to the fire as possible would provide the fastest way to get firefighters in place before a fire raged out of control . Consequently , by 1939 the first stages of the parachuting smokejumper program were initiated at Winthrop , Washington , and at two locations in Montana . A later review of 16 fatal fires , from the Blackwater fire in 1937 through 1956 , led managers of the USFS to implement the Ten Standard Firefighting Orders in 1957 , which were later changed to <unk> in 1987 , with each letter designating one of the ten orders . Not long after the Ten Standard Firefighting Orders were implemented , 18 <unk> Situations were also developed to increase firefighter safety . Decades after the Blackwater fire , forest managers had developed a better understanding of the ecological role of fire . Consequently , in 1977 , the USFS dropped the 10 am rule from their firefighting strategic planning , and shifted their emphasis away from wildfire suppression to wildfire management . 
 = = = Memorials = = = 
 In 1938 , several monuments were erected by members of the CCC to honor those killed and injured during the Blackwater fire . The largest and most accessible is along U.S. Route 14 / 16 / 20 . Another memorial was erected the same year near the location where Alfred Clayton and his crew perished . A third memorial was placed where Urban Post and his crews waited out the firestorm on the rocky ledge that was later named Post Point . Clayton also had several geographic locations named in his honor , including Clayton Mountain . Though only the roadside monument can be reached by car , the other two monuments can be visited by trail , which is a 10 @-@ mile ( 16 km ) round @-@ trip hike . 
 = Wilt Chamberlain = 
 Wilton Norman " Wilt " Chamberlain ( August 21 , 1936 – October 12 , 1999 ) was an American basketball player . He played for the Philadelphia / San Francisco Warriors , the Philadelphia 76ers , and the Los Angeles Lakers of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) ; he played for the University of Kansas and also for the Harlem Globetrotters before playing in the NBA . The 7 foot 1 inch Chamberlain weighed 250 pounds as a rookie before bulking up to 275 and eventually to over 300 pounds with the Lakers . He played the center position and is widely considered one of the greatest and most dominant players in NBA history . 
 Chamberlain holds numerous NBA records in scoring , rebounding , and durability categories . He is the only player to score 100 points in a single NBA game or average more than 40 and 50 points in a season . He also won seven scoring , eleven rebounding , nine field goal percentage titles and led the league in assists once . Chamberlain is the only player in NBA history to average at least 30 points and 20 rebounds per game in a season , a feat he accomplished seven times . He is also the only player to average at least 30 points and 20 rebounds per game over the entire course of his NBA career . 
 Although he suffered a long string of professional losses , Chamberlain had a successful career , winning two NBA championships , earning four regular @-@ season Most Valuable Player awards , the Rookie of the Year award , one NBA Finals MVP award , and being selected to 13 All @-@ Star Games and ten All @-@ NBA First and Second teams . Chamberlain was subsequently enshrined in the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 1978 , elected into the NBA 's 35th Anniversary Team of 1980 , and chosen as one of the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History of 1996 . 
 Chamberlain was known by various nicknames during his basketball playing career . He hated the ones that called attention to his height such as " Goliath " and " Wilt the Stilt " , which was coined during his high school days by a Philadelphia sportswriter . He preferred " The Big Dipper " , which was inspired by his friends who saw him dip his head as he walked through doorways . 
 After his basketball career ended , Chamberlain played volleyball in the short @-@ lived International Volleyball Association , was president of this organization , and is enshrined in the IVA Hall of Fame for his contributions . Chamberlain was also a successful businessman , authored several books , and appeared in the movie Conan the Destroyer . He was a lifelong bachelor , and became notorious for his claim to have had sexual intercourse with as many as 20 @,@ 000 women . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Wilton Norman Chamberlain was born in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , into a family of nine children , the son of Olivia Ruth Johnson , a domestic worker and homemaker , and William Chamberlain , a welder , custodian , and handyman . He was a frail child , nearly dying of pneumonia in his early years and missing a whole year of school as a result . In his early years Chamberlain was not interested in basketball , because he thought it was " a game for sissies " . Instead , he was an avid track and field athlete : as a youth , he high jumped 6 feet , 6 inches , ran the 440 yards in 49 @.@ 0 seconds and the 880 yards in 1 : 58 @.@ 3 , put the shot 53 feet , 4 inches , and broad jumped 22 feet . But according to Chamberlain , " basketball was king in Philadelphia " , so he eventually turned to the sport . Because Chamberlain was a very tall child , already measuring six feet at age 10 and six feet 11 inches when he entered Philadelphia 's Overbrook High School , he had a natural advantage against his peers ; he soon was renowned for his scoring talent , his physical strength and his shot blocking abilities . According to ESPN journalist Hal Bock , Chamberlain was " scary , flat @-@ out frightening ... before he came along , most basketball players were mortal @-@ sized men . Chamberlain changed that . " It was also in this period of his life when his three lifelong nicknames " Wilt the Stilt " , " Goliath " , and his favorite , " The Big Dipper " , were allegedly born . 
 = = High school career = = 
 As a player for the Overbrook Panthers , Chamberlain averaged 31 points a game during the 1953 high school season and led his team to a 71 @-@ 62 win against the Northeast High School of his future NBA teammate Guy Rodgers . He scored 34 points , won Overbrook the Public League title and a berth for the Philadelphia city championship game against the winner of the rival Catholic league , West Catholic . In that game , West Catholic quadruple @-@ teamed Chamberlain the entire game , and despite the center 's 29 points , the Panthers lost 54 @-@ 42 . 
 In his second Overbrook season , Chamberlain continued his prolific scoring , among them scoring a high school record 71 points against Roxborough . The Panthers comfortably won the Public League title after again beating Northeast in which Chamberlain scored 40 points , and later won the city title by defeating South Catholic 74 @-@ 50 . Chamberlain scored 32 points and led Overbrook to a flawless 19 – 0 season . 
 During summer vacations Chamberlain worked as a bellhop in <unk> 's Hotel . Subsequently , owners Milton and Helen <unk> kept up a lifelong friendship with Wilt , and according to their son Mark , " They were his second set of parents . " Red Auerbach , the coach of the Boston Celtics , spotted the talented teenager at <unk> 's and had him play 1 @-@ on @-@ 1 against Kansas University standout and national champion , B. H. Born , elected the Most Valuable Player of the 1953 NCAA Finals . Chamberlain won 25 @-@ 10 ; Born was so dejected that he gave up a promising NBA career and became a tractor engineer ( " If there were high school kids that good , I figured I wasn 't going to make it to the pros " ) , and Auerbach wanted Chamberlain to go to a New England university , so he could draft him as a territorial pick for the Celtics , but Chamberlain did not respond . 
 In Chamberlain 's third and final Overbrook season , he continued his high scoring , once logging 74 , 78 and 90 points in three consecutive games . The Panthers won the Public League a third time , beating West Philadelphia 78 @-@ 60 , and in the city championship game , they met West Catholic once again . Scoring 35 points , Chamberlain led Overbrook to an easy 83 @-@ 42 victory . After three years , Chamberlain had led Overbrook to two city championships , logged a 56 – 3 record and broken Tom Gola 's high school scoring record by scoring 2 @,@ 252 points , averaging 37 @.@ 4 points per game . 
 After his last Overbrook season , over 200 universities wanted to recruit the basketball prodigy . Among others , UCLA offered Chamberlain the opportunity to become a movie star , the University of Pennsylvania wanted to buy him diamonds , and Chamberlain 's Panthers coach <unk> was even offered a coaching position if he could persuade the center . In his 2004 biography of Chamberlain , Robert Cherry has described that Chamberlain wanted a change and therefore did not want to go to or near Philadelphia ( also eliminating New York ) , was not interested in New England , and snubbed the South because of segregation ; leaving the Midwest . In the end , after visiting the University of Kansas with renowned college coach Phog Allen , Chamberlain then proclaimed he was going to play college basketball at Kansas . 
 = = College career = = 
 In 1955 , Chamberlain joined KU . At KU , Chamberlain became a player for the Kansas Jayhawks freshman team under coach Phog Allen , whom he admired , and also a member of Kappa Alpha Psi fraternity , where he was the president of his pledge class . Announced as " looking lighter than his 240 pounds , [ able to ] reach 9 ' 6 " up in the air [ <unk> ] , and [ with a wingspan of ] 7 ' 2 " , his debut was highly anticipated , and he delivered : in Chamberlain 's debut game for the freshman squad , the freshman Jayhawks were pitted against the varsity Jayhawks , who were favored to win their conference that year . Chamberlain dominated his older college mates by scoring 42 points ( 16 – 35 from the field , 10 – 12 on free throws ) , grabbing 29 rebounds and registering four blocks . Chamberlain 's prospects of playing under Allen ended , however , when the coach turned 70 shortly after and was forced to retire by KU regulation . Chamberlain had a bad relationship with Allen 's successor , Dick Harp , fueled by resentment and disappointment : Cherry has doubted whether Chamberlain would have chosen KU if he had known that Allen was going to retire . 
 On December 3 , 1956 , Chamberlain made his varsity debut . In his first varsity game the center scored 52 points and grabbed 31 rebounds , breaking both all @-@ time Kansas records in an 87 – 69 win against the Northwestern team of future NBA teammate Joe Ruklick . Teammate Monte Johnson testified to his athleticism : " Wilt ... had unbelievable endurance and speed ... and was never tired . When he dunked , he was so fast that a lot of players got their fingers jammed [ between Chamberlain 's hand and the rim ] . " Reportedly , Chamberlain also broke Johnny Kerr 's toe with a slam dunk . By this time , Chamberlain had developed several offensive weapons that became his trademarks : his finger roll , his fade @-@ away jump shot , which he could also hit as a bank shot , his passing and his shot @-@ blocking . Leading a talented squad of starters , including Maurice King , Gene Elstun , John Parker , Ron <unk> and Lew Johnson , the Jayhawks went 13 – 1 until they lost a game 56 – 54 versus Oklahoma State , who held the ball the last three and a half minutes without any intention of scoring a basket , which was still possible in the days before the shot clock ( introduced 1984 in the NCAA ) . 
 As he did at Overbrook , Chamberlain again showcased his diverse athletic talent . He ran the 100 @-@ yard dash in 10 @.@ 9 seconds , shot @-@ <unk> 56 feet , triple jumped more than 50 feet , and won the high jump in the Big Eight track and field championships three straight years . 
 In 1957 , 23 teams played for the NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Championship . The Midwest regional tourney was held in Dallas , Texas , which at the time was segregated . In the first game , the Jayhawks played the all @-@ white SMU team , and KU player John Parker later said : " The crowd was brutal . We were spat on , pelted with debris , and subjected to the vilest racial epithets possible . " KU won 73 – 65 in overtime , after which police had to escort the Jayhawks out . The next game against Oklahoma City was equally unpleasant , with KU winning 81 – 61 under intense racist abuse . In the semi @-@ finals , Chamberlain 's Jayhawks handily defeated the two time defending national champion San Francisco , 80 – 56 , with Wilt scoring 32 points , grabbing 11 rebounds , and having at least seven blocked shots . ( Game film is unclear whether an 8th block occurred , or the ball just fell short due to Chamberlain 's withering defensive intimidation ) . Chamberlain demonstrated his growing arsenal of offensive moves , including jump shots , put @-@ backs , tip @-@ ins , and his turnaround jump shot . He was far more comfortable and effective at the foul line than he would later be during his pro career . He had outstanding foot speed throughout the game , and several times led the fast break , including blocking a shot near the basket and then <unk> the field for a layup . His stellar performance led Kansas to an insurmountable lead , and he rested on the bench for the final 3 : 45 remaining in the game . 
 Chamberlain made the First Team of the All @-@ America squad and led his Jayhawks into the NCAA finals against the Tar Heels of North Carolina . In that game , Tar Heels coach Frank McGuire used several unorthodox tactics to thwart Chamberlain . For the tip @-@ off , he sent his shortest player , Tommy Kearns , in order to rattle Chamberlain , and the Tar Heels spent the rest of the night triple @-@ teaming him , one defender in front , one behind , and a third arriving as soon as he got the ball . With their fixation on Chamberlain , the Jayhawks shot only 27 % from the field , as opposed to 64 % of the Tar Heels , and trailed 22 – 29 at halftime . Later , North Carolina led 40 – 37 with 10 minutes to go and stalled the game : they passed the ball around without any intention of scoring a basket . After several Tar Heel turnovers , the game was tied at 46 at the end of regulation . In the first overtime each teams scored two points , and in second overtime Kansas froze the ball in return , keeping the game tied at 48 . In the third overtime , the Tar Heels scored two consecutive baskets , but Chamberlain executed a three @-@ point play , leaving KU trailing 52 – 51 . After King scored a basket , Kansas was ahead by one point , but then Tar Heel Joe Quigg was fouled on a drive with 10 seconds remaining and made his two foul shots . For the final play , Dick Harp called for Ron Loneski to pass the ball into Chamberlain in the low post . The pass was intercepted , however , and the Tar Heels won the game . Nonetheless , Chamberlain , who scored 23 points and 14 rebounds , was elected the Most Outstanding Player of the Final Four . Cherry has speculated , however , that this loss was a watershed in Chamberlain 's life , because it was the first time that his team lost despite him putting up impressive individual stats . Chamberlain later admitted that this loss was the most painful of his life . 
 In Chamberlain 's junior year ( 1957 – 58 NCAA season ) , the Jayhawks ' matches were even more frustrating for him . Knowing how dominant Chamberlain was , the opponents resorted to freeze @-@ ball tactics and routinely used three or more players to guard him . Teammate Bob Billings commented : " It was not fun basketball ... we were just out chasing people throwing the basketball back and forth . " Nevertheless , Chamberlain averaged 30 @.@ 1 points for the season and led the Jayhawks to an 18 – 5 record , losing three games while he was out with a urinary infection : because KU came second in the league and at the time only conference winners were invited to the NCAA tourney , the Jayhawks ' season ended . It was a small consolation that he was again named an All @-@ American , along with future NBA Hall @-@ of @-@ Famers Elgin Baylor and Oscar Robertson plus old rival Guy Rodgers . 
 Having lost the enjoyment from NCAA basketball and wanting to earn money , he left college and sold the story named " Why I Am Leaving College " to Look magazine for $ 10 @,@ 000 , a large sum when NBA players earned $ 9 @,@ 000 in a whole season . In two seasons at Kansas , Chamberlain averaged 29 @.@ 9 points and 18 @.@ 3 rebounds per game while totaling 1 @,@ 433 points and 877 rebounds , and led Kansas to one Big Seven championship . By the time Chamberlain was 21 , he had already been featured in Time , Life , Look , and Newsweek magazines , even before he turned professional . 
 For many years following Chamberlain 's departure from the University of Kansas , critics claimed that he either wanted to leave the very white Midwest or was embarrassed by not being able to bring home the NCAA basketball tournament victory . In 1998 , Chamberlain returned to Allen Field House in Lawrence , Kansas to participate in a jersey @-@ retiring ceremony for his # 13 . Around this time , he has been quoted as saying : " There 's been a lot of conversation , since people have been trying to get my jersey number retired , that I have some dislike for the University of Kansas . That is totally ridiculous . " 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Harlem Globetrotters ( 1958 – 1959 ) = = = 
 After his frustrating junior year , Chamberlain wanted to become a professional player before finishing his senior year . However , at that time , the NBA did not accept players who had not finished their last year of studies . Therefore , Chamberlain was prohibited from joining the NBA for a year , and decided to play for the Harlem Globetrotters in 1958 for a sum of $ 50 @,@ 000 ( equal to about $ 410 @,@ 000 today ) . 
 Chamberlain became a member of the Globetrotters team which made history by playing in Moscow in 1959 , enjoyed a sold out tour of the USSR and prior to the start of a game at Moscow 's Lenin Central Stadium , were greeted by the General Secretary Nikita Khrushchev . One particular Trotter skit involved Trotters captain Meadowlark Lemon collapsing to the ground , and instead of helping him up , Chamberlain threw him several feet high up in the air and caught him like a doll . " [ Chamberlain ] was the strongest athlete who ever lived " , the 210 @-@ pound Lemon later recounted . In later years , Chamberlain frequently joined the Trotters in the off @-@ season and fondly recalled his time there , because he was no longer jeered at or asked to break records , but just one of several artists who loved to entertain the crowd . On March 9 , 2000 , Chamberlain 's number 13 was retired by the Trotters . 
 = = = Philadelphia / San Francisco Warriors ( 1959 – 1965 ) = = = 
 On October 24 , 1959 , Chamberlain finally made his NBA debut , starting for the Philadelphia Warriors . Chamberlain immediately became the NBA 's best paid player , earning $ 30 @,@ 000 ( equal to about $ 244 @,@ 000 today ) in his rookie contract ; in comparison , the previous top earner was Bob Cousy of the Boston Celtics with $ 25 @,@ 000 ; in fact , Gottlieb bought the whole Warriors franchise for $ 25 @,@ 000 seven years earlier . 
