 In the early fourteenth century , Lihou may have become the origin of a local legend about a wealthy Bailiff of Guernsey who attempted to have an innocent peasant executed on false charges of theft of silver cups . In either 1302 or 1304 , a priory servant called Thomas le Roer was alleged to have murdered one of the monks . The Bailiff and several assistants attempted to apprehend Le Roer but he did not surrender and was subsequently killed by Ranulph Gautier , one of the Bailiffs assistants . Gautier tried to find sanctuary in a nearby church and eventually fled to England , before returning to Guernsey when the king pardoned him . However , some years later Gautier was tortured to death in Castle Cornet , but it is not known why . 
 The priory was seized in 1414 by King Henry V of England along with a number of alien priories . In the first three centuries , there were several Priors appointed , sometimes with short tenures , but in 1500 Ralph Leonard was installed as Prior for life . However , within decades the Priory was abandoned , with evidence of Thomas de <unk> being the final Prior around 1560 . There is also evidence that the priory was allocated to John After in 1566 , who had also been appointed as the Dean of Guernsey . 
 In 1759 the Governor of Guernsey , John West , had the priory destroyed to prevent French forces from capturing the island during the Seven Years ' War . In the early nineteenth century , a farmhouse was built on Lihou , and the island was listed as being owned by Eleazar le Marchant , who held the post of lieutenant bailiff of Guernsey . Eleazar made an ultimately unsuccessful attempt , in 1815 , to suppress the seaweed industry based around Lihou . In a book published in the same year , William Berry noted the presence of an " iron hook of a gate hinge " on some rocks , approximately three miles out at sea from Lihou , along with the remains of old roads , and surmised that Lihou may have been significantly larger in the past but that the sea had eroded a considerable portion . Through the remainder of the nineteenth century and the start of the twentieth century , the island changed hands between a succession of owners including James <unk> in 1863 , Arthur <unk> in 1883 , and Colonel Hubert de Lancey Walters in 1906 . 
 During World War II , the Channel Islands were occupied by the Germans from 1940 @-@ 1945 , and Lihou was used for target practice by the German artillery , causing the farmhouse to collapse completely . During the summer of 1952 , the ruins of the priory were studied in some detail by John and Jean le <unk> . In 1961 , Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Patrick Wootton purchased Lihou . Wootton had plans to develop the island , beginning in the following year first by clearing the area of the old farmhouse , in preparation for the building of a new farmhouse , with construction work continuing into 1963 . He organized summer camps for young adults on the island and imported sheep from the Orkneys which could consume seaweed . In 1983 Wootton decided to emigrate to Prince Edward Island , in Canada , and the island was sold to Robin and Patricia Borwick . In 1995 the island was bought by the States of Guernsey . The ruins of the priory are possibly the most extensive religious relic in Guernsey . There have been several studies and excavations of the ruins , including archaeological investigations in 1996 , and in 1998 , when several twelfth @-@ fourteenth century graves were unearthed . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Historically , Lihou was an important location for a commercially significant industry based around the harvesting of seaweed ( or <unk> in the local language , <unk> ) . Records suggest considerable activity as early as the beginning of the nineteenth century . The value of the seaweed as a fertiliser was so great that in 1815 <unk> Le Marchant , lieutenant bailiff of Guernsey and owner of Lihou , initiated a court case to prevent islanders from drying seaweed on the beaches of Lihou . The case eventually led to new regulations issued in 1818 by the Bailiwick legislature , known as the Chief Pleas at the time , based on a review of ancient royal decrees . However , the Royal Court of Guernsey ruled in favour of the islanders in 1821 , with the effect that permission to harvest seaweed on Lihou was granted to inhabitants of the parishes of St Peters and St <unk> . More than a century later , in 1927 , a factory was established on the island to produce iodine from the seaweed . 
 The economic mainstay of the island is now ecological tourism , based around the farmhouse , which is operated by the Lihou Charitable Trust , although overall responsibility for the island remains with the Environment Department of the States of Guernsey . Lihou and several other small Channel Islands such as Herm and Sark , issued their own stamps until 1969 , when the States of Guernsey assumed responsibility for postal services in the Bailiwick , which had previously been provided by the UK Government . 
 = Jennifer Blow = 
 Jennifer Blow ( born 10 January 1991 ) is an Australian goalball player and is classified as a B3 competitor . Having only started playing the sport in 2009 , she has several goalball scholarships . She plays for the New South Wales women 's goalball team in the Australian national championships , where she has won three silver medals . As a member of the national team , she has competed in the 2010 World Championships , 2011 IBSA Goalball World Cup and the 2011 African @-@ Oceania regional Paralympic qualifying competition . She was selected to represent Australia at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in goalball . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Nicknamed " Awesome " by her goalball teammates , Blow was born in <unk> , New South Wales , on 10 January 1992 . She has the visual disability of <unk> albinism , a congenital vision impairment , and is 165 centimetres ( 65 in ) . As of 2012 , Blow is attending the University of Sydney and double majoring in Arts and Education , which would enable her to become an English and drama teacher . In 2009 , she was awarded a New South Wales Department of Education and Training Teacher Education Scholarship . In 2011 , she earned the NSW Institute of Sport Academic Excellence Award . 
 = = Goalball = = 
 Blow is a goalball player , and is classified as a B3 competitor . She started playing the sport in 2009 . She has a goalball scholarship with the New South Wales Institute of Sport , and the Sydney University Elite Athlete Program . In 2011 / 2012 , the Australian Sports Commission gave her a A $ 7 @,@ 000 grant as part of their Direct Athlete Support ( DAS ) program . Blow plays for the New South Wales women 's goalball team , making her debut in 2009 . As a member of the team , she has earned three total silver medals at the national championships , including one in 2010 . 
 Blow made her national team debut in 2010 , less than a year after taking up the sport , when she represented Australia at the 2010 World Championships , where her team finished eighth . As a member of the 2011 team , she finished sixth at the IBSA Goalball World Cup . During the tournament , she found " a rock shaped like the lucky egg from the film Cool Runnings . The rock has since become integrated into her team 's pre @-@ <unk> ritual where she " must hold the rock and quote from the movie before every big game . " Her team made it the quarter finals before losing to Russia 3 @-@ 6 . It then met the Spain women 's national goalball team to try to earn a spot in the fifth / sixth place match . Australia walked away 8 @-@ 7 victors , but in the fifth / sixth place match , it lost to the Israel women 's national goalball team 6 @-@ 8 . She played in the 2011 African @-@ Oceania regional Paralympic qualifying competition . She played in the gold medal game against the New Zealand women 's national goalball team . Australia won the game . The Manly Daily described her play in the series as " instrumental " to the team 's success . 
 Blow was a named a member of the Aussie Belles that was going to the 2012 Summer Paralympics . That the team qualified for the Games came as a surprise , as the Australian Paralympic Committee had been working on player development with the idea of qualifying for the 2016 Summer Paralympics . An Australian team had not participated since the 2000 Summer Paralympics , when they earned an automatic selection as hosts , and the team finished last in the competition . The country has not medalled in the event since 1976 . Going into the Paralympics , the team was ranked eighth in the world . She was 21 years old at the Games . In the 2012 Summer Paralympics tournament , the Belles played games against Japan , Canada , the United States and Sweden . They lost every game , and did not advance to the finals . 
 = Silverplate = 
 Silverplate was the code reference for the United States Army Air Forces ' participation in the Manhattan Project during World War II . Originally the name for the aircraft modification project for the B @-@ 29 Superfortress bomber to enable it to drop an atomic weapon , Silverplate eventually came to identify the training and operational aspects of the program as well . The original directive for the project had as its subject line " Silver Plated Project " but continued usage of the term shortened it to " Silverplate " . 
 Testing began with scale models at the Naval Proving Ground in Dahlgren , Virginia , in August 1943 . Modifications began on a prototype Silverplate B @-@ 29 known as the " Pullman " in November 1943 , and it was used for bomb flight testing at Muroc Army Air Field in California commencing in March 1944 . The testing resulted in further modifications to both the bombs and the aircraft . 
 Seventeen production Silverplate aircraft were ordered in August 1944 to allow the 509th Composite Group to train with the type of aircraft they would have to fly in combat , and for the 216th Army Air Forces Base Unit to test bomb configurations . These were followed by 28 more aircraft that were ordered in February 1945 for operational use by the 509th Composite Group . This batch included the aircraft which carried out the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945 . Including the Pullman B @-@ 29 , a total of 46 Silverplate B @-@ 29s were produced during and after World War II . An additional 19 Silverplate B @-@ 29s were ordered in July 1945 , which were delivered between the end of the war and the end of 1947 . Thus , a total of 65 Silverplate B @-@ 29s were made . 
 The use of the Silverplate codename was discontinued after the war , but modifications continued under a new codename , Saddletree . Another 80 aircraft were modified under this program . A last group of B @-@ 29s was modified in 1953 , but never saw further service . 
 = = Origin = = 
 The Silverplate project was initiated in June 1943 when Dr. Norman F. Ramsey from the Los Alamos Laboratory 's E @-@ 7 Group identified the Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress as the only airplane in the United States inventory capable of carrying either type of the proposed weapons shapes : the tubular shape of the Thin Man , and the oval shape of the Fat Man . 
 Prior to the decision to use the B @-@ 29 , serious consideration had been given to using the British Avro Lancaster with its cavernous 33 @-@ foot ( 10 m ) bomb bay to deliver the weapon . This would have required much less modification , but would have required additional crew training for the USAAF crews . Major General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , the director of the Manhattan Project , and General Henry H. Arnold , the Chief of United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) , wished to use an American plane , if this was at all possible . 
 The first B @-@ 29 was delivered to the USAAF on 1 July 1943 , and Groves met with Arnold later that month . Groves briefed Arnold on the Manhattan Project , and asked for his help in testing the ballistics of the Project 's proposed bomb shapes . Arnold and the head of the Ordnance Division at Los Alamos , Captain William S. Parsons , arranged for tests to be carried out at the Naval Proving Ground in Dahlgren , Virginia in August 1943 . No aircraft was available that could carry the 17 @-@ foot ( 5 @.@ 2 m ) long Thin Man , so a 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) scale model was used . The results were disappointing – the bomb fell in a flat spin – but the need for a thorough test program was demonstrated . 
 Groves met with Arnold again in September 1943 . He informed Arnold that there was now a second bomb shape under consideration , the Fat Man , and formally requested that further tests be carried out , that not more than three B @-@ 29s be modified to carry the weapons , and that the USAAF form and train a special unit to deliver the bombs . Arnold delegated responsibility for this to Major General Oliver P. Echols . In turn , Echols designated Colonel Roscoe C. Wilson as the Project Officer . 
 = = Codename = = 
 Originally the name for the aircraft modification project for the B @-@ 29 to enable it to drop a nuclear weapon , Silverplate eventually came to identify the training and operational aspects of the program as well . The airplane modification project fell under the purview of the Manhattan Project 's Project Alberta after March 1945 . The original codename for the project was " Silver Plated " but continued usage of the term shortened it to the one word " Silverplate " . For security reasons , the codename " Silverplate " was not officially registered . Confusion then resulted when the War Department allocated " Silverplate " to another project . Arnold 's office had to order the other agency to discontinue its use of the codename . 
 Los Alamos 's Thin Man and Fat Man code names were adopted by the USAAF for the weapons . A cover story was devised that Silverplate was about modifying a Pullman car for use by President Franklin Roosevelt ( Thin Man ) and Prime Minister Winston Churchill ( Fat Man ) on a secret tour of the United States . 
 = = Initial phase = = 
 The USAAF sent instructions to its Army Air Forces Materiel Command at Wright Field , Ohio , on 30 November 1943 , for a highly classified B @-@ 29 modification project . The Manhattan Project would deliver full @-@ sized mockups of the weapons shapes to Wright Field by mid @-@ December , where Army Air Forces Materiel Command would modify an aircraft and deliver it for use in bomb flight testing at Muroc Army Air Field in California . B @-@ 29 @-@ 5 @-@ BW 42 @-@ <unk> ( referred to as the " Pullman airplane " from an internal code name assigned it by the Engineering Division of Army Air Forces Materiel Command ) was delivered to the 468th Bombardment Group at Smoky Hill AAB , Kansas , on 30 November 1943 , and flown to Wright Field , Ohio , on 2 December . 
 Modifications to the bomb bays were extensive and time @-@ consuming . Its four 12 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) bomb bay doors and the fuselage section between the bays were removed and a single 33 @-@ foot ( 10 m ) bomb bay configured . The length of the gun @-@ type shape was approximately 17 feet ( 5 @.@ 2 m ) . New bomb suspensions and bracing were attached for both shape types , with the gun @-@ type suspension anchored in the aft bomb bay ( although its length protruded into the forward bay ) and the implosion type mounted in the forward bay . Separate twin @-@ release mechanisms were mounted in each bay , using modified glider tow @-@ cable attach @-@ and @-@ release mechanisms . 
 = = Testing of bomb shapes = = 
 The Pullman B @-@ 29 flew in to Muroc on 20 February 1944 , and testing began on 28 February . Twenty @-@ four drops were carried out before tests were discontinued so that improvements could be made to Thin Man . The bombs failed to release immediately , frustrating calibration tests . In what turned out to be the last test flight of the series on 16 March , a Thin Man was prematurely released while the B @-@ 29 was still en route to the test range and fell onto the bomb bay doors , severely damaging the aircraft . The modified glider mechanisms had apparently caused all four malfunctions , because of the weight of the bombs , and were replaced with British Type G single @-@ point attachments and Type F releases used on the Lancaster to carry the 12 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 5 @,@ 400 kg ) Tallboy bomb . 
 After repair of the Pullman B @-@ 29 at Wright Field , testing resumed with three Thin Man and nine Fat Man shapes dropped in the last two weeks of June 1944 . High speed photographs revealed that the tail fins folded under the pressure , resulting in an erratic descent . Various combinations of stabilizer boxes and fins were tested on the Fat Man shape to eliminate its persistent wobble until an arrangement dubbed a " California Parachute " , a cubical tail box with fins angled at 45 ° to the line of fall , was approved . 
 The Thin Man gun @-@ type design was at that time based on the <unk> of the very pure plutonium 239 isotope so far only produced in microgram quantities by the Berkeley cyclotron . When the Hanford production reactors came on @-@ line in early 1944 , the mix of plutonium 239 and plutonium 240 obtained was found to have a high rate of spontaneous fission . To avoid pre @-@ detonation , the muzzle velocity of the gun @-@ type design would need to be greatly raised , making it impractically long . 
 Thin Man as a plutonium @-@ based design was therefore abandoned and the weapon was re @-@ designed to use uranium 235 . The muzzle velocity required was much lower , reducing the barrel length of the resulting bomb , now code @-@ named Little Boy , to less than 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) . This allowed the device to fit into a standard B @-@ 29 bomb bay , so the Pullman was modified to its original configuration with the rear bomb bay a standard B @-@ 29 design . All subsequent Silverplates were also configured in this manner . The Pullman B @-@ 29 was flown to Wendover Army Air Field in Utah in September 1944 . It carried out further drop testing with the 216th Army Air Forces Base Unit until it was damaged in a landing accident in December . 
 = = Wartime production versions = = 
 On 22 August 1944 , to meet the requirements of the USAAF group about to be formed to train in the atomic mission , a production phase of Silverplate B @-@ 29s was ordered from the Glenn L. Martin Company 's modification center at Omaha , Nebraska under the designation Project <unk> @-@ S. The first three of these second increment Silverplate B @-@ 29s were delivered to the USAAF in mid @-@ October , and flown to Wendover . They were fitted with British single @-@ point bomb releases mounted on a re @-@ designed H @-@ frame suspension rack fitted in the forward bomb bay , so that additional fuel tanks could be carried in the aft bay . A new crew position , called the " weaponeer station " , was created in the cockpit with a panel to monitor the release and detonation of the bomb during the actual combat drops . Fourteen production aircraft were assigned to the 393d Bombardment Squadron for training , and three to the 216th Army Air Force Base Unit for bomb drop testing . 
 By February 1945 the seventeen aircraft of the second increment were themselves in need of upgrades , particularly those of the 216th Army Air Force Base Unit . Four of the planes assigned to the 393d Bombardment Squadron ( now part of the 509th Composite Group ) were transferred to the 216th to meet an increase in its testing tempo . Rather than attempt to modify the existing aircraft a few at a time , a decision was made to start a new production series . The first five of this third increment , known as Project <unk> @-@ S , also went to the test unit . The order totaled an additional 28 aircraft , with delivery of 15 designated combat models for the 393d beginning in April . The final eight were not delivered until after the two atomic bomb missions in August . Two were given to the 216th while the remaining six were assigned to the 509th at Wendover as replacements for any bombers lost while operating from Tinian . Ironically , no bombers were lost during operations from Tinian , but five of these six were lost in crashes over the next few years . 
 The final wartime Silverplates incorporated all technical improvements to B @-@ 29 aircraft , as well as the final series of Silverplate modifications that included Curtiss Electric reversible @-@ pitch propellers , and pneumatic actuators for rapid opening and closing of bomb bay doors . The British F @-@ type bomb release and G @-@ type attachment were installed , along with dual electrical and mechanical bomb release mechanisms . Early model B @-@ 29s were plagued by a host of engine problems , and the early Silverplate bombers were no exception . One was written off after being badly damaged as a result of an engine fire in February 1945 . The fuel @-@ injected Wright R @-@ 3350 @-@ 41 engines in the later model bombers delivered in July and August 1945 were greatly improved and far more reliable . This was an important factor in the success of the 509th Composite Group 's operations . 
 The Fat Man and Pumpkin bombs weighed over 10 @,@ 000 pounds ( 4 @,@ 500 kg ) , so weight was a concern , even with the more powerful engines . Weight reduction was accomplished by removal of all gun turrets and armor plating . This work was done by the 509th Composite Group for the early Silverplate aircraft , but later models were delivered without them . These B @-@ 29s represented a significant increase in performance over the standard variants . 
 Flying at 30 @,@ 000 feet ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) put the B @-@ 29s above the effective range of Japanese flak . Each Pumpkin bomb mission was conducted by a formation of three aircraft in the hope of convincing the Japanese military that small groups of B @-@ 29s did not justify a strong response . This strategy proved successful , and Japanese fighters only occasionally attempted to intercept the 509th Composite Group 's aircraft . One B @-@ 29 incurred minor battle damage in operations . 
 = = Silverplate operational units = = 
 Including the Pullman B @-@ 29 , a total of 46 Silverplate B @-@ 29s were produced during World War II . Of these , 29 were assigned to the 509th Composite Group during World War II , with 15 used to carry out the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . An additional 19 Silverplate B @-@ 29s were ordered in July 1945 , which were delivered between the end of the war , and the end of 1947 . By this time only 13 of the original 46 were still operational . Thus , a total of 65 Silverplate B @-@ 29s were made , of which 32 were operational at the start of 1948 . Martin @-@ Omaha produced 57 Silverplate B @-@ 29s . The other 8 were built by Boeing @-@ Wichita . Of these 65 bombers , 31 were eventually converted to other configurations , 16 were placed in storage and later scrapped , and 12 were lost in accidents ( including four of the Tinian bombers ) . The pair of historic , weapons delivery aircraft , named Enola Gay and Bockscar , are today displayed in museums . 
 The only other United States Air Force combat unit to use the Silverplate B @-@ 29 was the 97th Bombardment Wing at Biggs Air Force Base in El Paso , Texas . In mid @-@ 1949 it received 27 of the aircraft from the 509th Bombardment Wing when the latter transitioned to B @-@ 50D bombers . The re @-@ equipment of the 97th Bombardment Wing was part of an expansion of the atomic strike force to ten wings during 1949 . Within a year all were converted to TB @-@ 29 trainers . One other Silverplate B @-@ 29 , on temporary assignment in the United Kingdom , was converted into a weather reconnaissance aircraft ( WB @-@ 29 ) and transferred to the 9th Bombardment Wing at Travis Air Force Base in California . The last Silverplate B @-@ 29 in service as a nuclear weapons carrier was reassigned to another role in November 1951 , ending Silverplate after nearly eight years . 
 = = Follow @-@ up programs = = 
 Use of the codename Silverplate was discontinued in May 1947 . It was superseded by a new codename , " Saddletree " . This was applied to aircraft modifications only . Initially it was intended that Saddletree would refer only to modifications to the B @-@ 29s , but it came to be used for modifications to B @-@ 50 and B @-@ 36 bombers as well . Saddletree modifications included a new bomb bay frame and hoist , and replacing the British FG bomb release with the newly developed U @-@ 1 pneumatic bomb release mechanism . Due to delays in the delivery of the B @-@ 50s , Saddletree commenced in February 1948 . In all , 6 @,@ 000 hours of work was carried out on each of the 36 B @-@ 50s by Sacramento Air Materiel Area . 
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff issued a directive in January 1948 for the modification of 225 B @-@ 29 , B @-@ 50 , and B @-@ 36 bombers to carry nuclear weapons , along with eight C @-@ 97 Stratofreighter aircraft to carry bomb assembly teams . There were already 32 Silverplate B @-@ 29s in service with the Strategic Air Command , so the Air Materiel Command was directed to carry out Saddletree modifications on a further 80 B @-@ 29s , 36 B @-@ <unk> , 23 B @-@ <unk> and 18 B @-@ <unk> . The B @-@ 36A could not carry nuclear weapons without major modifications . 
 As the anticipated enemy was the Soviet Union , the aircraft also required " <unk> " to allow them to operate from Arctic bases . The project included 36 B @-@ 29s , and the modification of 36 others to have an air refueling capability . With the addition of the 80 Saddletree B @-@ 29s , a total of 145 B @-@ 29s were modified to carry nuclear weapons , and 117 of these were assigned to operational units . 
 In October 1951 , in anticipation of a major build @-@ up of the USAF to 95 groups , and of delays in the B @-@ 47 program , the Air Materiel Command was ordered to modify a further 180 B @-@ 29s then in storage to carry the Mark 4 , Mark 5 , Mark 6 , and Mark 8 nuclear bombs . Modifications were carried out in Oklahoma City and Sacramento . By the time the aircraft were all delivered in September 1953 , the B @-@ 29 was being phased out , and the modified aircraft went back into storage without seeing further service . 
 = = Costs = = 
 In 1945 , a B @-@ 29 bomber cost $ 782 @,@ 000 . It cost $ 32 @,@ 000 to upgrade an aircraft to Silverplate configuration , so the total cost of a Silverplate bomber was $ 814 @,@ 000 . The total cost of the 65 wartime Silverplate B @-@ 29s was therefore $ 53 million . Adding $ 7 million for logistics , this put the estimated cost of the Silverplate project at around $ 60 million . 
 = James G. Blaine = 
 James Gillespie Blaine ( January 31 , 1830 – January 27 , 1893 ) was an American statesman and Republican politician who represented Maine in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1863 to 1876 , serving as Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives from 1869 to 1875 , and then in the United States Senate from 1876 to 1881 . He twice served as Secretary of State ( 1881 , 1889 – 1892 ) , one of only two persons to hold the position under three separate presidents ( the other being Daniel Webster ) , and unsuccessfully sought the Republican nomination for President in 1876 and 1880 before being nominated in 1884 . In the general election , he was narrowly defeated by Democrat Grover Cleveland . Blaine was one of the late 19th century 's leading Republicans and champion of the moderate reformist faction of the party known as the " Half @-@ Breeds " . 
 Blaine was born in the western Pennsylvania town of West Brownsville and after college moved to Maine where he became a newspaper editor . Nicknamed " the Magnetic Man " , he was a charismatic speaker in an era that prized oratory . He began his political career as an early supporter of Abraham Lincoln and the Union war effort in the American Civil War . In Reconstruction , Blaine was a supporter of black suffrage , but opposed some of the more coercive measures of the Radical Republicans . Initially a protectionist , he later worked for a reduction in the tariff and an expansion of American trade with foreign countries . Railroad promotion and construction were important issues in his time , and as a result of his interest and support Blaine was widely suspected of corruption in the awarding of railroad charters ; these allegations plagued his 1884 presidential candidacy . 
 As Secretary of State , Blaine was a transitional figure , marking the end of an isolationist era in foreign policy and foreshadowing the rise of the American Century that would begin with the Spanish – American War . His efforts at expanding the United States ' trade and influence began the shift to a more active American foreign policy . Blaine was a pioneer of tariff reciprocity and urged greater involvement in Latin American affairs . An expansionist , Blaine 's policies would lead in less than a decade to the establishment of the United States ' acquisition of Pacific colonies and dominance of the Caribbean . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Family and childhood = = = 
 James Gillespie Blaine was born January 31 , 1830 in West Brownsville , Pennsylvania , the third child of Ephraim Lyon Blaine and his wife Maria ( Gillespie ) Blaine . Blaine 's father was a western Pennsylvania businessman and landowner , and the family lived in relative comfort . On his father 's side , Blaine was descended from Scotch @-@ Irish settlers who first emigrated to Pennsylvania in 1745 . His great @-@ grandfather , Ephraim Blaine , served as a Commissary @-@ General under George Washington in the American Revolutionary War . Blaine 's mother and her forebears were Irish Catholics who emigrated to Pennsylvania in the 1780s . Blaine 's parents were married in 1820 in a Roman Catholic ceremony , although Blaine 's father remained a Presbyterian . Following a common compromise of the era , the <unk> agreed that their daughters would be raised in their mother 's Catholic faith while their sons would be brought up in their father 's religion . In politics , Blaine 's father supported the Whig party . 
 Blaine 's biographers describe his childhood as " harmonious " , and note that the boy took an early interest in history and literature . At the age of thirteen , Blaine enrolled in his father 's alma mater , Washington College ( now Washington & Jefferson College ) , in nearby Washington , Pennsylvania . There , he was a member of the Washington Literary Society , one of the college 's debating societies . Blaine succeeded academically , graduating near the top of his class and delivering the <unk> address in June 1847 . After graduation , Blaine considered attending law school at Yale Law School , but ultimately decided against it , instead moving west to find a job . 
 = = = Teacher and publisher = = = 
 In 1848 , Blaine was hired as a professor of mathematics and ancient languages at the Western Military Institute in Georgetown , Kentucky . Although he was only eighteen years old and younger than many of his students , Blaine adapted well to his new profession . Blaine grew to enjoy life in his adopted state and became an admirer of Kentucky Senator Henry Clay . He also made the acquaintance of Harriet Stanwood , a teacher at the nearby Millersburg Female College and native of Maine . On June 30 , 1850 , the two were married . Blaine once again considered taking up the study of law , but instead took his new bride to visit his family in Pennsylvania . They next lived with Harriet Blaine 's family in Augusta , Maine for several months , where their first child , Stanwood Blaine , was born in 1851 . The young family soon moved again , this time to Philadelphia where Blaine took a job at the Pennsylvania Institution for the Instruction of the Blind ( now Overbrook School for the Blind ) in 1852 , teaching science and literature . 
 Philadelphia 's law libraries gave Blaine the chance to at last begin to study the law , but in 1853 he received a more tempting offer : to become editor and co @-@ owner of the Kennebec Journal . Blaine had spent several vacations in his wife 's native state of Maine and had become friendly with the Journal 's editors . When the newspaper 's founder , Luther Severance , retired , Blaine was invited to purchase the publication along with co @-@ editor Joseph Baker . He quickly accepted , borrowing the purchase price from his wife 's brothers . Baker soon sold his share to John L. Stevens , a local minister , in 1854 . The Journal had been a staunchly Whig newspaper , which coincided with Blaine 's and Stevens 's political opinions . The decision to become a newspaperman , unexpected as it was , started Blaine on the road to a lifelong career in politics . Blaine 's purchase of the Journal coincided with the demise of the Whig party and birth of the Republican party , and Blaine and Stevens actively promoted the new party in their newspaper . The newspaper was financially successful , and Blaine was soon able to invest his profits in coal mines in Pennsylvania and Virginia , forming the basis of his future wealth . 
 = = = Maine politics = = = 
 Blaine 's career as a Republican newspaperman led naturally to involvement in Republican party politics . In 1856 , he was selected as a delegate to the first Republican National Convention . From the party 's early days , Blaine identified with the conservative wing , supporting Supreme Court Justice John McLean for the presidential nomination over the more radical John C. Frémont , the eventual nominee . The following year , Blaine was offered the editorship of the Portland Daily Advertiser , which he accepted , selling his interest in the Journal soon thereafter . He still maintained his home in Augusta , however , with his growing family . Although Blaine 's first son , Stanwood , died in infancy , he and Harriet had two more sons soon afterward : Walker , in 1855 , and Emmons , in 1857 . They would have four more children in years to come : Alice , James , Margaret , and Harriet . It was around this time that Blaine left the Presbyterian church of his childhood and joined his wife 's denomination , becoming a member of the South Parish Congregational Church in Augusta . 
 In 1858 , Blaine ran for a seat in the Maine House of Representatives , and was elected . He ran for reelection in 1859 , 1860 , and 1861 , and was successful each time by large majorities . The added responsibilities led Blaine to reduce his duties with the Advertiser in 1860 , and he soon ceased editorial work altogether . Meanwhile , his political power was growing as he became chairman of the Republican state committee in 1859 , replacing Stevens . Blaine was not a delegate to the Republican convention in 1860 , but attended anyway as an enthusiastic supporter of Abraham Lincoln . Returning to Maine , he was elected Speaker of the Maine House of Representatives in 1861 and reelected in 1862 . With the outbreak of the Civil War in 1861 , he supported Lincoln 's war effort and saw that the Maine Legislature voted to organize and equip units to join the Union Army . 
 = = House of Representatives , 1863 – 1876 = = 
 = = = Elected to the House = = = 
 Blaine had considered running for the United States House of Representatives from Maine 's 4th district in 1860 , but agreed to step aside when Anson P. Morrill , a former governor , announced his interest in the seat . Morrill was successful , but after redistricting placed Blaine in the 3rd district for the 1862 elections , he allowed his name to be put forward . Running on a campaign of staunch support for the war effort , Blaine was elected with an ample majority despite Republican losses across the rest of the country . 
 Under the Congressional calendar of the 1860s , members of the 38th United States Congress , elected in November 1862 , did not begin their work until December 1863 ; by the time Blaine finally took his seat that month , the Union had turned the tide in the war with victories at Gettysburg and Vicksburg . As a first @-@ term congressman , he initially said little , mostly following the administration 's lead in supporting the continuing war effort . He did clash several times with the leader of the Republicans ' radical faction , Thaddeus Stevens of Pennsylvania , firstly over payment of states ' debts incurred in supporting the war , and again over monetary policy concerning the new greenback currency . Blaine also spoke in support of the commutation provision of the military draft law passed in 1863 and proposed a constitutional amendment allowing the federal government to impose taxes on exports . 
 = = = Reconstruction and impeachment = = = 
 Blaine was reelected in 1864 and , when the 39th Congress assembled in December 1865 , the main issue was the Reconstruction of the defeated Confederate States . Although he was not a member of the committee charged with drafting what became the Fourteenth Amendment , Blaine did make his views on the subject known and believed that three @-@ fourths of the non @-@ seceded states would be sufficient to ratify it , rather than three @-@ fourths of all states , an opinion that did not prevail and placed him , atypically , in the radical camp . The Republican Congress also played a role in the governance of the conquered South , dissolving the state governments President Andrew Johnson had installed and substituting military governments under Congress 's control . Blaine voted in favor of these new , harsher measures , but also supported some leniency toward the former rebels when he opposed a bill that would have barred Southerners from attending the United States Military Academy . Blaine voted to impeach Johnson in 1868 , although he had initially opposed the effort . Later , Blaine was more ambiguous about the validity of the charges against Johnson , writing that " there was a very grave difference of opinion among those equally competent to decide , " but at the time partisan zeal led him to follow his party 's leaders . 
 = = = Monetary policy = = = 
 Continuing his earlier battle with Stevens , Blaine led the fight in Congress for a strong dollar . After the issuance of 150 million dollars in greenbacks — non @-@ gold @-@ backed currency — the value of the dollar stood at a low ebb . A bipartisan group of <unk> , led by Republican Benjamin F. Butler and Democrat George H. Pendleton , wished to preserve the status quo and allow the Treasury to continue to issue greenbacks and even to use them to pay the interest due on pre @-@ war bonds . Blaine called this idea a repudiation of the nation 's promise to investors , which was made when the only currency was gold . Speaking several times on the matter , Blaine said that the greenbacks had only ever been an emergency measure to avoid bankruptcy during the war . Blaine and his hard money allies were successful , but the issue remained alive until 1879 , when all remaining greenbacks were made redeemable in gold by the Specie Payment Resumption Act of 1875 . 
 = = = Speaker of the House = = = 
 With Speaker Schuyler Colfax 's election to the Vice Presidency in 1868 , the leadership of the House became vacant . Blaine had only been a member of Congress since 1863 , but he had developed a reputation for parliamentary skill and , aside from a growing feud with Roscoe Conkling of New York , was popular with his fellow Republicans . He was elected with the unanimous vote of the Republican members at the start of the 41st Congress in March 1869 . Blaine was an effective Speaker with a magnetic personality ; President Ulysses S. Grant valued his skill and loyalty in leading the House . He enjoyed the job and made his presence in Washington more permanent by buying a large residence on Fifteenth Street in the city . At the same time , the Blaine family moved to a mansion in Augusta . 
 Republicans remained in control of the House in the 42nd and 43rd Congresses , and Blaine was reelected as Speaker at the start of both of them , for a total term of six years in the Speaker 's chair . His popularity continued to grow , and Republicans dissatisfied with Grant mentioned Blaine as a potential candidate for president in 1872 . Instead , Blaine worked steadfastly for Grant 's reelection , which was a success . Blaine 's growing fame brought growing opposition from the Democrats , as well , and during the 1872 campaign he was accused of receiving bribes in the Crédit Mobilier scandal Blaine denied any part in the scandal , which involved railroad companies bribing federal officials to turn a blind eye to fraudulent railroad contracts that overcharged the government by millions of dollars . No one was able to satisfactorily prove Blaine 's involvement ( and the law that made the fraud possible had been written before he was elected to Congress ) but other Republicans were exposed by the accusations , including Vice President Colfax , who was dropped from the ticket at the 1872 Republican National Convention . 
 Although he supported a general amnesty for former Confederates , Blaine opposed extending it to include Jefferson Davis , and he cooperated with Grant in helping to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1875 in response to increased violence and disenfranchisement of blacks in the South . He refrained from voting on the anti @-@ third term resolution that overwhelmingly passed the House that same year , believing that to vote for it would look self @-@ interested . Blaine was loyal to Grant , but the scandals of the Grant administration did not taint how the public perceived him ; according to his biographer , Blaine was never more popular than when he was Speaker of the House . Liberal Republicans saw him as an alternative to what they saw the corruption of other Republican leaders , and some even urged him to form a new , reformist party . Although he remained a Republican , this base of moderate reformers remained loyal to Blaine and became known as the Half Breed faction of the party . 
 = = = Blaine Amendment = = = 
 The 1874 House elections produced a Democratic majority for the 44th Congress , and Blaine 's time as Speaker was at an end . This gave Blaine more time to concentrate on his presidential ambitions , and to develop new policy ideas . One result was a foray into education policy . In late 1875 , President Grant made several speeches on the importance of the separation of church and state and the duty of the states to provide free public education . Blaine saw in this an issue that would distract from the Grant administration scandals and let the Republican party regain the high moral ground . In December 1875 , he proposed a joint resolution that became known as the Blaine Amendment . 
 The proposed amendment codified the church @-@ state separation Blaine and Grant were promoting , stating that : 
 " No State shall make any law respecting an establishment of religion , or prohibiting the free exercise thereof ; and no money raised by taxation in any State for the support of public schools , or derived from any public fund therefor , nor any public lands devoted thereto , shall ever be under the control of any religious sect ; nor shall any money so raised or lands so devoted be divided between religious sects or denominations . " 
 The effect was to prohibit the use of public funds by any religious school , although it did not advance Grant 's other aim of requiring states to provide public education to all children . The bill passed the House but failed in the Senate . Although it never passed Congress , and left Blaine open to charges of anti @-@ Catholicism , the proposed amendment served Blaine 's purpose of rallying Protestants to the Republican party and promoting himself as one of the party 's foremost leaders . 
 = = 1876 presidential election = = 
 = = = Mulligan letters = = = 
 Blaine entered the 1876 presidential campaign as the favorite , but his chances were almost immediately harmed by the emergence of a scandal . Rumors had begun to spread in February of that year that Blaine had been involved in a transaction with the Union Pacific Railroad in which the railroad had paid Blaine $ 64 @,@ 000 for some Little Rock and Fort Smith Railroad bonds he owned , even though the bonds were nearly worthless ; in essence , the alleged transaction was a sham designed to bribe Blaine . Blaine denied the charges , as did the Union Pacific 's directors . Blaine claimed he never had any dealings with the Little Rock and Fort Smith Railroad except to purchase bonds at market price , and that he had lost money on the transaction . Democrats in the House of Representatives nevertheless demanded a Congressional investigation . The testimony appeared to favor Blaine 's version of events until May 31 , when James Mulligan , a Boston clerk formerly employed by Blaine 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , testified that the allegations were true , that he had arranged the transaction , and that he had letters to prove it . The letters ended with the damning phrase , " Kindly burn this letter . " When the investigating committee recessed , Blaine met with Mulligan in his hotel room ; what transpired between the men is unknown , but Blaine left with the letters and refused to turn them over to the committee . 
 Blaine took his case to the House floor , proclaiming his innocence and calling the investigation a partisan attack by Southern Democrats , revenge for his exclusion of Jefferson Davis from the amnesty bill of the previous year . By now the pressure had begun to affect Blaine 's health , and he collapsed while leaving church services on June 14 . Blaine 's ill health combined with the lack of evidence against him garnered him sympathy among Republicans , and when the Republican convention began in Cincinnati later that month , he was again seen as the front @-@ runner . 
 = = = <unk> Knight = = = 
 Though he was damaged by the Mulligan letters , Blaine entered the convention as the favorite . Five other men were also considered serious candidates : Benjamin Bristow , the Kentucky @-@ born Treasury Secretary ; Roscoe Conkling , Blaine 's old enemy and now a Senator from New York ; Senator Oliver P. Morton of Indiana ; Governor Rutherford B. Hayes of Ohio ; and Governor John F. Hartranft of Pennsylvania . Blaine 's was nominated by Illinois orator Robert G. Ingersoll in what became a famous speech : 
 This is a grand year — a year filled with recollections of the Revolution ... a year in which the people call for the man who has torn from the throat of treason the tongue of slander , the man who has snatched the mask of Democracy from the hideous face of rebellion ... Like an armed warrior , like a plumed knight , James G. Blaine from the state of Maine marched down the halls of the American Congress and threw his shining lance full and fair against the brazen foreheads of every traitor to his country and every <unk> of his fair reputation . 
 The speech was a success and Ingersoll 's appellation of " plumed knight " remained a nickname for Blaine for years to come . On the first ballot , no candidate received the required majority of 378 , but Blaine had the most votes , with 285 and no other candidate had more than 125 . There were a few vote shifts in the next five ballots , and Blaine climbed to 308 votes , with his nearest competitor at just 111 . On the seventh ballot the situation shifted drastically as anti @-@ Blaine delegates began to coalesce around Hayes ; by the time the balloting ended , Blaine 's votes had risen to 351 , but Hayes surpassed him at 384 , a majority . 
 Blaine received the news at his home in Washington and telegraphed Hayes his congratulations . In the subsequent contest of 1876 , Hayes was elected after a contentious compromise over disputed electoral votes . The results of the convention had further effects on Blaine 's political career as Bristow , having lost the nomination , also resigned as Treasury Secretary three days after the convention ended . President Grant selected Senator Lot M. Morrill of Maine to fill the cabinet post , and Maine 's governor , Seldon Connor , appointed Blaine to the now @-@ vacant Senate seat . When the Maine Legislature reconvened that autumn , they confirmed Blaine 's appointment and elected him to the full six @-@ year term that would begin on March 4 , 1877 . 
 = = United States Senate , 1876 – 1881 = = 
 Blaine was appointed to the Senate on July 10 , 1876 , but did not begin his duties there until the Senate convened in December of that year . While in the Senate , he served on the Appropriations Committee and held the chairmanship of the Committee on Civil Service and Retrenchment , but he never achieved the role of leadership that he had held as a member of the House . The Senate in the 45th Congress was controlled by a narrow Republican majority , but it was a majority often divided against itself and against the Hayes administration . Blaine did not number himself among the administration 's defenders , but neither could he join the Republicans led by Conkling — later known as the Stalwarts — who opposed Hayes , because of the deep personal enmity between Blaine and Conkling . He opposed Hayes 's withdrawal of federal troops from Southern capitals , which effectively ended the Reconstruction of the South , but to no avail . Blaine continued to antagonize Southern Democrats , voting against bills passed in the Democrat @-@ controlled House that would reduce the Army 's appropriation and repeal the post @-@ war Enforcement Acts he had helped pass . By 1879 , there were only 1 @,@ 155 soldiers stationed in the former Confederacy , and Blaine believed that this small force could never guarantee the civil and political rights of black Southerners — which would mean an end to the Republican party in the South . Such bills passed Congress several times and Hayes vetoed them several times ; ultimately , the Enforcement Acts remained in place , but the funds to enforce them dwindled . 
 On monetary issues , Blaine continued the advocacy for a strong dollar that he had begun as a Representative . The issue had shifted from debate over greenbacks to debate over which metal should back the dollar : gold and silver , or gold alone . The Coinage Act of 1873 stopped the coinage of silver for all coins worth a dollar or more , effectively tying the dollar to the value of gold . As a result , the money supply contracted and the effects of the Panic of 1873 grew worse , making it more expensive for debtors to pay debts they had entered into when currency was less valuable . Farmers and laborers , especially , clamored for the return of coinage in both metals , believing the increased money supply would restore wages and property values . Democratic Representative Richard P. Bland of Missouri proposed a bill , which passed the House , that would require the United States to coin as much silver as miners could sell the government , thus increasing the money supply and aiding debtors . In the Senate , William B. Allison , a Republican from Iowa offered an amendment to limit the silver coinage to two to four million dollars per month . This was still too much for Blaine , and he denounced the bill , but the amended Bland – Allison Act passed the Senate by a 48 to 21 vote . Hayes vetoed the bill , but Congress mustered the two @-@ thirds vote to pass it over his veto . Even after the Bland – Allison Act 's passage , Blaine continued his opposition , making a series of speeches against it during the 1878 congressional campaign season . 
 His time in the Senate allowed Blaine to develop his foreign policy ideas . He advocated expansion of the American navy and merchant marine , which had been in decline since the Civil War . Blaine also bitterly opposed the results of the arbitration with Great Britain over American fishermen 's right to fish in Canadian waters , which resulted in a $ 5 @.@ 5 million award to Britain . Blaine 's Anglophobia combined with his support of high tariffs when he initially opposed a reciprocity treaty with Canada that would have reduced tariffs between the two nations , but by the end of his time in the Senate he changed his mind , believing that Americans had more to gain by increasing exports than they would lose by the risk of cheap imports . 
 = = 1880 presidential election = = 
 Hayes had announced early in his presidency that he would not seek another term , which meant that the contest for the Republican nomination in 1880 was open to all challengers — including Blaine . Blaine was among the early favorites for the nomination , as were former President Grant , Treasury Secretary John Sherman of Ohio , and Senator George F. Edmunds of Vermont . Although Grant did not actively promote his candidacy , his entry into the race re @-@ energized the Stalwarts and when the convention met in Chicago in June 1880 , they instantly polarized the delegates into Grant and anti @-@ Grant factions , with Blaine the most popular choice of the latter group . Blaine was nominated by James Frederick Joy of Michigan , but in contrast to Ingersoll 's exciting speech of 1876 , Joy 's lengthy oration was remembered only for its <unk> . After the other candidates were nominated , the first ballot showed Grant leading with 304 votes and Blaine in second with 284 ; no other candidate had more than Sherman 's 93 , and none had the required majority of 379 . Sherman 's delegates could swing the nomination to either Grant or Blaine , but he refused to release them through twenty @-@ eight ballots in the hope that the anti @-@ Grant forces would desert Blaine and flock to him . Eventually , they did desert Blaine , but instead of Sherman they shifted their votes to Ohio Congressman James A. Garfield , and by the thirty @-@ sixth ballot he had 399 votes , enough for victory . 
 Garfield placated the Stalwarts by endorsing Chester A. Arthur of New York , a Conkling loyalist , as nominee for vice president , but it was to Blaine and his delegates that Garfield owed his nomination . When Garfield was elected over Democrat Winfield Scott Hancock , he turned to Blaine to guide him in selection of his cabinet and offered him the preeminent position : Secretary of State . Blaine accepted , resigning from the Senate on March 4 , 1881 . 
 = = Secretary of State , 1881 = = 
 = = = Foreign policy initiatives = = = 
 Blaine saw presiding over the cabinet as a chance to preside over the Washington social scene , as well , and soon ordered construction of a new , larger home near Dupont Circle . Although his foreign policy experience was minimal , Blaine quickly threw himself into his new duties . By 1881 , Blaine had completely abandoned his protectionist leanings and now used his position as Secretary of State to promote freer trade , especially within the western hemisphere . His reasons were twofold : firstly , Blaine 's old fear of British interference in the Americas was undiminished , and he saw increased trade with Latin America as the best way to keep Britain from dominating the region . Secondly , he believed that by encouraging exports , he could increase American prosperity , and by doing so position the Republican party as the author of that prosperity , ensuring continued electoral success . Garfield agreed with his Secretary of State 's vision and Blaine called for a Pan @-@ American conference in 1882 to mediate disputes among the Latin American nations and to serve as a forum for talks on increasing trade . At the same time , Blaine hoped to negotiate a peace in the War of the Pacific then being fought by Bolivia , Chile , and Peru . Blaine favored a resolution that would not result in Peru yielding any territory , but Chile , which had by 1881 occupied the Peruvian capital , rejected any negotiations that would gain them nothing . Blaine sought to expand American influence in other areas , calling for renegotiation of the Clayton – Bulwer Treaty to allow the United States to construct a canal through Panama without British involvement , as well as attempting to reduce British involvement in the strategically located Kingdom of Hawaii . His plans for the United States ' involvement in the world stretched even beyond the Western Hemisphere , as he sought commercial treaties with Korea and Madagascar . 
 = = = Garfield 's assassination = = = 
 On July 2 , 1881 , Blaine and Garfield were walking through the Sixth Street Station of the Baltimore and Potomac Railroad in Washington when Garfield was shot by an assassin , Charles J. Guiteau . Guiteau , a deranged man who had earlier pestered Blaine and other State Department officials to be appointed to ambassadorships for which he was grossly unqualified , believed that by assassinating the President he could ingratiate himself with Vice President Arthur and receive his coveted position . Guiteau was captured immediately and hanged just short of a year later ; he survived longer than Garfield , who lingered for two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half months , then died on September 19 , 1881 . Garfield 's death was not just a personal tragedy for Blaine ; it also meant the end of his dominance of the cabinet and the end of his foreign policy initiatives . With Arthur 's ascent to the presidency , the Stalwart faction now held sway and Blaine 's days at the State Department were numbered . Arthur asked all of the cabinet members to postpone their resignations until Congress recessed that December ; Blaine nonetheless tendered his resignation on October 19 , 1881 but agreed to remain in office until December 19 , when his successor was in place . Blaine 's replacement was Frederick T. Frelinghuysen , a New Jersey Stalwart . Arthur and Frelinghuysen undid much of Blaine 's work , cancelling the call for a Pan @-@ American conference and stopping the effort to end the War of the Pacific , but they did continue the drive for tariff reductions , signing a reciprocity treaty with Mexico in 1882 . 
 = = = Private life = = = 
 Blaine began the year 1882 without a political office for the first time since 1859 . Troubled by poor health , he sought no employment other than the completion of the first volume of his memoir , Twenty Years of Congress . Friends in Maine petitioned Blaine to run for Congress in the 1882 elections , but he declined , preferring to spend his time writing and supervising the move to the new home . His income from mining and railroad investments was sufficient to sustain the family 's lifestyle and to allow for the construction of a vacation cottage , " Stanwood " , on Mount Desert Island , Maine , designed by Frank Furness . Blaine appeared before Congress in 1882 during an investigation into his War of the Pacific diplomacy , defending himself against allegations that he owned an interest in the Peruvian guano deposits being occupied by Chile , but otherwise stayed away from the Capitol . The publication of the first volume of Twenty Years in early 1884 added to Blaine 's financial security and thrust him back into the political spotlight . As the 1884 campaign loomed , Blaine 's name was being circulated once more as a potential nominee , and despite some reservations , he soon found himself back in the hunt for the presidency . 
 = = 1884 presidential election = = 
 = = = Nomination = = = 
 In the months leading up to the 1884 convention , Blaine was once more considered the favorite for the nomination , but President Arthur was contemplating a run for election in his own right . George Edmunds was again the favored candidate among reformers and John Sherman had a few delegates pledged to him , but neither was expected to command much support at the convention . John A. Logan of Illinois hoped to attract Stalwart votes if Arthur 's campaign was unsuccessful . Blaine was unsure he wanted to try for the nomination for the third time and even encouraged General William T. Sherman ( John Sherman 's older brother ) to accept it if it came to him , but ultimately Blaine agreed to be a candidate again . 
 William H. West of Ohio nominated Blaine with an enthusiastic speech and after the first ballot , Blaine led the count with 334 ½ votes . While short of the necessary 417 for nomination , Blaine had far more than any other candidate with Arthur in second place at 278 votes . Blaine was unacceptable to the Arthur delegates just as Blaine 's own delegates would never vote for the President , so the contest was between the two for the delegates of the remaining candidates . Blaine 's total steadily increased as Logan and Sherman withdrew in his favor and some of the Edmunds delegates defected to him . Unlike in previous conventions , the momentum for Blaine in 1884 would not be halted . On the fourth ballot , Blaine received 541 votes and was , at last , nominated . Logan was named vice presidential nominee on the first ballot , and the Republicans had their ticket . 
 = = = Campaign against Cleveland = = = 
 The Democrats held their convention in Chicago the following month and nominated Governor Grover Cleveland of New York . Cleveland 's time on the national scene was brief , but Democrats hoped that his reputation as a reformer and an opponent of corruption would attract Republicans dissatisfied with Blaine and his reputation for scandal . They were correct , as reform @-@ minded Republicans ( called " Mugwumps " ) denounced Blaine as corrupt and flocked to Cleveland . The Mugwumps , including such men as Carl Schurz and Henry Ward Beecher , were more concerned with morality than with party , and felt Cleveland was a kindred soul who would promote civil service reform and fight for efficiency in government . However , even as the Democrats gained support from the Mugwumps , they lost some blue @-@ collar workers to the Greenback Party , led by Benjamin F. Butler , Blaine 's antagonist from their early days in the House . 
 The campaign focused on the candidates ' personalities , as each candidate 's supporters cast aspersions on their opponents . Cleveland 's supporters rehashed the old allegations from the Mulligan letters that Blaine had corruptly influenced legislation in favor of railroads , later profiting on the sale of bonds he owned in both companies . Although the stories of Blaine 's favors to the railroads had made the rounds eight years earlier , this time more of his correspondence was discovered , making his earlier denials less plausible . Blaine acknowledged that the letters were genuine , but denied that anything in them impugned his integrity or contradicted his earlier explanations . Nevertheless , what Blaine described as " stale slander " served to focus the public 's attention negatively on his character . On some of the most damaging correspondence , Blaine had written " Burn this letter " , giving Democrats the last line to their rallying cry : " Blaine , Blaine , James G. Blaine , the continental liar from the state of Maine , ' Burn this letter ! " 
 To counter Cleveland 's image of superior morality , Republicans discovered reports that Cleveland had fathered an illegitimate child while he was a lawyer in Buffalo , New York , and chanted " Ma , Ma , where 's my Pa ? " . ( To which the Democrats , after Cleveland had been elected , appended : " Gone to the White House , Ha ! Ha ! Ha ! " ) Cleveland admitted to paying child support in 1874 to Maria Crofts Halpin , the woman who claimed he fathered her child named Oscar Folsom Cleveland . Halpin was involved with several men at the time , including Cleveland 's friend and law partner , Oscar Folsom , for whom the child was also named . Cleveland did not know which man was the father , and is believed to have assumed responsibility because he was the only bachelor among them . At the same time , Democratic operatives accused Blaine and his wife of not having been married when their eldest son , Stanwood , was born in 1851 ; this rumor was false , however , and caused little excitement in the campaign . 
 Both candidates believed that the states of New York , New Jersey , Indiana , and Connecticut would determine the election . In New York , Blaine received less support than he anticipated when Arthur and Conkling , still powerful in the New York Republican party , failed to actively campaign for him . Blaine hoped that he would have more support from Irish Americans than Republicans typically did ; while the Irish were mainly a Democratic constituency in the 19th century , Blaine 's mother was Irish Catholic , and he believed his career @-@ long opposition to the British government would resonate with the Irish . Blaine 's hope for Irish defections to the Republican standard were dashed late in the campaign when one of his supporters , Samuel D. Burchard , gave a speech denouncing the Democrats as the party of " Rum , Romanism , and Rebellion " . The Democrats spread the word of this insult in the days before the election , and Cleveland narrowly won all four of the swing states , including New York by just over one thousand votes . While the popular vote total was close , with Cleveland winning by just one @-@ quarter of a percent , the electoral votes gave Cleveland a majority of 219 – 182 . 
 = = Party leader in exile = = 
 Blaine accepted his narrow defeat and spent most of the next year working on the second volume of Twenty Years of Congress . The book continued to earn him enough money to support his lavish household and pay off his debts . Although he spoke to friends of retiring from politics , Blaine still attended dinners and commented on the Cleveland administration 's policies . By the time of the 1886 Congressional elections , Blaine was giving speeches and promoting Republican candidates , especially in his home state of Maine . Republicans were successful in Maine , and after the Maine elections in September , Blaine went on a speaking tour from Pennsylvania to Tennessee , hoping to boost the prospects of Republican candidates there . Republicans were less successful nationwide , gaining seats in the House while losing seats in the Senate , but Blaine 's speeches kept him and his opinions in the spotlight . 
 Blaine and his wife and daughters sailed for Europe in June 1887 , visiting England , Ireland , Germany , France , Austria @-@ Hungary , and finally Scotland , where they stayed at the summer home of Andrew Carnegie . While in France , Blaine wrote a letter to the New @-@ York Tribune criticizing Cleveland 's plans to reduce the tariff , saying that free trade with Europe would impoverish American workers and farmers . The family returned to the United States in August 1887 . His letter in the Tribune had raised his political profile even higher , and by 1888 Theodore Roosevelt and Henry Cabot Lodge , both former opponents , urged Blaine to run against Cleveland again . Opinion within the party was overwhelmingly in favor of <unk> Blaine . 
 As the state conventions drew nearer , Blaine announced that he would not be a candidate . His supporters doubted his sincerity and continued to encourage him to run , but Blaine still demurred . Hoping to make his intentions clear , Blaine left the country and was staying with Carnegie in Scotland when the 1888 Republican National Convention began in Chicago . Carnegie encouraged Blaine to accept if the convention nominated him , but the delegates finally accepted Blaine 's refusal . John Sherman was the most prominent candidate and sought to attract the Blaine supporters to his candidacy , but instead found them flocking to former senator Benjamin Harrison of Indiana after a telegram from Carnegie suggested that Blaine favored him . Blaine returned to the United States in August 1888 and visited Harrison at his home in October , where twenty @-@ five thousand residents paraded in Blaine 's honor . Harrison defeated Cleveland in a close election , and offered Blaine his former position as Secretary of State . 
 = = Secretary of State , 1889 – 92 = = 
 Harrison had developed his foreign policy based largely on Blaine 's ideas , and at the start of his term , Harrison and Blaine had very similar views on the United States ' place in the world . In spite of their shared worldview , however , the two men became personally unfriendly as the term went on . Harrison was conscious that his Secretary of State was more popular than he , and while he admired Blaine 's gift for diplomacy , he grew displeased with Blaine 's frequent absence from his post because of illness , and suspected that Blaine was angling for the presidential nomination in 1892 . Harrison tried to limit how many " Blaine men " filled subordinate positions in the State Department and denied Blaine 's request that his son , Walker , be appointed First Assistant Secretary , instead naming him Solicitor of the Department of State . Despite the growing personal rancor , the two men continued , with one exception , to agree on the foreign policy questions of the day . 
 = = = Pacific diplomacy = = = 
 Blaine and Harrison wished to see American power and trade expanded across the Pacific and were especially interested in securing rights to harbors in Pearl Harbor , Hawaii , and Pago Pago , Samoa . When Blaine entered office , the United States , Great Britain , and the German Empire were disputing their respective rights in Samoa . Thomas F. Bayard , Blaine 's predecessor , had accepted an invitation to a three @-@ party conference in Berlin aimed at resolving the dispute , and Blaine appointed American representatives to attend . The result was a treaty that created a condominium among the three powers , allowing all of them access to the harbor . 
 In Hawaii , Blaine worked to bind the kingdom more closely to the United States and to avoid its becoming a British protectorate . When the McKinley Tariff of 1890 eliminated the duty on sugar , Hawaiian sugar @-@ growers looked for a way to retain their once @-@ exclusive access to the American market . The Hawaiian minister to the United States , Henry A. P. Carter , tried to arrange for Hawaii have complete trade reciprocity with the United States , but Blaine proposed instead that Hawaii become an American protectorate ; Carter favored the idea , but the Hawaiian king , Kalākaua , rejected the infringement on his sovereignty . Blaine next procured the appointment of his former newspaper colleague John L. Stevens as minister to Hawaii . Stevens had long believed that the United States should annex Hawaii , and as minister he co @-@ operated with Americans living in Hawaii in their efforts to bring about annexation . Their efforts ultimately culminated in a coup d 'état against Kalākaua 's successor , Liliuokalani , in 1893 . Blaine 's precise involvement is undocumented , but the results of Stevens 's diplomacy were in accord with his ambitions for American power in the region . The new government petitioned the United States for annexation , but by that time Blaine was no longer in office . 
 = = = Latin America and reciprocity = = = 
 Soon after taking office , Blaine revived his old idea of an international conference of western hemisphere nations . The result was the First International Conference of American States , which met in Washington in 1890 . Blaine and Harrison had high hopes for the conference , including proposals for a customs union , a pan @-@ American railroad line , and an arbitration process to settle disputes among member nations . Their overall goal was to extend trade and political influence over the entire hemisphere ; some of the other nations understood this and were wary of deepening ties with the United States to the exclusion of European powers . Blaine said publicly that his only interest was in " annexation of trade " , not annexation of territory , but privately he wrote to Harrison of a desire for some territorial enlargement of the United States : 
 " I think there are only three places that are of value enough to be taken ... One is Hawaii and the others are Cuba and Porto Rico [ sic ] . Cuba and Porto Rico are not now imminent and will not be for a generation . Hawaii may come up for decision at an unexpected hour and I hope we shall be prepared to decide it in the affirmative . " 
 Congress was not as enthusiastic about a customs union as Blaine and Harrison were , but tariff reciprocity provisions were ultimately included in the McKinley Tariff that reduced duties on some inter @-@ American trade . Otherwise , the conference achieved none of Blaine 's goals in the short @-@ term , but did lead to further communication and what would eventually become the Organization of American States . 
 In 1891 , a diplomatic crisis arose in Chile that drove a wedge between Harrison and Blaine . The American minister to Chile , Patrick Egan , a political friend of Blaine 's , granted asylum to Chileans who were seeking refuge from the Chilean Civil War . Chile was already suspicious of Blaine because of his War of the Pacific diplomacy ten years earlier , and this incident raised tensions even further . When sailors from the Baltimore took shore leave in Valparaíso , a fight broke out , resulting in the deaths of two American sailors and three dozen arrested . When the news reached Washington , Blaine was in Bar Harbor recuperating from a bout of ill health and Harrison himself drafted a demand for reparations . The Chilean foreign minister , Manuel Antonio Matta , replied that Harrison 's message was " erroneous or deliberately incorrect " , and said that the Chilean government was treating the affair the same as any other criminal matter . Tensions increased as Harrison threatened to break off diplomatic relations unless the United States received a suitable apology . Blaine returned to the capital and made conciliatory overtures to the Chilean government , offering to submit the dispute to arbitration and recall Egan . Harrison still insisted on an apology and submitted a special message to Congress about the threat of war . Chile issued an apology for the incident , and the threat of war subsided . 
 = = = Relations with European powers = = = 
 Blaine 's earliest expressions in the foreign policy sphere were those of a reactionary <unk> , but by the end of his career his relationship with the United Kingdom had become more moderate and nuanced . A dispute over seal hunting in the waters off Alaska was the cause of Blaine 's first interaction with Britain as Harrison 's Secretary of State . A law passed in 1889 required Harrison to ban seal hunting in Alaskan waters , but Canadian fishermen believed they had the right to continue fishing there . Soon thereafter , the United States Navy seized several Canadian ships near the Pribilof Islands . Blaine entered into negotiations with Britain and the two nations agreed to submit the dispute to arbitration by a neutral tribunal . Blaine was no longer in office when the tribunal began its work , but the result was to allow the hunting once more , albeit with some regulation , and to require the United States to pay damages of $ 473 @,@ 151 . Ultimately , the nations signed the North Pacific Fur Seal Convention of 1911 , which outlawed open @-@ water seal hunting . 
 At the same time as the Pribilof Islands dispute , an outbreak of mob violence in New Orleans became an international incident . After New Orleans police chief David Hennessy led a crackdown against local mafiosi , he was assassinated on October 14 , 1890 . After the alleged murderers were found not guilty on March 14 , 1891 , a mob stormed the jail and lynched eleven of them . Since many of those killed were Italian citizens the Italian minister , Saverio Fava , protested to Blaine . Blaine explained that federal officials could not control how state officials deal with criminal matters , and Fava announced that he would withdraw the legation back to Italy . Blaine and Harrison believed the Italians ' response to be an overreaction , and did nothing . Tensions slowly cooled , and after nearly a year , the Italian minister returned to the United States to negotiate an indemnity . After some internal dispute — Blaine wanted conciliation with Italy , Harrison was reluctant to admit fault — the United States agreed to pay an indemnity of $ 25 @,@ 000 , and normal diplomatic relations resumed . 
 = = Retirement , death , and legacy = = 
 Blaine had always believed his health to be fragile , and by the time he joined Harrison 's cabinet he truly was unwell . The years at the State Department also brought Blaine personal tragedy as two of his children , Walker and Alice , died suddenly in 1890 . Another son , Emmons , died in 1892 . With these family issues and his declining health , Blaine decided to retire and announced that he would resign from the cabinet on June 4 , 1892 . Because of their growing animosity , and because Blaine 's resignation came three days before the 1892 Republican National Convention began , Harrison suspected that Blaine was preparing to run against him for the party 's nomination for president . 
 Harrison was unpopular with the party and the country , and many of Blaine 's old supporters encouraged him to run for the nomination . Blaine had denied any interest in the nomination months before his resignation , but some of his friends , including Senator Matthew Quay of Pennsylvania and James S. Clarkson , chairman of the Republican National Committee , took it for false modesty and worked for his nomination anyway . When Blaine resigned from the cabinet , his boosters were certain that he was a candidate , but the majority of the party stood by the incumbent . Harrison was renominated on the first ballot , but die @-@ hard Blaine delegates still gave their champion 182 and 1 / 6 votes , good enough for second place . 
 Blaine spent the summer of 1892 at his Bar Harbor cottage , and did not involve himself in the presidential campaign other than to make a single speech in New York in October . Harrison was defeated soundly in his rematch against former president Cleveland and when Blaine returned to Washington at the close of 1892 , he and Harrison were friendlier than they had been in years . Blaine 's health declined rapidly in the winter of 1892 – 1893 , and he died in his Washington home on January 27 , 1893 . After a funeral at the Presbyterian Church of the Covenant , he was buried in Oak Hill Cemetery in Washington . He was later re @-@ interred in Blaine Memorial Park , Augusta , Maine , in 1920 . 
 A towering figure in the Republican party of his day , Blaine fell into obscurity fairly soon after his death . A 1905 biography by his wife 's cousin , Edward Stanwood , was written when the question was still in doubt , but by the time David Saville Muzzey published his biography of Blaine in 1934 , the subtitle " A Political Idol of Other Days " already spoke to its subject 's fading place in the popular mind , perhaps because of the nine men the Republican Party nominated for the Presidency from 1860 to 1912 , Blaine is the only one who never became President . In 1947 , the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission installed a historical marker in West Brownsville , noting Blaine 's historic importance . Although several authors studied Blaine 's foreign policy career , including Edward P. Crapol 's 2000 work , Muzzey 's was the last full @-@ scale biography of the man until Neil <unk> 's 2006 book . Historian R. Hal Williams was working on a new biography of Blaine , tentatively titled James G. Blaine : A Life in Politics , until his death in 2016 . 
 = Who Shot Mr. Burns ? = 
 " Who Shot Mr. Burns ? " is a two @-@ part episode of The Simpsons . Part One is the twenty @-@ fifth and final episode of the sixth season and originally aired on Fox on May 21 , 1995 , while Part Two is the season premiere of the seventh season and aired on September 17 , 1995 . Springfield Elementary School strikes oil , but Mr. Burns steals it and at the same time brings misery to many of Springfield 's citizens . Part One has a cliffhanger ending where Mr. Burns is shot by an unidentified assailant . In Part Two , Springfield 's police try to find the culprit , with their main suspects being Waylon Smithers and Homer Simpson . 
 Both episodes were written by Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein ; Part One was directed by Jeffrey Lynch and Part Two by Wes Archer . Musician Tito Puente guest stars as himself in both parts . " Who Shot Mr. Burns ? " was conceived by series creator Matt Groening and the writing staff decided to turn it into a two @-@ part mystery episode . Part One contains several clues about the identity of the culprit because the writers wanted it to be solvable . 
 The concept for the two @-@ part episode was the episode of the primetime soap Dallas titled " A House Divided " , known by most as " Who shot J.R. ? " in which character J.R. Ewing was shot . In the months following the airing of Part One , there was much widespread debate among fans of the series as to who actually shot Mr. Burns and in many ways the public reaction and response to the episode mirrored that of its " Who shot J.R. ? " inspiration . Over the summer of 1995 , Fox offered a related contest which was one of the first such endeavors to tie in elements of television and the Internet . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Part One = = = 
 Principal Skinner walks into school and discovers that the class gerbil , " <unk> " , has died . As Groundskeeper Willie digs a grave , he unexpectedly strikes oil . Skinner and Superintendent Chalmers lavishly think of ways to spend the school 's newfound wealth , taking many student requests , including Lisa 's suggestion of hiring Tito Puente as a music teacher . 
 At the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant , Homer is disturbed that Mr. Burns can never remember his name , even after working for him for ten years . He takes a suggestion from Marge and sends Mr. Burns a box of chocolates with a family picture underneath the candy ; however , Burns and Smithers are not interested in the one candy covering Homer 's face and discard the box . As a result , Burns writes a " thank you " card only to Marge , Bart , Lisa and Maggie , further angering Homer . 
 Meanwhile , Mr. Burns learns of the school 's oil and immediately decides that he must have it , even as Smithers voices his disapproval . After failing to convince Skinner to give him the oil through a poor deception , Mr. Burns establishes a slant drilling operation and beats the school to tapping the oil well . The school is told they have no legal recourse , and Willie and Puente are laid off to cover the school 's losses . 
 Mr. Burns ' drilling operation causes further harm and distress to many Springfield citizens : Moe 's Tavern is closed due to the harmful fumes from the drilling , leaving Moe and Barney enraged ; the drilling wrecks the Springfield Retirement Castle , leaving Grampa homeless , forcing him to move in with the Simpsons ; and Bart 's treehouse is destroyed by a burst of oil from the rig , which also injures Santa 's Little Helper . 
 Mr. Burns then reveals to Smithers his grandest scheme : the construction of a giant , movable disc that will permanently block out the sun in Springfield , forcing the residents to continuously use the electricity from his power plant . A horrified Smithers finally stands up to Mr. Burns , insisting that he has gone too far ; Burns fires him in response . 
 Later , Homer sneaks into Mr. Burns ' office and spray @-@ paints " I am Homer Simpson " on the wall in giant letters . Mr. Burns catches him in the act , but yet still seemingly does not recognize Homer . In a rage , Homer attacks him and is hauled away by security . All the citizens affected by Mr. Burns ' mad schemes , including Homer and even Smithers , swear revenge . 
 A town meeting is held to discuss Mr. Burns ' actions . Mr. Burns arrives , armed with a gun after his encounter with Homer . Despite the whole town standing up to him , he activates the sun @-@ blocking device , thinking himself invincible . He walks into an alley , obscured from view , and says : " Oh it 's you , what are you so happy about ? ... I see . I think you 'd better drop it . " He struggles with someone until a gunshot is heard . He stumbles out into the open , wounded , and collapses on the town 's sundial . The townspeople find him and Marge tells all of them that since Burns has angered so many people recently , just about anyone could have been the shooter . 
 = = = Part Two = = = 
 As Mr. Burns fights for life at the hospital , the Springfield police are working to find his assailant . Smithers wakes up the next morning and vaguely remembers shooting someone the night before in a drunken rage . Guilt @-@ ridden , Smithers heads for a local church , and is promptly arrested when the confessional turns out to be a police sting . While passing the media in his way to the police station , Smithers makes a witty remark that Sideshow Mel recognizes from an episode of Pardon My Zinger that aired at the same time as the shooting . Mel realizes that Smithers must have watched it as well , giving him an alibi . As Smithers ' memory clears , it turns out that he had actually shot Jasper in his wooden leg . 
 With one of the prime suspects cleared , the police , aided by Lisa , eliminate other suspects , including Tito Puente ( whose revenge took the form of a " slanderous mambo " ) , Skinner ( who was busy applying what he thought was camouflage make @-@ up at the time of the shooting ) , Willie ( who cannot fire a pistol due to arthritis in his index fingers ) , and Moe ( who is cleared via polygraph test ) . After a surreal dream about Lisa , Wiggum finds an eyelash on Mr. Burns ' suit which matches Simpson DNA . At the same time , Mr. Burns wakes up from his coma and cries , " Homer Simpson ! " 
 The police raid the Simpson home and find a gun under the seat of their car , covered with Homer 's fingerprints and loaded with bullets that match the one fired into Mr. Burns . Homer is arrested for attempted murder , but escapes from the paddywagon when it overturns while the police are trying to pick up a Drive @-@ Thru meal . Smithers offers a reward for his capture . 
 At the hospital , it is revealed that " Homer Simpson " is the only thing that Mr. Burns can say , suggesting that his supposed " accusation " may not have actually been one . Hoping to clear Homer 's name , Lisa returns to the scene of the crime to investigate and figures out the identity of Mr. Burns ' true assailant . At the same time , Homer arrives at the hospital to confront Mr. Burns and demand that Burns exonerate him , despite being somewhat impressed that Burns finally remembered his name . After a police bulletin reports Homer 's location , the police , Lisa and many other citizens of Springfield all race to the hospital . Upon entering Mr. Burns ' room , everyone finds an enraged Homer vigorously shaking Burns and demanding that he take back his accusation . Homer 's shaking him returns Mr. Burns 's ability to speak normally , and he quickly asks who the person shaking him is . <unk> with fury at Burns again not remembering who he is , Homer grabs Wiggum 's gun and aims it at Mr. Burns ' face , demanding that Burns recant his accusations . Mr. Burns then laughs at the idea and confirms that Homer did not shoot him . He then reveals the true assailant : Maggie Simpson . 
 Mr. Burns reveals that , after leaving the town meeting , he came across Maggie eating a lollipop in the Simpsons ' car . Mr. Burns decided to try stealing candy from a baby , but Maggie would not let go of the lollipop , resulting in a struggle . As he finally yanked it away , his gun slipped from its holster into Maggie 's hands and fired at Burns . The gun and lollipop both then fell beneath the car seat ; Homer would later unknowingly leave fingerprints on the gun while feeling around under the seat for an ice cream cone he accidentally dropped . Lisa guesses that with his last strength , Burns must have pointed at the " S " and " W " on the sundial ( with the " W " appearing as an " M " from his perspective ) , to identify his assailant ; Mr. Burns corrects her , saying that he was actually swallowing his gold fillings to protect them from being pilfered by the paramedics . The " S " and " M " were purely coincidental . 
 Mr. Burns demands for Maggie to be arrested for the crime , but he is dismissed by Chief Wiggum , who says that no jury would convict a baby for a crime , except " maybe Texas " . Marge also adds that the shooting must have been an accident , considering the fact that Maggie does not know how to operate a gun . The final shot shows Maggie with shifty eyes suggesting it may not have been an accident after all . 
 = = Production = = 
 The idea for the episode came from Matt Groening , who had wanted to do an episode in which Mr. Burns was shot , which could be used as a publicity stunt . The writers decided to write the episode in two parts with a mystery that could be used in a contest . It was important for them to design a mystery that had clues , took advantage of freeze frame technology , and was structured around one character who seemed the obvious culprit . While deciding who the culprit was , Oakley and Weinstein pitched Barney Gumble because he was a character that could go to jail and it could change the dynamic of the show . Mirkin suggested Maggie because he felt it was funnier and wanted the culprit to be a Simpsons family member . Oakley and Weinstein were initially unsure about having Maggie as the culprit , and it was decided that the episode would end with Maggie shifting her eyes and making it look like it was not a complete accident . 
 The producers worked hard to keep the ending of the episode a secret . While it was in production , David Silverman was the only animator who knew who the culprit was . Wes Archer , director of the episode , was initially unaware of the solution and directed the episode up until the conclusion . When it was time to animate the ending of the show , Silverman and Archer waited until the end of the summer of 1995 to work on it . They realized they needed help with the layouts and started giving various animators small parts to work on without telling them who the culprit was . The table read for the episode also ended before the third act . The writers had wanted the clues that were animated to be just right , so there were many animation retakes . 
 Tito Puente and his Latin jazz ensemble appear in the episode and sing the song " Señor Burns " . Oakley and Weinstein were unfamiliar with Puente and wrote him into the episode because Groening is a fan . They figured he would sing the song , but later discovered that Puente was a drummer , not a singer . The lyrics were sung by one of Puente 's band members . His band would also play their version of The Simpsons ' theme over the end credits . 
 = = = Hidden clues = = = 
 A number of subtle clues , and a few red herrings , were planted in Part One for viewers who wanted to unravel the mystery . 
 Almost every clock is set at three or nine o 'clock . The point of the clocks was to teach the viewer to view the sundial at the end upside down . 
 Mr. Burns looks from his balcony and talks about stealing candy from a baby . 
 When Mr. Burns collapses on the sundial , he points at W and S , although from his viewpoint , the W looks like an M. 
 Many of the suspects have the letters S and W or M in their initials and the intention was that several " obvious " suspects could be eliminated by the letters . Several characters already had names with those initials , but some were made up specifically for this <unk> Skinner 's full name is revealed to be " W. Seymour Skinner " on a diploma in his office . 
 Mr. Burns calls Santa 's Little Helper the " Simpson Mutt " . 
 Moe 's liquor license reveals that his full name is Moe Szyslak . 
 Grampa 's gun was a Smith & Wesson . 
 Just before entering Mr. Burns ' office to spray paint his name , Homer passes in front of the words " <unk> IN " on the pavement ( upside down from the viewer 's perspective ) , and very briefly blocks all of the letters except " NO " and a small arrow pointing at him . 
 A television in Moe 's Tavern shows that " Pardon My Zinger " is broadcast on weekdays at 3 PM on Comedy Central . It is later revealed that Burns is shot at 3 PM . Smithers reveals at the meeting that he never misses the show , and afterward is seen heading in the opposite direction that Burns heads . 
 During the scene at the town hall , several citizens are seen stroking guns : Smithers has a revolver , an unidentified woman also has a revolver , Moe has a shotgun , Skinner has a semi @-@ automatic handgun with a suppressor attached , and Barney has a derringer . 
 As Mr. Burns collapses on the sundial , it is seen that the gun he was previously carrying has gone missing . This was inserted as an intentional freeze frame clue . 
 = = = Alternate endings = = = 
 Due to the amount of interest in the ending of this episode , David Mirkin wrote several " terrible endings " and , with just Harry Shearer , recorded several alternate endings . His original intention was to fool the production staff and also leak the endings to various media outlets , but much to his surprise he was unsuccessful . Several endings were animated that showed various characters shooting Mr. Burns . Several of the alternate endings aired during the clip show " The Simpsons 138th Episode Spectacular " . Various clips showed Apu , Moe , Barney , Tito , and even Santa 's Little Helper as the gunmen . There was also a full @-@ length conclusion that aired in which Smithers shot Burns and explained his doing so at Burns 's bedside after Homer 's wild chase , and fell on " W " and S " on the compass , Waylon 's initials ; Burns then decides to give Smithers a 5 percent pay cut for attempting to kill him . 
 = = Contest = = 
 In the months following the broadcast of Part One , there was widespread debate among fans of the series as to who shot Mr. Burns . Fox offered a contest to tie in with the mystery where callers who dialed 1 @-@ 800 @-@ COLLECT were eligible and they then guessed who the culprit was . It ran from August 13 to September 10 and was one of the first contests to tie together elements of television and the Internet . Fox launched a new website , <unk> , devoted to the mystery which got over 500 @,@ 000 hits during the summer of 1995 . The winner would be animated on an episode of the show . Due to contest regulations , a winner had to be selected out of a random sample of entries . The sample did not contain any correct answers , and so a winner ( who had the wrong answer ) was chosen at random . However , the winner , <unk> Gibson of Washington D.C. , did not watch the show and opted to accept a cash prize in lieu of being animated . 
 The contest is referenced at the end of the episode when Dr. Hibbert says , " Well I couldn 't possibly solve this mystery ... Can you ? " 
 = = Springfield 's Most Wanted = = 
 Springfield 's Most Wanted was a TV special hosted by John Walsh , host of America 's Most Wanted . The special aired on September 17 , 1995 , at 7 : 30 P.M. ET before Part Two of Who Shot Mr. Burns ? . A parody of Walsh 's television series , this special was designed to help people find out who shot Mr. Burns , by laying out the potential clues and identifying the possible suspects . It features opinions from former Los Angeles police chief Daryl Gates and predictions from Dennis Franz , Courtney Thorne @-@ Smith , Kevin Nealon , Chris Elliott , and Andrew Shue . It was directed by Bill Brown and written by Jack Parmeter and Bob Bain . 
 The special was criticized for taking the publicity of the episode too far . Several critics said the special tainted host John Walsh 's credibility and was described as gimmicky , tacky , and " blatant groveling for viewers " . The special averaged an 8 @.@ 4 Nielsen Rating and finished 50th in the United States in the ratings for the week of September 11 – 17 , 1995 . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The title and concept for these two episodes were taken from the series Dallas . In the " Who shot J. R. ? " plot line , J. R. Ewing is shot in the season finale . The identity of the assailant was not revealed until the following season , leaving viewers to wonder for months which of Ewing 's many enemies was the culprit . 
 When Mr. Burns refers to his package at the beginning of the episode , he states that it " absolutely , positively " has to arrive in Pasadena , California , the following day , a reference to an early FedEx slogan . The song Mr. Burns sings to a lamp @-@ post echo the lyrics of Simon & Garfunkel 's song " The 59th Street Bridge Song ( Feelin ' Groovy ) " . The musical score that ends the first episode ( when the credits roll ) is a parody of John Williams ' Drummers ' Salute , which is part of the musical score he composed for Oliver Stone 's film JFK . During the scene in Part One where Moe 's bar is closed , an episode of Mystery Science Theater 3000 is playing on the television in the background following a promotion for the fictional program Pardon My Zinger at 3 : 00pm . Homer 's file photo with the Springfield Police Department shows him after a recent beating and wearing a T @-@ shirt that says , " Haig in ' 88 , " a reference to former Secretary of State Alexander Haig 's controversial bid for the Republican Presidential nomination in 1988 . 
 The opening of Part Two , wherein Smithers realizes that he merely dreamed about shooting Mr. Burns , is a reference to the episode " Blast from the Past " from Dallas , in which the events of the entire eighth season were explained away as being merely a character 's dream . The dream itself , in which Smithers and Burns are undercover detectives on the 1960s Speedway racing circuit , parodied The Mod Squad . Groundskeeper Willie 's interrogation , and particularly his crossing and <unk> his legs , is a parody of Sharon Stone 's famous interrogation scene in Basic Instinct . The nightclub is called ' Chez Guevara ' , a reference to Communist revolutionary Che Guevara . 
 Homer 's escape from the overturned paddy wagon is a homage to the 1993 film The Fugitive . Chief Wiggum 's dream in which Lisa speaks backwards is reference to Twin Peaks and Special Agent Dale Cooper 's interaction with the Man from Another Place . While recording Lisa 's lines for the segment , Yeardley Smith recorded the part backwards ; the recording was in turn reversed , a technique known as phonetic reversal , the same technique used on Twin Peaks . Several other parts out of the segment are direct references to the dream , including a moving shadow on the curtain , and Wiggum 's hair standing straight up after waking . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Part One finished 51st with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 7 , the fifth highest rated Fox show of the week . Part Two averaged 12 @.@ 3 million households and a 12 @.@ 9 Nielsen rating . It finished sixteenth in the United States in the ratings for the week of September 11 – 17 , 1995 , finishing first in its time slot and was the highest rated show on the Fox network that week . It helped the Fox network rank third overall for that week at a time when Fox was usually finishing fourth . 
 In 2003 , Entertainment Weekly published a Top 25 Simpsons episode list and placed both parts of " Who Shot Mr. Burns ? " in 25th place , saying " a two @-@ part comedic homage to Dallas ' Who shot J.R. ? stunt , [ Who Shot Mr. Burns ] is perhaps The Simpsons ' most grandiose pop moment ever " . The Daily Telegraph characterized the episode as one of " The 10 Best Simpsons TV Episodes . " 
 The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , called it " A superb end to the season — and what 's more , it 's a genuine whodunnit . There 's no cheating — all the clues are there . " Jake Rossen of Wizard called the ending the sixth greatest cliffhanger of all time but expressed disappointment in the resolution , saying , " Sometimes it 's better to make up your own ending , kids . " In 2008 , Entertainment Weekly included Part One in their list of the best television season finales of all time . 
 The song " Señor Burns " , which was composed by Alf Clausen and written by Bill Oakley & Josh Weinstein was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award in 1996 for " Outstanding Individual Achievement in Music and Lyrics " . Tito Puente ranked 19th on AOL 's list of their favorite 25 Simpsons guest stars . 
 = Cool Hand Luke = 
 Cool Hand Luke is a 1967 American prison drama film directed by Stuart Rosenberg , starring Paul Newman and featuring George Kennedy in an Oscar @-@ winning performance . Newman stars in the title role as Luke , a prisoner in a Florida prison camp who refuses to submit to the system . 
 The film , set in the early 1950s , is based on Donn Pearce 's 1965 novel of the same name . Pearce sold the story to Warner Bros. , who then hired him to write the script . Due to Pearce 's lack of film experience , the studio added Frank Pierson to rework the screenplay . Newman 's biographer Marie Edelman Borden states that the " tough , honest " script drew together threads from earlier movies , especially Hombre , Newman 's earlier film of 1967 . The film has been cited by Roger Ebert as an anti @-@ establishment film which was shot during the time of the Vietnam War , in which Newman 's character endures " physical punishment , psychological cruelty , hopelessness and equal parts of sadism and masochism . " His influence on his prison mates and the torture that he endures is compared to that of Jesus , and Christian symbolism is used throughout the film , culminating in a photograph superimposed over crossroads at the end of the film in comparison to the crucifixion . Filming took place on the San Joaquin River Delta , and the set , imitating a southern prison farm , was built in Stockton , California . The filmmakers sent a crew to Tavares Road Prison in Tavares , Florida , to take photographs and measurements . 
 Upon its release , Cool Hand Luke received favorable reviews and became a box @-@ office success . The film cemented Newman 's status as one of the era 's top box @-@ office actors , while the film was described as the " touchstone of an era . " Newman was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor , George Kennedy won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor , Pearce and Pierson were nominated for the Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay , and the score by Lalo Schifrin was also nominated for the Best Original Score . In 2005 , the United States Library of Congress selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry , considering it to be " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant . " It has a rare 100 % rating on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes . The quotation used by the prison warden in the film , which begins with " What we 've got here is failure to communicate , " was listed at No. 11 on the American Film Institute 's list of the 100 most memorable movie lines . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Decorated World War II veteran Lucas " Luke " Jackson ( Paul Newman ) , is arrested for cutting the " heads " off of parking meters one drunken night . He is sentenced to two years in prison and sent to a Florida chain gang prison run by a stern warden , the Captain ( Strother Martin ) , and a stoic rifleman , Walking Boss Godfrey ( Morgan Woodward ) , whose eyes are always covered by a pair of mirrored sunglasses . Carr ( Clifton James ) the <unk> , tells the rules to the new set of prisoners , with any violations resulting in spending the night in “ the box , ” a small squared room with limited air and very little room to move . 
 Luke refuses to observe the established pecking order among the prisoners and quickly runs afoul of the prisoners ' leader , Dragline ( George Kennedy ) . When the pair have a boxing match , the prisoners and guards watch with interest . Although Luke is severely outmatched by his larger opponent , he refuses to acquiesce . Eventually , Dragline refuses to continue the fight . Luke 's tenacity earns the prisoners ' respect . Later , Luke wins a poker game by bluffing with a hand worth nothing . Luke comments that " sometimes , nothing can be a real cool hand , " prompting Dragline to nickname him " Cool Hand Luke " . 
 After a visit from his sick mother <unk> ( Jo Van Fleet ) , Luke becomes more optimistic about his situation . He continually confronts the Captain and the guards , and his sense of humor and independence prove to be both contagious and inspiring to the other prisoners . Luke 's struggle for supremacy peaks when he leads a work crew in a seemingly impossible but successful effort to complete a road @-@ paving job in less than one day . The other prisoners start to idolize him after he makes and wins a spur @-@ of @-@ the moment bet that he can eat fifty hard @-@ boiled eggs in one hour . 
 One day , Luke picks up a deadly rattlesnake from the grassy ditch and holds it up for Boss Godfrey to shoot with his rifle . Luke tosses the snake to the boss as a joke , before he hands him his walking cane . Dragline advises Luke to be more careful about his actions pertaining to the " man with no eyes . " A rainstorm causes everyone to prematurely end their work . Before he joins the other prisoners in the truck , Luke shouts to God , testing him . On that same evening , Luke receives a letter stating that his mother has died . 
 After news of his mother 's death reaches Luke , the Captain , anticipating that Luke might attempt to escape in order to attend his mother 's funeral , has him locked in the prison punishment box . After being released from the box , receiving word that his mother 's burial is completed , and being told to forget about her , Luke is determined to escape . Under the cover of a Fourth of July celebration , he makes his initial escape attempt . He is later recaptured by local police and returned to the chain gang , but not before one of the blood hounds sent after him dies from strain caused by struggling through barbed @-@ wire fences . After his capture and return , the Captain has Luke fitted with leg @-@ irons and delivers a warning speech to the other inmates , explaining , " What we 've got here is failure to communicate . Some men you just can 't reach . So you get what we had here last week , which is the way he wants it . Well , he gets it . I don 't like it any more than you men . " 
 A short time later , Luke escapes again by using string to shake a bush and distract the guards , visiting a nearby house where he uses an axe to remove his shackles . To keep the guard dogs from following his scent , he spreads curry powder and chili powder across the ground to send them into sneezing fits and overload their sensitive sense of smell . While free , Luke mails Dragline a magazine that includes a photograph of him with two beautiful women . He is soon recaptured , beaten , returned to the prison camp and fitted with two sets of leg irons . Luke is warned by the Captain that if he ever attempts to escape again , he will be killed on the spot . Luke is now annoyed by the other prisoners fawning over the magazine photo and reveals it to be a fake . At first , the other prisoners are angry , but after a long stay in the box , when Luke is forced to eat a huge serving of rice , they come to help him finish it . 
 As punishment for his escape , he is forced to repeatedly dig a grave @-@ sized hole in the prison camp yard , fill it back in , then be beaten . The prisoners observe his persecution , singing spirituals . Finally , as the other prisoners watch from the windows of the bunkhouse , an exhausted Luke collapses in the hole , begging God for mercy and pleads with the bosses not to hit him again . Believing Luke is finally broken , the Captain stops the punishment . Boss Paul warns Luke that he will be killed if ever he runs away again , which Luke promises in tears not to do . The prisoners begin to lose their idealized image of Luke , and one tears up the photograph of Luke with the women . 
 Seemingly broken , and again working on the chain gang , Luke stops working to give water to a prisoner . Watched by the disappointed prisoners , he runs to one of the trucks to take Boss Godfrey 's rifle to him . After Boss Godfrey shoots a snapping turtle , Luke retrieves it from a slough for him , complimenting the boss for his shot . Luke takes one last stab at freedom when he is ordered to take the turtle to the truck . He steals the dump truck , as well as the keys to the other trucks . In the excitement of the moment , Dragline jumps in the dump truck and joins Luke in his escape . Later , after abandoning the truck , Luke tells Dragline that they should part ways . Drag agrees and leaves . Luke enters a church , where he talks to God and blames Him for sabotaging him so he cannot win in life . Moments later , police cars arrive . Dragline walks in and tells Luke that the police and bosses have promised not to hurt Luke if he surrenders peacefully . But Luke , feeling that his life is no longer worth living , walks to a window facing the police and mocks the Captain by repeating the first part of his speech ( " What we 've got here is a failure to communicate . " ) . He is immediately shot in the neck by Boss Godfrey . Dragline carries Luke outside , then charges at Boss Godfrey and attempts to strangle him until he is beaten and subdued by the other guards . In tears , Dragline implores Luke to live . The local police want to take Luke to a nearby hospital , but the Captain tells them to take him to the prison hospital instead , a long enough distance that Luke 's chances of survival are slim . As the captain 's car drives away , it crushes Boss Godfrey 's glasses . After Luke 's implied death , Dragline and the other prisoners reminisce about him . In the final scene , the prison crew is seen working near a rural intersection close to where Luke was shot . Dragline is now wearing leg irons , and there is a new Walking Boss . As the camera zooms out , the torn photograph of Luke grinning with the two women is superimposed on a bird 's eye view of the cross @-@ shaped road junction . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Script = = = 
 Pearce , a merchant seaman who later became a counterfeiter and safe cracker , wrote the novel Cool Hand Luke , about his experiences working on a chain gang while serving in a Florida prison . He sold the story to Warner Bros. for US $ 80 @,@ 000 and received another US $ 15 @,@ 000 to write the screenplay . After working in television for over a decade , Rosenberg chose it to make it his directorial debut in cinema . He took the idea to <unk> Productions , owned by Jack Lemmon . Since Pearce had no experience writing screenplays , his draft was reworked by Frank Pierson . Conrad Hall was hired as the cinematographer , while Paul Newman 's brother , Arthur , was hired as the unit production manager . Newman 's biographer Marie Edelman Borden states that the " tough , honest " script drew together threads from earlier movies , especially Hombre , Newman 's earlier film of 1967 . Director Stuart Rosenberg altered the original ending in the script , adding " an upbeat ending that would reprise the protagonist 's ( and Paul Newman 's ) trademark smile . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Paul Newman 's character , Luke , is a decorated war veteran who is sentenced to serve two years in a Florida rural prison . He constantly defies the authorities of the facility , becoming a leader among the prisoners , as well as escaping multiple times . While the script was being developed , the leading role was initially considered for Jack Lemmon or Telly Savalas . Newman asked to play the leading role after hearing about the project . In order to develop his character , he traveled to West Virginia , where he recorded local accents and surveyed people 's behavior . George Kennedy turned in an Academy Award @-@ winning performance as the leader of the prisoners , Dragline , who fights Luke , and comes to respect him . During the nomination process , worried about the box office success of Camelot and Bonnie and Clyde , Kennedy invested US $ 5 @,@ 000 in trade advertising to promote himself . Kennedy later stated that thanks to the award his salary was " multiplied by ten the minute ( he ) won , " also adding " the happiest part was that I didn 't have to play only villains anymore . " 
 Strother Martin , known for his appearances in westerns , was cast as the Captain , a prison warden who is depicted as a cruel and insensitive leader , severely punishing Luke for his escapes . The role of Luke 's dying mother , <unk> , who visits him in prison , was passed to Jo Van Fleet after it was rejected by Bette Davis . Morgan Woodward was cast as Boss Godfrey , a laconic , cruel and remorseless prison officer who Woodward described as a " walking Mephistopheles . " He was dubbed " the man with no eyes " by the inmates for his mirrored sunglasses . The blonde Joy Harmon was cast for the scene where she teases the prisoners in washing her car after her manager , Leon Lance , contacted the producers . She auditioned in front of Rosenberg and Newman wearing a bikini , without speaking . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming took place on the San Joaquin River Delta . The set , imitating a southern prison farm , was built in Stockton , California . The filmmakers sent a crew to Tavares Road Prison in Tavares , Florida to take photographs and measurements , where Pearce had served his time . The structures that were built in Stockton included barracks , a mess hall , the warden 's quarters , a guard shack and dog kennels . The trees on the set were decorated with spanish moss that the producers took to the area . The construction soon attracted the attention of a county building inspector who confused it with migrant worker housing and ordered it " condemned for code violations . " The opening scene where Newman cuts the parking meters was filmed in Lodi , California . Meanwhile , the scene in which Luke is chased by bloodhounds and other exteriors were shot in Jacksonville , Florida , at Callahan Road Prison . Luke was played by a stunt actor , using dogs from the Florida Department of Corrections . 
 Rosenberg wanted the cast to internalize life on a chain gang and banned the presence of wives on set . After Joy Harmon arrived on location , she remained for two days in her hotel room , and wasn 't seen by the rest of the cast until shooting commenced . Despite the directors ' intentions , the scene was ultimately filmed separately . Rosenberg instructed an unaware Harmon of the different movements and expressions he wanted . Originally planned to be shot in half a day , Harmon 's scene took three . For the part of the scene featuring the chain gang , Rosenberg substituted a teenage cheerleader , who wore an overcoat . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 The Academy Award nominated original score was composed by Lalo Schifrin , who created tunes with a background in popular music and jazz . While some of the tracks include the use of guitars , banjos and harmonicas , others include trumpets , violins , flutes and piano . 
 An edited version of the musical cue from the Tar Sequence ( where the inmates are energetically paving the road ) has been used for years as the theme music for local television stations ' news programs around the world , mostly those owned and operated by ABC in the United States . Although the music was written for the film , it became more familiar for its association with television news , in part because its staccato melody resembles the sound of a telegraph . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Christian imagery = = = 
 Pierson included in his draft explicit religious symbolism . The film contains several elements based on Christian themes , including the concept of Luke as a Saint who wins over the crowds and is ultimately sacrificed . Newman 's character of Luke is portrayed as a " Jesus @-@ like redeemer figure . " After winning the egg @-@ eating bet , Luke lies exhausted on the table in the position of Jesus as depicted on his crucifixion . After learning about the death of his mother , Luke sings " Plastic Jesus . " Greg Garrett also compares Luke to Jesus , in that like Jesus , he was not physically threatening to society because of his actions , and like Jesus ' crucifixion , his punishment was " out of all proportion . " 
 Luke challenges God during the rainstorm on the road , telling him to do anything to him . Later , while he is digging and filling trenches and confronted by the guards , an inmate performs the spiritual " No Grave Gonna Keep my Body Down . " Toward the end of the film , Luke speaks to God , evoking the conversation between God and Jesus at the Garden of Gethsemane , depicted in the Gospel of Luke . Following Luke 's talk , the film depicts Dragline as a Judas , who delivers Luke to the authorities , trying to convince him to surrender . In the final scene , Dragline eulogizes Luke . He explains that despite Luke 's death , his actions succeeded in defeating the system . The closing shot shows inmates working on crossroads with the repaired photo of Luke and the two women superimposed . 
 = = = Use of traffic signs and signals = = = 
 Different traffic signs are used throughout the film , complementing the actions of the characters during the scenes . At the beginning , while Luke cuts the heads off the parking meters , the word " Violation " appears . Stop signs are also seen . Instances include the road @-@ paving scene and the last scene , where the road meets at a cross section . Traffic lights turn from green to red in the background at the time Luke is arrested , while at the end , when he is fatally wounded , a green light in the background turns to red . 
 = = = " Failure to communicate " = = = 
 What we 've got here is failure to communicate . Some men you just can 't reach . So you get what we had here last week . Which is the way he wants it . Well , he gets it . And I don 't like it any more than you men . 
 After writing the line , Pierson worried that the phrase was too complex for the warden . To explain its origin , he created a backstory that was included in the stage directions . Pierson explained that in order to advance in the Florida prison system , officers had to take criminology and <unk> courses at the state university , showing how the warden might know such words . Strother Martin later clarified that he felt the line was the kind that his character would very likely have heard or read from some " pointy @-@ headed intellectuals " who had begun to infiltrate his character 's world under the general rubric of a new , enlightened approach to incarceration . Some authors believe that the quotation was a metaphor for the ongoing Vietnam War conflict which was taking place during the filming , and others have applied it towards corporations and even teenagers . The quotation was listed at number 11 on the American Film Institute 's list of the 100 most memorable movie lines . An audio sample of the line is included in the Guns N ' Roses songs " Civil War " and " Madagascar . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Cool Hand Luke opened on November 1 , 1967 at Loew 's State Theatre in New York City . The proceeds of the premiere went to charities . The film became a box @-@ office success , grossing US $ 16 @,@ 217 @,@ 773 in domestic screenings . Kennedy won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor . Newman was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor , while Pearce and Pierson were nominated for the Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay and <unk> was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Score . 
 Rosenberg was nominated for best director by the Writers Guild of America and Conrad Hall was nominated for best cinematography by the National Society of Film Critics . 
 Variety described Newman 's performance as " excellent , " noting the supporting cast as " versatile and competent . " The New York Times praised the film , remarking that Pearce and Pierson 's " sharp script , " Rosenberg 's " ruthlessly realistic and plausible " staging and direction and Newman 's " splendid " performance with an " <unk> " cast , " elevates " it among other prison films . On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an overall 100 % " Certified Fresh " approval rating based on 45 reviews , with an average of 8 @.@ 8 out of 10 . The site 's consensus is that " Though hampered by Stuart Rosenberg 's direction , Cool Hand Luke is held aloft by a stellar script and one of Paul Newman 's most indelible performances . " Empire rated it five stars out of five , declaring the movie one of Newman 's best performances . Slant rated the film three stars out of four . It described Newman 's role as " iconic , " also praising its cinematography and sound score . Allmovie praised Newman 's performance as " one of the most indelible anti @-@ authoritarian heroes in movie history . " 
 Critic Roger Ebert included the film in his review collection The Great Movies , rating it four stars out of four . Ebert stated that it was a " great " film and also an anti @-@ establishment one during the time of the Vietnam War . He believed that the film was a product of its time and that no major film company would be interested in producing a film of such " physical punishment , psychological cruelty , hopelessness and equal parts of sadism and masochism " today . He praised the cinematography , capturing the " punishing heat " of the location , and stated that " the physical presence of Paul Newman is the reason this movie works : The smile , the innocent blue eyes , the lack of strutting , " which no other actor could have produced as effectively . 
 Contrary to the general consensus , Newman 's biographer Lawrence J. Quirk thought that it was one of Newman 's weaker performances , stating " For once , even Newman 's famed charisma fails him , for in Cool Hand Luke he completely lacks the charm that , say , Al Pacino in Scarecrow effortlessly exhibits when he plays a screw @-@ up who also winds up ( briefly ) incarcerated . " However , Quirk added that Newman 's performance was stronger in the second half and said that " to be fair to Newman , he was trying his damnedest to play an impossible part , since Luke is a convict 's rationalization fantasy and never a real character . " Some authors have criticized the film 's depiction of prison life at the time . In a review entitled " Sheer Beauty in the Wrong Place , " Life , while praising the film 's photography , criticized the influence of the visual styles in the depictions of the prison camp . The magazine declared that the landscapes turned it into " a rest camp ( in which ) the men are getting plenty of sleep , food and healthy outdoor exercise , " that despite the presence of the guards showed that there were " worse ways to pay one 's debt with society . " Ron Clooney also remarked that prisons " were not hotels and certainly not the stuff of Cool Hand Luke movies . " 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 In 2003 , AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes & Villains rated Luke as the number 30 greatest hero in American cinema , and three years later , AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Cheers : America 's Most Inspiring Movies rated Cool Hand Luke number 71 . Cool Hand Luke was included in the United States National Film Registry in 2005 . In 2006 , Luke was ranked 53rd in Empire magazine 's " The 100 Greatest Movie Characters . " The movie solidified Newman 's status as a box @-@ office star , while the film is considered a touchstone of the era . In 2005 , the United States Library of Congress deemed Cool Hand Luke to be " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry . 
 An episode of the TV show The Dukes of Hazzard entitled " Cool Hands Luke and Bo " was shown with Morgan Woodward playing " Colonel Cassius Claiborne " the boss of a neighboring county and warden of its prison farm . He wears the trademark shades of Boss Godfrey throughout the episode . 
 The book was adapted into a West End play by Emma Reeves . It opened at London 's Aldwych Theatre starring Marc Warren , but closed after less than two months , following poor reviews . The show was chosen by The Times both as " Critic 's Choice " and " What the Critics Would Pay To See . " Nashville @-@ based Christian alternative rock band Cool Hand Luke is named after the film . 
 = James Fisher Robinson = 
 James Fisher Robinson ( October 4 , 1800 – October 31 , 1882 ) was the 22nd Governor of Kentucky , serving the remainder of the unfinished term of Governor Beriah Magoffin . Magoffin , a Confederate sympathizer , became increasingly ineffective after the elections of 1861 yielded a supermajority to pro @-@ Union forces in both houses of the Kentucky General Assembly . Magoffin agreed to resign the governorship , provided he could select his successor . He selected Robinson . 
 Politically , Robinson opposed both secession and abolition . Though he had Union sympathies , he was considered a moderate , opposing both fugitive slave laws and the enlistment of black soldiers . As a state senator , he supported the Crittenden Compromise and opposed the Civil War . As governor , he drew criticism from the administration of President Abraham Lincoln for opposing the Emancipation Proclamation . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Robinson was born to Jonathan and Jane Black Robinson in Scott County , Kentucky on October 4 , 1800 . His early studies were done under a private tutor , then under Presbyterian minister Robert Marshall . He was of English and Scottish descent . He attended Forest Hill Academy and Transylvania University , graduating in 1818 . His brother , John McCracken Robinson graduated in the same class and moved to Illinois , where he eventually served two terms as a U.S. Senator . James Robinson studied law under William T. Barry , and was admitted to the bar , beginning his practice in Georgetown , Kentucky . 
 On December 29 , 1821 , Robinson married Susan Mansell of Georgetown , the first of his three wives . Mansell and Robinson had two children , a son and a daughter , before Mansell died in 1835 . Robinson married <unk> S. Herndon of Scott County on March 21 , 1839 . The couple had eight children , seven of whom survived to adulthood . Herndon died in 1861 . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Robinson 's political career began in 1851 , when he was elected to the Kentucky Senate as a Whig without opposition . He did not immediately seek re @-@ election , but was again elected to the state Senate in 1861 over challenger James B. Beck . He was elected Speaker of the Senate on September 2 , 1861 , but resigned the post only a few days later . 
 Robinson again assumed the position as Speaker of the Senate on August 16 , 1862 as part of a political deal to effect the resignation of Governor Beriah Magoffin . Magoffin 's lieutenant governor , Linn Boyd , had died in office in 1859 , and Magoffin was unwilling to allow John Fisk , then Senate Speaker and next in line for the governorship , to succeed him . Magoffin agreed to resign if the Senate would elect Robinson as Speaker , putting him next in line for the governorship . This was done , and at 10 : 00 am on August 18 , 1862 , Robinson succeeded Magoffin upon the latter 's resignation . Because he never resigned from the Senate , Robinson technically held both his legislative seat and the governorship concurrently . 
 The Civil War was ongoing during Robinson 's administration . During Robinson 's tenure , the Confederacy made its major advance into the Commonwealth . In an attempt to protect the citizens of the Commonwealth , Robinson raised taxes in an effort to revive Kentucky 's state militia . He was also concerned with the effect the war had on public education in the state . He asked the General Assembly to investigate the condition of state schools , especially in war @-@ ravaged areas , and encouraged them to accept the Lincoln administration 's offer of land to establish an agricultural and mechanical college . 
 Robinson proudly noted that by January 1 , 1863 , a divided Kentucky had still managed to send 44 @,@ 000 soldiers – fifty @-@ one regiments – to aid the Union cause . At the same time , he lamented what he perceived as poor treatment of the state as disloyal by the Federal government . He cited examples such as the declaration of martial law in the Commonwealth and the suspension of the right of habeas corpus for its citizens . He answered President Lincoln 's contention " that military necessity is not to be measured by Constitutional limits " by warning " If military necessity is not to be measured by Constitutional limits , we are no longer a free people . " 
 On completion of his term , Robinson supported his eventual successor , Thomas E. Bramlette . The constitutional questions Robinson raised during his administration shaped much of the political debate for Bramlette 's term . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Following his term as governor , Robinson retired to " <unk> , " his family farm in Scott County . Politically , he became more distant from the national administration , supporting George B. McClellan for president in 1864 . He served as president of the Farmers ' Bank of Georgetown and chair of the Georgetown College Board of Trustees . On December 1 , 1873 , he married his third wife , Caroline " Carrie " Hening of Georgetown , who was 36 years his junior . He died on October 31 , 1882 , and is buried in the Georgetown Cemetery in Georgetown , Kentucky . 
 = Fakih Usman = 
 Kyai Hajji Fakih Usman ( also Faqih Usman ; [ <unk> <unk> ] ; 2 March 1904 – 3 October 1968 ) was an Indonesian Islamic leader and politician with the Masyumi Party . He twice served as the Minister of Religious Affairs : under the Halim Cabinet in the State of the Republic of Indonesia in 1950 , and in the national government during the Wilopo Cabinet from 1952 to 1953 . In his early years Fakih was criticised by conservative Muslims for his involvement with the modernist Islamic organisation Muhammadiyah , though that group remembers him warmly . 
 Born to a merchant and his wife in Gresik , Dutch East Indies , Fakih studied with his father and at a series of pesantren ( Islamic boarding schools ) until the 1920s . In 1925 he became involved with the Muhammadiyah , rising quickly through the leadership until he became the head of the Surabaya branch in 1938 . He was also active in local politics . When a group of Islamic organisations formed the Indonesian Islamic Assembly in 1937 , Fakih became treasurer . He continued to be involved in politics and Islamic groups during the Japanese occupation and ensuing national revolution . While serving as minister of religious affairs , he oversaw educational and institutional reform , growing in prominence within the Muhammadiyah . He served as deputy chairman of the organisation under several different leaders before being chosen as its chairman in late 1968 , several days before his death . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Fakih was born in Gresik , East Java , Dutch East Indies , on 2 March 1904 . His father , Usman Iskandar , was a wood merchant , and his mother , a housewife , was the daughter of an ulama ( scholar of Islam ) . The couple , who were of modest means , had four other children , and the family 's lack of a noble background meant the children were ineligible to receive an education at Dutch @-@ run schools . Instead , Fakih studied Islam from a young age , receiving much of his instruction from his father . At the age of ten he began studying at a pesantren ( Islamic boarding school ) in Gresik , finishing four years later . In 1919 he continued his studies at several pesantren outside the city , including ones in rural Gresik and in nearby <unk> . 
 = = Work with the Muhammadiyah = = 
 Fakih 's father helped him become a trader , although Fakih continued to study independently . When the modernist Islamic organisation Muhammadiyah opened a branch in Gresik in 1922 , Fakih was one of the first to join . Extremely active in the group , he became the Gresik branch 's leader within three years , and under his leadership the group was formally recognised by the central Muhammadiyah administration . Through his work with the Muhammadiyah in Gresik , Fakih became better known . He later transferred to the branch in Surabaya , a much larger city where , in 1929 , he was chosen to sit on the city council . He also remained active in commerce , running a construction material trade and shipbuilding shop . During this period he served on the local chamber of commerce . 
 From 1932 to 1936 Fakih was a member of the Muhammadiyah 's regional council , serving concurrently as the editor of the organisation 's official magazine Bintang Islam and on the Legal Affairs Committee . As he became more active , Fakih began commuting regularly from Surabaya to Gresik , handling Muhammadiyah business in Surabaya and the wood company in Gresik ; this commute was done in Fakih 's personal car , a rare luxury at the time . Studying Dutch in his spare time , Fakih continued to improve his knowledge of Islam by studying the thoughts of Muhammad Abduh . However , conservative Muslims disapproved of Fakih 's work with Muhammadiyah , giving him the nickname <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " Dutchman with the black arse " ) , and often throwing stones at his home . 
 On 21 September 1937 , Muhammadiyah , the conservative <unk> Ulama ( NU ) , the merchants ' cooperative Sarekat Islam , and several other Islamic groups – which for the past decade had been feuding – united to form an umbrella group : the Indonesian Islamic Assembly ( <unk> Islam Ala Indonesia , or MIAI ) , based in Surabaya . Fakih served as treasurer . In 1938 he was made the head of the Surabaya branch of the Muhammadiyah , replacing Mas <unk> . Two years later he began working full @-@ time with the MIAI , having been selected as the head of its secretariat in mid @-@ September 1940 . To take this position , he resigned as head of the Surabaya branch of Muhammadiyah and as a city council member . 
 = = Masyumi and National Revolution = = 
 On 9 March 1942 Governor @-@ General Tjarda van Starkenborgh Stachouwer and head of the Royal Netherlands East Indies Army General Hein ter Poorten capitulated to the Empire of Japan , which had invaded the Indies the month before . As a result , the Indies fell under Japanese control . The Japanese banned all forms of organisations , and the MIAI was disbanded in May . It was reformed on 5 September 1942 following a meeting of 30 ulamas in the Des Indes Hotel in Jakarta , and was recognised by the occupation government as the sole Islamic organisation in the country . At the end of 1943 , the organisation was renamed the Council of Indonesian Muslim Associations ( Partai Majelis <unk> <unk> Indonesia , or Masyumi ) . Fakih was made a member of the Japanese @-@ sponsored advisory board , or Syu Sangi In , for Surabaya . He held this position until the end of the occupation , concurrently serving on the Masyumi board . 
 After the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and the proclamation of Indonesian independence in August 1945 , the Japanese began withdrawing from the nascent republic . The Indonesian republican government , based in Jakarta and including Sukarno as president and Mohammad Hatta as vice president , began to take over infrastructure from the departing Japanese . By September 1945 , however , allied British and Dutch forces had begun to enter the archipelago , hoping to reestablish the status quo ante . The British initially focused on Java and Sumatra and attempted to avoid armed confrontations with the Republican forces ; the Dutch , meanwhile , spent the first months after the Japanese surrender reclaiming the eastern islands with help from Australia . 
 Fakih , who had begun making contacts within the republican government , participated in the Indonesian Islamic Conference ( <unk> Islam Indonesia ) in Yogyakarta from 7 to 8 November 1945 . As a result of these talks , Masyumi was made into a political party representing Islamic interests . Although Fakih returned to Gresik after the conference , he and his family soon evacuated to Malang due to the outbreak of a battle at Surabaya between Republican soldiers and British forces tasked with repatriating Dutch prisoners of war . 
 In Malang , Fakih worked with Masjkur and <unk> Arifin to start an armed resistance to fight in the revolution against the returning Europeans . He served as deputy chief in command of this resistance , which consisted of the Japanese @-@ trained Islamic units <unk> and Hizbullah . After the Dutch launched Operation Kraai in December 1948 , Fakih and his family escaped to Surakarta , where he again became active in Muhammadiyah . Fakih , serving as deputy chair under <unk> <unk> , frequently commuted between Surakarta and the organisation 's head office in Yogyakarta . 
 = = Minister of Religious Affairs = = 
 In late 1949 the Indonesian and Dutch governments held a conference lasting several months , which resulted in Dutch recognition of Indonesian sovereignty on 27 December 1949 . This led to the formation of the United States of Indonesia ( Republik Indonesia <unk> , or RIS ) , which consisted of sixteen member states . On 21 January 1950 Fakih replaced Masjkur as the Minister of Religious Affairs in the Halim Cabinet , representing the Republic of Indonesia ; at this point the republic consisted of Yogyakarta , Banten , and much of Sumatra . Working with the RIS Minister of Religious Affairs Wahid Hasyim , Fakih began instituting a standardised religious curriculum in the public schools and modernising education at religious schools . The two also worked to unite the ministries . On 17 August 1950 the RIS and its member states became a unified republic . Hasyim was kept on as minister of religious affairs , with Fakih appointed director of religious education . 
 Meanwhile , the different factions in Masyumi were in conflict over the path the party was taking ; the NU members thought Masyumi was becoming too political , abandoning its Islamic roots . When the Natsir Cabinet began to collapse , the Masyumi put forth Fakih as a potential Minister for Religious Affairs . This act was controversial because four of the five allocated slots for the party were already filled by non @-@ NU members , and ultimately the NU pulled out of Masyumi , effective 5 April 1952 . Fakih had been chosen with a majority of five votes , while the next leading candidate , Usman <unk> , received four . 
 Fakih was made the Minister of Religious Affairs in the Wilopo Cabinet and sworn in on 3 April 1952 , which led to him and his family moving to the capital at Jakarta . He began to work on reforming the ministry , including formalising its mission statement : to provide religious teachers , promote interfaith relations , and to establish the dates of religious holidays . He worked on internal structure , including formalising the ministry 's leadership hierarchy and the opening of the provincial and regional branches . The ministry also continued its promotion of religious education and was tasked with handling the numerous Indonesian pilgrims who went on the hajj . The Wilopo Cabinet collapsed on 30 July 1953 , following an immigration and land dispute in Medan . Fakih was replaced by Masjkur . 
 = = Later work = = 
 Fakih continued to work with the ministry and the Muhammadiyah , serving as the organisation 's First Deputy Chair under Ahmad <unk> Sutan Mansur . In 1956 he was one of three Muhammadiyah members who presented their concept of a truly Islamic society , one which emphasised social education . During this time he was more active with Masyumi , and after the 1955 Constituent Assembly election , Fakih was made a member of the Constitutional Assembly of Indonesia . This assembly , meant to reach an agreement for a new national constitution , failed to gain a consensus , and was disbanded by president Sukarno with his decree of 5 July 1959 . That year Fakih collaborated with Hamka , Joesoef <unk> Abdullah , and Ahmad Joesoef to launch the magazine Pandji <unk> . Sukarno later disbanded Masyumi on 17 August 1960 after leading Masyumi members , such as Mohammad Natsir and <unk> <unk> , were involved with the Revolutionary Government of the Republic of Indonesia ; Fakih had been involved in the negotiations with the Revolutionary Government , working with Mohammad Roem . 
 The disbanding of Masyumi left Fakih with more time to focus on the Muhammadiyah , serving as the Second Deputy Chair under <unk> Anis . During a leadership course run by the organisation during Ramadhan of 1380 AH ( February / March 1961 ) , Fakih began promoting an institutional identity through his lecture " <unk> Muhammadiyah Itu " ( " What is Muhammadiyah ? " ) . This outlined the organisation as one based in dawah , focusing on real @-@ world issues , and willing to work with the government to ensure a prosperous future for Muslims . These concepts were later formulated through 1962 and established as an institutional identity , one which called for Muhammadiyah to work towards creating a truly Islamic society while opposing leftist politics . This , in turn , was followed by <unk> within the organisation to better adapt the new identity . 
 From 1962 until 1965 Fakih served as the First Deputy Chair of Muhammadiyah under Ahmad Badawi , providing guidance for young religious leaders . During the killings and power shift which followed the 30 September Movement coup attempt , Fakih and several Muhammadiyah members sent a letter requesting that Masyumi be allowed to reform ; this permission was not granted . For Badawi 's second term , Fakih served as an advisor to the chairman , often taking management responsibilities . He was selected as the organisation 's chairman at the 37th Muhammadiyah Congress in 1968 . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 On being chosen as chairman , Fakih began work to ensure there would be a successor , as his health was failing . On 2 October , at a joint meeting of the board at his home , he outlined his plans for his three @-@ year period of leadership ; Fakih also appointed <unk> and Abdul <unk> Fachruddin as temporary leaders while he went abroad for medical treatment . Fakih died on 3 October 1968 , only a few days after being selected , and was replaced by Fachruddin on the day of his death ; Fachruddin served as chairman for 24 years . 
 The street where Fakih lived as a child is now known as Fakih Usman Street . Within Muhammadiyah Fakih continues to be well respected . He is credited with the formulation of the " Muhammadiyah Personality " ( <unk> Muhammadiyah ) , Muhammadiyah 's institutional identity . Out of respect towards Fakih , the Muhammadiyah continues to record his period as chairman as lasting the full three @-@ year term . <unk> Syafruddin , a faculty member at the Jakarta Islamic State University , writes that Fakih was highly dedicated to education , noting that five of Fakih 's seven children eventually became doctors ; Syafruddin also writes that , owing to a lack of human resources , Fakih was limited in his reforms while Minister of Religious Affairs . Former Muhammadiyah chairman Ahmad <unk> 'i <unk> described Fakih as the " tranquil , cleansing water " who served as a calming influence for Muhammadiyah when the organisation was in turmoil . 
 = Battles of Latrun ( 1948 ) = 
 The Battles of Latrun were a series of military engagements between the Israel Defense Forces and the Jordanian Arab Legion on the outskirts of Latrun between 25 May and 18 July 1948 , during the 1948 Arab – Israeli War . Latrun takes its name from the monastery close to the junction of two major highways : Jerusalem to Jaffa / Tel Aviv and Gaza to Ramallah . During the British Mandate it became a Palestine Police base with a <unk> fort . The United Nations Resolution 181 placed this area within the proposed Arab state . In May 1948 , it was under the control of the Arab Legion . It commanded the only road linking the Yishuv @-@ controlled area of Jerusalem to Israel , giving Latrun strategic importance in the battle for Jerusalem . 
 Despite assaulting Latrun on five separate occasions Israel was ultimately unable to capture Latrun , and it remained under Jordanian control until the Six @-@ Day War . The battles were so decisive that the Israelis decided to construct a bypass surrounding Latrun so as to allow vehicular movement between Tel Aviv and Jerusalem , thus avoiding the main road . Regardless , during the Battle for Jerusalem , the Jewish population of Jerusalem could still be supplied by a new road , named the " Burma Road " , that bypassed Latrun and was suitable for convoys . The Battle of Latrun left its imprint on the Israeli collective imagination and constitutes part of the " founding myth " of the Jewish State . The attacks cost the lives of 168 Israeli soldiers , but some accounts inflated this number to as many as 2 @,@ 000 . The combat at Latrun also carries a symbolic significance because of the participation of Holocaust survivors . 
 Today , the battleground site has an Israeli military museum dedicated to the Israeli Armored Corps and a memorial to the Israeli War of Independence . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = 1948 Arab – Israeli War = = = 
 After the adoption of the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine in November 1947 , a civil war erupted in the British Mandate of Palestine . The Jews living in Jerusalem constituted one of the weak points of the Yishuv and a main cause for concern to its leaders . With nearly 100 @,@ 000 inhabitants , a sixth of the total Jewish population in the Mandate , the city was isolated in the heart of territory under Arab control . 
 In January , in the context of the " War of the Roads " , the Holy War Army of Abd al @-@ Qadir al @-@ Husayni besieged the Jewish part of the city and stopped convoys passing between Tel Aviv and Jerusalem . By the end of March , the tactic proved its worth and the city was cut off . The Haganah then launched Operation <unk> , 4 – 20 April , and managed to force through a number of large convoys . Following the death of Abd al @-@ <unk> al @-@ Husayni at al @-@ <unk> , the Arab League 's military committee ordered the other Arab force in Palestine , the Arab Liberation Army , to move its forces from Samaria ( the northern part of today 's West Bank ) to the road of Jerusalem and the areas of Latrun , Ramla , and Lydda . 
 In the middle of May , the situation for the 50 @,@ 000 Arab inhabitants of the city and the 30 @,@ 000 – 40 @,@ 000 in the outlying neighbourhoods was no better . After the massacre at Deir Yassin and the Jewish offensive of April that triggered the large @-@ scale exodus of the Palestinian Arabs in other mixed cities , the Arab population of Jerusalem was frightened and feared for its fate . With the departure of the British on 14 May , the Haganah launched several operations to take control of the city and the local Arab leadership requested King Abdullah of Jordan to deploy his army to come to their aid . 
 On 15 May , the situation in the newly declared State of Israel and the remnants of Palestine was chaotic with the British leaving . The Jewish forces gained advantage over the Arab forces , but they feared the intervention of the Arab armies that had been announced for that day . 
 = = = Geography = = = 
 Latrun is located at the crossroads between the Tel Aviv – Ramla – Jerusalem and Ramallah – Isdud roads in the area allocated to the Arab state by the United Nations Partition Plan . At that point , the Jerusalem road enters the foothills of Judea at Bab al @-@ Wad ( Sha 'ar <unk> ) . The fort dominated the Valley of Ayalon , and the force that occupied it commanded the road to Jerusalem . 
 In 1948 , Latrun comprised a detention camp and a fortified police station occupied by the British , a Trappist monastery , and several Arab villages : Latrun , Imwas , Dayr Ayyub and Bayt Nuba . During the civil war , after the death of Abd al @-@ Qadir al @-@ Husayni , the forces of the Arab Liberation Army positioned themselves around the police fort and the surrounding villages , to the indifference of the British . They regularly attacked supply convoys heading for Jerusalem . At that time , neither the Israeli nor Jordanian military staffs had prepared for the strategic importance of the place . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Operation Maccabi ( 8 – 16 May ) = = = 
 On 8 May , Haganah launched Operation Maccabi against the Arab Liberation Army and the Palestinian irregulars who occupied several villages along the Jerusalem road and prevented the resupplying of Jerusalem 's Jewish community . The Givati Brigade ( on the west side ) and Harel Brigade ( on the east side ) were engaged in fighting , notably in the Latrun area . 
 Between 9 – 11 May , a battalion of the Harel brigade attacked and took the village of Bayt <unk> , used by Palestinians as a base for the control of Bab al @-@ Wad . The " Sha 'ar <unk> " battalion of the Harel brigade also took up a position on the hills north and south of the road . It had to withstand the fire of the Arab Liberation Army artillery and the " unusual " fire of British armoured vehicles , but succeeded in holding the position and entrenched there . 
 To the west , on 12 May , Givati brigade troops took the British detention camp on the road leading to Latrun , but abandoned it the next day . Between 14 and 15 May , its 52nd battalion took the villages of Abu Shusha , Al @-@ Na 'ani and al @-@ <unk> north of Latrun , thus cutting off the zone from Ramla , the main Arab town in the area . Lapierre and Collins report also that a platoon of the Givati brigade fired on and then penetrated the fort without encountering any resistance on the morning of 15 May . Again to the east , on 15 May , the troops of the Harel brigade took Dayr Ayyub , which they abandoned the next day . 
 It is at this time that the Israeli officers in the field appreciated the strategic importance of Latrun . A report was sent from OC Harel brigade to OC Palmach that concluded that " The Latrun junction became the main point in the battle [ of Jerusalem ] " [ exact words must be taken from the source ] , but " that appreciation was not shared by the staff one week previously " . Meanwhile , because of the Egyptian Army 's advance , the Givati brigade got an order to redeploy on a more southern front , and the Harel brigade to remain in the Jerusalem sector . This decision to leave the area , and the fact of not planning for its strategic importance , would later be a source of controversy between Haganah chief of operations Yigael Yadin and Yitzhak Rabin , commander of the Harel brigade . 
 = = = The Arab Legion takes control = = = 
 During the confusion of the last days of the British Mandate and with the " entry in war " of the Arab armies , the position at Latrun changed hands without combat . Firstly , around 14 – 15 May , an order was given to Fawzi al @-@ Qawuqji and his Arab Liberation Army to withdraw and to leave the place to the Arab Legion . According to Yoav Gelber , this departure occurred before the arrival of the Jordanian troops at Latrun and the position was held by just 200 irregulars . Benny Morris nevertheless points out that a platoon of legionnaires of the 11th Company along with irregulars was there and took over the fort . 
 Indeed , as auxiliary forces of the British in Mandatory Palestine , several elements of the Arab Legion served in Palestine during the Mandate . The British had promised that these units would be withdrawn before the end of April , but for " technical reasons " , several companies didn 't leave the country . John Bagot Glubb , the commander of the Arab Legion , formed them into one division with two brigades , each made up of two infantry battalions , in addition to several independent infantry companies . Each battalion was given an armored @-@ car company , and the artillery was made into a separate battalion with three batteries . Another " dummy " brigade was formed to make the Israelis believe it was a reserve brigade , thus deterring them from counterattacking into Transjordan . 
 On 15 May , the Arab states entered the war , and Syrian , Iraqi , Jordanian and Egyptian contingents deployed in Palestine . Among these , the Jordanian expeditionary corps was mainly constituted by an elite mechanized force " <unk> " by British officers and named Arab Legion . It comprised : 
 the 1st Brigade comprising the 1st and 3rd Battalions in areas that lead to Nablus ; 
 the 3rd Brigade under the orders of Colonel Ashton comprising the 2nd Battalion under the orders of Major Geoffrey Lockett and the 4th battalion under the orders of Lieutenant Colonel Habes al @-@ Majali that took position at Ramallah ; 
 the 5th and 6th Battalions acting independently . 
 Glubb first realized ( " pris conscience " ) the strategical importance of Latrun in the Battle of Jerusalem . His objective was twofold : he wanted to prevent the Israelis from strengthening Jerusalem and from supplying the city , and he wanted to " make a diversion " to keep the strengths of the Haganah far from the city , warranting to the Arabs the control of East Jerusalem . In addition to the 11th Company already there , he sent to Latrun the whole 4th Regiment . During the night between 15 and 16 May , the first contingent of 40 legionnaires seconded by an undetermined number of Bedouins strengthened the position , and the remainder of the regiment reached the area on 17 May . 
 On 18 May , the strength of the Arab Legion deployed around Latrun and Bab al @-@ Wad was sufficient , and the road was blocked again . The Israeli general staff needed several days to assess the actual disposition of the Jordanian forces around Latrun and Jerusalem because these latter were thought to be at several locations in the country . 
 = = = Situation in Jerusalem = = = 
 At Jerusalem , after the successful offensives that enabled the Jewish forces to take control of the buildings and strongholds that had been abandoned by the British , Glubb Pasha sent the 3rd Regiment of the Arab Legion to strengthen the Arab irregulars and fight the Jewish forces . After " violent " fighting , the Jewish positions in the Old City of Jerusalem were threatened ( this felt indeed on 28 May ) . " We have surrounded the town " : on 22 and 23 May , the second Egyptian brigade , composed mainly of several battalions of irregulars and several units of the regular army , reached the southern outskirts of Jerusalem and continued to attack at Ramat Rachel . 
 Glubb nevertheless knew that the Israeli army would sooner or later be stronger than his and that he had to prevent the strengthening of the Harel and Etzioni brigades to secure East Jerusalem . He redeployed his strength on 23 May to reinforce the blockade . The Iraqi army , at that time seconded by tanks , relieved the Legion units in northern Samaria and these were redeployed towards the Jerusalem sector . The 2nd Regiment of the Legion moved to Latrun . A full Jordanian brigade was placed in the area . 
 On the Israeli side , several leaders of the Jewish city sent emergency telegrams to David Ben @-@ Gurion where they described the situation as desperate and that they could not hold out more than two weeks . Fearing that without a supply the city would collapse , Ben @-@ Gurion ordered the taking of Latrun . This decision seemed strategically necessary but was politically delicate , because Latrun was in the area allocated to the Arab State according to the terms of the Partition Plan and this attack was contrary to the non @-@ aggression agreements , concluded with King Abdullah This decision was also opposed by the Chief of Operations , Yigael Yadin who considered that there were other military priorities at that moment , in particular on the southern front , where the Egyptian army was threatening Tel Aviv if Yad Mordechai fell . But Ben @-@ Gurion set Israeli military policy . This difference in strategy influenced the outcome of the battle , and has been debated in Israel for many years . 
 = = Battles = = 
 = = = Operation Bin Nun Alef ( 24 – 25 May ) = = = 
 The task to lead Operation Bin Nun ( lit . Nun 's son , in reference to Joshua , Nun 's son , conqueror of Canaan according to the Book of Joshua ) was given to Shlomo Shamir , a former officer of the British army . His force consisted of 450 men of the Alexandroni Brigade and 1 @,@ 650 men of the 7th Brigade . Of these , about 140 to 145 were immigrants who had just arrived in Israel , nearly 7 % of the total . Their heavy weaponry was limited to two French 65 @-@ millimetre ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) mortars of 1906 ( nicknamed Napoleonchik ) , one 88 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) mortar with 15 rounds of ammunition , one <unk> , ten 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) mortars and twelve armored vehicles . Three hundred soldiers of the Harel Brigade were also in the area but were not aware of the operation , but assisted after finding out about it by intercepting a radio transmission . 
 The Jordanian forces were under the order of Lieutenant Colonel Habes al @-@ Majali . He " disposed " of the 4th Regiment and 600 Jordanian volunteers seconded by 600 local volunteers . The 2nd Regiment of the brigade , commanded by Major Geoffrey Lockett , had just left Jerusalem and arrived at Latrun during the battle . The brigade totalled 2 @,@ 300 men seconded by 800 auxiliaries . It had at its disposal 35 armoured vehicles with 17 Marmon @-@ Herrington Armoured Cars each armed with an anti @-@ tank 2 pounder gun . For artillery it had eight 25 pounder Howitzers / Field guns , eight 6 pounder anti @-@ tank guns , ten 2 pounder anti @-@ tank guns also sixteen 3 @-@ inch mortars . 
 Zero Hour ( that is , the start of the attack ) was first fixed for midnight 23 May . But it was delayed 24 hours because it had not been possible to gather troops and weapons in time . Because no reconnaissance patrol was made the Israelis didn 't know the exact composition of enemy forces . Intelligence reports just talked about " local irregular forces " . On 24 May at 19 : 30 , Shlomo Shamir was warned that an enemy force of around 120 vehicles , comprising armoured vehicles and artillery , was probably moving towards Latrun , urged an attack . The attack was postponed by 2 hours and fixed at 22 : 00 . The attack was planned on two axes : 
 The battalion of the Alexandroni brigade had to take the town of Latrun , the police fort and then Imwas in order to block any new Arab reinforcement , and also to protect the passage of supply convoys ; 
 The 72nd Battalion would circle the position by the south to join the Jerusalem road at the level of Bab al @-@ Wad ; it would then cross the road and climb the ridges to take Dayr Ayyub , Yalu and Bayt Nuba , and would ambush there to cover the passage of convoys . It would be supported by three armored cars and two half @-@ tracks of the 73rd Battalion . 
 During the night , something unexpected happened : a roadblock on the road that had to be used by the brigade had to be dismantled . Zero hour was once more modified and set at midnight . At last , the troops fought battle between 2 am and 5 am but with no benefit of cover . The attackers were rapidly discovered , depriving the Israelis of the surprise effect . The battle started at 4am . The Israeli forces were submitted to a strong fire . The artillery tried to intervene but felt rapidly out of ammunition or was not within range to provide a counter @-@ battery fire . 
 In front of the total failure of the attack , Shlomo Shamir ordered the retreat at 11 @.@ 30 am . But this occurred on open ground under a heavy sun and the soldiers had no water . Numerous men were killed or injured by Arab fire . It was only at 2 pm that the first injured men reached the transport they had left in the morning . However , the Arab Legion didn 't take advantage of this victory while , according to Benny Morris , it could easily have performed a counter @-@ attack up to the Israeli headquarters located at Hulda . 
 Jordanians and Arab irregulars had 5 deaths and 6 injured . The Israelis counted 72 deaths ( 52 from the 32nd Battalion and 20 from the 72nd Battalion ) , 6 prisoners and 140 injured . Ariel Sharon , the future Prime Minister of Israel , a lieutenant at the time , headed a platoon of the 32nd Battalion and suffered serious injury to his stomach during the battle . 
 = = = Reorganisation of the central front = = = 
 At the end of May , David Ben @-@ Gurion was convinced that the Arab Legion expected to take control of all Jerusalem . Moreover , after the fighting , the situation there deteriorated : the Jewish community had very small reserves of fuel , bread , sugar and tea , which would last for only 10 days , and water for 3 months . In Glubb 's opinion , the aim was still to prevent the Israelis from reinforcing the city and taking control of its Arab part . On 29 May , the UN Security Council announced its intention to impose a ceasefire for 4 weeks , which would prevent further capture of territory and thus prevent resupplying the besieged city . 
 From a military point of view , the 10th Harel Brigade required reinforcements and Ben @-@ Gurion dispatched a battalion of the 6th Etzioni Brigade . He considered it imperative that the 7th Brigade join the forces in Jerusalem as well as a contingent of 400 new recruits to reinforce the Harel Brigade . Weapons and spare parts that had arrived in Israel by air were also now ready for combat on the Jerusalem front . The commander of the 7th Brigade wished to neutralize the negative effects of the debacle on the morale of the troops and on his prestige . The central front was reorganized and its command given to an American volunteer fighting on the Israeli side , Colonel David Marcus , who was subsequently appointed Aluf ( Major General ) . He took command of the Etzioni and 7th Brigades , and the 10th Palmach Harel Brigade . 
 = = = Operation Bin Nun Bet = = = 
 <unk> Shamir was once again given the command of the operation . He sent the 7th Brigade and the 52nd Battalion of the Givati Brigade that replaced the 32nd that had been decimated in the previous battle . The 73rd Battalion was an armored force of light infantry with flame @-@ throwers and 22 " military cars " made locally . 
 The Israelis sent numerous reconnaissance patrols but they nevertheless had no clear idea of the adversary 's forces . They expected to fight 600 men of the Legion and of the Arab Liberation Army , so a force was allocated that was not enough to hold the 4 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) Latrun front . Jordanians still had in fact a full brigade and are supported by several hundreds of irregulars . Taking into account the mistakes of the previous attacks , the renewed assault was organised with precision , and the area from where the units had to launch their attack had been cleared on 28 May . In particular the two hamlets of Bayt <unk> and Bayt Susin , where a counter @-@ attacks had been launched by the Arab militants during the first battle , and Hill 369 . The attack was once more foreseen on two axes : 
 The 72nd and 52nd Infantry Battalions were to counter @-@ attack on foot from the south up to Bayt Susin and then take Bab al @-@ Wad and attack respectively Dayr Ayyub and Yalu , then head for Latrun and attack this from the east ; 
 The 71st Infantry Battalion and 73rd Mechanised Battalion were to assault the police fort , the monastery and the town of Latrun by south @-@ west . 
 Around midnight , the men of the 72nd and the 52nd passed Bab al @-@ Wad noiselessly and then separated towards their respective targets . One company took Deir Ayyub , which was empty , but then were discovered as they did so by enemies on a nearby hill . They suffered the joint fire of the Legion 's artillery and machines guns . Thirteen men were killed and several other injured . The company , composed mainly of immigrants , then retreated to Bab al @-@ Wad . The 52nd Battalion was preparing to take the hill in front of Yalu , but received an order to retreat . 
 On the other front , the forces divided in two parts . The infantry of the 71st rapidly took the monastery and then fought for the control of the town . On the other side , the Israeli artillery succeeded in neutralizing the fort 's weapons . The volunteers crossed the defence fence and their flame @-@ throwers took the defenders by surprise . Nevertheless , the light coming from the fire they created lost their cover and they became easy targets for the 60 @-@ millimetre ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) mortars of the Jordanians . They were quickly knocked out and destroyed . The sappers succeeded nevertheless to make the door explode , but in the confusion were not followed by the infantrymen . Chaim Laskov , the chief of operations on that front , ordered company D of the 71st Battalion ( that had been kept in reserve ) to intervene , but one of the soldiers accidentally exploded a landmine , killing three men and injuring several others . They were then attacked by heavy fire from the Jordanian artillery and the men retreated towards the west in panic . 
 The battle was still not lost for the Israelis although the wake was coming , and Laskov considered that his men could not hold in front of a Legion 's counter @-@ attack and he preferred to order the retreat . It was also time for the Jordanians to regroup , their 4th Regiment was completely out of ammunition . 73rd Battalion suffered 50 % losses and the whole of the engaged forces had counted 44 deaths and twice that number injured . According to the sources , the Legion suffered between 12 and 20 deaths , including the lieutenant commanding the fort . In contrast , the Jordanians reported 2 just deaths on their side , and 161 of the Israelis . 
 David Marcus later attributed the responsibility for the defeat to the infantry , stating : " the artillery cover was correct . The armoury were good . The infantry , very bad " . Benny Morris considers that the mistake was rather to disperse the forces on several objectives instead of concentrating the full brigade on the main objective : the fort . 
 = = = " Burma Road " = = = 
 On 28 May , after they took Bayt Susin , the Israelis controlled a narrow corridor between the coastal plain and Jerusalem . But this corridor was not crossed by a road that could have let trucks supply the city . A foot patrol of the Palmach discovered some paths that linked several villages in the hills south of the main road controlled by the Arab Legion . In the night of 29 – 30 May , Jeeps sent into the hills confirmed there was a path suitable for vehicles . The decision was then taken to build a road in the zone . This was given the name of " Burma Road " , referring to the supply road between Burma and China built by the British during World War II . 
 Engineers immediately started to build the road while convoys of jeeps , mules and camels were organised from Hulda to carry 65 @-@ millimetre ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) mortars to Jerusalem . Without knowing the goals of these works , the Jordanians realised a game was afoot in the hills . They performed artillery bombings , that would anyway have been rapidly stopped under the orders of the top British officer , and they sent patrols to stop the works , but without success . 
 Nevertheless , it was mainly food that the inhabitants of Jerusalem needed . Starting 5 June , the Israeli engineers started to fix the road so that it let civil transport trucks pass to supply the city . 150 workers , working in four teams , installed a pipeline to supply the city with water , because the other pipeline , crossing Latrun , had been cut by the Jordanians . In O Jerusalem , Dominique Lapierre and Larry Collins talked about heroic action , when during the night of 6 – 7 June , in fear of the critical situation of Jerusalem and to improve the morale of the population , 300 inhabitants of Tel Aviv were requisitioned to carry on their backs , for the few kilometers not yet ready for the trucks , what would be needed to feed the inhabitants of Jerusalem one more day . 
 The first phase of these works was achieved for the 10 June truce and on 19 June a convoy of 140 trucks , each carrying three tons of merchandise as well as numerous weapons and ammunition , reached Jerusalem . The siege of the city was then definitively over . This Israeli success was punctuated by an incident that became marked in memory : the death of Aluf Mickey Marcus , accidentally killed by an Israeli sentry during the night of 10 – 11 June . 
 = = = Operation Yoram ( 8 – 9 June 1948 ) = = = 
 Between 30 May and 8 June the status between the Israeli and Arabic armies became a stand @-@ off . They were used to fighting small , violent battles and taking heavy losses of people and arms , and the United Nations renewed its call for a truce on 11 June . It was in this context that David Ben @-@ Gurion took the decision to withdraw from Galilee the elite 11th Yiftach Brigade under the orders of Yigal Allon to launch a third assault against Latrun . He had at his disposal an artillery support composed of four 65 @-@ millimetre ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) mortars and four 120 millimetres ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) guns that were part of the heavy weapons recently delivered to Israel by Operation Balak . 
 This time , the general staff decided on an attack concentrated on the centre of the Legion disposal , with several diversion attacks to the north to disrupt the Jordanians . While a battalion from the Yiftach Brigade was performed some diversions attacks on <unk> , Imwas and Bayt Nuba , a battalion from the Harel brigade was to take Hill 346 , between the fourth and second Legion regiments and a battalion from the Yiftach Brigade was then to pass through it , take Hill 315 and Latrun village and the police fort by the East . The Israeli operation started with an artillery barrage on the fort , the village of Latrun and the positions around . Hills 315 and 346 occupied with a company from the Legion , were not targeted not to alert the Jordanians . 
 The men of the Harel brigade made leave on foot from Bab al @-@ Oued but took a wrong way and mistakenly attacked Hill 315 . Located by the Jordanian sentries , they launch the attack of the hill . The Legionnaires were outnumbered but counterattacked with violence , going as far as requiring an artillery bombing on their own position . The Israelis suffered some heavy losses . When the Yiftach arrived at the bottom of Hill 346 , they are targeted by firearms , grenades and artillery . Thinking that Harel men were there , they called by radio to the headquarters to ceasefire , and laid down arms . They refused , not believing that account of the events and Harel soldiers stayed in place . 
 Confusion among Jordanians was as important as among Israelis with the attack on Hill 315 and those of diversion . With the incoming morning and unable to evaluate properly the situation , the Israeli HQ gave orders at 5 @.@ 30 am for the soldiers to retreat to Bad al @-@ Oued . The losses were also significant . Indeed , the 400 @-@ strong Harel battalion numbered 16 dead and 79 injured , and the Yiftach an handful of dead and injured . The Legion numbered several dozen victims . 
 The following day , Jordan mounted two counter @-@ attacks . The first was over Beit Susin . The Legionnaires took several Israeli guard posts but could not keep them more than a few hours . The fighting took lives and some 20 injuries on the Israeli side . The second was at Kibbutz Gezer from where the diversion attacks had been launched . A force the strength of a battalion , made up of Legionnaires and irregulars and supported by a dozen armoured vehicles , attacked the kibbutz in the morning . It was defended by 68 soldiers of the Haganah ( including 13 women ) . 
 After the four @-@ hour battle , the kibbutz fell . A dozen of the defenders escaped . Most others surrendered and one or two were executed . The Legionnaires protected the prisoners from irregulars and the next day freed the women . The toll was 39 dead on the Israeli side and 2 on the Legionnaires ' side . The kibbutz was looted by the irregulars and the Legionnaires evacuated the area after the fights . In the evening the Yiftach Brigade retook the kibbutz . 
 = = = Attacks organised during Operation Danny = = = 
 After the month of truce , during which <unk> increased forces and re @-@ equipped , the weakest point of the Israeli dispositions were on the central front and the corridor to Jerusalem . The High Command decided to launch " Operation <unk> " with the objective of taking Lydda , Ramle , Latrun and Ramallah and relieving the threat on Tel Aviv on a side and West Jerusalem on the other . 
 To achieve this objective Yigal Allon in entrusted 5 brigades : the Harel and Yiftach ( now totalling five battalions ) , the 8th armoury brigade ( newly constituted as the 82nd and 89th battalions ) , several infantry battalions from the <unk> and Alexandroni brigades , and 30 pieces of artillery . The 7th brigade was sent to the northern front . In a first phase , between 9 and 13 July , the Israelis took Lydda and Ramle and reasserted the area around Latrun by taking <unk> , but the forces are exhausted and the High Command renounced to the objective of taking Ramallah . Two attacks was launched against Latrun . 
 = = = On the east of the Jordanian positions ( 16 July ) = = = 
 On the night of 15 – 16 July , several companies of the Harel brigade laid on an assault against Latrun by the east , around the " artillery ridge " and the villages of <unk> and Bayt Nuba . They carried on to the hills by way of the villages of Bayt <unk> and <unk> transporting their armoury using pack mules . After several hours of fighting and counter @-@ attacks by armoured vehicles of the Arab Legion , they were finally pushed back but could keep control of several hills . In total , the Israelis lost 23 dead and numerous injured . 
 = = = Frontal assault against the police fort ( 18 July ) = = = 
 One hour before the truce , the High Command decided to try a frontal assault against the police fort . Intelligence indicated that , in effect , it was " more likely than not " that the Legion 's forces in the sector were " substantial " . In the morning , reconnaissance patrols had sized up the sector , but could not confirm or deny the information that had been gathered by the intelligence . At 6 pm two Cromwell tanks driven by British deserters , seconded by a mechanised battalion of the Yiftach and supported by artillery launched the attack of the police fort . 
 When the Israeli forces arrived 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) from the fort , they were shelled by Jordanian artillery . Around 6 : 15 pm. one of the tanks was hit by a shell ( or sustained a mechanical damage ) and had to retreat to al @-@ <unk> for repairs . The remaining forces waited for its return and the attack resumed around 7 : 30 pm , but was abandoned around 8 pm . The Israelis counted between 8 and 12 victims . At the same time , elements of the Harel brigade took about 10 villages to the south of Latrun to enlarge and secure the area of the Burma road . The majority of inhabitants had fled the fights in April but those who remained were systematically expelled . 
 = = = The final assault = = = 
 After the ten @-@ day campaign , the Israelis were military superior to their enemies and the Cabinet subsequently considered where and when to attack next . Three options were offered : attacking the Arabic enclave in Galilee held by the Arab Liberation Army ; moving eastward as far as possible in Samarian and Judean areas , taken by the Iraqis and Jordanians ; or attacking southern Negev taken by the Egyptians . 
 On 24 September , an incursion made by the Palestinian irregulars in the Latrun sector ( killing 23 Israeli soldiers ) precipitated the debate . On 26 September , David Ben @-@ Gurion put his argument to the Cabinet to attack Latrun again and conquer the whole or a large part of West Bank . 
 The motion was rejected by 5 votes to 7 after discussions . According to Benny Morris , the arguments that were advanced not to launch the attack were : the negative international repercussions for Israel already accentuated by the recent assassination of Count Bernadotte ; the consequences of an attack on an agreement with Abdallah ; the fact that defeating the Arab Legion could provoke a British military intervention because of Britain and Jordan 's common defense pact and lastly because conquering this area would add hundreds of thousands of Arab citizens to Israel . 
 Ben @-@ Gurion judged the decision <unk> <unk> ( " A cause for lamentation for generations " ) in considering that Israel could never renounce its claim in Judea , Samaria and over Old Jerusalem . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 At the operational level , the five assaults on Latrun were solved with Israeli defeats and Jordanian victories : the Jordanians repelled all assaults and kept control of the road between the coastal plain and Jerusalem , with Israel losing 168 killed and many more injured . Strategically , the outcome was more nuanced : 
 The opening of the Burma Road enabled the Israelis to bypass Latrun and supply the 100 @,@ 000 Jewish inhabitants of West Jerusalem with food , arms , munitions , and equipment and reinforce their military position there ; 
 If the control of West Jerusalem by Israel hold some of the Arab forces , the Arab Legion control of Latrun , 15 kilometres ( 10 mi ) from Tel Aviv , was a thorn in the side of Israeli forces ; 
 Latrun was a pivot point of the Legion 's deployment ; Glubb Pacha massed a third of his troops there ; its fall would have caused the one of Jerusalem and probably of <unk> as a whole . 
 At the discussions of the Israeli @-@ <unk> Armistice at Rhodes , the Israelis requested unsuccessfully the removal of the legion from Latrun . It subsequently remained under Jordanian control until the Six @-@ Day War . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 = = = Israeli historiography and collective memory = = = 
 According to Israeli historian Anita Shapira , there is a gap , at times quite wide , between the ' facts established by historical research ' and the image of the battle as retained in collective memory . This is certainly the case for the battle of Latrun , which has become , in Israel , a founding myth . 
 = = = = The clear @-@ sightedness of the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief = = = = 
 The first version of the battle of Latrun was contrived by David Ben @-@ Gurion and his entourage . 
 Initially , the governing power within Israel remained silent . However , on May 27 , the Israeli daily Maariv printed a sceptical coverage of Arab accounts , which spoke of a great victory by the Arab Legion , involving some 800 Israeli dead . In response , the Israeli press stressed that the aim of the operation was not to take Latrun , but to strike the Legion and , on June 1 , it published casualty figures of 250 deaths for the Arab side and 10 deaths , with 20 badly wounded , and another 20 lightly wounded on the Israeli side . 
 From 14 June , the press shifted its focus to the ' opening of the Burma route ' and , in the context of a conflict between the military 's senior command and Ben @-@ Gurion , Yigael Yadin called the operation a ' great catastrophe ' while the latter replied that , in his view , it had been " a great , although costly , victory " . 
 The " official version " entered in the historiography in 1955 following the work of lieutenant colonel Israel Beer , whereas adviser and support of Yadin at the time of the events , who published ' The battles of Latrun ' . This study , considered by the historian Anita Shapira as " the most clever ever written on the topic " , puts the battles in their military and political context . It concludes that given the strategic and symbolic importance of Jerusalem , " the three tactical defeats that occurred at Latrun ( ... ) permitted the supply [ of the city ] and were a <unk> manoeuvre ( ... ) [ and ] are the consequence of the strategic clear @-@ sightedness of the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , able to identify the key points and subordinate to his general sight the tactical considerations , limited , of the military command . 
 Ber put the responsibility of the tactical defeats on the failures of the intelligence services and on the " absence de <unk> <unk> sur les <unk> fronts . " He also points out the badly trained immigrants , the defective equipment , and the difficulty for a new army to succeed a first operation targeting to capture a defended area that was organised by advance . He gives the first estimates for the losses : 50 deaths in the 32nd battalion of the Alexandroni brigade and the 25 deaths in the 72nd battalion of the 7th brigade ( composed mainly of immigrants ) . 
 Finally , Ber founded the myth and pictured the events of Latrun as " an heroic saga , as the ones that occurs at the birth of a nation or at the historical breakthrough of movements of national liberation " . 
 = = = = Criminal negligence = = = = 
 [ About the First Battle of Latrun : ] " the Jordanians broke the attack by noon , with fewer than two thousand Israeli deaths . " 
 Whereas many events in the war were more bloody for the Israelis , like the massacre at Kfar Etzion with 150 deaths or the one of the Mount Scopus with 78 , the Battle of Latrun is the event of the war to provoke most rumours , narratives and controversies in Israel . The main reason is that Latrun had still been the mainstay for the road to Jerusalem until the Six @-@ Day War , keeping the Israelis at the margins and having to go round and maintain the town , but struggling to bypass it , which played each day on their minds . According to Anita Shapira , the primary reason was nothing but people 's grievous memories , of David Ben @-@ Gurion and the veterans of the British Armies on one side and former <unk> and Haganah soldiers on the other . In this sphere of influence during the 1970s and in the controversies that continued until the 1980s , the " Strategic Necessity " was said , if it were not done , it would be " Criminal negligence " , with a heavy toll on bring in immigrants to the battle , and forging a new founding myth . 
 On one side , the opponents of Ben @-@ Gurion attacked his " moral authority " . They said that the intrusion into Latrun by the " scum of the earth " immigrants who died had changed the situation for the worse . And the number of victims , and the proportion of immigrants , inflated in the narratives : from " several hundreds of dead " to " 500 to 700 dead and even " 1 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 000 dead " . The proportion of immigrants making up this total of victims was up to 75 % . His opponents accused Ben @-@ Gurion of wanting to take out the myth of the " invincible Arab Legion " and to justify the abandonment of the city of David to Abdallah . ( Anita Shapira considers this story to be at the origin of the theory of Avi Shlaim who brought forth what she considers as the myth of the collusion between Ben @-@ Gurion and Abdallah . ) On the other side , those supporting Ben @-@ Gurion put everything to advance the case of the " historic sacrifice " by the immigrants , laying the failure to their poor training . 
 Many contemporary books about the 1948 War were published at this time : John and David Kimche , The two sides of the hill ( 1960 ) ( the more reliable ) ; Dominique Lapierre and Larry Collins , O Jerusalem ( 1972 ) ( the best known internationally ) and Dan Kurzman , Genesis , 1948 ( 1970 ) ( the only one that got reviews in the Israeli press ) . With this political writing , historical research on Latrun tends to concentrate on the 1980s with the work of <unk> <unk> , " Latrun " ( in 2 volumes ) . It gives the exact number of victims , but , at the contrary of Israel Beer ( meanwhile caught as spying for USSR ) , it depicts the battle as " The hardest in the history of <unk> " , and it puts the responsibility of the defeat on Ben @-@ Gurion , who panicked about Jerusalem , and tactical errors on the brigade commanders and not on the immigrants who received ( from his point of view ) a sufficient training . 
 = = = = The drama of alienation = = = = 
 In the first years after its foundation , Israel met a problem with social integration of new immigrants who had arrived after the war , who had received much trauma from their exodus from Arab lands or from the death camps , and had suffered six years of war . Their integration was difficult with Sabra Israelis , born in the Palestinian Mandate , and taking the essential jobs and around who Israel had built an image of " <unk> , strong and courageous , fearless heroes , disdaining feebleness and trouble " . The phenomenon rose up again with the Israeli victory of the Six @-@ Day War . 
 All the while , these uncertainties and the reparations from the Yom Kippur War polished the sheen on the Shoah . The collective memory resurfaced and looked to reconcile its history of difficulties , suffering and sacrifices . A new elite arose from the Sephardic Jews and the " can @-@ do " of Menahem Begin . In this context , the " myth " of Latrun derived from the frustrations and the death of the new immigrants and was catalysed by their integration in a society where " the survivor of Shoah carried the new collective memory , immigrant refugees who had troubled pasts , and then were confronted with hostility and threat and still took their place with their blood and taking part in the war " . 
 This myth was founded in the factual knowledge of the immigrants ' participation in the battles , and the mythical knowledge because of the differences in the number of victims , the leaving of the injured on the fields of battle , and that the Latrun battle was the hardest and most important in the war . The influence on written history appeared primarily in books and commentary , where " the immigrants wanted only to make sure that their contribution at the battle was written in the collective memory with a plus sign " . It didn 't bring new documents but it expressed itself in memoirs , reminiscences and obituaries by or of those involved in the events . It was a view that was seldom heard in polemics giving two preceding versions of events but that had a life of its own , given to it by the immigrants . 
 = = = = Myth of guilt = = = = 
 In the 1980s , a schism arose within the post @-@ Zionism movement , and the history of the battle of Latrun came to represent the culpability of the Israeli state and a way of pointing out that it was born in the context of massacres and the exodus of the Palestinian population . It shouted " hypocrisy " , " false truths " , and " the blood of the escapees of Shoah who came to find a new life and yet found death " . 
 This version was put into several poems by the celebrated provocative poet Gabi Daniel ( pseudonym of Benjamin <unk> @-@ <unk> ) and entitled " Peter the Great " . Themes in the poem include dehumanisation and how Ben @-@ Gurion got Shoah into his pocket , by the work of the other " innocent young Jews of the Superior Race , who , without name or vision , found themselves the saviours of Israel " . 
 Peter the Great 
 Paved the city of St Petersburg 
 In the northern seas 
 On the backs of his serfs . 
 David Ben @-@ Gurion 
 Paved 
 The Burma Road , which turned around 
 The road , by the road to the capital Jerusalem , 
 With the backs of the young refugees from Shoah . 
 Anita Shapira considers this " New myth " was necessary not to reject identity with the past and to be able to renounce their common memory . While Israel in the 1980s was under much criticism from myths about the state 's founding , the reception of this idea was mitigated and " this version of Latrun that was destined to blow up the myth that the <unk> was solely in the hands of a group of radicals in the middle of the [ Israeli ] intellectual community " . 
 = = = = <unk> <unk> = = = = 
 A battle fought in this zone and tragic for the Israelis was completely eclipsed from their collective memory . On 18 July , a company from the 1st Battalion of Yiftach Brigade received the order to capture <unk> <unk> , an outpost protecting the only way for the Legion to get to Latrun located several kilometres to the north of the place . Intelligence services had not informed the responsible officer that nearby there was another outpost , occupied by a reinforced company of the Legion . From there the legionnaires could observe all the operations of the Israelis and called for reinforcements , notably armoured vehicles . When they mounted the counter @-@ attack , the Israelis were taken by a lightning strike in an encircling movement . No troops were available there to reinforce them , so they had to retreat in plain daylight . 45 Israeli soldiers , nineteen of them aged 18 or less , lost their lives . 
 Despite this bloodbath , Anita Shapira underlines that this battle didn 't remain in the Israeli collective memory . " If success has numerous fathers , [ ... ] defeat remains an orphan . [ ... ] The deaths of <unk> did not enter into the pantheon of the Israeli national memory . [ ... ] [ While there were numerous polemics about Latrun ] , that 45 soldiers perished [ ... ] should have begged a question . But they died in a side of the arena that proved to be unimportant , given it was not to decide the outcome of the campaign . 
 = = = = Commemoration = = = = 
 After the Suez Crisis and the Six @-@ Day War , the army came to arm the most important place . For technical reasons ( distance of communication with bases ) and because new places of historical interest were accessible , the top brass debated whether to transfer the postings of new recruits at <unk> to a more appropriate place . It was Latrun that was finally chosen . In the 1980s , a commemorative site and a museum was built on the old police site . The complex has a wall listing all the names of the fallen soldiers since the War Of Independence , and a monument to the glory of the heroes and another for reverence . The museum has nearly 200 tanks and other armoured vehicles of many kinds . 
 = = = Jordanian historiography = = = 
 According to Eugène Rogan , the Jordanian history of the war is essentially that of the recollections by Jordanian officers who took part in the fighting , or of nationalist historians . He states that these " non @-@ critical " works are largely loyal to the Jordanian regime and quotes My memoirs by Habes al @-@ Majali , commander of the 4th Regiment ; The battles of Bad al @-@ Oued by Mahmoud al @-@ <unk> , one of the High Command officers ; On the road to Jerusalem by Ma 'n Abu Nuwar , an officer of the Arab Legion , Jordanian soldier and Soldier with the Arabs with John Bagot Glubb . Jordanian historiography declares Latrun as a great success of the Arab Legion in the defense of Jerusalem , where a contingent of 1 @,@ 200 men resisted an assault of 6 @,@ 500 Israeli soldiers , and claiming Israeli casualties of between 400 and 800 killed . Glubb claimed 600 deaths on the first assault and 600 others for the two after . 
 Habes al @-@ Majali is quoted as the only Arab commander to have defeated the Israelis in 1948 and who restored a little honour to the Arabs . By his version of events , he would even have caught Ariel Sharon in the course of the battle and it is Colonel Ashton ( his British superior from 3rd Brigade ) would have forbidden him to use the artillery against the Burma road , action by which he could have prevented its construction . After the war , he was appointed bodyguard of Abdallah and in 1957 Chief @-@ of @-@ Staff of the Jordanian army . He became Jordanian Minister of Defence in 1967 . 
 = = = Palestinian historiography and collective memory = = = 
 The Palestinian account of the battle is much the same as the Israeli one . It is , after , all , based on the Israeli one but gives no weight or symbolic character to it . In his work " All That Remains : The Palestinian Villages Occupied and <unk> by Israel in 1948 " Walid Khalidi refers to Operation Maccabi as the first assault . He reports that the resistance offered by the Arab Legion and the volunteer army were " inspired by Abd al @-@ Qadir al @-@ Husayni " ( who had been killed a month before ) . 
 Nevertheless , Palestinian historiography and collective memory point out that during the exodus of Palestinian Arab population of the 1948 War the massacres and forced expulsions that happened could be seen as ethnic cleansing . In the Latrun zone , this affected about 20 villages and ten thousand Palestinian Arabs . Some inhabitants fled during the fights of April but most fled when the Israelis attacked their village during the following operations . After capturing a village , the Israeli soldiers systematically expelled the non @-@ combatants , intimidating them to leave and demolishing houses . A massacre of between thirty and seventy Arabs took place some days after Abu Shusha was taken . Most villages were levelled , so as not to be used by the Arab volunteers and to prevent the inhabitants returning . In some cases Jewish settlements were established on village land . 
 = 27th Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 27th Battalion was an infantry battalion of the Australian Army . It was initially raised in 1915 as part of the First Australian Imperial Force for service during World War I. During the conflict , the battalion saw action briefly at Gallipoli before later fighting on the Western Front between 1916 and 1918 . It was disbanded in 1919 , but was re @-@ raised in 1921 as part of the Citizens Force , which later became the " Militia " . During World War II the battalion was used mainly in a garrison role until the last year of the war when it was committed to the fighting against the Japanese during the Bougainville campaign . Following the end of hostilities it was disbanded in May 1946 . Between 1948 and 1965 the battalion was re @-@ raised and disbanded a number of times before eventually becoming part of the Royal South Australia Regiment . It was disbanded for a final time in 1987 , when it was amalgamated with the 10th Battalion , Royal South Australia Regiment to form the 10th / 27th Battalion , Royal South Australia Regiment . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 = = = = Gallipoli = = = = 
 Because of the restrictions that the Defence Act ( 1903 ) placed upon deploying units of the Citizens Force overseas , following the outbreak of World War I , the Australian government decided to raise an all volunteer force for overseas service . This force was known as the Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) . Initially , the AIF was to consist of only one infantry division , but following the despatch of the 1st Division in late 1914 further units were raised and these were eventually organised to form the 2nd Division . As part of the 2nd Division , the 27th Battalion was formed on 16 March 1915 at Ascot Park Camp , Adelaide , from recruits drawn mainly from South Australia , who had originally been allocated to the 24th Battalion . After a period of basic training , the battalion embarked for the Middle East on the troopship HMAT A2 Geelong on 31 May 1915 , arriving there on 6 July . 
 They then undertook a further two months of training in Egypt before an urgent request for reinforcements led to them being dispatched to Gallipoli where they landed on 12 September . Attached to the 7th Brigade , along with the 25th , 26th and 28th Battalions , they reinforced the battle @-@ worn New Zealand and Australian Division and took up a defensive position on Cheshire Ridge . Throughout October they defended the ridge , during which time they suffered five killed and 29 wounded , before being relieved by New Zealanders in early November . After this they moved to new positions in Mule Gulley where they undertook further defensive operations alongside the 26th Battalion . Losses during this time amounted to two killed and eight wounded . In December , they took over from the 28th Battalion around Happy Valley , before the decision was made to evacuate the Allied forces from the peninsula . On 12 December 1915 , the battalion embarked upon the <unk> , bound for Lemnos Island . 
 Following this the 27th Battalion returned to Egypt , where the AIF undertook a period of training and re @-@ organisation as reinforcements arrived from Australia . During this time the AIF was expanded from two infantry divisions to four – with a fifth forming in Australia – and many infantry battalions that had seen service at Gallipoli were split up to provide cadre staff for the newly raised battalions . The battalions of the 2nd Division , however , were not split up in this manner and the 27th Battalion remained intact . 
 = = = = Western Front = = = = 
 In early 1916 , the decision was made to transfer part of the AIF to Europe to take part in the fighting in the trenches along the Western Front in France and Belgium . Still attached to the 7th Brigade , the 27th Battalion entered the front @-@ line for the first time on 7 April 1916 as the Australians took over a quiet sector near Armentières . On 8 July 1916 , the 7th Brigade was ordered to march to the Somme to support the Australian 1st Division which was taking part in the fighting around Pozières . On 28 July , the 7th Brigade undertook an attack on the German line , however , during this time the 27th Battalion was held back in reserve . The attack proved unsuccessful and as a result it was ordered to launch a second attack on 4 August , centred upon German positions around Bapaume . 
 This time the 27th Battalion was to play a key role . Moving off from positions around La <unk> in the afternoon , the battalion advanced with two companies forward and two back in reserve under the cover of an intense artillery barrage . Due to congestion around the assembly trenches , the battalion arrived at its objective late . Nevertheless , the first wave managed to capture the first line of German trenches and although the follow @-@ up waves became lost amidst thick smoke , the two assault companies began to consolidate their position during the night . In the early morning of 5 August , a heavy German counterattack was launched . This was turned back with considerable cost , with the Germans suffering an estimated 100 men killed and 60 men captured . Following this , the battalion sent out patrols into No Man 's Land as reinforcements were brought up . Later during the day their positions were subjected to heavy shellfire from German guns positioned around Thiepval . Although successful , the attack proved costly with the battalion reporting the following casualties : 40 killed , 289 wounded and 67 missing . Afterwards they were relieved by the 48th Battalion and were eventually transferred to Belgium where they were rested in a ' quiet ' sector south of Zillebeke . 
 In early October , they undertook a number of small scale raids on the German line , capturing a number of prisoners , before they were withdrawn from the line on 27 October and transferred back to the Somme where they subsequently took part in two unsuccessful attacks against German positions east of Flers . In January 1917 , the 7th Brigade moved into the Le Sars sector where they took over from British units that were holding the line near Mametz . Offensive operations during this time were largely curtailed by bad weather , but on 2 March the battalions of the 5th and 7th Brigades launched a combined attack north of Warlencourt . The initial assault yielded some ground , but the Germans completed a successful outflanking move on the left , which threatened to take the momentum out of the attack . As reinforcements were brought up , the 27th Battalion linked up with the 26th Battalion on its left flank near the <unk> Road and , under the cover of mist , managed to establish a new trench line 500 yards ( 460 m ) long and captured a number of prisoners . 
 The battalion 's next engagement came on 26 March 1917 when they undertook an attack on Lagnicourt , during which they lost 11 killed and 29 wounded . The 27th Battalion did not undertake a major engagement until 20 September when they took part in the Battle of Menin Road , which resulted in success for the Australians . During the battle , they were committed to the fighting as part of the first wave which routed the German forces . Advancing under a cover of artillery and machine gun fire , the battalion captured a section of the German line known as the ' Blue Line ' between Polygon Wood and a position known as the Iron Cross Redoubt . Later , they successfully took part in the Battle of Broodseinde on 4 October , which was their last major offensive action in 1917 . 
 In early 1918 , the 7th Brigade was placed in divisional reserve around <unk> as extreme winter weather conditions set in . At the end of January the brigade was relieved and moved back to <unk> where it was tasked with covering a 24 miles ( 39 km ) length of the line . During this time the 27th Battalion was near full strength , with 43 officers and 993 men , and was positioned between <unk> and <unk> . They remained there throughout February and March during which time they undertook training and the men were given leave to visit Boulogne . In March 1918 , the Germans launched their Spring Offensive in an effort to bring about an end to the war . The offensive saw considerable tactical gains , and although the Australian Corps missed the opening phase of the offensive as they were out of line at the time , they were brought up in April to help stem the tide of the German advance . As a part of this effort , the 27th Battalion returned to the battlefields of the Somme , as the 7th Brigade relieved the 13th Brigade around the Somme Canal on the night of 7 / 8 April . At the end of the month they moved to the <unk> – <unk> area . As the German offensive became focused upon Villers – Bretonneux they were called upon to undertake a supporting role to the Australian counterattack , relieving the 6th Brigade around Ville @-@ sur @-@ Ancre following the 6th 's assault on the town . 
 In early June , plans were made for the Australian 2nd Division to attack around Morlancourt in preparation for a more significant attack at Hamel . On 10 June , the battalion advanced on the right of the 7th Brigade 's line , capturing the German front line trenches around Morlancourt and wiping out a whole battalion , taking 325 prisoners for the loss of 400 men . On 4 July the battalion undertook a supporting role in the successful Australian attack at Hamel , following up the initial success with a further , albeit small , advance on 8 July . After the German offensive petered out , the 27th Battalion undertook peaceful penetration operations against the German line as the Allies began to prepare to launch their own offensive . 
 On 8 August 1918 , the Allies launched their Hundred Days Offensive . During the fighting around Amiens , the battalion was responsible for capturing 200 prisoners as well as a number of machine guns and artillery pieces . They remained in the line throughout August and September , undertaking further attacks at Biaches and Mont St Quentin . Casualties during this time were high and by the end of September 1918 the battalion 's strength had fallen to 31 officers and 537 men . Their final engagement of the war came on the night of 3 October 1918 , when they took part in the Battle of Beaurevoir . During this battle , the battalion attacked around Prospect Hill , suffering 67 casualties . The following night they crossed the Estrees Road and took up position northeast of Estrees to support the 6th Brigade which was attacking positions beyond Beaurevoir . 
 Following this , the battalions of the Australian Corps were removed from the line for rest on 5 October , after a request from the Australian prime minister , Billy Hughes . They had been severely depleted and were suffering from acute manpower shortages as a result of the combination of a decrease in the number of volunteers from Australia and the decision to grant home leave to men who had served for over four years . Subsequently , when the armistice was signed on 11 November 1918 , the Australian Corps had not returned to the front and was still in the rear reorganising and training . With the end of hostilities the demobilisation process began , and men were slowly repatriated back to Australia . The process took a considerable period of time , though , and a large number of men were able to undertake tertiary and vocational training in England and France to prepare for their return to civilian life . Finally , as numbers dwindled , the battalion was disbanded on 4 June 1919 . 
 The battalion suffered 762 men killed or died on active service during the war , as well as a further 2 @,@ 155 wounded . Members of the 27th Battalion received a number of decorations , including : one Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George ( CMG ) , five Distinguished Service Orders ( DSOs ) , 20 Military Crosses ( MCs ) and two bars , 14 Distinguished Conduct Medals ( DCMs ) , 69 Military Medals ( MMs ) and two bars , five Meritorious Service Medals ( MSMs ) , 21 Mentions in Despatches ( MIDs ) and six foreign awards . A total of 16 battle honours were awarded to the 27th Battalion for its involvement in the fighting on Gallipoli and the Western Front . 
 = = = Interwar years = = = 
 In 1921 , the decision was made to perpetuate the battle honours and traditions of the AIF by re @-@ organising the units of the Citizens Force to adopt the numerical designations of their related AIF units . The 27th Battalion had been recruited mainly from personnel that had served in the 74th ( Boothby ) Infantry Regiment , and as a result , on 1 May 1921 , the 74th 's successor units — the 2nd and 5th Battalions , 27th Regiment — were amalgamated to re @-@ raise the 27th Battalion . Through this link , the 27th inherited the battle honour " South Africa 1899 – 1902 " . Upon establishment , the battalion formed part of the 3rd Brigade and was based in South Australia where it formed part of the 4th Military District . 
 In 1927 , territorial titles were adopted by the units of the Citizens Force , and as a result the battalion adopted the title of the " South Australian Regiment " . It also adopted the motto of " Primus inter Pares " , meaning " First Among Equals " . The following year , 1928 , the battalion formed an alliance with the Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers , which were also known as the 27th Regiment of Foot . A year later , following the election of the Scullin Labor government , the compulsory training scheme was abolished and in its place a new system was introduced whereby the Citizens Forces would be maintained on a part @-@ time , voluntary basis only . It was also renamed the " Militia " at this time . The decision to suspend compulsory training , coupled with the economic downturn of the Great Depression meant that the manpower of many Militia units dropped considerably and as a result the decision was made to amalgamate a number of units . The 27th Battalion , however , did not suffer this fate and in 1938 it adopted the territorial title of " South Australian Scottish Regiment " and was afforded the right to wear the MacKenzie tartan , after forming an alliance with the Seaforth Highlanders . At the same time it also raised a pipe band . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Following the outbreak of World War II , due to the provisions of the Defence Act ( 1903 ) which precluded deploying the Militia outside of Australian territory , the government decided to raise an all volunteer force for overseas service , known as the Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) . As such while the Militia would provide a cadre for this force , its main role was to provide training to conscripts as part of the compulsory training scheme which was re @-@ established in early 1940 . During this time the Militia were called up in cohorts for periods of continuous training and the 27th Battalion , along with the rest of the 3rd Brigade , undertook garrison duties in South Australia as well as running number of training camps designed to increase the nation 's defences in case of war in the Pacific . With Japan 's entry into the war following the attacks on Pearl Harbor and Malaya , the battalion was mobilised for wartime service on 9 December 1941 and transported to Darwin in northern Australia where it formed part of the garrison force to defend against possible Japanese attack . During this time it was based at Winnellie and took part in building defences in the north . 
 Later , in December 1942 , the 27th Battalion was transferred from the 3rd Brigade to the 23rd Brigade . This unit had previously been a 2nd AIF unit , but the loss of several of its battalions when they had been deployed to Ambon , Timor and Rabaul , had resulted in it being re @-@ formed with Militia battalions and the 27th joined the 7th and 8th Battalions to round out its establishment . In March 1943 , after having endured several bombings by Japanese aircraft since their arrival in Darwin the previous year , the battalion was replaced in the Darwin garrison and its personnel returned Adelaide for leave . In December , they regrouped on the Atherton Tablelands in Queensland for jungle training , as the 23rd Brigade — then part of the 3rd Division — was converted to the jungle establishment , in preparation for them undertaking active service in New Guinea . Around this time the battalion was gazetted as an AIF battalion , meaning that because more than 65 per cent of its personnel had volunteered for service outside of Australian territory , it could be deployed beyond the limits set out in the Defence Act ( 1903 ) . 
 In September 1944 , the 27th Battalion was deployed to Green Island where they relieved the American troops defending Lagoon Airfield . The Americans were subsequently redeployed to the fighting in the Philippines . In 1945 , the battalion moved to Bougainville to take part in the Australian campaign there . Initially , it was tasked with relieving the 55th / 53rd Battalion at <unk> River in the central sector of the island , which it did so in March . In April , the battalion pressed on to Pearl Ridge where they took over from the 31st / 51st Battalion and began to carry out patrols in front of the ridge . Over the course of six weeks , the battalion carried out a number of minor attacks and in the process captured several key features before moving to the northern sector of the island on the Bonis Peninsula around Ratsua where they continued to harass Japanese forces through active patrolling and ambushing . This continued until the end of the war in August 1945 . 
 Following the Japanese surrender , the 27th Battalion ceased operations and was transported to Torokina , where they had to wait for shipping to become available for repatriation back to Australia to begin the demobilisation process . This process began in October 1945 , albeit slowly , and gradually the battalion 's numbers decreased as men were repatriated back to Australia or were transferred to other units for further service . Long service men received priority for discharge , while some men volunteered to be transferred to the battalions of the 34th Brigade that were being formed on Morotai Island for service as part of the British Commonwealth Occupation Force in Japan . Finally , on 1 May 1946 , the battalion was disbanded . 
 The 27th Battalion lost 22 men killed in action or died and 54 wounded during its service in World War II , the majority of these coming in the final weeks of the war . In addition to the normal campaign ribbons , the battalion 's personnel also received a number of decorations for distinguished service and bravery , these included : one DSO , one MC , one MM and 16 MIDs . The battalion received one battle honour for its involvement in the war . 
 = = = Post World War II = = = 
 In 1948 , with demobilisation of Australia 's wartime army complete , the decision was made to re @-@ raise the part @-@ time forces of the Militia , albeit with the new name of the Citizens Military Force , on a reduced establishment . The 27th Battalion was re @-@ raised in May 1948 , and was once again assigned to the 3rd Division , attached to the 9th Brigade . In 1951 , the compulsory training scheme was reintroduced and as a result the size of many CMF units swelled . The march , The Campbells Are Coming , was approved as the battalion 's regimental march in 1953 . In 1959 , the national service scheme was suspended , and as a result numbers dropped once more . Following the introduction of the Pentropic divisional structure in early 1960 , the CMF was reorganised and a number of infantry battalions were disbanded or amalgamated together to form six new State @-@ based regiments . 
 As part of these changes , in July 1960 the 27th Battalion was amalgamated with the 43rd / 48th Battalion ( Hindmarsh Regiment ) and 10th Battalion ( The Adelaide Rifles ) to form the Pentropic 1st Battalion , Royal South Australian Regiment ( 1 RSAR ) , with the 27th Battalion 's personnel forming ' A ' and ' B ' Companies within this organisation . The 16 battle honours awarded to the 2nd AIF 's 2 / 27th Battalion , which had served in North Africa , Syria , and New Guinea with the 7th Division were entrusted to the battalion in 1961 , through the promulgation of Army Order 135 . In 1965 , the Australian Army 's experiment with the Pentropic structure was abandoned and the CMF was once again reorganised with many of the Pentropic battalions being split once again to form additional battalions . On 1 July 1965 , 1 RSAR was split and the 10th , 27th and 43rd Battalions were reformed in their own right as battalions of the Royal South Australia Regiment . On 29 November 1987 , the 10th and 27th Battalions were linked to form the 10th / 27th Battalion , Royal South Australia Regiment ( 10 / 27 RSAR ) . This unit continues to exist to this day , maintaining the battle honours and traditions of its predecessor units . 
 = = Alliances = = 
 The 27th Battalion held the following alliances : 
 United Kingdom – Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers ; 
 United Kingdom – Seaforth Highlanders . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 The 27th Battalion was awarded the following battle honours : 
 South Africa 1899 – 1902 ( inherited ) ; 
 World War I : Somme 1916 – 18 , Pozières , Bapaume 1917 , Ypres 1917 , Menin Road , Polygon Wood , Broodseinde , Poelcappelle , Passchendaele , Amiens , Albert 1918 , Mont St Quentin , Hindenburg Line , Beaurevoir , France and Flanders 1916 – 18 , Gallipoli 1915 – 16 ; 
 World War II : Liberation of Australian New Guinea . 
 In 1961 , the battalion – although no longer on the Australian Army 's order of battle – was entrusted with the battle honours awarded to the 2 / 27th Battalion for its service with the 2nd AIF during World War II . The honours it inherited at this time were : North Africa ; Syria 1941 ; The Litani ; Sidon ; <unk> ; Damour ; South @-@ West Pacific 1942 – 1945 ; Kokoda Trail ; Efogi – <unk> ; Buna – Gona ; Gona ; Liberation of Australian New Guinea ; Ramu Valley ; Shaggy Ridge ; Borneo 1945 ; Balikpapan . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 World War I 
 Lieutenant Colonel Walter Dollman ( 16 March 1915 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel James Charles Frederick Slane ( 22 August 1916 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Frederick Royden Chalmers ( 1 October 1917 ) . 
 World War II 
 Lieutenant Colonel Francis Mayfield Best ( 1 May 1934 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Lindsay Keith Farquhar ( 6 November 1939 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Alexander Pope ( 14 April 1942 ) . 
 = Manuel Marques de Sousa , Count of Porto Alegre = 
 Manuel Marques de Sousa , Count of Porto Alegre ( 13 June 1804 – 18 July 1875 ) , nicknamed " the Gloved Centaur " , was an army officer , politician , abolitionist and monarchist of the Empire of Brazil . Born into a wealthy family of military background , Porto Alegre joined the army in 1817 when he was little more than a child . His military initiation occurred in the conquest of the Banda Oriental ( Eastern Bank ) , which was annexed and became the southernmost Brazilian province of Cisplatina in 1821 . For most of the 1820s , he was embroiled in the Brazilian effort to keep Cisplatina as part of its territory : first during the struggle for Brazilian independence and then in the Cisplatine War . It would ultimately prove a futile attempt , as Cisplatina successfully separated from Brazil to become the independent nation of Uruguay in 1828 . 
 A few years later , in 1835 , his native province of Rio Grande do Sul was engulfed in a secessionist rebellion , the Ragamuffin War . The conflict lasted for almost ten years , and the Count was leading military engagements for most of that time . He played a decisive role in saving the provincial capital from the Ragamuffin rebels , allowing forces loyal to the legitimate government to secure a key foothold . In 1852 , he led a Brazilian division during the Platine War in an invasion of the Argentine Confederation that overthrew its dictator . He was awarded a noble title , eventually raised from baron to viscount and finally to count . 
 In the postwar years , Porto Alegre turned his attention to politics , retiring from his military career as a lieutenant general , the second @-@ highest rank in the Imperial army . He was an affiliate of the Liberal Party at the national level and was elected to the legislature of Rio Grande do Sul . He also founded a provincial party , the Progressive @-@ Liberal Party — a coalition of Liberals like him and some members of the Conservative Party . Porto Alegre later entered the lower house of the Brazilian parliament and was briefly Minister of War . When the Paraguayan War erupted in 1864 , he returned to active duty . One of the main Brazilian commanders during the conflict , his participation was marked by important battlefield victories , as well as constant quarrels with his Argentine and Uruguayan allies . 
 Upon his return from the war , Porto Alegre resumed his political career . He became an active advocate for the abolition of slavery and a patron in the fields of literature and science . His death came on 18 July 1875 while again serving in Parliament . He was highly esteemed until the downfall of the monarchy in 1889 . Regarded as too closely associated with the fallen regime , Porto Alegre slipped into obscurity . His reputation was eventually rehabilitated to a certain degree by historians , some of whom consider him to be among Brazil 's greatest military figures . 
 = = Early years = = 
 = = = Birth and background = = = 
 Manuel Marques de Sousa was born on 13 June 1804 ( sometimes erroneously given as 1805 ) in Rio Grande . The town was located in Rio Grande do Sul , a southern captaincy ( later province ) of Brazil , then part of the Portuguese Colonial Empire . His parents were Manuel Marques de Sousa and <unk> <unk> da Silveira . He had four younger siblings : two sisters and two brothers . An archetypal leading family of Rio Grande do Sul , Marques de Sousa 's Portuguese @-@ descended family was wealthy and influential , owning ranches and huge cattle herds . His father and his paternal grandfather , both also named Manuel Marques de Sousa , were seasoned soldiers who took part in the colonial wars . His grandfather , the elder Marques de Sousa , was the wealthiest person in Rio Grande do Sul . 
 <unk> populated , far from the colonial capital of Rio de Janeiro ( which exercised little actual control ) , Rio Grande do Sul was often the target of invasions from its neighboring Hispanic @-@ American colony , the United Provinces of the Río de la Plata ( later Argentina ) . Because the captaincy had to be self @-@ sufficient , the inhabitants of Rio Grande do Sul led lives as merchants , farmers or ranchers , while often also serving as soldiers or militiamen . Owners of large landholdings such as Marques de Sousa 's father and grandfather provided food , equipment and protection for themselves and for families living in areas under their control . Their private defense forces consisted primarily of laborers who were drafted as soldiers . Marques de Sousa grew up in that hostile environment , and from a very young age he listened to war stories recounting the exploits of his relatives against Hispanic @-@ American invaders . 
 = = = Conquest of the Banda Oriental = = = 
 In 1808 , the Portuguese Royal Family arrived in Brazil , settling in Rio de Janeiro . The Hispanic @-@ American colonies became easy prey , as they were engulfed in turmoil and beset by wars of independence against Spain . In 1811 Prince Regent Dom João ( later King Dom João VI ) ordered the invasion of the Banda Oriental ( Eastern Bank ) , which bordered Rio Grande do Sul . João 's attempt at conquering the entire region met with failure . He launched another invasion a few years later , in 1816 , who counted among their ranks Marques de Sousa 's father and paternal grandfather . In 1817 , around age 13 , he asked his grandfather to allow him to fight in the war . The elder Marques de Sousa agreed , and the youngster learned guerrilla hit @-@ and @-@ run tactics on horseback near the border town of Jaguarão . 
 Months later , on 20 January 1818 , Marques de Sousa was enlisted into the army as a cadet in the 1st Regiment of Light Cavalry in the Division of Royal Volunteers . The regiment had been deployed to Montevideo , the largest town in the Banda Oriental . He fought in the Battle of Pando on 30 March and in the Battle of Manga near Montevideo on 1 April . Successful in both battles , on 24 June he was promoted to alferes ( equivalent to a modern @-@ day second lieutenant ) and named adjutant to the commander @-@ in @-@ chief , Lieutenant General Carlos Frederico <unk> ( then Baron and later Viscount of Laguna ) . 
 Years later as an elderly man near the end of his life , Marques de Sousa would fondly recall his advancement : " Never in my life had I judged myself so great , nor experienced such ineffable rejoicing ... as in the day I placed my fists into the cuffs of alferes . I walked through all the streets of the city , looking at myself , conceited , believing that everyone looking with admiration envied my luck , that all enamored ladies vied for my hand . " For the remainder of the conflict he was stationed in the defense of Montevideo . The conquest of the Banda Oriental was ended in July 1821 , when Portugal declared it a province of Brazil with the name of Cisplatina . 
 = = = Wars for Cisplatina = = = 
 News arrived in Montevideo in late 1822 that Prince Dom Pedro , son and heir of King João VI , had declared the independence of Brazil on 7 September and had been acclaimed emperor as Dom Pedro I on 12 October . Marques de Sousa was dispatched to Rio de Janeiro by the Baron of Laguna to pledge loyalty to the Emperor on behalf of the army in the south . The young alferes was an apt choice for the task ; he was well connected in the imperial capital ( his uncle , married to a paternal aunt , was Minister of War ) , cultured , and well educated . Marques de Sousa was a handsome man of average height with dark , curly hair and brown eyes . <unk> about his appearance , he always took care to dress well , even during battles , and contemporaries made note of his trimmed and clean nails . He was also merry and gallant , with a " pleasant and well @-@ tuned voice in conversation , ample and resounding in command " . 
 Brazilian independence did not meet with unanimous approval in the south . Part of the army , led by Dom Álvaro de Macedo ( later Count of Ilha da Madeira ) , entrenched itself in Montevideo and remained loyal to Portugal . The town was besieged by forces under Laguna . Following his return from the imperial capital , Marques de Sousa served under his father 's command , taking part in the siege and later fighting in the successful Battle of Las Piedras on 18 May 1823 . In early 1824 , Macedo and his men surrendered . The end of the Brazilian War of Independence came at a cost for Marques de Sousa . His father was mysteriously murdered with poison in Montevideo on 21 November 1824 , leaving him the head of his family at age 20 , as his paternal grandfather had died ( of old age ) on 22 April 1822 . He was promoted to lieutenant ( modern @-@ day first lieutenant ) on 1 December 1824 for his acts of bravery during the war . 
 A few months after his promotion , in April 1825 , secessionists in Cisplatina rebelled . The United Provinces of the Río de la Plata attempted to annex the province , and in retaliation Brazil declared war , triggering the Cisplatine War . Although Marques de Sousa was living in Rio de Janeiro and enrolled in the Military Academy , he was ordered to return to Montevideo . He was soon named adjutant to Brigadier Sebastião Barreto Pereira Pinto , commander of the 1st Division , which was defending Rio Grande do Sul . Marques de Sousa fought in the unsuccessful Battle of <unk> ( known to Brazilians as the Battle of the Passo do Rosário ) on 20 February 1827 . For his acts of bravery during the ill @-@ fated battle , he was promoted on 20 March to captain , and , on 16 August , he was assigned as adjutant to the now Viscount of Laguna , commander @-@ in @-@ chief of Brazilian land forces in the conflict . Marques de Sousa subsequently fought in the Battle of <unk> on 28 April and participated in other , smaller skirmishes . 
 = = Ragamuffin rebellion = = 
 = = = Secessionist threat = = = 
 By 1828 , Brazil could no longer sustain the war effort in the south and in April relinquished Cisplatina , which became the independent nation of Uruguay . Marques de Sousa was sent to Montevideo to serve under field marshal ( present @-@ day divisional general ) Manuel Jorge Rodrigues , who commanded a Brazilian force temporarily stationed in the new country . On 29 March 1829 , Marques de Sousa was made brevet ( acting ) major , and , on 28 August 1830 , he was placed in command of the 6th company of 4th Regiment of Light Cavalry . Stationed in Rio Grande do Sul , the unit had previously been commanded by his father and his paternal grandfather . 
 The peaceful lull following the Cisplatine conflict did not last long . On 20 September 1835 , a civil war erupted in Rio Grande do Sul . The revolt , known as the Ragamuffin War , began after the provincial president ( governor ) was removed from office in a coup d 'état . Despite the nickname , the Ragamuffin rebels were landlords , like Marques de Sousa , who after losing elections tried to take power by force . Marques de Sousa was among the army officers in the province who remained loyal to the deposed president . He fought in the Battle of <unk> Grande on 14 October 1835 , in which rebel troops were defeated . But the forces loyal to the legitimate government were heavily outnumbered . Marques de Sousa and the deposed president departed for Rio de Janeiro to request aid , but the central government was unable to render much assistance , as rebellions and riots had broken out all over the country . With the infantry 's 1st Battalion of Caçadores ( Sharpshooters ) placed under his command , Marques de Sousa embarked on 8 March 1836 for Pelotas , in southeastern Rio Grande do Sul , after being named its military commander . 
 Pelotas was besieged and conquered by the Ragamuffins on 7 April 1836 . Marques de Sousa was taken prisoner and removed to Porto Alegre , capital of Rio Grande do Sul , which had been under rebel control since the beginning of the conflict . He was held in a presiganga ( prison ship ) . During his imprisonment , with the aid of the people of Porto Alegre , he managed to convince some of the rebel soldiers to switch sides , taking control of the entire town during the early hours of 15 June and arresting the remaining Ragamuffins . He repulsed rebel land and sea assaults against Porto Alegre on 18 June , 30 June , 15 July and 20 July ; thereafter , the town remained in the hands of the legitimate government until the end of the conflict . The central government in Rio de Janeiro promoted Marques de Sousa to permanent major on 18 February 1837 in recognition of his vital role . The balance of power tipped against the Ragamuffins only a few months after the declaration of Rio Grande do Sul 's independence on 11 September 1836 . The Ragamuffins , although emboldened by their initial successes , never managed to gain control of the entire province . 
 = = = Province pacification = = = 
 The long , strenuous walk from Pelotas to Porto Alegre and the hardships endured in the presiganga ruined Marques de Sousa 's health , and he was afflicted with articular rheumatism for the rest of his life . With Porto Alegre safe , he was granted a leave of absence to recover . In the middle of 1837 he traveled to Europe for medical treatment . After a year away , and still feeling ill , Marques de Sousa secluded himself in Porto Alegre . He was brevetted lieutenant colonel on 20 August 1838 . He only returned to active duty in early 1840 after he was made permanent lieutenant colonel on 2 December 1839 and given the command of the 2nd Regiment of Light Cavalry . But the war against the Ragamuffins was still being waged , and Marques de Sousa met and defeated a rebel force in the Battle of the <unk> do Varejão on 16 September 1841 . A new promotion came on 27 March 1842 , when he was given the rank of colonel . 
 The course of the conflict took a radical turn when the central government charged Luís Alves de Lima e Silva ( then Count and later Duke of Caxias ) with putting an end to the rebellion in late 1842 . Marques de Sousa probably met him during Caxias ' short trip to Rio Grande do Sul in 1839 as part of the Minister of War 's entourage . They subsequently maintained a friendly correspondence . Marques de Sousa was removed from his position over the 2nd Regiment of Light Cavalry and instead was given command of the 7th Brigade , which formed part of the 1st Division . The brigade consisted of his former 2nd Regiment of Light Cavalry and a National Guard cavalry corps . 
 Unlike his predecessors , who were notable for their inertia , Caxias went on the offensive from the start . In July 1843 , Marques de Sousa attacked the rebel capital , <unk> , which had been all but abandoned by the Ragamuffins . He marched from there to Pelotas and recaptured the town he had lost in 1836 . On 2 December , he fought and won a small skirmish with rebels near the imperial army 's main encampment . He remained in the village of São Gabriel for most of 1844 , guarding it undisturbed . The Ragamuffins were by this time on the run , and they sued for peace . Caxias chose Marques de Sousa to take a Ragamuffin representative to discuss a peace accord with the central government ; they arrived in Rio de Janeiro on 12 December . The negotiations were successful and the war came to an end on 1 March 1845 . 
 = = War and politics = = 
 = = = Platine War = = = 
 The Provincial Assembly of Rio Grande do Sul was closed in 1837 and no elections were held because of the Ragamuffin rebellion . In 1845 , Marques de Sousa ran and was elected as provincial deputy in the legislature that met in 1846 , though he had no party affiliation . He married Maria Balbina Álvares da Gama , daughter of José Gama Lobo de Eça ( later Baron of <unk> ) , on 28 November 1846 . The couple 's only child , Maria Manuela da Gama Marques , was born less than a year and a half later . Marques de Sousa was made brevet brigadier on 14 March 1847 , and the 2nd Cavalry Brigade was placed under his command ( until April 1848 ) . He was later confirmed in the rank of brigadier on 14 August 1850 . On 11 June 1851 , his wife died in childbirth ( aged 29 ) , leaving him with a three @-@ year @-@ old daughter . 
 Barely a month later on 18 August 1851 , Juan Manuel de Rosas , dictator of the Argentine Confederation , declared war on Brazil , beginning the Platine War . Marques de Sousa had been warned by Caxias as early as 27 July 1844 of the possibility of an armed conflict between Brazil and its Platine neighbor . The government in Rio de Janeiro had prepared against the threat and formed an anti @-@ Rosas alliance consisting of Brazil , Uruguay and dissident Argentine provinces . Caxias , who had been appointed commander @-@ in @-@ chief of Brazilian land forces , placed Marques de Sousa at the head of the 2nd Brigade , part of the 2nd Division . The Brazilian army crossed into Uruguay in September 1851 . On 17 November , while the army was camped in the village of Santa Lucía near the Uruguayan capital , Marques de Sousa was promoted to a higher command , the 1st division . The choice was controversial , as there were two more senior and experienced officers next in line who were bypassed owing to their foreign birth . 
 The allies decided to divide their forces into two armies : a multinational force that included the 1st Division and a second army composed entirely of Brazilians under Caxias . The 1st Division led by Marques de Sousa , along with Uruguayan and Argentine rebel troops , invaded Argentina . He found the long march to Buenos Aires , the Argentine capital , highly uncomfortable . He had spent his life up to that point fighting Hispanic @-@ Americans , and he was now marching as their ally , surrounded by them . He did not trust them , and they trusted neither him nor his men . The only person among the allies with whom he shared his thoughts , and <unk> at that , was Domingo Faustino Sarmiento ( later president of Argentina ) : " We [ Brazilians ] form in here a separate group ; we do not talk to anyone ; no one approaches us and we could say that we walk among enemies . " On 3 February 1852 , in the Battle of Caseros , they faced Rosas and his army . The allies were victorious , Rosas fled to the United Kingdom , and Marques de Sousa acquired his carriage as a war trophy . 
 = = = Party leader = = = 
 On 3 March 1852 , Marques de Sousa was raised to the rank of field marshal , and Emperor Dom Pedro II conferred on him the noble title of Barão de Porto Alegre ( Baron of Porto Alegre ) . It was a reward for his victory at Caseros , but also a nod to his role in saving the capital of Rio Grande do Sul during 1836 . His exploits achieved great renown in Brazil , where he was referred to as the " <unk> of the Platine Tiger [ Rosas ] " . He replaced Caxias as head of the army that had fought in the war on 26 June , after its return to Brazil . Soon after , on 24 September , the Baron of Porto Alegre was removed from that post and made comandante das armas ( military commander ) of Rio Grande do Sul , a position he held until he requested to be relieved on 5 March 1853 . 
 As one of the largest landowners in Rio Grande do Sul , and now a war hero , Porto Alegre believed that he could win a senatorial seat in 1852 , but his candidacy was a failure . From a list containing the names of the candidates who had received the most votes , Pedro II chose one of Porto Alegre 's rivals as senator . During his campaign , Porto Alegre founded and became head of the " Progressive @-@ Liberal Party " , a provincial coalition drawn from members of both national political parties : the Liberal Party and the Party of Order ( then increasingly known as the Conservative Party ) . His personal life greatly improved after he married Bernardina Soares de <unk> , who was thirty @-@ three years his junior , on 11 June 1855 . Their marriage was happy and produced two daughters , Maria Bernardina in 1860 and Clara in 1873 . Between the death of his first wife and his second marriage , he had a daughter named Maria Manuela Marques , whom he legitimized . Porto Alegre petitioned for , and was granted , a military retirement on 7 July 1856 and was raised to lieutenant general , the second highest rank in the imperial army . 
 The opportunity to graduate from provincial to national politics came soon after . The Conservative prime minister Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão , Marquis of Paraná , faced overwhelming opposition from his own party in parliament . Paraná knew that the party 's principles were seen as irrelevant and ignored at local and provincial levels . A cabinet could use patronage alone to gain backing from local bosses for its national candidates , including in the province of Rio Grande do Sul . Porto Alegre was a Liberal allied to Conservatives in his province . He pledged support to Paraná and in 1857 was elected general deputy ( member of the Chamber of Deputies , the national legislature 's lower house ) . He was reelected in 1860 . 
 On 19 February 1860 , he founded and became the first and only president of the Historic and Geographic Institute of the Province of São Pedro ( as Rio Grande do Sul was also known ) . The institute was short @-@ lived , lasting from 1860 until 1864 . In 1862 , Porto Alegre was among the Liberals who , along with dissident Conservatives , founded the Liga <unk> ( Progressive League ) , which replaced the Liberal Party . He became Minister of War on 24 May as a member of the first Progressive cabinet , headed by Zacarias de Góis e Vasconcelos . However , the cabinet fell after a vote of no confidence six days later . When the Chamber of Deputies was dissolved in 1863 and new elections were called , he was elected and served until 1866 . 
 = = Paraguayan War = = 
 = = = Siege of Uruguaiana = = = 
 In December 1864 , the dictator of Paraguay , Francisco Solano López , ordered the invasion of the Brazilian province of Mato Grosso ( currently the state of Mato Grosso do Sul ) , triggering the Paraguayan War . Four months later , Paraguayan troops invaded Argentine territory in preparation for an attack on Rio Grande do Sul . The situation in Rio Grande do Sul was chaotic , and the local military commanders were incapable of mounting an effective resistance to the Paraguayan army . The Baron of Porto Alegre offered to return to active duty , and on 21 July 1865 , the government gave him command of the Brazilian land forces in Rio Grande do Sul . He set out for Uruguaiana , a small town in the province 's west , where the Paraguayan army was besieged by a combined force of Brazilian , Argentine and Uruguayan units . 
 Porto Alegre assumed the command of the Brazilian army in Uruguaiana on 21 August 1865 . From the very beginning , he had an acrimonious relationship with Brazil 's allies Bartolomé Mitre , president of Argentina , and Venancio Flores , president of Uruguay , who led the armies of their respective nations . The years had not lessened Porto Alegre 's prejudice against Hispanic @-@ Americans ; on the contrary , his antagonism had increased . On 2 September , Flores suggested an immediate attack on Uruguaiana , an option rejected by Porto Alegre and Joaquim Marques Lisboa ( then Viscount and later Marquis of Tamandaré ) , the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Brazilian navy . Tamandaré was a first cousin of Porto Alegre ; their mothers were sisters . When Flores claimed that he could defeat the Paraguayan army alone , he was mocked by both Brazilian officers . 
 Since his arrival in Uruguaiana , Mitre had claimed the position of commander @-@ in @-@ chief of all allied forces participating in the siege — a precedence Porto Alegre vehemently refused to recognize . He reminded the Argentine president that , according to the Treaty of the Triple Alliance , the imperial army would be led by a Brazilian officer while on Brazilian soil . Porto Alegre later argued that " I would prefer to answer to a court @-@ martial rather than to subject myself , in our territory , to the command of a foreign general " . The dispute was temporarily forgotten when Pedro II arrived at the front . The Brazilian monarch settled the dispute when , at his suggestion , the allied army was divided into three forces , one led by Porto Alegre and the other two by Mitre and Flores . On 18 September , the Paraguayan garrison surrendered without further bloodshed . 
 = = = Offensive in Paraguayan territory = = = 
 The allies invaded Paraguay in April 1866 , but after initial success , their advance was blocked by fortifications at Humaitá and along the Paraguay River . Porto Alegre had remained behind , leading the 2nd Corps and guarding Rio Grande do Sul . Mitre , no longer on Brazilian territory and acknowledged as the allied commander @-@ in @-@ chief , planned to use Porto Alegre 's army to march through Paraguayan territory from the rear to surround Humaitá . As a result of a suggestion by Tamandaré — though Mitre had not issued orders for the move — Porto Alegre boarded his army onto Brazilian ships and instead brought them up to the positions occupied by the other allied troops . 
 On 18 August , Porto Alegre received instructions from Mitre to attack the Paraguayan fort at Curuzú . The operation would be carried out under the command of Tamandaré . Porto Alegre not only refused to defer to his cousin , arguing that both held the same rank , but also warned that he would operate by himself at Curuzú . Porto Alegre was incapable of submitting his forces to foreign direction and was unwilling to comply with orders issued by the allied commander . Nor was the situation among the allied forces improved once Porto Alegre and Tamandaré found common ground in their distaste for the Brazilian commander of the 1st Corps , Field Marshal <unk> <unk> Jordão ( later the Viscount of Santa Teresa ) . Jordão was ostracized for supporting Mitre and for being a member of the Conservative Party , while Porto Alegre and Tamandaré were Progressives . 
 Porto Alegre , who had been promoted from baron to viscount , led an amphibious attack that lasted from 1 September until the 3rd . His forces were victorious in the Battle of Curuzú . The allied army next marched to Curupayty , an outer line of defense of Humaitá . The Battle of Curupayty that ensued on 22 September was an immense allied defeat . The allied leaders blamed each other for disastrous failure at Curupayty , but the main focus of Porto Alegre 's denunciations was Mitre . He said : " Here is the result of the Brazilian government 's lack of confidence in its generals and giving its armies to foreign generals . " To end the internecine squabbling , the Brazilian government placed Caxias in command of all Brazilian forces in Paraguay . Formerly friends , Porto Alegre and Caxias ( a member of the Conservative Party ) had been estranged by politics . Tamandaré was replaced by Caxias ' fellow Conservative Chief of Fleet Joaquim José Inácio ( later the Viscount of Inhaúma ) , but Porto Alegre was kept on as head of the 2nd Corps . 
 A little before dawn on 3 November 1867 , the Paraguayans made a surprise attack on the allied camp at Tuyutí , breaching the Argentine lines . When Porto Alegre saw the mayhem — Argentine soldiers fleeing and Paraguayans inside the Brazilian perimeter — he shouted : " Aqui <unk> <unk> o último <unk> ! " ( " In here shall die the very last Brazilian ! " ) . During the Second Battle of Tuyutí , as it was called , he fought with his saber in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat and lost two horses one after the other . Porto Alegre and his troops , outnumbered three to one , stopped the Paraguayan advance and forced the enemy to retreat . Feeling very ill , and unable to mount a horse for a month , Porto Alegre was relieved of command on 27 January 1868 . He returned to Rio Grande do Sul and was raised from viscount to count a few months later . 
 = = Later years = = 
 = = = Return to politics and death = = = 
 On 16 July 1868 , a Progressive cabinet led by Zacarias resigned following a political crisis and Pedro II asked the Conservatives to form a new government . As always when a party returned to power , new elections were held , though marked by fraud . The two main wings of the Progressive Party ( Progressive , to which Porto Alegre belonged , and Historical ) set aside their disputes , became more disciplined in their unity and renamed their party the Liberal Party . When Porto Alegre 's term as general deputy ended in 1866 , the ongoing war precluded elections in Rio Grande do Sul . Predictably , in the elections organized under the Conservative Party 's direction in early 1869 , he was not elected . He turned his attention to organizing a Liberal stronghold in his native province . At the request of the national Liberal Center , Porto Alegre created and became president of the province 's Liberal board of directors . 
 Around the same time , the count focused on two other projects : the first grew out of his longstanding interest in promoting literature and sciences , and the second , more ambitious aim was to fight for the gradual abolition of slavery . When in 1867 Pedro II openly asked for the gradual eradication of slavery in his Speech from the Throne , Porto Alegre was one of the few individuals who supported him , sending him a letter of congratulation . On 18 June 1869 , the <unk> <unk> ( Literary Parthenon ) , a spiritual successor to the Historic and Geographic Institute of the Province of São Pedro , was created and Porto Alegre was made an honorary member . In one of its sessions , the count , who had already embarked on a plan of gradually freeing his own slaves , proposed the creation of a civil association devoted to slavery 's abolition . His idea was not only welcomed , but came to fruition . The <unk> Libertadora ( Liberation Society ) was founded on 29 August , with Porto Alegre as its president , its primary purpose being the purchase of freedom for enslaved children . 
 Porto Alegre was elected general deputy in 1872 for the legislature that would be seated in that year . José Paranhos , Viscount of Rio Branco , headed a Conservative cabinet that faced strong opposition from its own party members . To widen the cabinet 's base of support , the prime minister set the 1872 elections to gain more supporters of his cabinet , even members of the Liberal Party like Porto Alegre , in Parliament . While serving as a general deputy , he lived in a hotel . He spent his time either attending Parliament or in the house of his sister Joaquina Marques de Sousa , who had married a member of the influential Carneiro Leão clan . While leaving the house of fellow Liberal João <unk> da Cunha <unk> ( later Marquis of <unk> ) , Porto Alegre fell while boarding his coupé . The injury he suffered led to an abscess and subsequently gangrene . Despite the pain he complained little , other than to utter : " This is too much . " He died at 07 : 00 on the morning of 18 July 1875 . His remains were accorded solemn funereal honors in Rio de Janeiro , Rio Grande and lastly , Porto Alegre . Among the men who carried his coffin in the imperial capital were Caxias , Rio Branco , Tamandaré and Irineu Evangelista de Sousa , Viscount of <unk> . He was interred in the <unk> da Santa Casa de Misericórdia ( Holy House of Mercy cemetery ) in Porto Alegre . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The Count of Porto Alegre was admired during his lifetime and for sometime thereafter . Felisberto Caldeira Brant , Baron of <unk> ( son of the Marquis of <unk> ) thought that " Marques de Sousa was the most brilliant type of soldier : heroic and patriotic . " José Paranhos , Baron of Rio Branco , said that he was " one of the most illustrious warriors that Brazil has had . " Alfredo d 'Escragnolle Taunay , Viscount of Taunay , regarded him a " great warrior " . Almost ten years after the count 's death , a marble statue representing him was unveiled on 2 February 1885 in the city of Porto Alegre . The celebration was accompanied by popular joy and an artillery salute , and was attended by Dona Isabel , daughter and heiress of Pedro II , and her husband Prince Gaston , Count of Eu . 
 The downfall of the monarchy in 1889 brought sudden changes in how past events were viewed . The Ragamuffins were reframed as heroes in Rio Grande do Sul , and Porto Alegre became an awkward reminder and symbol of the fallen regime . The memories of other imperial officers , Porto Alegre 's contemporaries , were subject to the same sort of revisionism , including the Duke of Caxias . After Porto Alegre 's death a marble tablet with the inscription " Here was born the worthy Count of Porto Alegre " was put at the entrance of the house where he was born . The plaque was removed in 1893 by the property 's owner and left to deteriorate . In the late 1890s , historian <unk> Ferreira Rodrigues lamented that it was the " testimony of one day 's passing gratitude and of the indifference , of the abandonment , of the ingratitude , in which we [ Brazilians ] , a people without civic education , know how to prize the services of the great men of the past . " Although the Brazilian army remembered Caxias and celebrated his centennial in 1903 , Porto Alegre 's centennial in 1904 passed unnoticed . 
 The work of historians has restored Porto Alegre 's reputation to a certain extent . Heitor Lira said that " Porto Alegre was certainly an officer of great valor " . Antônio da Rocha Almeida considered Porto Alegre " one of the greatest soldiers of Brazil " . Gustavo Barroso regarded him " the greatest military figure in Brazil , after Caxias and Osório " . Dante de <unk> said that he " was one of the most brilliant military leaders in the History of Brazil . " On 16 October 1974 , Porto Alegre was accorded the minor honor of being designated the <unk> ( protector ) of the 8th Cavalry regiment , which was given the name " <unk> Conde de Porto Alegre " ( Count of Porto Alegre Regiment ) . 
 = = Titles and honors = = 
 = = = Titles of nobility = = = 
 Baron of Porto Alegre ( Grandee ) on 3 March 1852 . 
 Viscount of Porto Alegre ( Grandee ) on 28 August 1866 . 
 Count of Porto Alegre on 11 April 1868 . 
 = = = Other titles = = = 
 President of the Historic and Geographic Institute of the Province of São Pedro ( Rio Grande do Sul ) . 
 Honorary member of the Literary Parthenon of Porto Alegre . 
 President of the Liberation Society . 
 = = = Honors = = = 
 Grand Cross of the Order of Christ . 
 Dignitary of the Brazilian Order of the Southern Cross . 
 Knight of the Order of Saint Benedict of Aviz . 
 = = = Military honors = = = 
 Medal of the Cisplatine Campaign ( 1811 and 1812 ) . 
 Medal of the Cisplatine Campaign ( 1815 to 1820 ) . 
 Medal of Monte Caseros . 
 Medal of Uruguaiana . 
 Medal of Merit due to military bravery . 
 Medal of Paraguay . 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = Dream Logic = 
 " Dream Logic " is the fifth episode of the second season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe , and the 25th episode overall . It was written by Josh Singer and directed by Paul A. Edwards . The episode follows several people seemingly dreaming while still awake , leading the Fringe team to investigate the dangerous side effects of a sleep study . 
 On its initial American broadcast on October 15 , 2009 on the Fox network , " Dream Logic " was watched by an estimated 5 @.@ 78 million viewers . It received mixed reviews , with multiple critics noting it was considerably worse in quality than the previous week 's episode while at the same time praising the case 's ties to Peter 's past as well as the return of Sam Weiss . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Seattle a man named Greg Leiter ( Jim Thorburn ) hallucinates that his boss and coworkers are demons , leading Greg to attack and murder the boss . Greg is hospitalized and falls asleep for sixteen hours ; when Olivia ( Anna Torv ) and Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) interview him in the hospital , he tells them his boss was a demon out of a bad dream before suffering a seizure and having his hair turn white . Walter ( John Noble ) posits that Greg died from " acute exhaustion " . However , believing Seattle to be like the mental institution , Walter desires to go home to Boston and run tests on the corpse from there . 
 Olivia and Peter learn Greg was being treated for a sleep disorder , and that his dreams had involved demons until they stopped several months ago . Another hallucinating victim turns up in Seattle and dies . The Fringe team discover that both victims had a brain – computer interface chip attached to their thalamus , the part of the brain controlling dreams . Broyles ( Lance Reddick ) and Nina ( Blair Brown ) reveal new information leading to the sleep researcher Dr. Nayak ( Ravi Kapoor ) who implanted the chips . Another victim named Diana ( <unk> Huguet ) hallucinates at a restaurant and kills a coworker before similarly dying of exhaustion . 
 Olivia and Peter first suspect Dr. Nayak 's research assistant Zach ( Jarrett Knowles ) but find him dead . Back in Boston Walter believes the chips lead to mind control and tests this on the FBI agent assigned to him while Peter and Olivia are away . However , during these tests Walter soon changes his theory ; the dreams are being stolen from their hosts to cause a " high " in Dr. Nayak , who is receiving them and has two personalities . Peter and Olivia shut down the dream equipment before Nayak kills another victim , but the doctor dies in the process . The final scene shows Peter dreaming about his childhood when Walter kidnaps him , an event Peter normally has no memory of ; Peter wakes up confused but still unaware of what his father did . 
 In a sideplot , Olivia is grieving for her partner Charlie ( Kirk Acevedo ) , whom she discovered was murdered by a shapeshifter in the previous episode . Sam Weiss ( Kevin Corrigan ) helps her work through it by giving her a " project " that requires her to collect business cards from people wearing the color red . She is told to grab random letters from the names , that once unscrambled read " you 're gonna be fine " . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Dream Logic " was written by co @-@ executive producer Josh Singer and was directed by cinematographer Paul A. Edwards . It was filmed in August 2009 . Shooting partly took place in the basement of a semi @-@ functioning mental hospital in Vancouver , leading actress Anna Torv to remark during filming , " I heard this is where they kept dead bodies . Bad vibes in this place . " Actor Joshua Jackson noted that the hospital 's " patients are known to wander through a shot . This has the potential for being a very interesting day . " 
 " Dream Logic " featured a guest appearance by recurring guest star Kevin Corrigan , as well as one time guest actors Ravi Kapoor , Jim Thorburn , Travis Schuldt , Drew Nelson , and Alex Zahara . 
 = = Music and cultural references = = 
 " Dream Logic " featured the song " From the Beginning " by the progressive rock trio Emerson , Lake & Palmer . Dr. Nayak 's lab assistant is named Zack Miller , which was perceived by some media outlets to be a reference to frequent Fringe writing partners Zack Stentz and Ashley Edward Miller . In the final scene set in the young Peter 's bedroom in the parallel universe , a poster depicts the Space Shuttle Challenger in its 11th mission ( 1984 ) . However , in the prime universe the Challenger exploded in its 10th mission two years later . One viewer noted this as yet another sign that the parallel universe is more technologically advanced than ours , as they began their space program earlier than ours . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 On its initial American broadcast on October 15 , 2009 , an estimated 5 @.@ 78 million viewers watched " Dream Logic " , helping it earn a 3 @.@ 5 / 6 ratings share among all households and a 2 @.@ 2 / 6 ratings share in the important 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 AOL TV writer Jane Boursaw wrote , " The whole storyline with the creepy dual @-@ personality doc and the mind @-@ control @-@ dreams was good , though I sort of knew the doc must be involved from the beginning . I also wonder how it fits in with the alternate universe . " The A.V. Club 's Zack Handlen graded the episode with a B- . Ken Tucker from Entertainment Weekly believed that " in some ways , this was one of the less @-@ distinctive , more X @-@ Files @-@ ish episodes of Fringe on Thursday night ... But as usual , there was another narrative layer at work here " involving a grieving Olivia . IGN 's Ramsey Isler rated the episode 7 @.@ 4 / 10 , explaining the case @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week failed to have " excitement , surprise , and suspense " and lacked " what makes a typical Fringe episode unique and intriguing " . While calling certain parts " kind of boring " , Isler did however praise the episode 's directing , acting , sets , and other technical aspects . He concluded his review by noting the best part of " Dream Logic " was the ending depicting a young Peter , " It 's a haunting scene , and it adds yet another stone in this long pathway to revelation that the Fringe team is building up to ... But besides that great little scene at the end , I thought this was an average episode . Granted , Fringe 's ' average ' episodes are still better than a lot of the other stuff on TV . " 
 MTV writer Josh Wigler thought the episode " nearly put [ him ] to sleep , " as it was " bland " and " a bit of a dud " . The episode however did lead Wigler to " start dig [ ging ] " Sam Weiss , and also to enjoying Olivia 's subplot , but believed the episode 's monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week could have been used to actually parallel her trauma ; Wigler appreciated how the Fringe case tied into Walter and Peter 's backstories . He concluded , " It wasn 't bad enough to make me concerned for the future of Fringe or anything , but it certainly didn 't keep me on the edge of my seat waiting for the next crazy twist like last week . I 'm still loving this season , but tonight 's episode was one of the weaker outings . " Newsarama 's Chanel Reeder stated " Dream Logic " " certainly put the brakes on the speed that Fringe had gained in the previous " episode , but praised the connection with Peter 's past as " one of the most interesting underlying parts " . Reeder 's favorite part was Sam Weiss , calling him " a fantastic dimension to the show " . Josie Kafka of Open Salon was more positive than other reviewers , and in particular highlighted the episode 's humor , " Almost all of the Cambridge scenes were funny : Astrid and Walter have a great rapport , especially when there 's a rube in the room for them to play with . " She concluded " I liked this one , more for the great Peter / Olivia and Walter / Astrid stuff than the plot of the week , " and gave the episode " Three out of four anagrams " . 
 After the episode 's broadcast , Popular Mechanics published an article analyzing the science depicted . They concluded that the Brain – computer interface ( BCI ) chips , like the ones used in the episode to tie the victims ' brains to the computer used by Dr. <unk> Nayak , have also been used on real @-@ life human subjects , though not in relation to controlling sleep cycles . However , the article continued that it is " not currently possible " for BCI chips to " facilitate direct transfer of understandable information from one person 's brain to another " , nor is it possible for the chips to " directly read another person 's thoughts or dreams " and steal them . In addition , Popular Mechanics noted that Walter 's theory of the victims ' deaths being caused by exhaustion is " pure bunk " , as there are many long @-@ term experiments that have safely tested humans ' deprivation of REM sleep . According to one scientist interviewed , though chips shown in " Dream Logic " cause hallucinations , paranoid thoughts , and a disconnect from reality , these traits are " not even remotely possible " outside of fiction . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Director Paul A. Edwards submitted " Dream Logic " for consideration in the Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series category at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards . He did not receive a nomination . 
 = Charles McKnight = 
 Charles McKnight ( October 10 , 1750 – November 16 , 1791 ) was an American physician during and after the American Revolutionary War . He served as a surgeon and physician in the Hospital Department of the Continental Army under General George Washington and other subordinate commanders . McKnight was one of the most respected surgeons of his day and was remembered by one colleague as " particularly distinguished as a practical surgeon … at the time of his death ( he ) was without a rival in that branch of his profession . " 
 = = Early life = = 
 McKnight was born in Cranbury Township in the colonial Province of New Jersey in 1750 . His only sibling was his younger brother , Richard . His father , also named Charles McKnight , emigrated to the colonies from Ireland sometime around 1740 and was ordained as a Presbyterian minister in 1742 . He became a minister of some note , and was one of the founders and trustees of the College of New Jersey ( now Princeton University ) . Reverend McKnight opposed British governance in Colonial America and was a loud voice for opposition and overthrow of the British government in New Jersey . According to Martha J. Lamb , Reverend McKnight received a severe saber cut to his head in the slashing melee that mortally wounded General Hugh Mercer at the Battle of Princeton . His church at Middletown Point was burned in 1777 and Reverend McKnight was arrested . While in custody aboard the British prison ship HMS Jersey in New York City , Rev. McKnight 's health rapidly failed , and he was released shortly before his death on January 1 , 1778 . 
 The younger McKnight attended schools in New Jersey and graduated from the College of New Jersey in 1771 , in the same class as James Madison , Gunning Bedford , Jr . , Henry Brackenridge , and Philip Freneau . He was one of the founders of the American Whig Society , along with Brackenridge , Madison , Samuel Stanhope Smith , Bedford , Freneau , John Beatty , John Henry of Maryland , and William Bradford . McKnight studied medicine and surgery privately with eminent Philadelphia surgeon William Shippen , but left before he completed his studies and entered the Continental Army in 1775 . 
 = = Continental Army surgeon = = 
 In late 1775 , Benjamin Church , the Director General , assigned McKnight to the Putnam House building , one of six hospitals of the army 's Hospital Department in Cambridge , Massachusetts . He remained in that division , which supported Washington 's army , until , during a period of great scarcity of medical and surgical supplies for the sick and wounded , McKnight went with other surgeons and physicians to North Castle , New York with Washington 's army when the Battle of White Plains began in October 1776 . The Continental Army lost the battle , and the British took Fort Washington and Fort Lee , which pushed Washington 's ragged army south toward New Jersey in December 1776 , which set the stage for the Battle of Trenton . 
 McKnight remained at North Castle until John Morgan , the Director General , ordered him and Samuel Adams , Jr . ( the son of Samuel Adams of Massachusetts ) to set up a new hospital near Peekskill , New York , for more than 300 sick soldiers of General William Heath 's division . Unable to find an acceptable site for a hospital , the two surgeons took over accommodations in Fishkill , New York , twenty miles north of Peekskill . Washington , however , sent convalescents to Peekskill because Morgan told him the hospital was there . Morgan was dismissed as Director General soon thereafter , in January 1777 , due to rancor with Washington over supplies and a rampant smallpox epidemic then raging its way through the army . Morgan 's management style rankled the surgeons , including McKnight , as Morgan was wrestling with Shippen , McKnight 's mentor , over control of the hospitals in New Jersey . Isaac Foster took over temporary supervision of the hospitals on the east side of the Hudson River after Morgan 's dismissal at Washington 's request . 
 McKnight served later as a surgeon in the Pennsylvania Battalion of the Flying Camp . On April 11 , 1777 , He was appointed Surgeon General ( also called Senior Surgeon , a subordinate position to Physician General and Director General , not to be confused with Surgeon General of the United States Army ) of the Flying Hospital of the Middle Department , which moved with the army during the New York and New Jersey campaign . He served as Senior Surgeon for three years . In December 1779 , McKnight was in Morristown , New Jersey with Washington , at the encampment near Jockey Hollow , during the worst winter of the Revolutionary War . 
 The Hospital Department of the army was reorganized in 1780 , and McKnight was promoted to Chief Hospital Physician , the highest medical position of the Middle Department . He served there until he left the army in January 1782 . According to records , he was one of the original members of the New York State Society of the Cincinnati . 
 = = Later years and death = = 
 After the war ended , McKnight settled in New York City , where he married Mary Morin Scott , daughter of General John Morin Scott . He opened a private practice and was one of the first physicians to use a carriage to visit his patients . McKnight published only one article , the surgical removal of an ectopic pregnancy , but the piece was cited later by the Medical Society of London in its London Medical Observations and Inquiries . 
 On November 26 , 1784 , McKnight was appointed one of the first regents of the University of the State of New York . In 1785 , McKnight became professor of anatomy and surgery at Columbia College ( now the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons ) , which his father @-@ in @-@ law co @-@ founded . He also was appointed Port Physician of New York . McKnight maintained a steady surgical practice and held his professorship until his death from pneumonia , the result of an old war injury , on November 16 , 1791 at age 41 . 
 McKnight was interred at the corner of Wall Street and Broadway in Lower Manhattan , just beyond the gates of the historic Trinity Churchyard , next to his wife , Mary , and her father . They left four daughters and one son , John Morin Scott McKnight , who also became a physician . 
 = Boys ( Britney Spears song ) = 
 " Boys " is a song recorded by American singer Britney Spears for her third studio album , Britney ( 2001 ) . It was written and produced by Chad Hugo and Pharrell Williams ( known collectively as The Neptunes ) . A version of the song , entitled the " The Co @-@ Ed Remix " , was released as the sixth and final single from Britney on July 29 , 2002 . The new version also served as the second single from the soundtrack of Austin Powers in Goldmember . " Boys " is a R & B and hip hop song , including funk influences . The remix carries a slower tempo than the album version , and both versions are noted to be reminiscent of Janet Jackson . Some critics praised Williams and Spears ' chemistry , as well as the production on the track , while others did not think the song worked well . 
 While the song did not perform well on the Billboard charts in the United States , it reached the top ten on the Belgian charts and in Ireland and the United Kingdom , and charted in the top 20 in Australia , Germany , Austria , Switzerland , Sweden , Finland , and Denmark . The song would later be certified Gold in Australia . The song 's accompanying music video , directed by Dave Meyers , was nominated at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards for " Best Video from a Film . " The clip features Spears and Williams at a party . The singer has performed " Boys " a number of times including at the 2002 NBA All @-@ Star Game , on Saturday Night Live , and on several of her concert tours . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Boys " was originally recorded by Janet Jackson before it was given to Spears . The song was originally included on Spears ' third , self @-@ titled studio album . It was written and produced by The Neptunes ( Chad Hugo and Pharrell Williams ) — members of American rap group N.E.R.D .. The song was re @-@ recorded as " The Co @-@ Ed Remix " , with a slightly different sound , and added featured vocals from Pharrell Williams . Following its inclusion on the Austin Powers in Goldmember OST , it was released as the second single from the soundtrack , following " Work It Out " , performed by one of the film 's stars ' , Beyoncé . The release also made it the sixth single release to come from Britney . A press release for Maverick Records called the track a standout from the film 's soundtrack , and said that Spears ' cameo in the film " brings superstar status to the Fembot brigade . " The release also stated that the song and video " stays true to the fractured funk [ at ] the heart of the film . " AOL Music premiered the new track on June 13 , 2002 , and it was streamed more than 1 @.@ 35 million times , setting a new record an AOL Music " First Listen . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Boys " is a song that combines R & B with hip hop . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by EMI Music Publishing , it is set in the time signature of common time and has a tempo of 108 beats per minute . While the original Britney version features Spears solely , " The Co @-@ ed Remix " which was released as a single , sees the singer and the song 's co @-@ producer , rapper Pharrell Williams trading lines . The remix version of the track contains a slower tempo then that of the original . According to the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel , Williams and Spears put on a " rap @-@ lite teen @-@ pop tease . " The song also includes influences of funk music . During the time of the album 's release , her official site stated that the song had aspects of 70 's soul music and influences of Prince 's music . According to Alex Needham of New Musical Express , the track takes influence from Janet Jackson . David Browne of Entertainment Weekly said the song was " cut @-@ rate ' 80s Janet Jackson . " Lyrical content sees Spears eying a guy with an intent to " get nasty . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Calling the song " a decidedly <unk> duet " , Alex Needham of New Musical Express said that " She sings about boys , he sings about girls . A simple concept , but an effective one , resulting in Britney ’ s best single [ in ] ages . " David Browne of Entertainment Weekly said that The Neptunes ' productions on the album , " I 'm a Slave 4 U " and " Boys " " swaddle her in writhing , kick @-@ the @-@ can beats , but never have a groove and a verse been so betrayed by a limp chorus . " Nicki Tranter of PopMatters said that the remainder of the album was " tried and tested " dance @-@ pop , noting " Boys " and " Cinderella " revisiting " old Britney territory exploring predictable issues including her love being irreplaceable , her use of the dance floor as an appropriate courting place , and her much @-@ loved girl @-@ ness . " Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly called it a " popping , Janet @-@ esque groove . " Yale Daily News writer Catherine Halaby considered the song " an envelope @-@ pushing ( when you consider her claims of wholesomeness ) smutfest . " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 The song failed to make much of an impact in the United States , only appearing on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 chart , where it appeared at number 22 . " Boys " is so far Britney Spears least successful single in the U.S. It appeared on the Billboard Pop Songs chart at number 32 . In Canada , on the Canadian Singles Chart , the song performed better , reaching number 21 . " Boys " fared better internationally , appearing in the top 20 in several markets in which it charted . On the UK Singles Chart , the song peaked at number seven . It also peaked in the top ten of the Irish Singles Chart and both the Belgian Flanders and Wallonia Ultratop charts . On the ARIA Singles Chart in Australia , the song spent 12 weeks on the chart , peaking at number 14 . " Boys " would go on to be certified Gold in Australia by the Australian Recording Industry Association . Furthermore , it peaked in the top 20 of the charts in Germany , Austria , Switzerland , Sweden , Finland , and Denmark . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Boys " was directed by Dave Meyers . In the video , a man DJ Qualls , tries to get into a castle which is hosting a party being attended by Spears . When the security guards refuse to grant him access , he begins to scream for Spears . As the music starts , Spears , readying herself for the party in one of the castle 's towers , is dancing with a group of women . The scene shifts to a castle courtyard , where Spears and a man are sit at opposite ends of a long table . Following this , Spears walks around a pool , in which she sees a man ( Justin Bruening ) swimming . As they begin to interact with each other , Pharrell is at the bar with a woman . Spears walks over to him and they begin to talk . Following this , Spears dances with a group of people , including Mike Myers as Austin Powers . Actors Jason Priestley , Justin Bruening and Taye Diggs also make cameo appearances in the video . Its choreography was favorably likened to Janet Jackson . The video was nominated for at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards for Best Video from a Film , but lost to Eminem 's " Lose Yourself . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Spears performed " Boys " on multiple occasions . She performed the song on February 10 , 2002 at the 2002 NBA All @-@ Star Game . She also performed it on the twenty @-@ seventh season of Saturday Night Live on February 2 , 2002 . She performed the song as a mash @-@ up with " I 'm a Slave 4 U " on her ABC special , In the Zone , to promote her fourth album In the Zone . In the United Kingdom , Spears performed the song on CD : UK . On the 2001 Dream Within a Dream Tour , Spears performed it wearing a tank @-@ top and suspenders . In the tour 's extension in 2002 , she replaced the original version with the remix on the tour . 
 On The Onyx Hotel Tour in 2004 , it featured male dancers pushing her while she was standing in luggage carts . During her performance of the song on The Circus Starring Britney Spears , the singer performed wearing a military costume , while surrounded by her dancers , some of them riding bicycles . The rendition was described as a " Rhythm Nation @-@ like military stomp . " On 2011 's Femme Fatale Tour , Spears wears a golden cape for a snake charming number of the song . Spears included " Boys " on the setlist of her 2013 @-@ 15 Las Vegas residency , Britney : Piece of Me . During this performance , she and her dancers wear neon outfits . Sophie Schillaci from MTV considered the performance " crowd @-@ pleasing " . 
 = = Usage in media = = 
 The song has been performed in a mash up with Justin Bieber 's " Boyfriend " by Kevin McHale and Darren Criss ( respectively as their characters Artie Abrams and Blaine Anderson ) in the musical TV series Glee in the second episode of season four , " Britney 2 @.@ 0 " ( aired on September 20 , 2012 ) , which is also the show 's second tribute episode to Britney Spears . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Klein Bikes = 
 Klein Bikes was a bicycle company founded by Gary Klein that pioneered the use of large diameter aluminum alloy tubes for greater stiffness and lower weight . 
 Klein produced his first bicycle frames whilst a student at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology during the 1970s , and full production runs of frames began in the 1980s . In 1995 the company was purchased by the Trek Bicycle Corporation , and the original Klein factory at Chehalis closed in 2002 as production moved to the Trek headquarters at Waterloo . Widespread distribution in the United States stopped in 2007 , and ceased altogether in the rest of the world in 2009 . 
 = = History = = 
 Gary Klein , born ( 1952 @-@ 06 @-@ 09 ) June 9 , 1952 , attended the University of California at Davis before transferring to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) . During the Independent Activities Period in 1973 , a group of students including Klein worked together under Professor Buckley to produce an aluminum framed bicycle . After analysing a number of contemporary steel frames , and examining ones that had broken in use , they were able to determine the stresses placed on a bicycle frame . Faced with limited available types of aluminum alloy tubing , the students chose to construct frames from 6061 aluminium alloy seamless drawn tube ; alternatives such as the stronger <unk> aluminum alloy were discarded because of the tubing dimensions . 
 After graduating from MIT in 1974 with a degree in chemical engineering , Klein took a business course for entrepreneurs . As a keen road racer , in 1975 , he started a business project with three other people and built a limited run of aluminum alloy framed bikes at the MIT Innovation Center , using a US $ 20 @,@ 000 grant provided by MIT and US $ 1 @,@ 000 of capital from each partner . The prototypes , with larger diameter tubes and thinner walls than those produced in 1973 , were displayed at the International cycle show in New York in the February of 1975 . 
 The next year , he relocated to some disused buildings on his parents ' farm in San Martin , California that had previously been used for dehydrating prunes . In 1977 , he patented use of large diameter aluminum alloy tubes to increase stiffness , and in 1980 , he moved from San Jose , California , to Chehalis , Washington . He started production runs of road bicycles in the early 1980s and mountain bikes in the mid 1980s . 
 Whilst Klein 's use of aluminium for a bicycle frames was not entirely novel , his use of large diameter tubes was . Aluminium alloys have a Young 's modulus around a third that of steel , but with thicker tubes he was able to make a bicycle that weighed around 15 % less than a conventional model . 
 In 1995 , Trek bought Klein bikes , after Klein found it hard to compete without the sales network of a larger company in place . 
 At its peak , around 250 people worked at the Chehalis plant , but operation gradually moved to the main Trek factory in Wisconsin . In 2001 , a workforce of around 70 people produced 15 @,@ 000 to 20 @,@ 000 frames a year . In 2002 , all production moved to the Trek headquarters at Waterloo , Wisconsin . Bikes were still sold under the Klein name until around 2009 in Japan , but widespread distribution ceased circa 2007 in the United States . 
 A green Klein mountain bike can be seen hanging on the wall in Jerry Seinfeld 's apartment in the television show Seinfeld . 
 = = Innovations = = 
 Some off @-@ road models featured two designs of one @-@ piece welded stem @-@ bar combination , marketed as " Mission Control " ( MC ) , that eliminated clamping bolts and excess material . The original version , <unk> , used a quill stem and required a 1 inch ( 25 mm ) threaded steerer . MC2 used a <unk> tightening against a collet that sat between the fork steerer and the stem , and a special eight pointed wrench was required to remove it . The steerer had to be cut to the correct length in order to adjust the height of the stem . <unk> was a third version that was only the stem , thus the handlebar was not welded . 
 Klein held a patent ( US <unk> ) for an improved method of routing cables through the frame of a bicycle , that reduced aerodynamic drag and stress on the frame . The front and rear derailleur cables were routed through the down tube , and the rear brake cable through the top tube , although some models changed in 2002 to top tube cable routing for greater harmonisation with Shimano components . 
 In the 2002 model year , Klein replaced 6061 aluminium alloy with a new alloy called ZR 9000 , that used zirconium in place of chromium ; the new alloy had not been assigned an industry number and it was named after the unused 9000 series . Advertised improvements included a 190 grams ( 6 @.@ 7 oz ) decrease in weight per frame and a fatigue life five times longer than the 2001 model year frames . 
 = = Techniques = = 
 Klein bicycles were famous for their paintwork , and offered a large number of custom colours and patterns . The paint used was a <unk> enamel non @-@ metallic paint that cost up to US $ 1 @,@ 800 per gallon . The Klein logo was <unk> into the frame by painting the frame in the colour of the logo , then applying a mask and painting the pattern . 
 Beginning with the MC2 frames , Klein used " Gradient tubing " , where the wall thickness varied along the length and diameter of the tube . Highly manipulated <unk> on mountain bikes allowed a tighter rear triangle to accommodate large off @-@ road tyres , and facilitated efficient transfer of power . 
 <unk> aluminium needed heat treating to restore strength lost in welding . After the treatment , frames were required to be aligned to within 0 @.@ 004 inches ( 0 @.@ 10 mm ) on all alignment surfaces , and were then machined to within 0 @.@ 0002 inches ( 0 @.@ 0051 mm ) . 
 = = Models = = 
 Klein produced both mountain bikes and road bikes . 
 Models are sourced from the official catalogue for that particular year . Years marked in red are incomplete due to a lack of reliable source information . 
 = = Sponsored teams = = 
 Klein made custom bikes for San Francisco 's Lombardi team which were ridden in 2001 . German cycling team Gerolsteiner rode Klein Quantum frames before 2003 , when Gerolsteiner changed their bike sponsor to Wilier Triestina . For the 2004 season , Klein sponsored the <unk> Joe 's cycling team . 
 = <unk> electric ray = 
 The onefin electric ray or Cape numbfish ( Narke capensis ) is a common but little @-@ known species of electric ray in the family <unk> , native to South Africa and Namibia . It is a benthic fish found in shallow coastal bays over sandy or muddy bottoms . This small species reaches 38 cm ( 15 in ) in length , and has a nearly circular pectoral fin disc and a short , muscular tail that supports a large caudal fin . It can be identified by its single dorsal fin , which is located over the large pelvic fins . Its dorsal coloration is yellowish to dusky brown . 
 Like other members of its family , the onefin electric ray can defend itself with a strong electric shock produced from a pair of kidney @-@ shaped electric organs beside its head . It feeds mainly on polychaete worms , and likely gives birth to live young . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) presently lacks enough information to assess the conservation status of this species . It is often caught incidentally by bottom trawl fisheries off South Africa , and may also be impacted by pollution from coastal development . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The onefin electric ray was described by German naturalist Johann Friedrich Gmelin in 1789 , in the 13th edition of Systema Naturae . Gmelin 's name for the species was printed as Raja capensis in some copies of the book , and as Raja <unk> in others . The original spelling was probably <unk> , which modern taxonomists regard as a typesetting error as the etymology of capensis ( " of the Cape [ of Good Hope ] " ) is far more reasonable . Later sources have consistently used capensis , though to officially fix the specific epithet under that spelling would require a decision by the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature ( ICZN ) . Gmelin did not refer to any type specimens . In 1826 , German naturalist Johann Jakob <unk> created the new genus Narke for this species , separating it from the other electric rays known at the time on the basis of its curved back and single dorsal fin . Later , more species were assigned to Narke . 
 = = Description = = 
 The pectoral fin disc of the onefin electric ray is wider than long and almost circular in shape . The two large , kidney @-@ shaped electric organs are visible beneath the skin on either side of the head . The eyes are small and protruding ; the larger spiracles lie closely behind and have three small finger @-@ like projections on their rims . The nostrils are placed rather close together , and between them is a long skirt @-@ like flap of skin that reaches the mouth . The small and protrusible mouth is nearly straight and surrounded by prominent furrows . The teeth are tiny and pointed . There are five pairs of small gill slits on the underside of the disc . 
 The large and broad pelvic fins have convex margins and originate beneath the pectoral fins . Adult males have stubby claspers . There is a single rounded dorsal fin positioned over the pelvic fins . The short and thick tail has a skin fold running along either side and terminates in a large triangular caudal fin with rounded corners , which is almost symmetrical above and below . The soft skin is completely devoid of dermal denticles . This species varies from yellowish brown to dusky brown above ; parts of the tail 's upper surface are yellowish . The underside is white to yellow with brown fin margins . It grows up to 38 cm ( 15 in ) long and 26 cm ( 10 in ) across , though individuals of this size are rare . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The onefin electric ray is common off the Eastern and Western Cape Provinces of South Africa . Its range extends to central Namibia , with a single specimen recorded from <unk> Bay and a second unconfirmed sighting from Walvis Bay . A historical record of this species from Madagascar may be a misidentification . Bottom @-@ dwelling in nature , the onefin electric ray mainly inhabits bays with sandy or muddy bottoms . It is most often found in waters shallower than 50 – 100 m ( 160 – 330 ft ) , though it has been recorded from as deep as 183 m ( 600 ft ) . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 Relative to its small size , the onefin electric ray can deliver an extremely powerful electric shock to defend itself against predators , which include the broadnose sevengill shark ( Notorynchus cepedianus ) . It propels itself using its muscular tail rather than its pectoral fins . The diet of this species consists mainly of polychaete worms . The reproductive biology of the onefin electric ray has not been documented ; presumably it is viviparous like other electric rays . Males mature sexually at somewhere between 11 and 17 cm ( 4 @.@ 3 and 6 @.@ 7 in ) long , while females mature at around 16 cm ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) long . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 The shock produced by the onefin electric ray can be painful , but is not substantially dangerous to humans . Though not utilized economically , this ray is frequently caught as bycatch in bottom trawls in South African waters . Because of its inshore habits , it may also be negatively affected by water pollution from coastal development . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has listed this species as Data Deficient due to lack of specific data , while noting that its vulnerability to fishing and habitat degradation may merit concern . 
 = Anarky = 
 Anarky is a fictional character , appearing in comic books published by DC Comics . Co @-@ created by Alan Grant and Norm Breyfogle , he first appeared in Detective Comics No. 608 ( November 1989 ) , as an adversary of Batman . Introduced as Lonnie Machin , a child prodigy with knowledge of radical philosophy and driven to overthrow governments to improve social conditions , stories revolving around Anarky often focus on political and philosophical themes . The character , who is named after the philosophy of anarchism , primarily espouses anti @-@ statism ; however , multiple social issues have been addressed through the character , including environmentalism , antimilitarism , economic inequality , and political corruption . Inspired by multiple sources , early stories featuring the character often included homages to political and philosophical books , and referenced anarchist philosophers and theorists . The inspiration for the creation of the character and its early development was based in Grant 's personal interest in anti @-@ authoritarian philosophy and politics . However , when Grant himself transitioned to the philosophy of Neo @-@ Tech , developed by Frank R. Wallace , he shifted the focus of Anarky from a vehicle for socialist and populist philosophy , to rationalist , atheist , and free market thinking . 
 Originally intended to only be used in the debut story in which he appeared , Grant decided to continue using Anarky as a sporadically recurring character throughout the early 1990s , following positive reception by readers and Dennis O 'Neil . The character experienced a brief surge in media exposure during the late 1990s when Norm Breyfogle convinced Grant to produce a limited series based on the character . The 1997 spin @-@ off series , Anarky , was received with positive reviews and sales , and later declared by Grant to be among his " career highlights " . Batman : Anarky , a trade paperback collection of stories featuring the character , soon followed . This popular acclaim culminated , however , in a financially and critically unsuccessful ongoing solo series . The 1999 Anarky series , in which even Grant has expressed his distaste , was quickly canceled after eight issues . 
