 Following the cancellation of the Anarky series , and Grant 's departure from DC Comics , Anarky experienced a prolonged period of absence from DC publications , despite professional and fan interest in his return . This period of obscurity lasted approximately nine years , with three brief interruptions for minor cameo appearances in 2000 , 2001 , and 2005 . In 2008 , Anarky reappeared in an issue of Robin authored by Fabian Nicieza , with the intention of ending this period of obscurity . The storyline drastically altered the character 's presentation , prompting a series of responses by Nicieza to concerned readers . Anarky became a recurring character in issues of Red Robin , authored by Nicieza , until the series was cancelled in 2011 in the aftermath of The New 52 . A new Anarky was introduced into the New 52 continuity in October 2013 , in an issue of Green Lantern Corps , which itself was a tie @-@ in to the " Batman : Zero Year " storyline . Yet more characters have been authored as using the Anarky alias in the New 52 continuity via the pages of Detective Comics and Earth 2 : Society . 
 From 2013 , Anarky began to be featured more heavily in media adaptations of DC Comics properties , across multiple platforms . In July , a revamped version of Anarky was debuted as the primary antagonist in Beware the Batman , a Batman animated series produced by Warner Bros. Animation . In October , the character made his video game debut in Batman : Arkham Origins , as a villain who threatens government and corporate institutions with destruction . Anarky made his live action debut in the Green Arrow television series Arrow in 2015 , portrayed by Alexander Calvert , once again as a villain . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 = = = Creation and debut = = = 
 Originally inspired by his personal political leanings , Alan Grant entertained the idea of interjecting anarchist philosophy into Batman comic books . In an attempt to emulate the success of Chopper , a rebellious youth in Judge Dredd , he conceptualized a character as a twelve @-@ year @-@ old anarchist vigilante , who readers would sympathize with despite the character 's harsh methods . Creating the character without any consultation from his partner , illustrator Norm Breyfogle , his only instructions to Breyfogle were that Anarky be designed as a cross between V and the black spy from Mad magazine 's Spy vs. Spy . The character was also intended to wear a costume that disguised his youth , and so was fitted with a crude " head extender " that elongated his neck , creating a jarring appearance . This was in fact intended as a ruse on the part of writer Alan Grant to disguise the character 's true identity , and to confuse the reader into believing Anarky to be an adult . While both of these design elements have since been dropped , more enduring aspects of the character have been his golden face mask , " priestly " hat , and his golden cane . 
 The first Anarky story , " Anarky in Gotham City , Part 1 : Letters to the Editor " , appeared in Detective Comics <unk> , in November 1989 . Lonnie Machin is introduced as " Anarky " as early as his first appearance in Detective Comics <unk> , withholding his origin story for a later point . He is established as an uncommonly philosophical and intelligent twelve @-@ year @-@ old . Lonnie Machin made his debut as " Anarky " by responding to complaints in the newspaper by attacking the offending sources , such as the owner of a factory whose byproduct waste is polluting local river water . Anarky and Batman ultimately come to blows , and during their brief fight , Batman deduces that Anarky is actually a young child . During this first confrontation , Anarky is aided by a band of homeless men , including Legs , a homeless cripple who becomes loyal to him and would assist him in later appearances . After being caught , Lonnie is locked away in a juvenile detention center . 
 = = = Anarky series = = = 
 Following the comic book industry crash of 1996 , Norm Breyfogle sought new employment at DC Comics . Darren Vincenzo , then an editorial assistant at the company , suggested multiple projects which Breyfogle could take part in . Among his suggestions was an Anarky limited series , to be written by Grant or another specified author . Following encouragement from Breyfogle , Grant agreed to participate in the project . The four @-@ issue limited series , Anarky , was published in May 1997 . Entitled " Metamorphosis " , the story maintained the character 's anti @-@ authoritarian sentiments , but was instead based on Neo @-@ Tech , a philosophy developed by Frank R. Wallace . 
 Well received by critics and financially successful , Grant has referred to the limited series as one of his favorite projects , and ranked it among his " career highlights " . With its success , Vincenzo suggested continuing the book as an ongoing series to Breyfogle and Grant . Although Grant was concerned that such a series would not be viable , he agreed to write it at Breyfogle 's insistence , as the illustrator was still struggling for employment . Building on the increasing exposure of the series , a trade paperback featuring the character titled Batman : Anarky was published . However , Grant 's doubts concerning the ongoing series 's prospects eventually proved correct . The second series was panned by critics , failed to catch on among readers , and was canceled after eight issues ; however Grant has noted that it was popular in Latin American countries , supposing this was due to a history of political repression in the region . 
 = = = Absence from DC publications = = = 
 After the financial failure of Anarky vol . 2 , the character entered a period of absence from DC publications that lasted several years . Norm Breyfogle attempted to continue using the character in other comics during this time . However , when his efforts were rejected , he came to suspect the character 's prolonged absence was due in part to censorship . Since the cancellation of the Anarky series , Grant has disassociated himself from the direction of the character , simply stating , " you have to let these things go . " 
 In 2005 , James Peaty succeeded in temporarily returning Anarky to publication , writing Green Arrow <unk> , Anarky in the USA . Although the front cover of the issue advertised the comic as the " return " of the character , Anarky failed to make any further appearances . This was despite comments by Peaty that he had further plans to write stories for the character . 
 Anarky retained interest among a cult fan base during this obscure period . During a panel at WonderCon 2006 , multiple requests were made by the audience for Anarky to appear in DC Comic 's limited series , 52 . In response , editors and writers of 52 indicated Anarky would be included in the series . However , the series concluded without Anarky making an appearance , and with no explanation given by anyone involved in the production of the series for the failed appearance . 
 = = = Return as " Moneyspider " = = = 
 On August 15 , 2008 , DC Comics announced that Anarky would reappear in the December issue of Robin , issue <unk> With the publication of Robin <unk> , " Search For a Hero , Part 5 : Pushing Buttons , Pulling Strings " , on December 17 , 2008 , it was revealed that Lonnie Machin 's role as Anarky had been supplanted by another Batman villain , Ulysses Armstrong . Fabian Nicieza , author of the issue and storyline in which Anarky appeared , depicted the character as being held hostage by Armstrong , " paralyzed and catatonic " , encased in an iron lung , and connected to computers through his brain . This final feature allowed the character to connect to the internet and communicate with others via a speech synthesizer . Nicieza 's decision to give Machin 's mantle as Anarky to another character was due to his desire to establish him as a nemesis for Tim Drake , while respecting the original characterization of Anarky , who Nicieza recognized as neither immature , nor a villain . Regardless , Nicieza did desire to use Machin and properly return the character to publication , and so favored presenting Ulysses H. Armstrong as Anarky , and Lonnie Machin as Moneyspider , a reference to a secondary name briefly used by Grant for Anarky in storyline published in 1990 . 
 The reactions to Robin <unk> included negative commentary from political commentator and scholar , Roderick Long , and Alan Grant himself . Among fans who interacted with Nicieza in a forum discussion , some responses were also negative , prompting responses from Nicieza in his own defense . 
 With the conclusion of Robin , Nicieza began authoring the 2009 Azrael series , leaving any future use of Anarky or Moneyspider to author Christopher Yost , who would pick up the Robin character in a new Red Robin series . However , in the ensuing months , Yost only made one brief reference to Anarky , without directly involving the character in a story plot . In April 2010 , it was announced that Nicieza would replace Yost as the author of Red Robin , and Nicieza was quick to note his interest in using Anarky and Moneyspider in future issues of the series . Nicieza reintroduced Ulysses Armstrong and Lonnie Machin within his first storyline , beginning in Red Robin No.16 , " The Hit List " , in December 2010 . Nicieza then proceeded to regularly use Lonnie as a cast member of the ongoing Red Robin series , until its cancellation in October 2011 . The series was concluded as a result of The New 52 , a revamp and relaunch by DC Comics of its entire line of ongoing monthly superhero books , in which all of its existing titles were canceled . 52 new series debuted in September 2011 with new No. 1 issues to replace the cancelled titles . 
 = = = <unk> in alternate media = = = 
 At the <unk> conference , on October 1 , 2011 , Sam Register , executive vice president for creative affairs at Warner Bros. Animation , announced several upcoming events for 2012 , including a new CGI animated series , Beware the Batman . Intended to focus on lesser known villains for an unfamiliar audience . A Cartoon Network press release announced that Anarky would be one of the planned villains to be included , while series developers later explained that the character would be revamped for the series and chosen as the primary antagonist . Series producers Glen Murakami and Mitch Watson compared his role to that of " Moriarty to Batman 's Sherlock Holmes " , explaining that he would indirectly challenge Batman through complex machinations . 
 Anarky debuted in the first season 's third episode , " Tests " , on July 27 , 2013 . The episode was written by Jim Krieg , with direction by Curt <unk> , while the character was voiced by Wallace Langham . The episode made heavy use of chess as a symbol for the conflict between Batman and Anarky . This theme had been forecasted in pre @-@ production interviews when Murakami described the relationship the characters were to have , and explained " Batman is the black king and Anarky is the white king . So it 's sort of this psychological chess game . " This version of the character was also used in the first issue of the tie @-@ in comic Beware the Batman No.1 , " Law and ( Dis ) Order " . 
 On May 20 , 2013 , Computer and Video Games 's website confirmed that Anarky would make his video game debut in Batman : Arkham Origins . Anarky was among the first villains premiered during the game 's first demonstration at the 2013 Electronic Entertainment Expo , and was introduced by creative director of WB Games Montréal , Eric Holmes . The game was released worldwide on October 25 , 2013 , and as earlier described , Anarky 's role in the game was that of an anti @-@ villain , who appealed to Batman for an alliance , while simultaneously threatening corrupt government and capitalist institutions . This portrayal , voiced by Matthew Mercer , was chosen because Anarky , as Holmes expressed , " is multidimensional in the Batman universe . " Holmes also warned players unfamiliar with Anarky against investigating the character through published material online , as he felt it would potentially spoil surprises the game held . 
 = = = The New 52 = = = 
 While Anarky was " rising in profile in other media " by mid 2013 , the character had yet to be reintroduced to the status quo of the post @-@ New 52 DC Universe . This changed on August 12 , when DC Comics announced that Anarky would be reintroduced in Green Lantern Corps No. 25 , " Powers That Be " , on November 13 , 2013 . The issue was a tie @-@ in to the " Batman : Zero Year " crossover event , authored by Van Jensen and co @-@ plotted by Robert Venditti . 
 In the lead up to the publication date , at a panel event at the New York Comic Con , Jensen was asked by a fan holding a " plush Anarky doll " what the character 's role would be in the story . Jensen explained that Anarky " would have a very big hand " in the story , and further explained , " you can understand what he 's doing even if you don 't agree with what he 's doing . " Jensen had also indicated that his version of Anarky would be a " fresh take that also honors his legacy . " The story featured a character study of John Stewart , narrating Stewart 's final mission as a young Marine in the midst of a Gotham City power blackout and citywide evacuation , mere days before a major storm is to hit the city . Anarky is depicted as rallying a group of followers and evacuees to occupy a sports stadium , on the basis that the area the stadium was built upon was gentrified at the expense of the local community and should be returned to them . The storyline brought two particular additions to the revamped version of Anarky ; the first being that this new version of Anarky is portrayed as an African American ; the second being to preserve the character 's anonymity , as Anarky escapes custody at the end of the story without an identity behind the mask being revealed . 
 Another version of Anarky debuted in the post @-@ New 52 Detective Comics series , written by Francis <unk> and Brian <unk> . This character isn 't the same Anarky that appeared in " Batman : Zero Year " , but rather a corrupt politician named Sam Young who used the Anarky persona to exact revenge on the Mad Hatter for murdering his sister . 
 A female version of Anarky from the alternate reality of Earth @-@ Two was introduced in Earth 2 : Society 's 2015 story line , " Godhood " , by Daniel H. Wilson . Prior to the fictional events of the series , this Anarky detonated a bomb in the city of <unk> that resulted in a public riot . She disappears before Superman and Power Girl can apprehend her . In the series , she is portrayed as a hacker that is allied with such characters as Doctor Impossible , <unk> , and Johnny Sorrow . 
 = = = Live action debut in Arrow = = = 
 Anarky made his live action debut in the Green Arrow television series Arrow in 2015 , portrayed by Alexander Calvert , once again as a villain . An official description of the character presented to the media stated : " Lonnie Machin ( AKA Anarky ) is a deranged freelancing criminal who is willing to do whatever it takes to impress a potential employer . " 
 = = Characterization = = 
 Anarky has undergone several shifts in his characterization over the course of the character 's existence . These were largely decided upon by Alan Grant , who between the creation of Anarky to the end of the 1999 Anarky series , was largely the sole author of the character . After the departure of Grant and Breyfogle from DC Comics , Anarky 's characterization fell to various authors who utilized him thereafter . 
 = = = Description and motivations = = = 
 Lonnie Machin is introduced as a twelve @-@ year @-@ old school boy . An only child , he shares his physical traits of light skin and red hair with both of his parents , Mike and Roxanne Machin , a middle @-@ class family living in Gotham City . The character 's age was continuously adjusted over the course of several years ; stated to be fourteen during " The Anarky Ultimatum " in Robin Annual No.1 , it is reestablished as fifteen during the events of the Anarky limited series , and adjusted as sixteen the following year during the ongoing series . 
 Grant laconically described Lonnie Machin as " a serious @-@ beyond @-@ his @-@ years teenager who wants to set the world to rights . " As the character was based on a theme of ideas , he had initially been given no personal , tragic past ; a common motivator in superhero fiction . This was intended to contrast with Batman , who fought crime due to personal tragedy , while Anarky would do so in the name of ideals and beliefs . As the character was further developed , he was also intended to contrast with common teenage superheroes . Referring to the tradition established by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby of saddling teenagers with personal problems , Grant purposely gave Anarky none , nor did he develop a girlfriend or social life for the character . As Grant wrote for the Batman : Anarky introduction , this was intended to convey the idea that Anarky was single minded in his goals . In one of the earliest explorations of Lonnie Machin 's back story in " The Anarky Ultimatum " , Grant described Lonnie as a prolific reader , but also of being isolated from peers his own age during his childhood . This was elaborated upon years later in the " Anarky " storyline , which described Lonnie as having lost a childhood friend living in an impoverished nation , the latter suffering the loss of his family due to civil war and strife before disappearing entirely . The resulting shock of discovering at such a young age that the world was in turmoil precipitated Lonnie Machin 's rapid maturation and eventual radicalization . 
 = = = Heroic and villainous themes = = = 
 Anarky 's introduction during the late 1980s was part of a larger shift among supervillains in the Batman franchise of the time . While many naive and goofy villains of previous eras were abandoned , and more iconic villains made more violent to cater to tastes of a maturing readership , some were introduced to challenge readers to " question the whole bad / good guy divide . " Falling into " the stereotype anarchist bomb @-@ toting image " , Anarky 's design was countered by his principled stances to create an odd contrast . In a review of the Anarky miniseries , Anarky was dubbed an " anti @-@ villain " , as opposed to " antihero " , due to his highly principled philosophy , which runs counter to most villains : " In the age of the anti @-@ hero , it only makes sense to have the occasional anti @-@ villain as well . But unlike sociopathic vigilante anti @-@ heroes like the Punisher , an anti @-@ villain like Anarky provides some interesting food for thought . Sure , he breaks the law , but what he really wants is to save the world ... and maybe he 's right . " 
 Breyfogle 's characterization of Anarky has shifted on occasion , with him at times referring to Anarky as a villain , and at other times as a hero . In his 1998 introductory essay composed for Batman : Anarky , Breyfogle characterized Anarky as not being a villain , but rather a " misunderstood hero " , and continued " he 's a philosophical action hero , an Aristotle in tights , rising above mere ' crime @-@ fighter ' status into the realm of incisive social commentary . " A year later , Breyfogle conceded that Anarky was " technically " a villain , but insisted " I don 't consider him a villain ... " Breyfogle later reconsidered the character in more ambiguous terms for a 2005 interview : " Anarky isn 't a villain , he 's his own character . He 's definitely not a superhero , although it depends on who you talk to . " 
 Grant has been more direct in his description of Anarky 's virtuous attributes : " In my eyes , Anarky 's a hero . Anarky 's the hero I want to be if I was smart enough and physically fit enough . " Acknowledging that Anarky 's moral perspective was guided by his own , Grant expressed that the conflict between Anarky and other heroes is a result of their political divisions : " In my eyes , he 's a hero , but to others , they see him as a villain . That is because most people might gripe about the political situation , or various aspects of the political situation , and wouldn 't advocate the total overthrow of the system under which we live . Anarky certainly does that , and more . " 
 In creating stories involving Anarky , other writers have played off this anti @-@ heroic and anti @-@ villainous tension . James Peaty made the heroic and political comparisons between Lonnie Machin and Oliver Queen the central theme of his 2005 Green Arrow story , " Anarky in the USA " : " Anarky comes to find Ollie because of his reputation and is quite disappointed in Ollie 's reaction towards him . However , as the story unfolds , Ollie has to re @-@ assess his initial reaction to Anarky and his own much vaunted ' radical ' credentials . " With his controversial revival of the character in 2008 , Fabian Nicieza chose to portray the mantle of Anarky as being possessed by a villain other than Lonnie Machin on the grounds that Lonnie was too heroic to act out the part of a black hat : " Since Lonnie is too smart to be immature and NOT a ' villain , ' I wanted Anarky , but it couldn 't be Lonnie without compromising who he is as a character . " 
 In the character 's 2013 video game debut in Batman : Arkham Origins , creative director Eric Holmes dubbed Anarky a " classic anti @-@ villain " . A " social activist " who wishes to " liberate and free people " , Anarky views himself as a hero akin to Batman and offers an alliance with him . However his approach is rebuked on the basis that their methods are nothing alike . Nonetheless , he attracts a following among the city 's downtrodden and particularly the homeless , whom he protects from the hostility of police officers . This " special relationship " between the homeless who look up to a villain , who in turn acts as their protector against police who prey upon them , was intended to present an area of grey morality for the player to consider . 
 On two occasions Grant nearly went against Dennis O 'Neil 's early wish that Anarky not kill opponents . These events include his appearance during the Batman : Knightfall saga , in which Grant briefly portrayed Anarky as preparing to kill both the Scarecrow and Batman @-@ Azrael . Grant also implied Anarky was a lethal figure in " The Last Batman Story " , part of Armageddon 2001 crossover event . In the story , a time traveler shows Batman a possible future in the ( relatively ) not @-@ too @-@ distant year of 2001 . An aged Batman is framed and sentenced to death for murder , but Anarky , now an adult , sympathizes with the fallen hero and breaks into the prison in an attempt to rescue Batman . However , Batman resists his help , on the basis that Anarky has killed others in the past , and the two never reconciled their differences . 
 Grant later expressed relief that he had not fully committed to portraying Anarky as a potential murderer , as he felt " Anarky would have compromised his own beliefs if he had taken the route of the criminal @-@ killer . " Anarky was given a non @-@ lethal approach in The Batman Adventures No.31 , " Anarky " , written by Alan Grant , who acted as a guest author for the issue . Anarky takes business elites hostage and places them on public trial , broadcast from a pirate television show . He charges these men with such crimes as the creation of land mines that kill or cripple thousands , funding Third World dictators , polluting the air with toxic chemicals , and profiting from wage slavery , and threatens each man with a bomb if the public should find them guilty . When the explosions take place , it is revealed that the bombs are fake , and the public trials were only intended to expose the men and raise public awareness . One bomb explosion carried a specific message . It unfurled a banner that denounced lethal weapons . 
 Contradicting Anarky 's non @-@ lethal portrayal , entries for the character in Who 's Who in the DC Universe , The DC Comics Encyclopedia , and The Supervillain Book , have falsely referred to Anarky as having killed criminals in early appearances . Norm Breyfogle was also under the false impression that Anarky had killed for several years , having failed to realize the original script for Anarky 's debut storyline had been rewritten . Grant eventually explained the situation to Breyfogle in 2006 , during a joint interview . Despite this regular equivocation of Anarky with murder and villainy in DC Comics character guides , the company made efforts to describe the character in heroic terms in promoting the 1999 Anarky series . During this time , DC Comics described Anarky as an " anti @-@ establishment loose cannon trying to do good as a hero to the disenfranchised " . 
 = = = Political and philosophical themes = = = 
 In the initial years following Anarky 's creation , Grant rarely incorporated the character into Batman stories , being reserved for stories in which the author wished to make a philosophical point . Originally , Grant created Anarky as an anarchist with socialist and populist leanings . In this early incarnation , Anarky was designed as an avatar for Grant 's personal meditations on political philosophy , and specifically for his burgeoning sympathy for anarchism . 
 Within the books , the nature of the character 's political opinions were often expressed through the character 's rhetoric , and by heavy use of the circle @-@ A as a character gimmick . The character 's tools often incorporate the circle @-@ A motif into them . In his earliest incarnation , he would also use red spray @-@ paint to leave the circle @-@ A as a calling card at crime scenes . The circle @-@ A has also been used to decorate the character 's base of operations , either as graffiti or suspended from wall tapestries . 
 In some instances , Anarky 's political behavior would stand as the only political element of the story , while in other instances , entire stories would be framed to create a political parable . In Batman : Shadow of the Bat Annual No.2 , an Elseworlds story entitled " The Tyrant " , Grant made dictatorship and the corrupting influence of power the primary theme . Batman ( under the influence of Jonathan Crane ) uses his resources to usurp power in the city of Gotham and institute a police state in which he exercises hegemonic control over the city 's population . Anarky becomes a resistance leader , undermining the centers of Batman 's power and ultimately overthrowing Bruce Wayne 's tyranny . The story ends with a quote by Mikhail Bakunin : " ( For reasons of the state ) black becomes white and white becomes black , the horrible becomes humane and the most dastardly felonies and atrocious crimes become meritorious acts . " During the early years of the character 's development , virtually no writers other than Grant used Anarky in DC publications . In the singular portrayal by an author other than Grant during this period , writer Kevin Dooley used Anarky in an issue of Green Arrow , producing an explicitly anti @-@ firearm themed story . Throughout the narrative , dialogue between Anarky and Green Arrow conveys the need for direct action , as Anarky attempts to persuade Oliver Queen to sympathize with militant , economic sabotage in pursuit of social justice . 
 Literary cues illustrated into scenes were occasionally used whenever Anarky was a featured character in a comic . During the Anarky limited series , fluttering newspapers were used to bear headlines alluding to social problems . Occasionally , the titles of books found in Anarky 's room would express the character 's philosophical , political , or generally esoteric agenda . In both Detective Comics <unk> and Batman : Shadow of the Bat <unk> , a copy of V for Vendetta can be seen on Lonnie Machin 's bookshelf as homage . Other books in his room at different times have included Apostles of Revolution by Max Nomad , The Anarchists by James Joll , books labeled " Proudhon " and " Bakunin " , and an issue of Black Flag . Non @-@ anarchist material included books labeled " Plato " , " Aristotle " , and " Swedenborg " , and a copy of <unk> , by Buckminster Fuller . The character also made references to Universe by Scudder Klyce , an extremely rare book . When asked if he was concerned readers would be unable to follow some of the more obscure literary references , Grant explained that he hadn 't expected many to do so , but reported encountering some who had , and that one particular reader of the 1999 Anarky series had carried out an ongoing correspondence with him on the topic as of 2005 . 
 Over the course of several years , Grant 's political opinions shifted from libertarian socialism to free market based philosophies . Grant later speculated that this transformation would be detectable within stories he 'd written . By 1997 , Grant 's philosophy settled on Neo @-@ Tech , which was developed by Frank R. Wallace , and when given the opportunity to write an Anarky miniseries , he decided to redesign the character accordingly . Grant laid out his reasoning in an interview just before the first issue 's publication . " I felt he was the perfect character " to express Neo @-@ Tech philosophy , Grant explained , " because he 's human , he has no special powers , the only power he 's got is the power of his own rational consciousness " . This new characterization was continued in the 1999 Anarky ongoing series . 
 The limited and ongoing series were both heavily influenced by Neo @-@ Tech , despite the term never appearing in a single issue . New emphasis was placed on previously unexplored themes , such as the depiction of Anarky as an atheist and a rationalist . Grant also expressed a desire to use the comic as a vehicle for his thoughts concerning the mind and consciousness , and made bicameralism a major theme of both series . While this trend led the character away from the philosophies he had espoused previously , the primary theme of the character remained anti @-@ statism . In one issue of the 1999 series , a character asked what the nature of Anarky 's politics were . The response was that Anarky was neither right @-@ wing , nor left @-@ wing , and that he " transcends the political divide " . Grant has specified that he categorized Anarky politically as an anarchist who " tried to put anarchist values into action . " Norm Breyfogle also stated in 1999 that the character represented anarchist philosophy , but said in 2003 that he believed the Neo @-@ Tech influence allowed Anarky to be classified as an objectivist . 
 = = Skills , abilities , and resources = = 
 Grant developed Anarky as a <unk> — a character who relies on inventions and gadgets to compensate for a lack of superpowers — and as a child prodigy . In early incarnations he was portrayed as highly intelligent , but inexperienced . Lacking in many skills , he survived largely by his ingenuity . In accordance with this , he would occasionally quote the maxim , " the essence of anarchy is surprise " . By 1991 a profile of the character , following the introduction of Anarky 's skills as a hacker in the " Rite of Passage " storyline of Detective Comics <unk> , described that " Lonnie 's inventive genius is equaled only by his computer wizardry . " 
 Anarky 's abilities were increased during the character 's two eponymous series , being portrayed as having enormous talents in both engineering and computer technology , as well as prodigiously developing skills in martial arts . This was indicated in several comics published just before the Anarky miniseries , and later elaborated upon within the series itself . 
 = = = Early skills and equipment = = = 
 Described as physically frail in comparison to the adults he opposes , the character often utilizes cunning , improvisation , and intelligence as tools for victory . During the Knightfall saga , the character states , " The essence of anarchy is surprise – spontaneous action ... even when it does require a little planning ! " 
 Early descriptions of the character 's gadgets focused on low @-@ tech , improvised tools and munitions , such as flare guns , swing lines , throwing stars , small spherical shelled explosives with burning fuses ( mimicking round mortar bombs stereotypically associated with 19th @-@ century anarchists ) , gas @-@ bombs , smoke bombs , and his primary weapon , a powerful electric stun baton shaped as a golden cane . 
 As a wanted criminal , Anarky 's methods and goals were described as leaving him with little logistical support amongst the heroic community , or the public at large , relegating him to underground operation . When in need of assistance , he would call on the help of the homeless community in Gotham who had supported him since his first appearance . 
 Anarky was described as having developed skills as a computer hacker to steal enormous sums of money from various corporations in his second appearance , part of the " Rite of Passage " storyline in Detective Comics <unk> This addition to the character 's skill set made him the second major hacker in the DC Universe , being preceded by Barbara Gordon 's debut as Oracle , and was quickly adapted by 1992 to allow the character to gain information on other heroes and villains from police computer networks . 
 = = = Anarky series ability upgrades = = = 
 According to Alan Grant , the urgency with which Anarky views his cause has necessitated that the character forsake any social life , and increase his abilities drastically over the years . " The kid 's whole life is dedicated to self @-@ improvement , " wrote Grant for the Batman : Anarky introduction , " with the sole aim of destroying the parasitic elites who he considers feast off ordinary folks . " A review of the first issue of the 1999 series described Anarky as akin to a " Batman Jr . " The reviewer continued , " [ Grant ] writes Lonnie like a teenager who is head and shoulders above the rest of the population , but still a kid . " 
 In 1995 , Grant used the two part " Anarky " storyline in Batman : Shadow of the Bat to alter the character 's status quo in several ways that would reach their fruition in the first Anarky series . To accomplish this feat , several plot devices were used to increase Lonnie 's abilities . To justify the character 's financial independence , Anarky was described as using the internet to earn money through his online bookstore , Anarco , which he used as a front company to propagate his philosophy . A second front organization , The Anarkist Foundation , was also developed to offer grants to radical causes he supports . A Biofeedback Learning <unk> was employed to increase Lonnie 's abilities . The cybernetic device was described as being capable of amplifying brain functions by a multiple of ten . Anarky was also described as having begun to train in martial arts , following the character 's time in juvenile hall . 
 The 1997 Anarky limited series saw the earlier plot devices of the preceding " Anarky " storyline become narrative justifications for drastically upgraded skill sets . Anarky 's earlier brain augmentation was now described as having " fused " the hemispheres of his brain , in a reference to bicameralism . Meanwhile , the character 's business enterprises were said to have gained him millions of dollars in the dot @-@ com bubble . The character 's combat abilities were described as having progressed remarkably , and to have included training in multiple styles which he " integrated " into a hybrid fighting style . Even the character 's primary stun baton weapon was enhanced , with a grappling hook incorporated into the walking stick itself to allow dual functionality . 
 With this enhanced intelligence and financial assets , the 1999 ongoing series narrates that Anarky went on to create an on @-@ board AI computer , MAX ( Multi @-@ Augmented X @-@ Program ) ; a crude but fully functioning teleportation device capable of summoning a boom tube , and secretly excavated an underground base below the Washington Monument . Portrayed as an atheist by Grant , Anarky espoused the belief that " science is magic explained " , and was shown to use scientific analysis to explain and manipulate esoteric forces of magic and energy . Anarky 's skill in software cracking was further increased to allow him to tap into Batman 's supercomputer , and the Justice League Watchtower . 
 This evolution in Anarky 's abilities was criticized as having overpowered the character in a <unk> review of the Anarky ongoing series . The rapid development was seen as preventing the suspension of disbelief in the young character 's adventures , which was said to have contributed to the failure of the series . This view stood in contrast with that of Breyfogle , who considered Anarky 's heightened skill set to be a complementary feature , and contended that Anarky 's advanced abilities lent uniqueness to the character . Breyfogle wrote , " Anarky 's singularity is due partly to his being , at his age , nearly as competent as Batman . " 
 = = = Abilities as Moneyspider = = = 
 In Fabian <unk> 's stories for Red Robin , Lonnie Machin 's abilities as Moneyspider were revamped , with the character taking on the persona of an " electronic ghost . " <unk> , Moneyspider was free to act through his mind via connections to the internet , and interacted with others via text messaging and a speech synthesizer . In this condition , he acts to " create an international web that will [ access ] the ins and outs of criminal and corporate operations . " Within virtual reality , the character 's augmented intelligence was described as a " fused bicameral mind " , able to maintain a presence online at all times , while another part of his mind separately interacted with others offline . 
 = = = Costume = = = 
 = = = = Designs by Norm Breyfogle = = = = 
 Anarky 's costume has undergone several phases in design , the first two of which were created by Norm Breyfogle , in accordance with Grant 's suggestions . The original costume was composed of a large , flowing red robe , over a matching red jumpsuit . A red , wide brimmed hat baring the circle @-@ A insignia ; a golden , metallic face mask ; and red hood , completed the outfit . The folds of the robe concealed various weapons and gadgets . Breyfogle later expressed that the color scheme chosen held symbolic purpose . The red robes " represented the blood of all the innocents sacrificed in war . " The gold cane , face mask , and circle @-@ A symbol represented purity and spirituality . The connection to spirituality was also emphasized through the hat and loose fabric , which mimicked that of a priest . Breyfogle believed the loose clothes " [ went ] better with a wide @-@ brimmed hat . It 's more of a colloquial style of clothing ... " However , observers have noted that Breyfogle 's Christian upbringing may have also inspired the " priestly analogy . " 
 This costume was also designed to disguise Anarky 's height , and so included a " head extender " under his hood , which elongated his neck . This design was also intended to create a subtle awkwardness that the reader would subconsciously suspect as being fake , until the reveal at the end of Anarky 's first appearance . Despite the revelation of this false head , which would no longer serve its intended purpose at misdirecting the reader , the head extender was included in several return appearances , while at irregular times other artists drew the character without the extender . This discontinuity in the character 's design ended when Breyfogle finally eliminated this aspect of the character during the 1997 limited series , expressing that the character 's height growth had ended its usefulness . In reality , Breyfogle 's decision was also as a result of the difficulty the design presented , being " awkward [ to draw ] in action situations . " 
 Anarky 's second costume was used during the 1999 ongoing Anarky series . It retained the red jumpsuit , gold mask , and hat , but excised the character 's red robes . New additions to the costume included a red cape , a utility belt modeled after Batman 's utility belt , and a single , large circle @-@ A across the chest , akin to Superman 's iconic " S " shield . The golden mask was also redesigned as a reflective , but flexible material that wrapped around Anarky 's head , allowing for the display of facial movement and emotion . This had previously been impossible , as the first mask was made of inflexible metal . Being a relatively new creation , Breyfogle encountered no editorial resistance in the new character design : " Because [ Anarky ] doesn 't have 50 years of merchandising behind him , I can change his costume whenever I want ... " Within the Anarky series , secondary costumes were displayed in Anarky 's base of operations . Each was slightly altered in design , but followed the same basic theme of color , jumpsuit , cloak , and hat . These were designed for use in various situations , but only one , a " universal battle suit " , was used during the brief series . These suits were also intended to be seen in the unpublished ninth issue of the series . 
 = = = = Post @-@ Breyfogle designs = = = = 
 In 2005 , James Peaty 's Green Arrow story , " Anarky in the USA " , featured a return to some of the costume elements used prior to the Anarky series . Drawn by Eric Battle , the circle @-@ A chest icon was removed in favor of a loose fabric jumpsuit completed with a flowing cape . The flexible mask was replaced with the previous , unmoving metallic mask , but illustrated with a new reflective quality . This design element was used at times to reflect the face of someone Anarky looked at , creating a mirroring of a person 's emotions upon Anarky 's own mask . This same effect was later reused in two issues of Red Robin . For the usurpation of the " Anarky " mantle by Ulysses Armstrong , Freddie Williams II illustrated a new costume design for Armstrong that featured several different design elements . While retaining the primary colors of gold and red , the traditional hat was replaced with a hood , and a new three @-@ piece cuirass with shoulder guards and leather belt was added . The mask was also altered from an expressionless visage to a menacing grimace . This design was later re @-@ illustrated by Marcus To in the Red Robin series , but with a new color scheme in which red was replaced with black . 
 = = = = Alternative media designs = = = = 
 In attempting to present the character as a figurative mirror to Batman , the costume worn by Anarky in Beware the Batman was radially redesigned as entirely white , in contrast to Batman 's black Batsuit . It consists of a tightly worn jumpsuit , cape , hood , flexible mask with white @-@ eye lenses , and a utility belt . Upon the chest is a small , stylized circle @-@ A in black . The design was negatively compared by reviewers to the longstanding design for Moon Knight , a Marvel Comics superhero . 
 The costume redesign for Anarky in Batman : Arkham Origins , while stylized , attempted to thematically highlight the character 's anarchist sentiments by updating his appearance utilizing black bloc iconography . Donning a red puffer flight jacket , hoodie and cargo pants , the character sported gold accents decorating his black belt , backpack and combat boots , and completed this with an orange bandana wrapped below his neck . His metallic mask was replaced with a white theatrical stage mask , evocative of the Guy Fawkes mask made popular among protesters by V for Vendetta and Anonymous . The jacket is itself emblazoned with a painted circle @-@ A. " He looks like a street protester in our game , " commented Eric Holmes , the creative director of the game , " and there 's no accident to that . " This design was later used as model for a DC Collectibles figure , released as part of a series based on villains featured in the game . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Impact on creators = = = 
 In the years that followed the creation of Anarky , both Norm Breyfogle and Alan Grant experienced changes in their personal and professional lives which they attributed to that collaboration . Each man acknowledged the primary impact of the character to have been on their mutual friendship and intellectual understanding . In particular , their time developing the Anarky series led to a working relationship centered on esoteric debate , discussion , and mutual respect . 
 Over time , Anarky emerged as each man 's favorite character , with Grant wishing he could emulate the character , and remarking that " Anarky in Gotham City " was the most personal story he had ever written , and the foremost among his three favorite stories he had ever written for the Batman mythos . Of Breyfogle , Grant complimented that the former " draws Anarky as if he loves the character . " While Breyfogle acknowledged that Anarky was his favorite of the creations they collaborated on , he felt that his own appreciation was not as great as Grant 's , commenting that Anarky was " Alan 's baby " . 
 With the cancellation of the Anarky series , and the eventual departure of each artist from DC Comics — first by Grant , followed by Breyfogle — their mutual career paths split , and Anarky entered into a period of obscurity . During this period , Breyfogle came to suspect that the treatment each man , and Anarky , had received from their former employer was suspect . While acknowledging that he lacked evidence , he held a " nagging feeling " that he and Grant had each been " blacklisted " from DC Comics as a result of the controversial views expressed in the Anarky series ' second volume . 
 While professing that Anarky was the character for whom he was proudest , and that the character 's narratives were among his best achievements for the amount of reaction they generated among readers , the character was also a source of some regret for Grant . Reflecting on his early secret plan to transform Lonnie Machin into a new Robin , Grant has stated that though he came to appreciate the character of Tim Drake , he occasionally experiences " <unk> of regret that Anarky wasn ’ t chosen as the new sidekick for comics ' greatest hero . " Grant has also stated that he attempted to distance himself from the direction of Anarky following his termination from DC Comics , and actively tried to avoid learning about the fate of Anarky and other characters he had come to care about . He often found himself disappointed to see how some characters were used or , as he felt , were mismanaged . Grant later joked on his disillusion in the handling of Anarky , " if you create something that 's close to your heart and you don 't own it , ' Oh woe is me ! ' " In 2011 , DC Comics initiated a special DC Retroactive series of comics , exploring different periods in the publication history of popular characters . Both Grant and Breyfogle were invited to participate , and collaborated to reproduce a story in the style of their classic Batman : Shadow of the Bat series . Grant chose to author a story featuring the Ventriloquist . However , he had been tempted to author a story featuring Anarky , only reconsidering the idea on the basis that his disassociation from the character had left him unfamiliar with what had become of Anarky 's canonical status at the time . 
 As Anarky was created while Grant and Breyfogle were operating under " work @-@ for @-@ hire " rules , DC Comics owns all rights to the Anarky character . Following the cancellation of the Anarky series , both men attempted to buy the rights to Anarky from the company , but their offer was declined . 
 = = = <unk> reaction = = = 
 When an interviewer commented that Anarky was popular among fans in 2003 , in the midst of the character 's period of obscurity , Norm Breyfogle offered a caveat : " Well , in certain segments of the comic book industry , I suppose . " Breyfogle continued , " It has some diehard fans . But , DC doesn 't seem to want to do anything with him . Maybe it 's because of his anti @-@ authoritarian philosophy , a very touchy subject in today 's world . " 
 The sense that Anarky is appreciated by certain fans is one shared by Alan Grant , who noted that the character 's stories routinely generated more reader mail than any other he wrote . Commenting on the popularity of the Anarky series , Grant acknowledged the failure of the series , but pointed out that it was very popular among some readers : " It wasn 't terribly popular in the States , although I received quite a few letters ( especially from philosophy students ) saying the comic had changed their entire mindset . But Anarky was very popular in South America , where people have had a long and painful taste of totalitarianism , in a way the US is just entering . " 
 Sales of the Anarky limited series were high enough to green light an ongoing series , with Breyfogle commenting , " [ it ] did well enough so that DC is willing to listen to Alan ’ s idea for a sequel if we wanted to pitch them . " However , despite the sales , Grant was still concerned the character lacked enough support among fans to sustain an ongoing series . While the ongoing series did find an audience amongst Latin American nations — Mexico and Argentina in particular — it failed in the United States , where Alan Grant has lamented that the comic was doomed to eventual cancellation , as DC Comics " [ doesn 't ] take foreign sales into consideration when counting their cash " . 
 Acknowledging the failure of the ongoing Anarky series , Grant has <unk> that its themes , in particular his interest in exploring esoteric concepts such as philosophy of mind , likely resulted in " plummeting " sales . Breyfogle claimed the difficulty of combining escapist entertainment with social commentary as his explanation for the series ' failure . Breyfogle wrote at the time : " Anarky is a hybrid of the mainstream and the not @-@ quite @-@ so @-@ mainstream . This title may have experienced exactly what every ' half @-@ breed ' suffers : rejection by both groups with which it claims identity . " Besides the themes , commentators have also found the escalation of Anarky 's skills and special heroics as a source of criticism among readers . " I liked the original concept behind Anarky : a teenage geek who reads The Will to Power one too many times and decides to go out and fix the world , " wrote a critic for <unk> , an online newsletter produced by comic book fans and professionals . " But the minute he wound up getting $ 100 million in a Swiss Bank account , owning a building , impressing <unk> [ sic ] , getting a Boom Tube and was shown as being able to outsmart Batman , <unk> Oracle and generally be invincible , I lost all interest I had in the character . " 
 In 2014 , Comic Book Resources held an informal poll which asked readers to vote for the best characters within the Batman franchise , in celebration of the 75th anniversary of the 1939 creation of " the Caped Crusader " . Anarky was placed at No.31 among the best villains , coming nearly 25 years after the character 's own creation . 
 = = = Political analysis and relevance = = = 
 The philosophical nature of the character has invited political critiques , and resulted in comparisons drawn against the political and philosophical views of other fictional characters . Of the various positive analyses drawn from Anarky , two points which are continuously touched upon by critics are that Anarky is among the most unusual of Batman 's rogue gallery , and that his challenge to the ideologies of superheroes is his best feature . 
 The authors of " I 'm Not Fooled By That Cheap Disguise " , a 1991 essay deconstructing the Batman mythos , refer to Anarky as a challenge to Batman 's social and political world view , and to the political position indirectly endorsed by the themes of a Batman adventure . As the Batman mythos is centered on themes of retribution and the protection of property rights , the invitation to readers to identify with Batman 's vigilantism is an invitation to adopt political authoritarianism . The authors summarize that position as " the inviolability of property relations and the justification of their defense by any means necessary ( short of death ) . " However , the authors contend that Anarky " potentially redefines crime " and invites the reader to identify with a new political position in favor of the disenfranchised , which Batman " can not utterly condemn " . The authors contend that the creation of Anarky and dialogue by other characters represented a shift towards " self @-@ conscious awareness of the Batman 's hegemonic function , questioning the most central component of the Batman 's identity — the nature of crime and his relation to it . " However , the authors remain skeptical of Anarky 's commercial nature , pointing out Anarky could be " incorporated as another marketing technique [ ... ] The contradictions of capitalism would thus permit the commodification of criticisms as long as they resulted in profits . " 
 With the publication in 2005 of an issue of Green Arrow in which Anarky guest @-@ starred , writer James Peaty juxtaposed Anarky 's radical philosophy with the liberal progressive beliefs of Green Arrow : " Everyone always goes on about what a radical Ollie is and I wanted to show that maybe that isn 't the case ... especially as Ollie 's radical credentials are pretty antiquated ... Anarky as a character — and as a broader idea — is much more radical than Ollie . " 
 Greg Burgas , of Comic Book Resources , critiqued Anarky as " one of the more interesting characters of the past fifteen or twenty years [ ... ] because of what he wants to accomplish ... " Burgas continued , comparing the nature of Anarky as a change agent against Batman : " He is able to show how ineffective Batman is against the real problems of society , and although Batman stops his spree , we find ourselves sympathizing much more with Anarky than with the representative of the status quo . " 
 Anarky 's appearance in Batman : Arkham Origins included a speech delivered at the conclusion of the character 's story arch . The player is given the opportunity to observe Anarky after he has been defeated , and watch as the teenager enters a monologue in which he laments the downfall of society , tries to reconcile his admiration for Batman , and ultimately denounces the Caped Crusader as a false hero . Nick Dinicola of PopMatters , in comparing the game to its predecessor , Batman : Arkham City , asserted that the narrative of Origins consistently challenged Batman 's ideological reasons for acting as he does , whereas City uncritically took his motivations as a given . " Anarky ’ s wonderful speech takes Batman to task for the contradictions in his symbolism , " writes Dinicola , choosing that moment in the game as one of several examples of this theme . " Considering that Batman is very explicitly a symbol of fear , Anarky is equating the rise of Batman with the downfall of society . " Dinicola was also of the opinion that the willingness to use characters like Anarky to scrutinize Batman 's heroism , rather than simply assert it , allowed the game to ultimately prove and uphold Batman as a heroic figure in a way City could not . To Dinicola , this validated the act of challenging a superhero 's traditional interpretation in service to the story . 
 In Batman and Philosophy , an analysis of various philosophies which intersect with the Batman mythos , Anarky 's critique of the state is compared favorably to that of Friedrich Nietzsche : " The Nietzschean state constitutes a ' new idol , ' one that is no less repressive than its predecessors , as it defines good and evil for , and hangs a ' sword and a hundred appetites ' over , the faithful . No Batman villain sees this as clearly as Anarky ... " However , Anarky 's behavior was also interpreted as an attempt to impose an even more restrictive order , with examples presented from Batman : Anarky , in which Lonnie Machin lectures fellow juvenile detainees in " Tomorrow Belongs to Us " , explains his motivations in a self @-@ righteous farewell letter to his parents in " Anarky " , and creates a fantasy dystopia in a distorted reflection of his desired society in " Metamorphosis " : " His [ Anarky 's ] search for an organizing principle that is less repressive than the state fails . " This is sharply compared with Batman , described as moderating his impulses towards social control . Dialogue from Detective Comics is employed , in which Batman compares himself to Anarky and denies the latter legitimacy : " The fact is , no man can be allowed to set himself up as judge , jury and executioner . " 
 Far less favorable views of Anarky have also been offered . Newsarama contributor George Marston was especially scathing of the character 's politics and costume , placing Anarky at No.8 on a list of the " Top 10 Worst Batman villains of all time . " <unk> the character as a " living embodiment of an Avril Lavigne t @-@ shirt " , he pointed out the pointlessness of being inspired to super heroics by radical philosophy , and the contradictory nature of fighting crime as an anarchist . He concluded by referring to the unsuccessful Anarky series as proof that " bad decisions are timeless " . Similarly , Cracked contributor Henrik Magnusson listed Anarky 's debut at No.3 on a list of " 5 Disastrous Attempts at Political Commentary in Comic Books . " Magnusson 's scorn focused on Anarky 's poorly written speeches , which he derided as " pedantic " and laden with " pseudo @-@ philosophical catchphrases . " Referring to the original identity of Lonnie Machin as a " naive pre @-@ teen " , Magnusson considered this fine satire of " base @-@ level philosophy " and teen rebellion . However , the understanding that Grant had intended Anarky to be a vehicle for his personal views , and that the " Anarky in Gotham City " narrative describes Batman as sympathetic to his goals , if not his methods , upset Magnusson . 
 Several global events of the early 2010s included the rise of hacktivist groups such as Anonymous and LulzSec ; large scale protest movements , including the Arab Spring , Occupy movement , and Quebec student protests ; the crypto @-@ anarchist activity on the part of Defense Distributed and Cody Wilson ; and the various information leaks to WikiLeaks by Chelsea Manning , the Stratfor email leak by Anonymous and Jeremy Hammond , and the global surveillance disclosures by Edward Snowden . The rapid succession of these events led some media commentators to insist that Anarky 's relevance as a character had dramatically increased , and recommended that the character receive a higher profile in media . This sentiment led the creative team that developed Batman : Arkham Origins to include Anarky in the game . Describing Anarky 's anti @-@ government and anti @-@ corporate agenda , Holmes acknowledged the relevance of anarchism in the contemporary protest movements of the time as a factor in the choice to include the character in the game , and to update his appearance to that of a street protester with a gang resembling a social movement . Holmes stressed in one interview , " In the real world , this is Anarky 's moment . Right now . Today . " Even as early as 2005 , James Peaty recommended that Anarky should be included in more publications in the midst of the ongoing War on Terror , stating " Anarky is a terrorist ! How can that not be interesting in the modern climate ? " 
 = = = = Anarchist critique = = = = 
 Critics have commented on the character 's depiction as an anarchist since his first appearance . According to Alan Grant , anarchists with whom he associated were angered by his creation of the character , seeing it as an act of recuperation for commercial gain . Neither Grant nor Breyfogle could fully agree with this criticism . As Grant put it , " I thought I was doing them a favour you know ? " 
 In the years following the Anarky publications of the late 1990s , more receptive critiques have been offered . In assessing the presentation of anarchist philosophy in fiction , Mark <unk> , the director for the Centre for Labour Studies from Simon Fraser University , cited Anarky as an example of the favorable treatment anarchist philosophy has occasionally received in mainstream comic books . <unk> took particular note of quotations derived from the dialogue in " Anarky in Gotham City " story , in which Batman speaks positively of Anarky 's intentions . Following the cancellation of the ongoing series , Roderick T. Long , an anarchist / libertarian political commentator and Senior Scholar at the Ludwig von Mises Institute , praised Anarky as " an impressive voice for liberty in today 's comics " . Margaret Killjoy 's examination of anarchist fiction , <unk> & <unk> , afforded Alan Grant and Anarky brief mention . Explaining the relationship Grant had with anarchism , Killjoy reviewed the characters ' early incarnations as " quite wonderful . " 
 Greg Burgas , in reviewing the career of Alan Grant , specifically cited Anarky 's anarchist philosophy as one of the character 's most empathetic traits . Lamenting the obscurity of the character , Burgas wished Anarky and anarchism would be presented more often : " ... anarchy as a concept is often dismissed , but it 's worth looking at simply because it is so radical and untenable yet noble . " 
 = = Media = = 
 As a lesser known character in the DC Universe , Anarky has a smaller library of associated comic books and significant story lines than more popular DC Comics characters . Between 1989 and 1996 , Anarky was primarily written by Alan Grant in Batman @-@ related comics , received a guest appearance in a single issue of Green Arrow by Kevin Dooley , and was given an entry in Who 's Who in the DC Universe . 
 In the late 1990s , Anarky entered a brief period of minor prominence ; first with the publication of the first Anarky volume in 1997 ; followed in 1998 with the Batman : Anarky collection ; and in 1999 , with featured appearances in both DCU Heroes Secret Files and Origins No.1 , and the second Anarky volume series . After the cancellation of the ongoing series , Anarky lapsed into obscurity lasting approximately nine years . This ambiguous condition was not complete , as Anarky was sporadically used during this time . These appearances include marginal cameos in issues of Young Justice , Wonder Woman , and Green Arrow . 
 Anarky made an appearance in a 2008 issue of Robin as part of an effort to return the character to regular publication , and became a recurring cast member in the Red Robin series in November 2010 , until the series was cancelled in October 2011 . 
 Lesser known among the cast of characters in the DC universe , Anarky went unused for adaptations to other media platforms throughout much of the character 's existence . However , in 2013 the character was chosen to recur in Beware the Batman , an animated series on Cartoon Network , voiced by Wallace Langham . Anarky debuted in the third episode , " Tests " , and appeared in seven total episodes of the series before its cancellation . Later that year , Anarky was also included in the Batman video game , Batman : Arkham Origins , voiced by Matthew Mercer , and Scribblenauts Unmasked : A DC Comics Adventure . Lonnie Machin made his live action debut in 2016 , during the fourth season of Arrow , in a villainous adaptation portrayed by Alexander Calvert . 
 = Summer Hill , New South Wales = 
 Summer Hill is a suburb of Sydney , in the state of New South Wales , Australia . Summer Hill is located 8 kilometres west of the Sydney central business district , in the local government area of the Inner West Council . 
 Summer Hill is a primarily residential suburb of Sydney 's Inner West , adjoining two of Sydney 's major arterial roads , Parramatta Road and Liverpool Road . The first land grant was made in 1794 to former convict and jailor Henry Kable , and the suburb began growing following the opening of the railway station on the Main Suburban railway line in 1879 . 
 By the 1920s , the suburb had become relatively upper class , with large estates and mansions built throughout the suburb . Some of these still exist today . Following a transition to a working @-@ class suburb in the mid @-@ 20th century , when many of the large estates were demolished or subdivided , the suburb today has a " village " character and a mix of medium @-@ density apartment blocks and federation houses . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Summer Hill 's boundaries are Parramatta Road and Liverpool Road to the north , the rear of the properties on the west side of Prospect Road ( with a detour around Trinity Grammar School ) to the West , Old Canterbury Road to the south , and the Inner West Light Rail to the east . North of Summer Hill is the suburb of Haberfield , to the east is Lewisham , to the south is Dulwich Hill , and to the west is Ashfield . 
 Summer Hill has a mix of Federation @-@ era houses , with medium density apartment blocks near the railway station . Local independent business people run most of the shops . The local council has defined a village character for the suburb . Summer Hill is a suburb rich in heritage . More than one hundred properties are heritage listed , and the strong feelings of some residents of the suburb towards protecting the local architecture has seen the introduction of a heritage review , which is expected to add more properties to the heritage register . 
 Despite formerly being working class , Summer Hill and many of the surrounding suburbs have gradually undergone gentrification over recent years . Culturally , Summer Hill is a blend of medium @-@ density European Sydney suburbia , with Italian influences ( which are most evident in Leichhardt to the east and Haberfield to the north ) , Eastern influences ( which are most strongly evident in Ashfield to the West ) , and smaller influences from many other cultures . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Aboriginal Anthropology = = = 
 Before the First Fleet arrived at Port Jackson in 1788 , what is now known as Summer Hill was part of a larger area where people of the Wangal and Cadigal tribes hunted , fought , and lived . There is research to show in the greater Sydney region 8000 - 10000 aborigines were resident , fluctuating on seasons and during tribal conflicts . What is now called the Hawthorne Canal ( originally Long Cove Creek ) appears to have been the boundary between the Cadigal and Wangal aboriginal group lands . Today there is a small park in Summer Hill , called Cadigal Reserve , located at 1 @-@ 4 Grosvenor Crescent . A bronze plaque placed by Ashfield Council names the reserve after the Cadigal ( Eora ) group of Koori people . Iron Cove and the mangrove @-@ lined estuaries of the Long Cove and Iron Cove Creeks would have provided a good source of fish and molluscs , the most common food of the coastal tribes in the Sydney basin . 
 In the early days of the colony , the land between Iron Cove and the Cook 's River was known as the Kangaroo Ground . This suggests that the land was open terrain favoured by kangaroos , that they were common in the area and may have formed a significant part of the Aboriginal diet . 
 = = = European settlement = = = 
 The first land grant in this area was for a farm in 1794 , to former convict and jailor Henry Kable . The land in the eastern corner of Summer Hill was an additional grant of 30 acres ( 12 ha ) made to Henry Kable in 1804 . This eastern corner would subsequently become part of the estate of James Underwood . Underwood died in 1844 and left a will so complicated that it required special legislation before it could be subdivided . 
 The earliest known use of the name " Summer Hill " was in 1876 , for a land subdivision adjacent to the present @-@ day St Andrew 's Anglican Church . The name Summer Hill is thought to be a name chosen by the land sub @-@ divider , presumably based on an attachment for England . Local historians regard the suggestion that the name is a derivation of " Sunning Hill " as a dubious story which has no substance . 
 Summer Hill 's largest mansion , Carleton ( now the Grosvenor Hospital 's main building ) , was built in the early 1880s on Liverpool Road for Charles Carleton <unk> . The suburb boomed with the opening of the railway station in 1879 , and was followed by subdivision of much of the surrounding area . Between 1880 and 1910 , the area became an upper @-@ class suburb , and was a popular choice for professionals in banking and insurance who worked in the city . Subdivision of gardens for housing continued in the 1920s and 1930s , and socioeconomically the suburb changed as some of the wealthier inhabitants moved to the North Shore . Demolition of most of the surviving mansions in the 1970s allowed erection of home units , especially within walking distance of the railway station . 
 = = Churches and other places of worship = = 
 There are a number of places of worship in Summer Hill . St Patrick 's Catholic Church was built in 1874 , and is the oldest known building in the suburb . There is also a small primary school associated with the church and located next to it . 
 The building was originally a private home known as Kelvin Grove , and owned by Mrs Jane Drynan . Much of the exterior of the church is original but none of the internal walls were retained when the building was converted into a church . Following Drynan 's death , Kelvin Grove was owned or leased by a succession of different people , including the Haberfield real @-@ estate developer Richard Stanton , Croydon brick @-@ maker William Downton , and two sisters named Freeman ( one of whom was a nurse ) . In the 1920s and 1930s Kelvin Grove may have been used as a nursing home . The first mass was celebrated in Kelvin Grove on St Patrick 's day 1946 , giving the church its name . 
 St Andrew 's Anglican Church has three distinctive internal transept arches , and was designed by a Presbyterian , Alexander Leckie Elphinstone Junior . The foundation stone was laid in 1883 , and the top of the spire completed in 1906 . The fast construction period , unusual for that time , was indicative of the area 's affluence . Recent Asian influences in Summer Hill have brought about the introduction of non @-@ Christian places of worship . The Wong Tai Sin ( or Kwan Yin Kur ) temple is located on the corners of Kensington Road and Liverpool Road in a building that was a Masonic temple in the 1920s . The same building was converted into the current temple ; the lower floor houses the Taoist deity of Wong Tai Sin , and the upper floor houses the Buddhist Bodhisattva of Kwan Yin . 
 = = Schools = = 
 Trinity Grammar School in Prospect Road is a private school catering for students from PreK to Year 12 . The schools 's site has been in continuous use for education for 120 years . The headmaster 's house at Trinity was erected circa 1877 . The site operated as several different teaching institutions until it was purchased by the Anglican Church , becoming known as Trinity Grammar School in 1925 . Trinity Grammar is one of many wealthy schools in New South Wales , and has previously received some of the largest government subsidies , when comparing total government subsidies per school . An expansion plan by Trinity involving the demolition of houses in nearby Seaview Street caused controversy in 2007 . The development was nonetheless approved by the New South Wales Land and Environment Court . 
 Summer Hill Public School , located in <unk> Street , is a primary school that caters for students from Kindergarten to Year 6 . It offers a selective program , known as Opportunity Classes , for Year 5 and 6 students under the New South Wales Government 's Opportunity Class program . The school was established in 1883 in a wooden shed on 2 acres ( 8 @,@ 100 m2 ) of land that had been resumed from James Bartlett . The older buildings currently used at the school date back to 1913 while more modern buildings were constructed in 1977 , 1998 and 2010 . The school , designed in the Victorian Classical style , is listed on the Register of the National Estate . 
 Saint Patrick 's Catholic School is a private primary school , close to Summer Hill Public School . 
 = = Commercial area = = 
 Summer Hill 's shopping precinct is centred around a small town square with good pedestrian access , and is surrounded by cafés and restaurants along Lackey and Smith Streets . The suburb is very small by Australian standards , having a population of just over 6000 , in an area of 110 hectares . It features some fine examples of architecture from the 19th and early 20th century . 
 The Summer Hill flour mill was built circa 1922 , utilising the north @-@ south goods railway line that was constructed during World War 1 . The silos were added from the 1950s onwards . The flour mill has been owned by various companies , including Mungo Scott , and Goodman Fielder , and then Allied Mills . In October 2007 , the mills were sold to a developer , EG Funds Management , who plans to redevelop the mill site into a residential and commercial precinct . 
 = = Transport = = 
 In the 2011 census , for people travelling to work from this suburb , 34 % travelled in a car as the driver , 34 % took the train , 5 % walked , 4 % took the bus and train and 3 % took the bus . Summer Hill is close to the main thoroughfares of Liverpool Road and Parramatta Road ; although they are quite congested at peak times . 
 From 1915 , Summer Hill was served by trams from Hurlstone Park . Trams left New Canterbury Road and went down Prospect Road , then swung right onto Smith Street . They turned onto Lackey Street , where they went right and terminated at the station . Low usage and rival buses saw the line closed in 1933 , however some remains can be seen . 
 Summer Hill railway station is located on the Airport , Inner West & South Line of the Sydney Trains network . The railway station was opened on 15 September 1879 , and most of the local shops are clustered close to the station . Travelling towards the city , the railway stops in order are Lewisham , Petersham , Stanmore , Newtown , Macdonaldtown , Redfern , Central , and Town Hall . Travelling west towards Strathfield , the stops are Ashfield , Croydon , Burwood , Strathfield and Homebush . A renovation and easy access upgrade of the railway station was completed in 2004 . 
 There are two stations serving Summer Hill on the Dulwich Hill Line of Sydney 's light rail network . These are - Lewisham West ( adjacent to the former flour mill on the border with Lewisham ) and Taverners Hill ( near Parramatta Road ) . Access to the city is quicker by train , but the light rail may be used for some cross @-@ regional journeys . It also interchanges with Dulwich Hill railway station on the Bankstown Line . 
 There are four Sydney Buses routes that service the area — the 480 and 483 follow routes along Parramatta Road and then Liverpool Road , the 461 travels along Parramatta Road and the 413 travels along Junction Road . 
 The area is also gradually becoming more bicycle friendly , with several bicycle paths in the suburb . A local group , " Friends of the Greenway " wish to see a bicycle and walking corridor built alongside the light rail . 
 = = Population = = 
 = = = Demographics = = = 
 In the 2011 census , the population of the Summer Hill was 6 @,@ 587 , in an area of 1 @.@ 1 square kilometres . The population was 52 % females , 48 % males . 42 % of the population was born overseas with China ( 6 % ) , England ( 4 % ) and New Zealand ( 3 % ) the most common . The five strongest religious affiliations in the area were in descending order : no religion ( 34 % ) , Catholic ( 25 % ) , Anglican ( 11 % ) , Buddhism ( 4 % ) and Hinduism ( 3 % ) . The majority of dwelling were flats , units or apartments ( 57 % ) followed by separate houses ( 24 % ) and semi @-@ detached , terrace houses , or townhouses ( 17 % ) . 
 = = = Notable residents = = = 
 Notable people to have been born or lived in Summer Hill include : 
 Normand Henry Baker ( 1908 – 1955 ) , Archibald Prize winning artist . 
 Dr John Belisario ( 1820 – 1900 ) , dentist at the later end of the 19th century , recorded as living in Summer Hill in the 1891 census ; first dentist in Australia to administer ether to a patient to carry out dental work . 
 Colonel Matron Kathleen Best ( 1910 – 1957 ) , first director of the Women 's Australian Army Corps . 
 David Elphinstone ( 1847 – 1916 ) , architect and builder . 
 Virginia Gay , All Saints actress and contestant on It Takes Two 
 Justice Greg James ( born 1944 ) , former judge of the Supreme Court of NSW . 
 Edwin Johnson ( 1835 – 1894 ) , education reformer , undersecretary to the Department of Public Instruction . 
 Ninian Melville Jnr ( 1843 – 1897 ) , local furniture maker and member of the NSW Parliament who also became Mayor of Newtown and later Ashfield . 
 John Paton ( 1833 – 1914 ) , winner of the Victoria Cross for bravery in India in 1857 ; a Summer Hill park is named after him . 
 Arthur Streeton ( 1867 – 1943 ) , Australian artist who briefly lived in Summer Hill . 
 Ian <unk> QC ( born 1942 ) , first head of the New South Wales Independent Commission Against Corruption . 
 Rt Hon Sir Cyril Walsh ( 1909 – 1973 ) , lawyer and Justice of the High Court of Australia . 
 Simon Carter , member of the Australian rock band The Cops . 
 Emmet Burns , Irish Athlete lived here from 1988 – 90 
 Robert Barbour , ( 1827 – 1895 ) , Politician . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Summer Hill is in the safe Labor federal electoral division of <unk> . This seat has been held continuously by Labor ( ALP ) since it was proclaimed in 1949 . It has been held by current member Anthony Albanese since 1996 . Anthony Albanese held various ministerial appointments under the Rudd and Gillard <unk> , eventually becoming Deputy Prime Minister . During the 2010 Federal election , Greens candidate former Marrickville Mayor Sam Byrne , received 45 % of the vote in comparison to Albanese 's 54 % . At the 2013 election , Albanese received over 70 % of the two party preferred vote , making it currently the ALP 's safest seat in the country . 
 For NSW state elections , Summer Hill is in the Electoral district of Summer Hill , which was created in 2015 . It is held by Jo <unk> of the Australian Labor Party . 
 Local political issues include : 
 Proposed construction of the M4 East , diverting traffic from Parramatta Road , and which construction option should be used . 
 Opposition to plans that would result in an increase in traffic at Sydney Airport , and thus more aircraft noise . 
 Concern over the proposed new supermarket building , and whether it is in keeping with the local shopping area . 
 The expansion of the Trinity school , including the demolition of housing and development of a new aquatic centre on Prospect Rd , and proposed increase in student numbers , 
 Another community concern is the proposed high @-@ rise re @-@ development of the Mungo Scott flour mill . 
 = = Summer Hill Rainbow Crossing = = 
 On April 14 , 2013 , in response to the removal of the Rainbow Crossing in Oxford St , Darlinghurst , parents and children from several local schools chalked a rainbow in the public square at Summer Hill , as part of the DIY Rainbow Crossing movement . 
 On April 15 , 2013 , Ashfield Council workers removed the rainbow . After media attention , council issued a statement labelling it a slip hazard and requested a permit be obtained before it could be re @-@ chalked . The events were covered in The Daily Telegraph , The Australian , Perth Now , and on <unk> FM . 
 On April 17 , 2013 , it was <unk> by more than 100 people , including local councillor , Alex Lofts . On April 18 , it was again removed , only to be re @-@ chalked . Since that date it has remained chalked . A group of families and supporters continue to chalk the rainbow , especially after rain . This group has also ensured the area remains free of litter ; they also hold occasional performances and arts @-@ related celebrations at the site . Some local businesses have offered discounts and support for the rainbow , these display a logo with a stylised image of the rainbow crossing on it . 
 At an Ashfield Council meeting on 28 May 2013 the council passed a motion that a permanent outline of a rainbow be painted in Summer Hill Square , with the understanding that this may be periodically ' chalked in ' by children , families and community members . 
 The Summer Hill Rainbow Crossing has a following on Twitter , @ <unk> , and on Facebook . 
 = Bill Bradley = 
 William Warren " Bill " Bradley ( born July 28 , 1943 ) is an American Hall of Fame basketball player , Rhodes scholar , and former three @-@ term Democratic U.S. Senator from New Jersey . He ran unsuccessfully for the Democratic Party 's nomination for President in the 2000 election . 
 Bradley was born and raised in Crystal City , Missouri , a suburb of St. Louis , and excelled at basketball from an early age . He was a member of the Boy Scouts , did well academically and was an all @-@ county and all @-@ state basketball player in high school . He was offered 75 college scholarships , but declined them all to attend Princeton University . He earned a gold medal as a member of the 1964 Olympic basketball team and was the NCAA Player of the Year in 1965 , when Princeton finished third in the NCAA Tournament . After graduating in 1965 , he attended Oxford on a Rhodes Scholarship , delaying a decision for two years on whether or not to play in the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . 
 While at Oxford , Bradley played one season of professional basketball in Europe , and eventually decided to join the New York Knicks in the 1967 – 68 season , after serving six months in the Air Force Reserve . He spent his entire ten @-@ year professional basketball career playing for the Knicks , winning two championship titles . Retiring in 1977 , he ran for a seat in the United States Senate the following year , from his adopted home state of New Jersey . He was re @-@ elected in 1984 and 1990 , left the Senate in 1997 , and was an unsuccessful candidate for the 2000 Democratic presidential nomination . 
 Bradley is the author of seven non @-@ fiction books , most recently We Can All Do Better , and hosts a weekly radio show , American Voices , on Sirius Satellite Radio . He is a corporate director of Starbucks and a partner at investment bank Allen & Company in New York City . 
 In 2008 Bradley was inducted into the New Jersey Hall of Fame . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bradley was born on July 28 , 1943 in Crystal City , Missouri , the only child of Warren ( d . 1994 ) , who despite leaving high school after a year had become a bank president , and Susan " Susie " ( née Crowe ) Bradley ( d . 1995 ) , a teacher and former high school @-@ basketball player . Politicians and politics were standard dinner @-@ table topics in Bradley 's childhood , and he described his father as a " solid Republican " who was an elector for Thomas E. Dewey in the 1948 presidential election . An active Boy Scout , he became an Eagle Scout and member of the Order of the Arrow . 
 Bradley began playing basketball at the age of nine . He was a star at Crystal City High School , where he scored 3 @,@ 068 points in his scholastic career , was twice named All @-@ American , and was elected to the Missouri Association of Student Councils . He received 75 college scholarship offers , although he applied to only five schools and only scored a 485 out of 800 on the Verbal portion of the SAT , which — despite being likely in the top third of all test takers that year — normally would have caused selective schools like Princeton University to reject him . 
 Bradley 's basketball ability benefited from his height — 5 ' 9 " in the 7th grade , 6 ' 1 " in the 8th grade , and his adult size of 6 ' 5 " by the age of 15 — and unusually wide peripheral vision , which he worked to improve by focusing on faraway objects while walking . During his high school years , Bradley maintained a rigorous practice schedule , a habit he carried through college . He would work on the court for " three and a half hours every day after school , nine to five on Saturday , one @-@ thirty to five on Sunday , and , in the summer , about three hours a day . He put ten pounds of lead slivers in his sneakers , set up chairs as opponents and dribbled in a slalom fashion around them , and wore <unk> frames that had a piece of cardboard taped to them so that he could not see the floor , for " a good dribbler never looks at the ball . " 
 = = Basketball = = 
 = = = College = = = 
 Considered the top high school player in the country , Bradley initially chose to attend Duke University in the fall of 1961 . However , after breaking his foot in the summer of 1961 during a baseball game and thinking about his college decision outside of basketball , Bradley decided to enroll at Princeton due to its record in preparing students for government or United States Foreign Service work . He had been awarded a scholarship at Duke , but not at Princeton ; the Ivy League does not allow its members to award athletic scholarships , and Bradley 's family 's wealth disqualified him from receiving financial aid . 
 Bradley 's childhood hero Dick Kazmaier had won the Heisman Trophy at Princeton , and he wore # 42 in his honor . In his freshman year , Bradley averaged more than 30 points per game for the freshman team , at one point making 57 consecutive free throws , breaking a record set by a member of the NBA 's Syracuse Nationals . The following year , as a sophomore , he was a varsity starter in Butch van Breda Kolff 's first year as coach of the Tigers . 
 In his sophomore year Bradley scored 40 points in an 82 – 81 loss to St. Joseph 's and was named to The Sporting News All @-@ American first team in early 1963 . The coach of the St. Louis Hawks believed he was ready to play professional basketball . The AP and United Press International polls both put Bradley on the second team , establishing him as the top sophomore player in the country ; Bradley also hit .316 as a first baseman for the baseball team . The following year The Sporting News again named him to its All @-@ American team as its only junior , and as its player of the year . At the Olympic basketball trials in April 1964 , Bradley played guard instead of his usual forward position but was still a top performer . He was one of three chosen unanimously for the Olympic team , the youngest chosen , and the only undergraduate . The Olympic team won its sixth consecutive gold medal . 
 As a senior and team captain in the 1964 – 1965 season , Bradley became a household name . Only the third tallest on his team , but called " easily the No. 1 player in college basketball today " , " the best amateur basketball player in the United States " , and " The White Oscar Robertson " , he scored 41 points in an 80 – 78 loss to Michigan and their star player Cazzie Russell in the 1964 ECAC Holiday Basketball Final at Madison Square Garden , then led Princeton to the NCAA Final Four after defeating heavy favorite Providence and Jimmy Walker by 40 points . The team then lost to Michigan in the semifinals , but Bradley scored a record 58 points in the consolation game to lead the team to victory against Wichita State and earn himself the Final Four MVP . In total , Bradley scored 2 @,@ 503 points at Princeton , averaging 30 @.@ 2 points per game . He was awarded the 1965 James E. Sullivan Award , presented annually to the United States ' top amateur athlete , the first basketball player to win the honor , and the second Princeton student to win the award , after runner Bill Bonthron in 1934 . 
 Bradley holds a number of Ivy League career records , including total and average points ( 1 @,@ 253 / 29 @.@ 83 , respectively ) , and free throws made and attempted ( 409 / 468 , 87 @.@ 4 % ) . Ivy League season records he holds similarly include total and average points ( 464 / 33 @.@ 14 , 1964 ) and most free throws made ( 153 in 170 attempts , 90 @.@ 0 % , 1962 – 1963 ) . He also holds the career point record at Princeton and many other school records , including the top ten slots in the category of total points scored in a game , but likely could have scored many more points if he had not insisted so often on passing the ball , in what his coaches called " Bradley 's hope passes " , to inferior teammates closer to the basket ; he only emphasized his own scoring when Princeton was behind or , as during the Wichita State game , his teammates forced Bradley to shoot by returning passes to him . Van Breda Kolff often encouraged Bradley to be more of a " one on one " player , stating that " Bill is not hungry . At least ninety percent of the time , when he gets the ball , he is looking for a pass . " 
 Van Breda Kolff described Bradley as " not the most physical player . Others can run faster and jump higher . The difference ... is self @-@ discipline . " At Princeton he had three to four hours of classes and four hours of basketball practice daily , studied an average of seven hours each weekday and up to 24 more hours each weekend , frequently spoke for the Fellowship of Christian Athletes around the country , and taught Sunday School at the local Presbyterian Church . When practicing he did not move from a location on the court unless he made at least ten of 13 shots , and could detect whether a basket was an inch too low from the regulation ten feet . 
 Improving from his mediocre freshman grades , Bradley graduated magna cum laude after writing his senior thesis about Harry S. Truman 's 1940 United States Senate campaign , titled " On That Record I Stand " , and received a Rhodes Scholarship at Worcester College , University of Oxford . His tenure at Princeton was the subject of Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning author John McPhee 's January 23 , 1965 article " A Sense of Where You Are " in The New Yorker , which McPhee expanded into a book of the same name . The title came from Bradley 's explanation for his ability to repeatedly throw a basketball over his shoulder and into the basket while looking away from it . 
 = = = Professional = = = 
 Bradley 's graduation year , 1965 , was the last year that the NBA 's territorial rule was in effect , which gave professional teams first rights to draft players who attended college within 50 miles of the team . The New York Knicks — one mile closer to Princeton than the Philadelphia 76ers — drafted Bradley as a territorial pick in the 1965 draft , but he did not sign a contract with the team immediately . While studying Politics , Philosophy , and Economics at Oxford , he commuted to Italy to play professional basketball in the Lega Basket Serie A for Olimpia Milano during the 1965 – 66 season , where the team won a European Champions Cup . 
 Bradley dropped out of Oxford two months prior to graduation in April 1967 , to go into the Air Force Reserves . After serving six months active duty as an officer ( the requirement was four years active duty ) , he joined the New York Knicks in December 1967 . The following year Oxford let Bradley take " special exams " and he graduated Oxford in 1968 . ( On March 6 , 1967 , Lyndon B. Johnson in a Special Message to the Congress on Selective Service , declared that he would be issuing an Executive Order that no deferments for post @-@ graduate study be granted in the future , except for those men pursuing medical and dental courses . ) 
 In Bradley 's rookie season , he joined the team late , having also missed the entire preseason . He was placed in the back court , although he had spent his high school and college careers as a forward . Both he and the team did not do well , and in the following season , he was returned to the forward slot . Then , in his third season , the Knicks won their first @-@ ever NBA championship , followed by the second in the 1972 – 73 season , when he made the only All @-@ Star Game appearance of his career . Over 742 NBA games – all with the Knicks – Bradley scored a total of 9 @,@ 217 points , an average of 12 @.@ 4 points per game , with his best season average being 16 @.@ 1 points per game in the 1972 – 73 season . Bradley also averaged 3 @.@ 4 assists per game . 
 During his NBA career , Bradley used his fame on the court to explore social as well as political issues , meeting with journalists , government officials , academics , businesspeople , and social activists . He also worked as an assistant to the director of the Office of Economic Opportunity in Washington , D.C. , and as a teacher in the street academies of Harlem . In 1976 , he also became an author by publishing Life on the Run . Using a 20 @-@ day stretch of time during one season as the main focus of the book , he chronicled his experiences in the NBA and the people he met along the way . He noted in the book that he had initially signed only a four @-@ year contract , and that he was uncomfortable using his celebrity status to earn extra money endorsing products as other players did . 
 Retiring from basketball in 1977 , he was elected to the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 1983 , along with teammate Dave DeBusschere . In 1984 , the Knicks retired his number 24 jersey ; he was the fourth player so honored by the Knicks , after Willis Reed , Walt Frazier , and DeBusschere . He is one of only two players , along with Manu Ginóbili , to have won a Euroleague title , an NBA championship , and an Olympic gold medal . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Politics was a frequent subject of discussion in the Bradley household , and some of his relatives held local and county political offices . He majored in history at Princeton , and was present in the Senate chamber when the Civil Rights Act of 1964 was passed . Van Breda Kolff and many others who knew him predicted that Bradley would be Governor of Missouri , or President , by 40 . He spent his time at Oxford focusing on European political and economic history . In 1978 , he said that congressman Mo Udall , himself a former professional basketball player , had told him ten years earlier that professional sports could help prepare him for politics , depending on what he did with his non @-@ playing time . 
 = = = U.S. Senate = = = 
 After four years of political campaigning for Democratic candidates around New Jersey , Bradley decided in the summer of 1977 to run for the Senate himself , coinciding with his retirement from the Knicks . He felt his time had been well @-@ spent in " paying his dues " . The seat was held by liberal Republican and four @-@ term incumbent Clifford P. Case . Case lost the primary election to anti @-@ tax conservative Jeffrey Bell , who , like Bradley , was 34 years old as the campaign season began . Bradley won the seat in the general election with about 56 percent of the vote . During the campaign , Yale football player John Spagnola was Bradley 's bodyguard and driver . 
 In the Senate , Bradley acquired a reputation for being somewhat aloof and was thought of as a " policy <unk> " , specializing in complex reform initiatives . Among these was the 1986 overhaul of the federal tax code , co @-@ sponsored with Dick Gephardt , which reduced the tax rate schedule to just two brackets , 15 percent and 28 percent , and eliminated many kinds of deductions . Domestic policy initiatives that Bradley led or was associated with included reform of child support enforcement ; legislation concerning lead @-@ related children 's health problems ; the Earned Income Tax Credit ; campaign finance reform ; a re @-@ apportioning of California water rights ; and federal budget reform to reduce the deficit , which included , in 1981 , supporting Reagan 's spending cuts but opposing his parallel tax cut package , one of only three senators to take this position . He sponsored the Freedom Support Act , an exchange program between the republics of the former Soviet Union and the United States . 
 Bradley was re @-@ elected in 1984 with 65 percent of the vote against Montclair mayor Mary V. <unk> . In 1988 , he was encouraged to seek the Democratic nomination for President , but he declined to enter the race , saying that he would know when he was ready . In 1990 , a controversy over a state income tax increase — on which he refused to take a position — and his proposal on merit pay for teachers , which led the <unk> to support his opponent , turned his once @-@ obscure rival for the Senate , Christine Todd Whitman , into a viable candidate , and Bradley won by only a slim margin . In 1995 , he announced he would not run for re @-@ election , publicly declaring American politics " broken . " 
 While he was a senator , Bradley walked the beaches from Cape May to Sandy Hook , a four @-@ day , 127 @-@ mile trip each Labor Day weekend , to assess beach and ocean conditions and talk with constituents . Bradley was criticized for neglecting constituent services while in office . 
 = = = Presidential candidate = = = 
 Bradley ran in the 2000 presidential primaries , opposing incumbent Vice President Al Gore for his party 's nomination . Bradley campaigned as the liberal alternative to Gore , taking positions to the left of Gore on a number of issues , including universal health care , gun control , and campaign finance reform . On the issue of taxes , Bradley trumpeted his sponsorship of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 , which had significantly cut tax rates while abolishing dozens of loopholes . He voiced his belief that the best possible tax code would be one with low rates and no loopholes , but he refused to rule out the idea of raising taxes to pay for his health care program , calling the idea of such a pledge " dishonest " . 
 On public education , he proposed to make over $ 2 billion in block grants available to each state every year . He further promised to bring 60 @,@ 000 new teachers into the education system in hard @-@ to @-@ staff areas over ten years by offering college scholarships to anyone who agreed to become a teacher after graduating ; Gore offered a similar proposal . 
 Bradley also made child poverty a significant issue in his campaign . He promised to address the minimum wage , expand the Earned Income Tax Credit , allow single parents on welfare to keep their child support payments , make the Dependent Care Tax Credit refundable , build support homes for pregnant teenagers , enroll 400 @,@ 000 more children in Head Start , and increase the availability of food stamps . 
 Although Gore was considered the party favorite , Bradley received a number of high @-@ profile endorsements , including senators Paul Wellstone , Bob Kerrey , and Daniel Patrick Moynihan ; former Secretary of Labor Robert Reich ; former New York City mayor Ed Koch ; former Federal Reserve chairman Paul Volcker ; and basketball stars Michael Jordan and Phil Jackson . Bradley and Jackson have been close friends since they were teammates playing for the New York Knicks . Jackson was a vocal supporter of Bradley 's run for the presidency and often wore his campaign button in public . He announced his acceptance of the position of head coach of the Los Angeles Lakers while Bradley was campaigning in California in 1999 , and he was a " regular draw on the Bradley money trail " during the campaign . Bradley later called it a " great honor " to be the presenter when Jackson was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 2007 . 
 In March 2000 , after failing to win any of the first 20 primaries and caucuses in the election process , Bradley withdrew his campaign and endorsed Gore ; he ruled out the idea of running as the vice @-@ presidential candidate and did not answer questions about possible future runs for the presidency . He said that he would continue to speak out regarding his brand of politics , calling for campaign finance reform , gun control , and increased health care insurance . 
 = = After politics = = 
 Later in 2000 , Bradley was offered the chairmanship of the United States Olympic Committee , which he turned down . In September 2002 , Bradley turned down a request from New Jersey Democrats to replace Robert Torricelli on the ballot for his old Senate seat , which another former senator , Frank Lautenberg , accepted . Oxford University awarded Bradley an honorary Doctor of Civil Law ( DCL ) in 2003 , with a citation that described him in part as " ... an outstandingly distinguished athlete , a weighty pillar of the Senate , and still a powerful advocate of the weak ... " . In 2007 Bradley was awarded the Distinguished Eagle Scout Award . This award is given in recognition of community service more than 25 years after a scout first earns the Eagle badge . 
 In January 2004 , Bradley and Gore both endorsed Howard Dean for President in the 2004 Democratic primaries . In January 2008 , Bradley announced that he was supporting Barack Obama in the 2008 Democratic primary . He campaigned for Obama and appeared on political news shows as a surrogate . Bradley 's name was mentioned as a possible replacement for Tom Daschle as nominee for Secretary of Health and Human Services in the Obama administration after Daschle withdrew from consideration ; the position went to Kansas governor Kathleen Sebelius . He has occasionally been involved in political matters , most recently consulting the Senate Finance Committee on tax reform along with former colleague Bob Packwood 
 He has worked as a corporate consultant and investment banker . He has been a managing director of Allen & Company LLC , since 2001 , was chief outside advisor to McKinsey & Company 's nonprofit division , the McKinsey Global Institute , from 2001 to 2004 , and is a member of the board of directors of <unk> and Starbucks and the private company <unk> . Bradley is a senior advisor to the private equity firm <unk> Partners . Bill Bradley is also a board member of <unk> , an online charity that connects individuals to classrooms in need . He is also the Chair of the Advisory Council for Acumen Fund , a non @-@ profit global venture fund that uses entrepreneurial approaches to solve the problems of global poverty . Bradley is also a Co @-@ Chair for the Advisory Board of Issue One , a non @-@ profit whose goal is to reduce the influence of money in American politics . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bradley married Ernestine ( née <unk> ) <unk> , a German @-@ born professor of comparative literature , in 1974 . She has a daughter , Stephanie , from a previous marriage , and they have one daughter , Theresa Anne . Bradley and <unk> divorced in 2007 , and he lives with former LBJ Library director Betty Sue Flowers . 
 = = Published works = = 
 Bradley , Bill We Can All Do Better ( Vanguard Press , May 8 , 2012 ) ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> 
 Bradley , Bill The New American Story ( Random House , 2007 ) ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> 
 Bradley , Bill The Journey from Here ( Artisan , 2000 ) ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> 
 Bradley , Bill Values of the Game ( Artisan , 1998 ) ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> 
 Bradley , Bill Time Present , Time Past : A Memoir ( Alfred A. Knopf , 1996 ) ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> 
 Bradley , Bill Life on the Run ( Bantam Books , 1977 ) ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> 
 = Al @-@ Mu 'tasim = 
 Abū <unk> Muḥammad ibn <unk> al @-@ <unk> ( Arabic : أبو إسحاق محمد بن <unk> <unk> ; October 796 – 5 January 842 ) , better known by his regnal name al @-@ <unk> bi ’ <unk> ( <unk> بالله , " he who seeks refuge in God " ) , was the eighth Abbasid caliph , ruling from 833 to his death in 842 . A son of Harun al @-@ Rashid , he succeeded his half @-@ brother al @-@ Ma 'mun , under whom he had served as a military commander and governor . His reign was marked by the introduction of the Turkish slave @-@ soldiers ( ghilmān or <unk> ) and the establishment for them of a new capital at Samarra . This was a watershed in the Caliphate 's history , as the Turks would soon come to dominate the Abbasid government , eclipsing the Arab and Iranian elites that had played a major role in the early period of the Abbasid state . Domestically , al @-@ Mu 'tasim continued al @-@ Ma 'mun 's support of Mu 'tazilism and its inquisition ( miḥna ) , and centralised administration , reducing the power of provincial governors in favour of a small group of senior civil and military officials in Samarra . Al @-@ Mu 'tasim 's reign was also marked by continuous warfare , both against internal rebellions like the Khurramite revolt of Babak Khorramdin or the uprising of Mazyar of Tabaristan , but also against the Byzantine Empire , where the Caliph personally led the celebrated Sack of Amorium , which secured his reputation as a warrior @-@ caliph . 
 = = Early life = = 
 The future al @-@ Mu 'tasim was born to the Caliph Harun al @-@ Rashid ( ruled 786 – 809 ) and <unk> , a Turkic slave concubine . He was born in the <unk> ( " Eternity " ) Palace in Baghdad , but the date is unclear : according to al @-@ Tabari , his birth was placed by various authorities either in October 796 ( Sha <unk> AH 180 ) , or earlier , in AH 179 ( i.e. spring 796 or earlier ) . Al @-@ Tabari describes the adult al @-@ Mu 'tasim as " fair @-@ complexioned , with a black beard the hair tips of which were red and the end of which was square and streaked with red , and with handsome eyes " , while other authors stress his physical strength and the fact that he was almost illiterate . 
 As one of Harun 's younger sons , he was initially of little consequence . During the civil war between his elder half @-@ brothers al @-@ Amin ( r . 809 – 813 ) and al @-@ Ma 'mun ( r . 813 – 833 ) he remained in Baghdad , and , like most members of the Abbasid dynasty and the Abbasid aristocracy ( abnāʾ al @-@ dawla ) , supported the anti @-@ caliph Ibrahim ibn al @-@ Mahdi in 817 – 819 . Al @-@ Tabari records that Abu Ishaq led the pilgrimage in 816 , accompanied by many troops and officials , among whom was <unk> ibn Ali ibn Isa ibn <unk> , who had just been appointed to the governorship of the Yemen and was on his way there . During his stay in Mecca , his troops defeated and captured a pro @-@ Alid leader who had raided the pilgrim caravans . He also led the pilgrimage in the next year , but no details are known . 
 From ca . 814 / 5 , Abu Ishaq began forming his corps of Turkish troops . The first members of the corps were domestic slaves he bought in Baghdad ( the distinguished general Itakh was originally a cook ) whom he trained in the art of war , but they were soon complemented by Turkish slaves sent directly from Central Asia after an agreement with the local Samanid rulers . This private force was small — it probably numbered between three and four thousand at the time of his accession — but it was highly trained and disciplined , and made Abu Ishaq a man of power in his own right , as al @-@ Ma 'mun increasingly turned to him for assistance . Abu Ishaq 's Turkish corps was also politically useful to al @-@ Ma 'mun , who aimed to lessen his own dependence on the mostly eastern Iranian leaders who had supported him in the civil war , and who now occupied the senior positions in the new regime . In an effort to counterbalance their influence , al @-@ Ma 'mun granted formal recognition to his brother and his Turkish corps , as well as placing the Arab tribal levies of the <unk> in the hands of his own son , al @-@ Abbas . 
 The nature and identity of al @-@ Mu 'tasim 's " Turkish slave soldiers " is a controversial subject , with both the ethnic label and the slave status of its members disputed . Although the bulk of the corps were clearly of servile origin , being either captured in war or purchased as slaves , in the sources they are never referred to as slaves ( <unk> or <unk> ) , but rather as mawālī ( " clients " or " freedmen " ) or ghilmān ( " pages " ) , implying that they were manumitted , a view reinforced by the fact that they were paid cash salaries . In addition , although the corps are collectively called simply " Turks " , <unk> , in the sources , prominent early members were neither Turks nor slaves , but rather Iranian vassal princes from Central Asia like al @-@ Afshin , prince of Usrushana , who were followed by their personal retinues ( Persian <unk> , Arabic <unk> ) . 
 Al @-@ Tabari mentions that in 819 Abu Ishaq commanded a force sent against some Kharijite rebels . During this campaign , one of the Turkish ghilmān placed himself between a Kharijite lancer and the future caliph , shouting , " Recognize me ! " ( in Persian " <unk> ma @-@ ra " ) . To express his appreciation , Abu Ishaq on that same day granted this man the name Ashinas . In 828 , al @-@ Ma 'mun appointed Abu Ishaq as governor of Egypt and Syria in place of Abdallah ibn Tahir , who departed to assume the governorship of Khurasan , while the Jazira and the frontier zone ( <unk> ) with the Byzantine Empire passed to al @-@ Abbas . Egypt had just been brought back under caliphal authority and pacified after the tumults of the civil war with Ibn Tahir , but the situation remained volatile . When Abu Ishaq 's governor , Umayr ibn al @-@ Walid , tried to raise taxes , the Nile Delta and <unk> regions rose in revolt . In 830 , Umayr tried to forcibly subdue the rebels , but was ambushed and killed along with many of his troops . With the government troops now confined to the capital Fustat , Abu Ishaq intervened in person , at the head of his 4 @,@ 000 Turks . The rebels were soundly defeated and their leaders executed . In 831 , however , soon after his departure , the revolt flared up again , this time encompassing both the Arab settlers and the native Christian Copts under the leadership of Ibn <unk> , a descendant of one of the original Arab conquerors of the country . The rebels were confronted by the Turks , led by Afshin , who engaged in a systematic campaign , winning a string of victories and engaging in large @-@ scale executions . Thus the male Copts were executed , and their women and children sold into slavery , while the old Arab elites who had ruled the country since the Muslim conquest of Egypt were practically annihilated . In early 832 , al @-@ Ma 'mun visited the province , and soon after that the last bastion of resistance , the Copts of the coastal marshes , were subdued . 
 In July – September 830 , al @-@ Ma 'mun , encouraged by perceived Byzantine weakness and suspicious of collusion between Emperor Theophilos and the Khurramite rebels of Babak Khorramdin , launched the first large @-@ scale invasion of Byzantine territory since the start of the Abbasid civil war , and sacked a number of Byzantine border fortresses . Following his return from Egypt , Abu Ishaq joined al @-@ Ma 'mun in his 831 campaign against the Byzantines . After rebuffing Theophilos ' offers of peace , the Abbasid army crossed the Cilician Gates and divided into three columns , with the Caliph , his son Abbas , and Abu Ishaq at their head . The Abbasids seized and destroyed several minor forts and the town of Tyana , while Abbas even won a minor skirmish against Theophilos in person , before withdrawing to Syria in September . In 832 al @-@ Ma 'mun repeated his invasion of the Byzantine borderlands , capturing the strategically important fortress of <unk> , a success that consolidated Abbasid control of both exits of the Cilician Gates . So encouraged was al @-@ Ma 'mun by this victory that he repeatedly rejected Theophilos ' ever more generous offers for peace , and publicly announced that he intended to capture Constantinople itself . Consequently Abbas was dispatched in May to convert the deserted town of Tyana into a military colony and prepare the ground for the westwards <unk> al @-@ Ma 'mun followed in July , but he suddenly fell ill and died on 7 August 833 . 
 = = Caliphate = = 
 On his deathbed , al @-@ Ma 'mun dictated a letter nominating his brother , rather than his son al @-@ Abbas , as his successor . This appointment owed much to Abu Ishaq 's strong personality and leadership skills , but also because he was the only Abbasid prince to control independent military power in the form of his Turkish corps , on which al @-@ Ma 'mun had come to increasingly depend . Consequently , Abu Ishaq was acclaimed as Caliph on 9 August , with the name of al @-@ Mu 'tasim . His position was far from secure , however , as a large part of the army favoured al @-@ Ma 'mun 's son Abbas , and even tried to proclaim him as the new Caliph . Consequently al @-@ Mu 'tasim called off the expedition , abandoned the Tyana project and returned with his army to Baghdad , which he reached on 20 September . 
 = = = New elites and administration = = = 
 The rise of al @-@ Mu 'tasim to the caliphate was a watershed moment in the history of the Abbasid state , heralding a radical change in the nature of its administration . Unlike his brother , who tried to use the Arabs and Turks to balance out the Iranian troops , al @-@ Mu 'tasim relied almost exclusively on his Turks , and established " a new regime that was militaristic and centred on the Turkish corps " ( Tayeb El @-@ Hibri ) . This was a decision with long @-@ lasting repercussions in Islamic history . Not only did the military acquire a predominant position , but it also increasingly became the preserve of minority groups from the peoples living on the margins of the Islamic world . Thus it formed an exclusive ruling caste , separated from the Arab @-@ Iranian mainstream of society by ethnic origin , language , and sometimes even religion . This dichotomy would become a " distinctive feature " ( Hugh N. Kennedy ) of many Islamic polities , and would culminate in the Mamluk dynasties that ruled Egypt and Syria in the late Middle Ages . 
 Although the new professional army proved militarily highly effective , it also posed a potential danger to the stability of the Abbasid regime : the army 's separation from mainstream society meant that the soldiers were entirely reliant on their cash salary ( ʿaṭāʾ ) for their very survival . Consequently , any failure to provide their pay or policies that threatened their position were likely to cause a violent reaction , as became evident a generation later during the " Anarchy at Samarra " . The need to cover military spending would henceforth be a fixture of caliphal government , and that at a time when government income began to decline rapidly — partly through the rise of autonomous dynasties in the provinces and partly through the decline in productivity of the lowlands of Iraq that had traditionally provided the bulk of tax revenue . Eventually , this would lead to the bankruptcy of the Abbasid government and the eclipse of the caliphs ' political power with Ibn Ra 'iq 's rise to the position of amīr al @-@ <unk> in 935 . 
 Al @-@ Mu 'tasim 's accession thus signalled the decline of the previous Arab and Iranian elites , both in Baghdad and the provinces , and an increasing centralisation of administration around the caliphal court . A characteristic example is that of Egypt , where the Arab settler families , who still nominally formed the country 's army ( jund ) and continued to receive a salary from the local revenues . Al @-@ Mu 'tasim discontinued the practice , removing the Arab families from the army registers ( <unk> ) and ordering that the revenues of Egypt be sent to the central government , which would then pay the ʿaṭāʾ only to the Turkish troops stationed in the province . 
 Al @-@ Mu 'tasim 's reliance on his ghilmān would increase in the aftermath of an abortive plot against him during the Amorium campaign in 838 . Headed by ' Ujayf ibn ' Anbasa , a long @-@ serving Khurasani who had served al @-@ Ma 'mun since the civil war against al @-@ Amin , the conspiracy rallied the traditional Abbasid elites , dissatisfied with al @-@ Mu 'tasim 's policies and especially his favouritism towards to the Turks . The plotters aimed to kill the Caliph and raise al @-@ Ma 'mun 's son al @-@ Abbas in his stead . According to al @-@ Tabari , al @-@ Abbas , although privy to these designs , rejected Ujayf 's urgent suggestions to kill al @-@ Mu 'tasim during the initial stages of the campaign , and the plot was soon uncovered . Al @-@ Abbas was imprisoned , and the Turkish leaders Ashinas , Itakh , and Bugha the Elder undertook to uncover and arrest the other conspirators . The affair was the signal for a large @-@ scale purge of the army of the remaining senior Iranian and abnāʾ officials and commanders — according to the Kitab al- ' Uyun , some seventy commanders were executed — while the influence of the Turkish leaders , who remained conspicuously loyal to al @-@ Mu 'tasim throughout the affair , correspondingly increased . The one exception to this purge of the Iranian element were the Tahirids , who remained in place as governors of their Khurasani super @-@ province , encompassing most of the eastern Caliphate . In addition , the Tahirids provided the governor of Baghdad , a focus of opposition to the Caliph under al @-@ Ma 'mun , which helped keep the city quiescent . The post was held throughout al @-@ Mu 'tasim 's reign by Ishaq ibn Ibrahim ibn Mus 'ab , who was " always one of al @-@ Mu 'tasim 's closest advisers and confidants " ( C. E. Bosworth ) . 
 Another departure from previous practice was al @-@ Mu 'tasim 's appointment of his senior lieutenants , such as Ashinas or Itakh , as nominal super @-@ governors over several provinces . This measure probably intended to allow his chief followers immediate access to funds with which to pay their troops , but also , according to Hugh Kennedy , " represented a further centralizing of power , for the under @-@ governors of the provinces seldom appeared at court and played little part in the making of political decisions " . Indeed , al @-@ Mu 'tasim 's caliphate marks the apogee of the central government 's authority , in particular as expressed in its right and power to extract taxes from the provinces , an issue that had been controversial and had faced much local opposition since the early days of the Islamic state . 
 Apart from the Turkish military and the Tahirids , al @-@ Mu 'tasim 's administration depended on the central fiscal bureaucracy . As the main source of revenue were the rich lands of southern Iraq ( the Sawad ) and neighbouring areas , the administration was staffed mostly with men drawn from these regions . The new caliphal bureaucratic class that emerged under al @-@ Mu 'tasim were thus mostly Persian or Aramean in origin , with a large proportion of newly converted Muslims and even a few Nestorian Christians , who came from landowner or merchant families . From his accession until 836 , al @-@ Mu 'tasim 's chief minister or vizier was his old personal secretary al @-@ Fadl ibn Marwan , distinguished for his caution and frugality . His replacement , Muhammad ibn al @-@ Zayyat , was of a completely different character : a rich merchant , he is described by Hugh Kennedy as " a competent financial expert but a callous and brutal man who made many enemies " , even among his fellow members of the administration . Nevertheless , and even though his political authority never exceeded the fiscal domain , he managed to maintain his office throughout the reign , and under al @-@ Mu 'tasim 's successor al @-@ <unk> ( ruled 842 – 847 ) as well . 
 = = = Foundation of Samarra = = = 
 The Turkish army was at first quartered in Baghdad , but quickly came into conflict with the remnants of the old Abbasid establishment in the city ( the abnāʾ ) and the city 's populace , who resented their loss of influence to the foreign troops . This was a major factor in al @-@ Mu 'tasim 's decision in 836 to found a new capital at Samarra , some 80 miles ( 130 km ) north of Baghdad , but there were other considerations at play as well . Founding a new capital was a public statement of the establishment of a new regime , while allowing the court to be " at a distance from the populace of Baghdad and protected by a new guard of foreign troops , and amid a new royal culture revolving around sprawling palatial grounds , public spectacle and a seemingly ceaseless quest for leisurely indulgence " ( Tayeb El @-@ Hibri ) , an arrangement compared by Oleg Grabar to the relationship between Paris and Versailles after Louis XIV . In addition , by creating a new city in a previously uninhabited area , al @-@ Mu 'tasim could reward his followers with land and commercial opportunities without cost to himself and free from any constraints , unlike Baghdad with its established interest groups . In fact , the sale of land seems to have produced considerable profit for the treasury — in the words of Hugh Kennedy , " a sort of gigantic property speculation in which both government and its followers could expect to benefit " . 
 Space and life in the new capital were strictly regimented : residential areas were separated from the markets , and the military was given its own cantonments , separated from the ordinary populace and each the home of a specific ethnic contingent of the army ( e.g. the Turks , <unk> , Maghariba and <unk> regiments ) . The city was dominated by its mosques ( most famous among which is the Great Mosque of Samarra built by Caliph al @-@ Mutawakkil ) and palaces , built in grand style by both the caliphs and their senior commanders , who were given extensive properties on the site . Unlike Baghdad , however , the new capital was an entirely artificial creation . Poorly sited in terms of water supply and river communications , its existence was determined solely by the presence of the caliphal court , and when the capital returned to Baghdad , sixty years later , Samarra rapidly declined . 
 = = = Mu 'tazilism and the miḥna = = = 
 Ideologically , al @-@ Mu 'tasim followed the footsteps of al @-@ Ma 'mun , continuing his predecessor 's support for Mu 'tazilism , a theological doctrine that attempted to tread a middle way between secular monarchy and the theocratic nature of rulership espoused by the Alids and the various sects of Shi 'ism . Mu <unk> espoused the view that the Quran was created and hence fell within the authority of a God @-@ guided <unk> to interpret according to the changing circumstances . While revering Ali , they also avoided taking a position on the righteousness of the opposing sides in the conflict between Ali and his opponents . Mu 'tazilism was officially adopted by al @-@ Ma 'mun in 827 , and in 833 , shortly before his death , al @-@ Ma 'mun made its doctrines compulsory , with the establishment of an inquisition , the miḥna . Al @-@ Mu 'tasim played an active role in the enforcement of the miḥna in the western provinces , and continued on the same course after his accession : the chief advocate of Mu 'tazilism , the head <unk> Ahmad ibn Abi <unk> , was perhaps the dominant influence at the caliphal court throughout al @-@ Mu 'tasim 's reign . 
 Thus Mu 'tazilism became closely identified with the new regime of al @-@ Mu 'tasim , and adherence to Mu 'tazilism was transformed into an intensely political issue : to question it was to oppose the authority of the Caliph as the God @-@ sanctioned <unk> . While Mu 'tazilism found broad support , it was also passionately opposed by traditionalists , who held that the Quran 's authority was absolute and unalterable as the word of God , as well as providing a vehicle for criticism by those who disliked the new regime and its elites . In the event , the active repression of the traditionalists was without success , and even proved counterproductive : the beating and imprisonment of one of the most resolute opponents of Mu 'tazilism , Ahmad ibn <unk> , in 834 , only helped to spread his fame , and by the time Caliph al @-@ Mutawakkil abandoned Mu 'tazilism and returned to traditional orthodoxy in 848 , the strict and conservative Hanbali school had emerged as the leading school of jurisprudence ( fiqh ) in Sunni Islam . 
 Al @-@ Mu 'tasim continued the patronage of scientists and translators , and Baghdad remained a major centre of learning throughout his reign . Among the notable scholars active during his reign were the astronomers Habash al @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> and Ahmad al @-@ Farghani , the polymath al @-@ Jahiz , and the distinguished Arab mathematician and philosopher al @-@ Kindi , who dedicated his work On First Philosophy to his patron al @-@ Mu 'tasim . 
 = = = Campaigns = = = 
 Although al @-@ Mu 'tasim 's reign was a time of peace in the Caliphate 's heartland territories , al @-@ Mu 'tasim himself was an energetic campaigner , and " acquired the reputation of being one of the warrior @-@ caliphs of Islam " . With the exception of the Amorium campaign , most of the military expeditions of al @-@ Mu 'tasim 's reign were domestic , directed against rebels and areas that , although nominally part of the Caliphate , had remained outside effective Muslim rule and where native peoples and princes retained de facto autonomy . 
 = = = = Domestic campaigns = = = = 
 An Alid revolt led by Muhammad ibn Qasim broke out in Khurasan in early 834 , but was swiftly defeated and Muhammad brought as a prisoner to the Caliph 's court . He managed to escape during the night of 8 / 9 October 834 , taking advantage of the Eid al @-@ Fitr festivities , and was never heard of again . In June / July of the same year , ' Ujayf ibn ' Anbasa was sent to subdue the Zutt . These were people brought from India by the Sassanid emperors and settled in the Mesopotamian Marshes . The Zutt had rebelled against caliphal authority since ca . 820 , and had been regularly raiding the environs of Basra and Wasit since that time . ' Ujayf was successful in encircling the Zutt and forcing them to surrender after a seven @-@ month campaign , making a triumphal entry into Baghdad in January 835 with his numerous captives . Many of the Zutt were then sent to Ayn <unk> on the Byzantine frontier , where they fell fighting against the Byzantines . 
 The first major campaign of the new reign was directed against the Khurramites in Azerbaijan and Arran . The Khurramite revolt had been going on since 816 / 7 , aided by the inaccessible mountains of the province and the absence of large Arab Muslim population centres , except for a few cities in the lowlands . Al @-@ Ma 'mun had left the local Muslims largely to their own devices , although a succession of military commanders tried to subdue the rebellion on their own initiative , and thus gain control of the country 's newly discovered mineral resources , only to be defeated by the Khurramites under the capable leadership of Babak . Immediately after his accession , al @-@ Mu 'tasim sent the <unk> al @-@ <unk> of Baghdad and Samarra , Ishaq ibn Ibrahim ibn Mus 'ab , to deal with an expansion of the Khurramite rebellion from Jibal into Hamadan . Ishaq achieved success swiftly , and by December 833 had suppressed the rebellion , forcing many Khurramites to seek refuge in the Byzantine Empire . It was only in 835 that al @-@ Mu 'tasim took action against Babak when he assigned his trusted and capable lieutenant , Afshin , to command the campaign against him . After three years of cautious and methodical campaigning , Afshin was able to capture Babak at his capital of <unk> on 26 August 837 , extinguishing the rebellion . Babak was brought in triumph to Samarra , where he was executed . 
 The second major domestic campaign was against another autonomous ruler , Mazyar of the <unk> dynasty in Tabaristan . Tabaristan had been subdued in 760 , but Muslim presence was limited to the coastal lowlands of the Caspian Sea and their cities , while the mountainous areas remained under native rulers — chief among whom were the <unk> in the eastern and the <unk> in the central and western mountain ranges — who retained their autonomy in exchange for paying a tribute to the Caliphate . With the support of al @-@ Ma 'mun , Mazyar had established himself as the de facto ruler of all Tabaristan , even capturing the Muslim city of Amul and imprisoning the local Abbasid governor . Al @-@ Mu 'tasim confirmed him in his post on his accession , but trouble soon began when Mazyar refused to accept his subordination to the Tahirid viceroy of the east , Abdallah ibn Tahir , instead insisting on paying the taxes of his region directly to al @-@ Mu 'tasim 's agent . Tension mounted as the Tahirids encouraged the local Muslims to resist Mazyar , forcing the latter to adopt an increasingly confrontational stance against the Muslim settlers and turn for support on the native Iranian , and mostly Zoroastrian , peasantry , whom he encouraged to attack the Muslim landowners . Open conflict erupted in 838 , when his troops seized the cities of Amul and Sari , took the Muslim settlers prisoner , and executed many of them . The Tahirids in return invaded Tabaristan and in 839 captured Mazyar , who was betrayed by his brother <unk> . <unk> then succeeded his brother as a Tahirid appointee , while Mazyar was taken to Samarra , where he was flogged to death the next year . While the autonomy of the local dynasties was maintained in the aftermath of the revolt , the event marked the onset of the country 's rapid Islamization , including among the native dynasties . 
 Mazyar 's rebellion had important repercussions in Samarra . The <unk> 's intransigence had been secretly encouraged by Afshin , who hoped to discredit the Tahirids and assume their vast governorship in the east himself , but after the defeat of Mazyar , their correspondence was discovered . Already an exception among the <unk> elite due to his Iranian princely origins , and possibly suspect in the Caliph 's eyes due to the independent military following he commanded , this discovery served to discredit Afshin and provided the pretext for a show trial , where he was accused , among other things , of being a false Muslim , and of being accorded divine status by his subjects in his native <unk> . Afshin was found guilty and thrown into prison , where he was starved to death in 841 . Once more , the affair enhanced the standing of the Turkish leadership , who now received Afshin 's revenue and possessions . At about the same time , <unk> al @-@ <unk> , whom Afshin had appointed as governor of Adharbayjan after the defeat of the Khurramites , rose up in revolt , either because he had been involved in financial irregularities , or because he had been a co @-@ conspirator of Afshin 's . Bugha the Elder marched against him , forcing the rebel to capitulate and receive a safe @-@ passage for Samarra in 839 / 40 . 
 Near the end of al @-@ Mu 'tasim 's life there were a series of uprisings in the Syrian provinces , including the revolt by Abu Harb , known as al @-@ <unk> or " the Veiled One " , which brought to the fore the lingering pro @-@ Umayyad sentiment of a part of the Syrian Arabs . 
 = = = = The Amorium campaign = = = = 
 Taking advantage of the Abbasids ' preoccupation with the suppression of the Khurramite rebellion , the Byzantine emperor Theophilos had launched a number of attacks on the Muslim frontier zone in the early 830s , and scored a few successes . His forces were also bolstered by some 14 @,@ 000 Khurramites who under their leader , Nasr , fled into the Empire , became baptized and enrolled into the Byzantine army under the command of Nasr , better known by his Christian name of Theophobos . In 837 , Theophilos , urged by the increasingly hard @-@ pressed Babak , launched a major campaign into the Muslim frontier lands , with an army reportedly numbering over 70 @,@ 000 men , whom he led in an almost unopposed invasion around the upper Euphrates . The Byzantines took the towns of <unk> ( Sozopetra ) and Arsamosata , ravaged and plundered the countryside , extracted ransom from Malatya and other cities in exchange for not attacking them , and defeated a number of smaller Arab forces . As refugees began arriving at Samarra , the caliphal court was outraged by the brutality and brazenness of the raids : not only had the Byzantines acted in open collusion with the Khurramites , but during the sack of <unk> all male prisoners were executed and the rest sold into slavery , and some captive women were raped by Theophilos ' Khurramites . 
 The Caliph took over preparations for a retaliatory expedition himself , as the campaigns against Byzantium were customarily the only ones where caliphs participated in person . Al @-@ Mu 'tasim assembled a huge force — 80 @,@ 000 men with 30 @,@ 000 servants and camp followers according to Michael the Syrian , or even bigger according to other writers — at Tarsus , and declared his target to be Amorium , the birthplace of the reigning Byzantine dynasty . The Caliph reportedly had the name painted on the shields and banners of his army . The campaign began in June , with a smaller force under Afshin attacking through the Pass of Hadath in the east , while the Caliph with the main army crossed the Cilician Gates on 19 – 21 June . Theophilos , who had been caught unaware by the two @-@ pronged Abbasid attack , tried to confront Afshin 's smaller force first , but suffered a major defeat at the Battle of Dazimon on 22 July , barely escaping with his life . Unable to offer any effective resistance to the Abbasid advance , the emperor returned to Constantinople . A week later , Afshin and the main caliphal army joined forces before Ancyra , which had been left defenceless and was plundered . 
 From Ancyra , the Abbasid army turned to Amorium , to which they laid siege on 1 August . The siege was fiercely contested , even after the Abbasids , informed by a defector , effected a breach in a weak spot of the wall . After two weeks , however , taking advantage of a short truce requested by the Byzantine commanders of the breach for negotiations , the Abbasid army stormed the city . The city was thoroughly plundered and its walls razed , while the populace , numbering into the tens of thousands , was carried off to be sold into slavery . According to al @-@ Tabari , al @-@ Mu 'tasim now pondered extending his campaign to attack Constantinople , when the conspiracy headed by his nephew , al @-@ Abbas , was uncovered . Al @-@ Mu 'tasim was forced to cut short his campaign and return quickly to his realm , without bothering with Theophilos and his forces , encamped in nearby Dorylaion . Taking the direct route from Amorium to the Cilician Gates , both the caliph 's army and its prisoners suffered in the march through the arid countryside of central Anatolia . Some captives were so exhausted that they could not move and were executed , whereupon others found the opportunity to escape . In retaliation , al @-@ Mu 'tasim , after separating the most prominent among them , executed the rest , some 6 @,@ 000 in number . 
 The sack of Amorium brought al @-@ Mu 'tasim much acclaim as a warrior @-@ caliph and <unk> , and was celebrated by contemporaries , most notably in Abu Tammam 's poems . The Abbasids , however , did not follow up on their success . Warfare continued between the two empires with raids and counter @-@ raids along the border , but after a few Byzantine successes a truce was agreed in 841 . At the time of his death in 842 , al @-@ Mu 'tasim was preparing yet another large @-@ scale invasion , but the great fleet he had prepared to assault Constantinople perished in a storm off Cape <unk> a few months later . Following al @-@ Mu 'tasim 's death , warfare gradually died down , and the Battle of Mauropotamos in 844 was the last major Arab – Byzantine engagement until the 850s . 
 = = Death = = 
 Al @-@ Tabari states that al @-@ Mu 'tasim fell ill on 21 October 841 . His regular doctor , <unk> ibn <unk> , whom the Caliph had trusted implicitly , had died the previous year and the new physician Yahya ibn <unk> did not follow the normal treatment of cupping and purging , which according to Hunayn ibn Ishaq worsened the caliph 's illness and brought about his death on 5 January 842 , after a reign of eight years , eight months and two days according to the Islamic calendar . He was buried in the <unk> Palace in Samarra . He was succeeded by his son , al @-@ <unk> . 
 Al @-@ Tabari describes al @-@ Mu 'tasim as having a relatively easygoing nature , being kind , agreeable and charitable , while according to the Orientalist C.E. Bosworth , " Not much of [ al @-@ Mu 'tasim 's ] character emerges from the sources , though they stress his lack of culture compared with his brother al @-@ Ma 'mun , with his questing mind ; yet al @-@ Mu 'tasim 's qualities as a military commander seem assured , and the Abbasid caliphate remained under him a mighty political and military entity " . 
 = = Al @-@ Mu 'tasim in literature = = 
 The name al @-@ Mu 'tasim is also used for a fictional character in the story The Approach to al @-@ Mu 'tasim by Argentine author Jorge Luis Borges , which appears in his anthology <unk> . The al @-@ Mu 'tasim referenced there is not the Abbasid caliph , though Borges does state , regarding the original , non @-@ fictional al @-@ Mu 'tasim from whom the name is taken : " the name of that eighth Abbasid caliph who was victorious in eight battles , fathered eight sons and eight daughters , left eight thousand slaves , and ruled for a period of eight years , eight moons , and eight days " . 
 While not strictly accurate , Borges ' quote paraphrases al @-@ Tabari , who notes that he was " born in the eighth month , was the eighth caliph , in the eighth generation from al- ‘ Abbas , his lifespan was eight and forty years , that he died leaving eight sons and eight daughters , and that he reigned for eight years and eight months " , and reflects the widespread reference to al @-@ Mu 'tasim in the Arabic sources as al @-@ <unk> ( " the man of eight " ) . 
 = Aphthous stomatitis = 
 Aphthous stomatitis ( also termed recurrent aphthous stomatitis , recurring oral aphthae or recurrent aphthous ulceration ; from Greek : <unk> aphtha , " mouth ulcer " ) is a common condition characterized by the repeated formation of benign and non @-@ contagious mouth ulcers ( aphthae ) in otherwise healthy individuals . The informal term canker sores is also used , mainly in North America , although this may also refer to any mouth ulcer . 
 The cause is not completely understood , but involves a T cell @-@ mediated immune response triggered by a variety of factors . Different individuals have different triggers , which may include nutritional deficiencies , local trauma , stress , hormonal influences , allergies , genetic predisposition or other factors . 
 These ulcers occur periodically and heal completely between attacks . In the majority of cases , the individual ulcers last about 7 – 10 days , and ulceration episodes occur 3 – 6 times per year . Most appear on the non @-@ keratinizing epithelial surfaces in the mouth ( i.e. anywhere except the attached gingiva , the hard palate and the dorsum of the tongue ) , although the more severe forms , which are less common , may also involve keratinizing epithelial surfaces . Symptoms range from a minor nuisance to interfering with eating and drinking . The severe forms may be debilitating , even causing weight loss due to malnutrition . 
 The condition is very common , affecting about 20 % of the general population to some degree . The onset is often during childhood or adolescence , and the condition usually lasts for several years before gradually disappearing . There is no cure , and treatments aim to manage pain , reduce healing time and reduce the frequency of episodes of ulceration . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Persons with aphthous stomatitis have no detectable systemic symptoms or signs ( i.e. , outside the mouth ) . Generally , symptoms may include prodromal sensations such as burning , itching , or stinging , which may precede the appearance of any lesion by some hours ; and pain , which is often out of proportion to the extent of the ulceration and is worsened by physical contact , especially with certain foods and drinks ( e.g. , acidic ) . Pain is worst in the days immediately following the initial formation of the ulcer , and then recedes as healing progresses . If there are lesions on the tongue , speaking and chewing can be uncomfortable , and ulcers on the soft palate , oropharynx , or esophagus can cause <unk> ( painful swallowing ) . Signs are limited to the lesions themselves . 
 <unk> episodes usually occur about 3 – 6 times per year . However , severe disease is characterized by virtually constant ulceration ( new lesions developing before old ones have healed ) and may cause debilitating chronic pain and interfere with comfortable eating . In severe cases , this prevents adequate nutrient intake leading to malnutrition and weight loss . 
 Aphthous ulcers typically begin as erythematous macules ( reddened , flat area of mucosa ) which develop into ulcers that are covered with a yellow @-@ grey fibrinous membrane that can be scraped away . An erythematous " halo " surrounds the ulcer . The size , number , location , healing time , and periodicity between episodes of ulcer formation are all dependent upon the subtype of aphthous stomatitis . 
 = = Causes = = 
 The cause is not entirely clear , but is thought to be multifactorial . It has even been suggested that aphthous stomatitis is not a single entity but rather a group of conditions with different causes . Multiple research studies have attempted to identify a causative organism , but aphthous stomatitis appears to be non @-@ contagious , non @-@ infectious and not sexually transmissible . The mucosal destruction is thought to be the result of a T cell ( T lymphocyte ) mediated immune response which involves the generation of interleukins and tumor necrosis factor alpha ( TNF @-@ α ) . Mast cells and macrophages are also involved , secreting TNF @-@ α along with the T cells . When early aphthous ulcers are <unk> , the histologic appearance shows a dense inflammatory infiltrate , 80 % of which is made up of T cells . Persons with aphthous stomatitis also have circulating lymphocytes which react with peptides 91 – 105 of heat shock protein 65 @-@ 60 , and the ratio of CD4 + T cells to CD8 + T cells in the peripheral blood of individuals with aphthous stomatitis is decreased . 
 Despite this preferred theory of immuno @-@ dysregulation held by most researchers , aphthous stomatitis behaves <unk> to autoimmune diseases in many regards . There is no association between aphthous stomatitis and other autoimmune diseases , which often accompany each other ; common autoantibodies are not detected , the condition tends to resolve spontaneously with advancing age rather than worsen , and usually serum immunoglobulins are at normal levels . 
 Evidence for the T cell @-@ mediated mechanism of mucosal destruction is strong , but the exact triggers for this process are unknown and are thought to be multiple and varied from one person to the next . This suggests that there are a number of possible triggers , each of which is capable of producing the disease in different subgroups . In other words , different subgroups appear to have different causes for the condition . These can be considered in three general groups , namely primary immuno @-@ dysregulation , decrease of the mucosal barrier and states of heightened antigenic sensitivity ( see below ) . <unk> factors in aphthous stomatitis are also sometimes considered as either host @-@ related or environmental . 
 = = = Immunity = = = 
 At least 40 % of people with aphthous stomatitis have a positive family history , suggesting that some people are genetically predisposed to suffering with oral ulceration . HLA @-@ B12 , HLA @-@ <unk> , HLA @-@ <unk> , HLA @-@ A2 , HLA @-@ A11 , and HLA @-@ DR2 are examples of human leukocyte antigen types associated with aphthous stomatitis . However , these HLA types are inconsistently associated with the condition , and also vary according to ethnicity . People who have a positive family history of aphthous stomatitis tend to develop a more severe form of the condition , and at an earlier age than is typical . 
 Stress has effects on the immune system , which may explain why some cases directly correlate with stress . It is often stated that ulceration is exacerbated during examination periods and lessened during periods of vacation . Alternatively , it has been suggested that oral <unk> activities such as lip or cheek chewing become more pronounced during periods of stress , and hence the mucosa is subjected to more minor trauma . 
 Aphthous @-@ like ulceration also occurs in conditions involving systemic immuno @-@ dysregulation , e.g. cyclic neutropenia and human immunodeficiency virus infection . In cyclic neutropenia , more severe oral ulceration occurs during periods of severe immuno @-@ dysregulation , and resolution of the underlying neutropenia prevents the cycle of ulceration . The relative increase in percentage of CD8 + T cells , caused by a reduction in numbers of CD4 + T cells may be implicated in RAS @-@ type ulceration in HIV infection . 
 = = = <unk> barrier = = = 
 The thickness of the mucosa may be an important factor in aphthous stomatitis . Usually , ulcers form on the thinner , non @-@ keratinizing mucosal surfaces in the mouth . Factors which decrease the thickness of mucosa increase the frequency of occurrence , and factors which increase the thickness of the mucosa correlate with decreased ulceration . 
 The nutritional deficiencies associated with aphthous stomatitis ( B12 , folate , and iron ) can all cause a decrease in the thickness of the oral mucosa ( atrophy ) . 
 Local trauma is also associated with aphthous stomatitis , and it is known that trauma can decrease the mucosal barrier . Trauma could occur during injections of local anesthetic in the mouth , or otherwise during dental treatments , frictional trauma from a sharp surface in the mouth such as broken tooth , or from tooth brushing . 
 Hormonal factors are capable of altering the mucosal barrier . In one study , a small group of females with <unk> stomatitis had fewer occurrences of aphthous ulcers during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle or with use of the contraceptive pill . This phase is associated with a fall in progestogen levels , mucosal proliferation and keratinization . This subgroup often experiences remission during pregnancy . However , other studies report no correlation between aphthous stomatitis and menstrual period , pregnancy or menopause . 
 Aphthous stomatitis is uncommon in people who smoke , and there is also a correlation between habit duration and severity of the condition . Tobacco use is associated with an increase in keratinization of the oral mucosa . In extreme forms , this may manifest as <unk> or stomatitis <unk> ( smoker 's keratosis ) . This increased keratinization may mechanically reinforce the mucosa and reduce the tendency of ulcers to form after minor trauma , or present a more substantial barrier to microbes and antigens , but this is unclear . Nicotine is also known to stimulate production of adrenal steroids and reduce production of TNF @-@ α , interleukin @-@ 1 and interleukin @-@ 6 . <unk> tobacco products also seem to protect against aphthous stomatitis . Cessation of smoking is known to sometimes precede the onset of aphthous stomatitis in people previously unaffected , or exacerbate the condition in those who were already experiencing aphthous ulceration . Despite this correlation , starting smoking again does not usually lessen the condition . 
 = = = <unk> sensitivity = = = 
 It has been hypothesized that the condition represents a state of heightened sensitivity to antigenic stimuli , with cross @-@ reactivity of the resulting cell @-@ mediated immune response with cells of the epithelium . Some hypothesize that aphthous stomatitis is caused by expression of HLA class II antigens along with the normally found HLA class I antigens in epithelial cells , which results in them being recognized by the immune system as foreign cells rather than self . Various antigenic triggers have been implicated as a trigger , including L forms of streptococci , herpes simplex virus , varicella @-@ zoster virus , adenovirus , and cytomegalovirus . 
 Others argue that there is no available evidence that demonstrates that any of these organisms are capable of causing aphthous stomatitis by themselves . Some people with aphthous stomatitis may show herpes virus within the epithelium of the mucosa , but without any productive infection . In some persons , attacks of ulceration occur at the same time as asymptomatic viral shedding and elevated viral titres . However , antiviral medication has no effect on aphthous stomatitis . 
 In some instances , recurrent mouth ulcers may be a manifestation of an allergic reaction . Possible allergens include certain foods ( e.g. , chocolate , coffee , strawberries , eggs , nuts , tomatoes , cheese , citrus fruits , <unk> , <unk> , and highly acidic foods ) , toothpastes , and mouthwashes . Where dietary allergens are responsible , mouth ulcers usually develop within about 12 – 24 hours of exposure . 
 Sodium lauryl sulphate ( SLS ) , a detergent present in some brands of toothpaste and other oral healthcare products , may produce oral ulceration in some individuals . It has been shown that aphthous stomatitis is more common in people using toothpastes containing SLS , and that some reduction in ulceration occurs when a SLS @-@ free toothpaste is used . Some have argued that since SLS is almost ubiquitously used in oral hygiene products , there is unlikely to be a true predisposition for aphthous stomatitis caused by SLS . 
 = = = Systemic disease = = = 
 Aphthous @-@ like ulceration may occur in association with several systemic disorders ( see table ) . These ulcers are clinically and <unk> identical to the lesions of aphthous stomatitis , but this type of oral ulceration is not considered to be true aphthous stomatitis by some sources . Some of these conditions may cause ulceration on other mucosal surfaces in addition to the mouth such as the conjunctiva or the genital mucous membranes . Resolution of the systemic condition often leads to decreased frequency and severity of the oral ulceration . 
 Behçet 's disease is a triad of mouth ulcers , genital ulcers and anterior uveitis . The main feature of Behçet 's disease is aphthous @-@ like ulceration , but this is usually more severe than seen in aphthous stomatitis without a systemic cause , and typically resembles major or <unk> ulceration or both . Aphthous @-@ like ulceration is the first sign of the disease in 25 – 75 % of cases . Behçet 's is more common in individuals whose ethnic origin is from regions along the Silk Road ( between the Mediterranean and the Far East ) . It tends to be rare in other countries such as the United States and the United Kingdom . MAGIC syndrome is a possible variant of Behçet disease , and is associated with aphthous @-@ like ulceration . The name stands for " mouth and genital ulcers with inflamed cartilage " ( relapsing <unk> ) . 
 <unk> syndrome is a rare condition that tends to occur in children . The name stands for " periodic fever , aphthae , pharyngitis ( sore throat ) and cervical <unk> " ( inflammation of the lymph nodes in the neck ) . The fevers occur periodically about every 3 – 5 weeks . The condition appears to improve with tonsillectomy or immunosuppression , suggesting an immunologic cause . 
 In cyclic neutropenia , there is a reduction in the level of circulating neutrophils in the blood that occurs about every 21 days . Opportunistic infections commonly occur and aphthous @-@ like ulceration is worst during this time . 
 <unk> deficiencies ( vitamin B12 , folic acid and iron ) , occurring singly or in combination , and with or without any underlying gastrointestinal disease , may be twice as common in people with RAS . However , iron and vitamin supplements only infrequently improve the ulceration . The relationship to vitamin B12 deficiency has been the subject of many studies . Although these studies found that 0 – 42 % of those with recurrent ulcers suffer from vitamin B12 deficiency , an association with deficiency is rare . Even in the absence of deficiency , vitamin B12 supplementation may be helpful due to unclear mechanisms . <unk> deficiencies can cause anemia , which is also associated with aphthous @-@ like ulceration . 
 Gastrointestinal disorders are sometimes associated with aphthous @-@ like stomatitis , e.g. most commonly Celiac disease , but also inflammatory bowel disease such as Crohn 's disease or ulcerative colitis . The link between gastrointestinal disorders and aphthous stomatitis is probably related to nutritional deficiencies caused by malabsorption . Less than 5 % of people with RAS have Celiac disease , which usually presents with severe malnutrition , anemia , abdominal pain , diarrhea and <unk> ( inflammation of the tongue ) . Sometimes aphthous @-@ like ulcerations can be the only sign of celiac disease . Despite this association , a gluten @-@ free diet does not usually improve the oral ulceration . 
 Other examples of systemic conditions associated with aphthous @-@ like ulceration include Reactive arthritis ( Reiter 's syndrome ) , and recurrent erythema multiforme . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Diagnosis is mostly based on the clinical appearance and the medical history . The most important diagnostic feature is a history of recurrent , self healing ulcers at fairly regular intervals . Although there are many causes of oral ulceration , recurrent oral ulceration has relatively few causes , most commonly aphthous stomatitis , but rarely Behçet 's disease , erythema multiforme , ulceration associated with gastrointestinal disease , and recurrent intra @-@ oral herpes simplex infection . A systemic cause is more likely in adults who suddenly develop recurrent oral ulceration with no prior history . 
 Special investigations may be indicated to rule out other causes of oral ulceration . These include blood tests to exclude anemia , deficiencies of iron , folate or vitamin B12 or celiac disease . However , the nutritional deficiencies may be latent and the peripheral blood picture may appear relatively normal . Some suggest that screening for celiac disease should form part of the routine work up for individuals complaining of recurrent oral ulceration . Many of the systemic diseases cause other symptoms apart from oral ulceration , which is in contrast to aphthous stomatitis where there is isolated oral ulceration . Patch testing may be indicated if allergies are suspected ( e.g. a strong relationship between certain foods and episodes of ulceration ) . Several drugs can cause oral ulceration ( e.g. <unk> ) , and a trial substitution to an alternative drug may highlight a causal relationship . 
 Tissue biopsy is not usually required , unless to rule out other suspected conditions such as oral squamous cell carcinoma . The histopathologic appearance is not pathognomonic ( the microscopic appearance is not specific to the condition ) . Early lesions have a central zone of ulceration covered by a fibrinous membrane . In the connective tissue deep to the ulcer there is increased <unk> and a mixed inflammatory infiltrate composed of lymphocytes , histiocytes and <unk> leukocytes . The epithelium on the margins of the ulcer shows <unk> and there are many mononuclear cells in the basal third . There are also lymphocytes and histiocytes in the connective tissue surrounding deeper blood vessels near to the ulcer , described histologically as " <unk> cuffing " . 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 Aphthous stomatitis has been classified as a type of non @-@ infectious stomatitis ( inflammation of the mouth ) . One classification distinguishes " common simple aphthae " , accounting for 95 % of cases , with 3 – 6 attacks per year , rapid healing , minimal pain and restriction of ulceration to the mouth ; and " complex aphthae " , accounting for 5 % of cases , where ulcers may be present on the genital mucosa in addition to mouth , healing is slower and pain is more severe . A more common method of classifying aphthous stomatitis is into three variants , distinguished by the size , number and location of the lesions , the healing time of individual ulcers and whether a scar is left after healing ( see below ) . 
 = = = = Minor aphthous ulceration = = = = 
 This is the most common type of aphthous stomatitis , accounting for about 80 – 85 % of all cases . This subtype is termed minor aphthous ulceration ( <unk> ) , or minor recurrent aphthous stomatitis ( <unk> ) . The lesions themselves may be referred to as minor aphthae or minor aphthous ulcers . These lesions are generally less than 10 mm in diameter ( usually about 2 – 3 mm ) , and affect non @-@ keratinized mucosal surfaces ( i.e. the labial and buccal mucosa , lateral borders of the tongue and the floor of the mouth ) . Usually several ulcers appear at the same time , but single ulcers are possible . Healing usually takes seven to ten days and leaves no scar . Between episodes of ulceration , there is usually an ulcer @-@ free period of variable length . 
 = = = = Major aphthous ulceration = = = = 
 This subtype makes up about 10 % of all cases of aphthous stomatitis . It is termed major aphthous ulceration ( <unk> ) or major recurrent aphthous stomatitis ( <unk> ) . Major aphthous ulcers ( major aphthae ) are similar to minor aphthous ulcers , but are more than 10 mm in diameter and the ulceration is deeper . Because the lesions are larger , healing takes longer ( about twenty to thirty days ) , and may leave scars . Each episode of ulceration usually produces a greater number of ulcers , and the time between attacks is less than seen in minor aphthous stomatitis . Major aphthous ulceration usually affects non keratinized mucosal surfaces , but less commonly keratinized mucosa may also be involved , such as the dorsum ( top surface ) of the tongue or the gingiva ( gums ) . The soft palate or the <unk> ( back of the throat ) may also be involved , the latter being part of the oropharynx rather than the oral cavity . Compared to minor aphthous ulceration , major aphthae tend to have an irregular outline . 
 = = = = Herpetiform ulceration = = = = 
 Herpetiform ulcers , ( also termed stomatitis herpetiformis , or herpes @-@ like ulcerations ) is a subtype of aphthous stomatitis so named because the lesions resemble a primary infection with herpes simplex virus ( primary herpetic <unk> ) . However , <unk> ulceration is not caused by herpes viruses . As with all types of aphthous stomatitis , it is not contagious . Unlike true herpetic ulcers , <unk> ulcers are not preceded by vesicles ( small , fluid filled blisters ) . <unk> ulcers are less than 1 mm in diameter and occur in variably sized crops up to one hundred at a time . Adjacent ulcers may merge to form larger , continuous areas of ulceration . Healing occurs within fifteen days without scarring . The ulceration may affect keratinized mucosal surfaces in addition to non keratinized . Herpetiform ulceration is often extremely painful , and the lesions recur more frequently than minor or major aphthous ulcers . Recurrence may be so frequent that ulceration is virtually continuous . It generally occurs in a slightly older age group than the other subtypes , and females are affected slightly more frequently than males . 
 = = = = RAS type ulceration = = = = 
 Recurrent oral ulceration associated with systemic conditions is termed " RAS type ulceration " , " RAS like ulceration " , or " aphthous @-@ like ulcers " . Aphthous stomatitis occurs in individuals with no associated systemic disease . Persons with certain systemic diseases may be prone to oral ulceration , but this is secondary to the underlying medical condition ( see the systemic disease section ) . This kind of ulceration is considered by some to be separate from true aphthous stomatitis . However , this definition is not strictly applied . For example , many sources refer to oral ulceration caused by anemia and / or nutritional deficiencies as aphthous stomatitis , and some also consider Behçet 's disease to be a variant . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 The vast majority of people with aphthous stomatitis have minor symptoms and do not require any specific therapy . The pain is often tolerable with simple dietary modification during an episode of ulceration such as avoiding spicy and acidic foods and beverages . Many different topical and systemic medications have been proposed ( see table ) , sometimes showing little or no evidence of efficacy when formally investigated . Some of the results of interventions for RAS may in truth represent a placebo effect . No therapy is curative , with treatment aiming to relieve pain , promote healing and reduce the frequency of episodes of ulceration . 
 The first line therapy for aphthous stomatitis is topical agents rather than systemic medication , with topical corticosteroids being the mainstay treatment . Systemic treatment is usually reserved for severe disease due to the risk of adverse side effects associated with many of these agents . The application of glycerin , along with Alchemilla vulgaris , has also been shown to effective in treating aphthous stomatitis . A systematic review found that no single systemic intervention was found to be effective . Good oral hygiene is important to prevent secondary infection of the ulcers . 
 Occasionally , in females where ulceration is correlated to the menstrual cycle or to an oral contraceptive , progestogen or a change in oral contraceptive may be beneficial . Use of nicotine replacement therapy for people who have developed oral ulceration after stopping smoking has also been reported . Starting smoking again does not usually lessen the condition . Trauma can be reduced by avoiding rough or sharp foodstuffs and by brushing teeth with care . If sodium lauryl sulfate is suspected to be the cause , avoidance of products containing this chemical may be useful and prevent recurrence in some individuals . Similarly patch testing may indicate that food allergy is responsible , and the diet modified accordingly . If investigations reveal deficiency states , correction of the deficiency may result in resolution of the ulceration . For example , there is some evidence that vitamin B12 supplementation may prevent recurrence in some individuals . 
 Surgical excision of aphthous ulcers has been described , but it is an ineffective and inappropriate treatment . Silver nitrate has also been used as a chemical <unk> . Apart from the mainstream approaches detailed above , there are numerous treatments of unproven effectiveness , ranging from herbal remedies to otherwise alternative treatments , including aloe vera , <unk> communis , Rosa <unk> , zinc sulfate , nicotine , polio virus vaccine and prostaglandin E2 . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 By definition , there is no serious underlying medical condition , and most importantly , the ulcers do not represent oral cancer nor are they infectious . However , aphthae are capable of causing significant discomfort . There is a spectrum of severity , with symptoms ranging from a minor nuisance to disabling . Due to pain during eating , weight loss may develop as a result of not eating in severe cases of aphthous stomatitis . Usually , the condition lasts for several years before spontaneously disappearing in later life . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Reported prevalence ranges from 5 – 66 % , but in most populations , about 20 % of individuals are affected to some degree , making it the most common disease of the oral mucosa . Aphthous stomatitis occurs worldwide , but is more common in developed countries . 
 Within nations , there is a slightly higher prevalence in higher socioeconomic groups . Males and females are affected in an equal ratio , and the peak age of onset between 10 and 19 years . About 80 % of people with aphthous stomatitis first developed the condition before the age of 30 . There have been reports of ethnic variation . For example , in the United States , aphthous stomatitis may be three times more common in white @-@ skinned people than black @-@ skinned people . 
 = = History , society and culture = = 
 " Aphthous affectations " and " aphthous ulcerations " of the mouth are mentioned several times in the treatise " Of the Epidemics " ( part of the Hippocratic corpus , in the 4th century B.C ) , although it seems likely that this was oral ulceration as a manifestation of some infectious disease , since they are described as occurring in epidemic @-@ like patterns , with concurrent symptoms such as fever . 
 Aphthous stomatitis was once thought to be a form of recurrent herpes simplex virus infection , and some clinicians still refer to the condition as " herpes " despite this etiology having been disproven . 
 The informal term " canker sore " is sometimes used , mainly in North America , either to describe this condition generally , or to refer to the individual ulcers of this condition , or mouth ulcers of any cause unrelated to this condition . The origin of the word " canker " is thought to have been influenced by Latin , Old English , Middle English and Old North French . In Latin , cancer translates to " malignant tumor " or literally " crab " ( related to the likening of sectioned tumors to the limbs of a crab ) . The closely related word in Middle English and Old North French , chancre , now more usually applied to syphilis , is also thought to be involved . Despite this etymology , aphthous stomatitis is not a form of cancer but rather entirely benign . 
 An aphtha ( plural aphthae ) is a non specific term that refers to an ulcer of the mouth . The word is derived from the Greek word aphtha meaning " eruption " or " ulcer " . The lesions of several other oral conditions are sometimes described as aphthae , including Bednar 's aphthae ( infected , traumatic ulcers on the hard palate in infants ) , oral candidiasis , and foot @-@ and @-@ mouth disease . When used without qualification , aphthae commonly refers to lesions of recurrent aphthous stomatitis . Since the word aphtha is often taken to be synonymous with ulcer , it has been suggested that the term " aphthous ulcer " is redundant , but it remains in common use . <unk> is also a non @-@ specific term referring to any inflammatory process in the mouth , with or without oral ulceration . It may describe many different conditions apart from aphthous stomatitis such as angular stomatitis . 
 The current most widely used medical term is " recurrent aphthous stomatitis " or simply " aphthous stomatitis " . Historically , many different terms have been used to refer to recurrent aphthous stomatitis or its sub @-@ types , and some are still in use . <unk> ' aphthae is a synonym of minor RAS , named after Jan <unk> @-@ Radecki . Synonyms for major RAS include Sutton 's ulcers ( named after Richard <unk> Sutton ) , Sutton 's disease , Sutton 's syndrome and <unk> mucosa <unk> <unk> . Synonyms for aphthous stomatitis as a whole include ( recurrent ) oral aphthae , ( recurrent ) aphthous ulceration and ( oral ) <unk> . 
 In traditional Chinese medicine , treatments for aphthae focus on clearing heat and nourishing Yin . 
 Rembrandt Gentle White toothpaste did not contain sodium lauryl sulfate , and was specifically marketed as being for the benefit of " canker sore sufferers " . When the manufacturer Johnson & Johnson discontinued the product in 2014 , it caused a backlash of anger from long term customers , and the toothpaste began to sell for many times the original price on the auction website eBay . 
 = Star Wars : The Force Unleashed II = 
 Star Wars : The Force Unleashed II is an action @-@ adventure platform video game developed and published by LucasArts . It is the second installment of the The Force Unleashed multimedia project , and the sequel to Star Wars : The Force Unleashed ( 2008 ) . The game was released in the United States on October 26 , 2010 , and throughout Europe on October 29 for the PlayStation 3 , Xbox 360 , and Nintendo Wii consoles , as well as the Nintendo DS and iOS portable devices . 
 Players control a clone of Starkiller , who himself was a secret apprentice to Darth Vader in The Force Unleashed . The clone embarks on a quest to find his identity and find Starkiller 's love interest , Juno Eclipse . Production for The Force Unleashed II transpired over an approximate period of nine months ; while it possesses some similarities to the previous game , producers modified several aspects such as the sound effects and gameplay . Sam Witwer again provides the voice and likeness for Starkiller , and several cast members return to voice and provide likeness to their respective roles . 
 The Force Unleashed II produced varying responses from critics , who despite <unk> the sound design and aesthetics , were concerned with several gameplay elements and an underwhelming storyline . Aggregate scores range from the 40 – 70 % range at websites GameRankings and Metacritic . During the first few weeks after its release it placed fifth or higher in sales for several regions . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The Force Unleashed II is a third @-@ person action game in which the player 's character 's weapons are the Force and a lightsaber . The game has a combo system for stringing lightsaber attacks and for combining lightsaber attacks with Force powers . Like the original Force Unleashed , experience points earned by killing enemies and finding artifacts can be used to increase Starkiller 's powers and traits . 
 The Force Unleashed II refines gameplay elements from the first Force Unleashed , and adds more variety with such features as puzzle solving . Combat was modified to include the ability to wield dual lightsabers , which can dismember or decapitate enemies . The game also adds more Force powers , such as " Mind Trick " and " Force Rage " . 
 = = = Platform @-@ specific elements = = = 
 According to lead producer <unk> Kudirka , the goal of the game across all platforms is to make the player feel like " a super @-@ powerful Jedi " . Executive producer Julio Torres said that while the story is consistent across platforms , gameplay decreases in style across platforms to reflect each platform 's uniqueness and strengths . The Wii 's control scheme is focused on being able to precisely control Starkiller 's Force powers and saber combos . The Wii exclusive " Force rage " power puts the game 's protagonist , Starkiller , into a bullet time mode exclusive to that platform ; the Wii version also has a Force sight power not included on other platforms . The Wii version also has a multiplayer mode , inspired by The <unk> , in which four players can challenge each other in a fighting @-@ style combat game . The Wii game also has an extra story @-@ based level , on Dagobah , that is not present in the HD version of the game , making the plot of the Wii game slightly different from the HD version . 
 The PC , PlayStation 3 , and Xbox 360 versions feature new Force powers , new skins for Force powers that appear in The Force Unleashed , an improved rendering system providing richer colors , and a new audio system . The gameplay also highlights the potential to " destroy " the game environment . Neither of the PC , PlayStation 3 or Xbox 360 versions of the game include multiplayer . The Nintendo DS version features the same Force powers as the console versions , but was designed for shorter play sessions due to its mobile nature . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game takes place approximately six months after the events of the first game , and a year before Star Wars . The Force Unleashed II is described as the " dark entry " in the series , and a more personal story for the game 's protagonist than the first game . 
 Players control Starkiller 's renegade clone , a failure of Darth Vader 's attempt to create a perfect secret apprentice . After a vision that Darth Vader will kill him due to his inability to kill a test droid , the clone escapes from captivity on Kamino . After eliminating his stormtrooper captors , Starkiller embarks on a quest to understand his identity and to find his template 's love interest from the first game , Juno Eclipse . Meanwhile , Darth Vader has hired Boba Fett to track down Juno Eclipse to lure Starkiller out of hiding . Starkiller rescues Jedi Master Rahm Kota from a <unk> arena , and encounters Yoda on Dagobah . After encountering strange visions on Dagobah , Starkiller rushes to Juno 's ship , only to arrive just as Boba captures her . 
 With help from Kota , the Rebels launch an all @-@ out assault on Kamino . Starkiller crashes a ship into the planet 's shield , allowing Kota to stage a ground assault , while he goes after Juno . In a confrontation with Vader , Juno is thrown out of a window , crashing to the ground . Starkiller , thinking Juno is dead , attacks Vader viciously , cutting off his hand and defeating him . Kota arrives with his men , and tells Starkiller not to kill Vader : he wants to interrogate the Sith Lord for the Empire 's secrets , then put him on trial , and then later execute him . As in the first game , this allows the player to choose either the light path or the dark path : 
 If the player chooses the dark side , Starkiller raises his saber to kill Vader , only to be stabbed by a shrouded figure who <unk> behind him . Kota attacks the figure , but is driven back and force pushed over the edge with numerous troops . As the figure removes his cowl , Vader tells the dying Starkiller he lied when he said the cloning process had not been perfected , revealing the figure to be a dark , perfect clone . Starkiller takes one last look at Juno 's corpse and dies . Vader instructs the kneeling clone to take Starkiller 's ship and kill the remaining leaders of the Rebel Alliance . Downloadable content released in December 2010 expands on this ending , with Starkiller 's clone participating in the Battle of Endor in which the remnants of the Rebel Alliance desperately attack Endor in the hopes of destroying the Death Star II . The dark Starkiller is sent to eliminate the threat and kills Ewoks and Rebels ( including Han Solo and Chewbacca ) in the process . Eventually he finds Princess Leia Organa , who is revealed to be a Jedi , waiting for him and duels her . Starkiller succeeds in killing her . Meanwhile , the Emperor scolds Vader for creating the dark copy of his failed apprentice and subdues him with Force Lightning ( calling him Skywalker ) . The Emperor then orders Captain <unk> to kill the dark Starkiller . 
 If the player chooses the light side , Starkiller lowers his blade and allows Kota 's men to capture Vader . Starkiller discovers Juno survived the fall , they kiss , and the two travel into hyperspace together aboard the Rogue Shadow , taking Vader prisoner . Starkiller confronts Vader again saying that because he made the conscious choice , of his own free will , to spare Vader 's life , he is finally free of the Dark Lord 's control . Vader 's response is that as long as Juno lives , Vader will always have control over him . Unknown to Starkiller and Juno , Boba Fett pursues in his spacecraft . 
 = = Development = = 
 Following the commercial success of its predecessor , a sequel was formally announced at the Spike Video Game Awards . The game was released for the PlayStation 3 , Xbox 360 , and Nintendo Wii consoles , as well as the Nintendo DS and iOS portable devices . A version was initially developed for the PlayStation Portable , but was cancelled for undisclosed reasons . The Force Unleashed II was released in North America on October 26 , 2010 , and in Europe on October 29 , 2010 . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Haden Blackman served as a writer for the sequel . In crafting the dialogue of The Force Unleashed II , Blackman sought influence from <unk> ( 2010 ) , as well as other video games such as Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves ( 2009 ) and Heavy Rain ( 2010 ) . In the wake the early stages of conceiving The Force Unleashed II , the main protagonist Starkiller was initially intended to be replaced with a new lead character , but such plans never materialized as LucasArts opted to develop more backstory for the character . As the character progression of Starkiller initiates , the story follows a dark nature — much like its predecessor . Blackman suggested that as opposed to his empathic tendencies in The Force Unleashed , Starkiller becomes conflicted with his loss of an identity , ultimately culminating into what he called a " much more personal story " ; " He 's dealing with a sense of identity and not knowing whether he 's going insane or not , " he added , " and the possible collapse of the Rebel Alliance , and his being torn between what he wants and what Kota wants . " Blackman 's main objective was to have the storyline be attractive to a broad audience ; while he asserted that fans with a general understanding of the Star Wars franchise would be more enthralled with the storyline , Blackman emphasized the need to appeal to a more mainstream demographic . " With The Force Unleashed II again we 're trying to create a story that if you ’ ve played The Force Unleashed , " explained the comic book writer , " you 're going to know a bit more going into it , but hopefully the story still stands on its own and you can enjoy it even if you haven 't played [ the first game ] , whether or not you 're familiar with all the continuity . " 
 Unlike in its predecessor , Blackman achieved more freedom in developing the story for The Force Unleashed II , as it took place in a relatively uneventful time period . Blackman and the writing staff had to receive approval from Star Wars creator George Lucas to portray the game in their vision . " He had some comments on the way we wanted to use Princess Leia in the first one and he wanted to make sure that we were aware that Bail Organa was one of the founders of the Rebel Alliance , but that was it — those were the only real constraints that we had . " To avoid any perceived constraints , they would travel to the headquarters of Lucasfilm in San Francisco , California to give an overview of their plans . " With The Force Unleashed II , remarked Blackman , " because we ’ d already established this notion of Darth Vader ’ s secret apprentice , really it was just sitting down with licensing and saying ‘ this is what we want to do ’ and getting a few pieces of feedback from them . " 
 The primary cast from the previous game returns to voice their characters again in The Force Unleashed II . Sam Witwer returns to provide both the likeness and voice of Starkiller , the game 's protagonist . He also voices Emperor Palpatine having earned the part during a read @-@ through of the script during development . Witwer petitioned David Collins , voice of <unk> and audio lead for the game . He told Collins that " if [ he was not ] going to get Ian McDiarmid to do this [ ... ] I 'll do it . " Actress and model Nathalie Cox reprises her role as Juno Eclipse , as does Cully Fredrickson as General Rahm Kota . Matt Sloan , who portrays Darth Vader in the webseries Chad Vader : Day Shift Manager and voices Vader in the original The Force Unleashed returns to the role in The Force Unleashed II . Veteran Star Wars : The Clone Wars voice actors Tom Kane and Dee Bradley Baker are also included amongst the cast . Kane voices Jedi Master Yoda , a role he has provided several times within the Star Wars franchise . Baker voices bounty hunter Boba Fett , a clone and adopted son of Jango Fett . Baker provides the voice of all of the clone troopers in the Clone Wars series , of which Boba is one . 
 = = = Technology = = = 
 The Force Unleashed II derives from LucasArts ' Ronin 2 @.@ 0 game engine , an update to a similarly named proprietary game engine used by its predecessor . Like The Force Unleashed , the game integrates three third @-@ party technologies : Havok for varying types of body physics such as ragdoll animation , NaturalMotion 's Euphoria for realistic non @-@ player character artificial intelligence , and Digital Molecular Matter for dynamic destructible objects . Blackman felt the second game takes better advantage of the powerful engine than does the first game . LucasArts acknowledged players ' frustration with the first game 's targeting system , and worked to revise it in the sequel ; Blackman said fixing the Force grip feature was the developers ' top priority . The game also includes fewer enemy types , instead focusing on making enemies more " ' special and unique ' " ; the game was also designed to offer " epic " boss battles . Other adjustments include allowing players to dismember enemy characters and improving menu speeds . 
 The game is AMD <unk> validated . 
 = = = = Sound effects = = = = 
 The audio engine received a massive overhaul to upgrade the quality of sound effects . Brian Tibbetts was declared the lead sound designer of the sound effects team , resuming his endeavors from The Force Unleashed . David Collins , who formerly served as the lead sound designer , sustained a supervisory position . The sound effects team was divided to address specific details ; Tom Bible was in charge of creating sound for weapons and force powers , while Aaron Brown specialized in the spaceships . Although some effects were borrowed from The Force Unleashed , the vast majority of sounds were completely new . Tibbetts thought that collaborating with his peers to be one of the most complex and challenging parts of his job . " I chose to have my office in the main area of game development and always had an open door policy regarding communication with other disciplines . There were many meetings regarding asset changes and in general communication at Lucasarts is good between disciplines . I ’ ve always stressed that we should work together as much as possible and there were many moments of myself and sound designers working directly with designers , artists , and producers at their desks or ours . " 
 The nine @-@ month schedule of The Force Unleashed II caused difficulties with Tibbetts , who found it frustrating to keep up with the frenetic schedule . " There are many different ways to integrate our audio assets including scripting or placing sound emitters directly inside environment art and our work was unfortunately blown out many times , " he stated . As production neared its conclusion , Tibbets created an emailing system with a group of engineers that would notify them after audio reference was edited . According to Tibbetts , " This helped a lot especially as the responsible parties didn ’ t realize or intend to blow us out and were more than happy to help resolve the situation . By the time this tool was built though , we had already had to re @-@ author / integrate excessively though which is always frustrating . " 
 = = = = Special effects = = = = 
 Dmitry Andreev devised a framing system that gave the illusion of operating at 60 frames per second ( FPS ) , despite running at <unk> . To familiarize himself with the process , Andreev observed various 120 Hz television sets that incorporated two frames in producing an intermediate image , resulting in a smoother and clearer picture . The design team utilized a variety of interpolation techniques on multiple parts of an image , such as transparency and reflection . Andreev stated that " as soon as I got back home , I started to play with it and soon after that realised that there are a lot of issues . Mostly the artifacts of a different kind , that appear in more or less complex scenes , as well as performance issues [ ... ] . " In response to the difficulties , he constructed a prototype that performed several enhancement techniques which examined images for vectors that demonstrated how " elements of the image would move from one frame to the next " . The LucasArts coder realized that such processes could be repackaged for a different use . " We already know how things are moving as we have full control over them . This way we don 't need to do any kind of estimation , " he professed . 
 <unk> the graphics in <unk> was opted due to the large variety of rendering technologies that were practical to developers , as well as a less stringent time schedule . Although Andreev felt that it was not impossible to produce a video game in <unk> graphics , he felt that it would require much more rigorous efforts on art , engineering , and design . " It is fair to say that in a lot of cases , " he explained , " during pre @-@ production , studios try to see what it would take to make a <unk> game . Then , they get something that doesn 't look very pretty when running at 60 , realising that all the art has to be produced very carefully as well as level and game design . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 The Force Unleashed II performed under expectations . In the United States , it sold 500 @,@ 000 copies within its first two weeks , thereby becoming the fifth best @-@ selling video game of October 2010 . The Force Unleashed II was the fifth @-@ highest selling game of the week in the United Kingdom , denoting sales of 56 @,@ 064 copies . In Sweden , The Force Unleashed II was the third best @-@ selling overall game of the week ; the PlayStation 3 version of the game topped its respective chart , while the Xbox 360 version trailed behind Fable 3 as the second @-@ best selling Xbox 360 game of the week . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Commentators were divided on The Force Unleashed II . The Wii version of the game was generally considered by reviewers to be the better version of the game , due to the significantly different storyline , extra levels and the addition of a multiplayer mode . This was an unusual occurrence , however most reviewers thought it was simply the most completed version of the game , and that the HD version was rushed , resulting in a less satisfactory product . The Observer columnist Toby Moses avouched that the game failed to live up to the expectations established by its predecessor . Alexander Sliwinski of Joystiq derided it as a " desperate cash grab " , which had no intentions of aspiring to be a " major part of lore or to be nearly as epic " as The Force Unleashed . " It simply cobbles together glorified fan fiction for what amounts to an unexceptional subplot as it abruptly ends in the second act screaming , ' <unk> GOES HERE ' , " remarked Sliwinski . Despite proclaiming that The Force Unleashed II had " dazzling " gameplay , The Washington Times ' journalist Joseph Szadkowski concluded that it was " one of the most underachieving games of the year " . In his 6 @.@ 5 out of 10 rating review , Anthony Gallegos of IGN stated that The Force Unleashed II immediately captivates the audience with its visuals , albeit being plagued with repetitious gameplay , a " shoe @-@ horned in story " , and a nonexistent depth " in the experience " . " Scenery is , of course , massive and massively impressive , and the possible repetitive nature has been broken up with some <unk> levels and the odd exploratory moment , " commented Neil Davey of The Guardian , who issued the game a four out of five stars . 
 Game Informer ' Andrew Reiner said the game 's mechanics are more fluid than the first game 's , and praised the textures and animations as " among this generation 's best " . GamePro 's Mitch Dyer and Matthew Keast of GamesRadar highlighted the game 's variety of lightsaber crystals and their ability to boost Starkiller 's powers . Keast observed that LucasArts seemed to take player feedback from the first game seriously , and made numerous subtle improvements for the <unk> he also praised " substantial " improvements to the Force grip power , although Alexander Sliwinski of Eurogamer did not detect any improvements . The Writers Guild of America nominated the game for its Outstanding Achievement in Video Game Writing recognition . 
 John Teti of Eurogamer said the game overall " feels like it was created out of obligation rather than inspiration " , and points toward Blackman 's departure from LucasArts before the game 's release as a potential sign of trouble . IGN 's Anthony Gallegos criticized the game 's repetitive level design and underdeveloped story . He also felt that because Starkiller begins the game as a powerful character , leveling up does not feel as satisfying as in the first game ; while the game does offer increased variety in enemy types that " occasionally present a challenge " , defeating them eventually becomes formulaic . Andrew Reiner of Game Informer criticized the story and the dissatisfying appearances by Boba Fett and Yoda . GameSpot 's Kevin VanOrd called the final battle repetitive , and that the game 's end sequence erases the story 's dramatic tension . The Force Unleashed II was later one of GameSpot 's nominees for " Least Improved Sequel of 2010 " . GamePro ' Mitch Dyer faulted several performance issues and the game 's brief , unfocused story . The downloadable content was poorly received by Luke Plunkett of Kotaku , who criticized the expansion 's murder of Han Solo and Chewbacca . 
 Nintendo Power praised the Wii version 's multiplayer mode , as did Lucas M. Thomas of IGN . GameSpot 's Kevin VanOrd was more critical of the multiplayer , calling it " unspectacular " . VanOrd did go on to praise the game 's art , combat , and control scheme . 
 = Our Town ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Our Town " is the twenty @-@ fourth episode of the second season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network in the United States on May 12 , 1995 . It was written by Frank Spotnitz and directed by Rob Bowman . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Our Town " received a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 4 and was watched by 9 @.@ 0 million households . The episode received mixed reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , Dudley , Arkansas is the site of the latest investigation for Mulder and Scully , who are sent to find a missing poultry inspector . The case takes a twist when another poultry worker is shot after she goes insane , giving Mulder a hunch that the townsfolk really are what they eat . 
 " Our Town " was future executive producer Spotnitz 's first stand @-@ alone episode for the show . Spotnitz was inspired to write the episode after thinking of cannibalism occurring at a chicken processing plant , an idea that he thought was one of the most despicable and vile things . Spotnitz later named the characters after real life cannibals . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Dudley , Arkansas , government health inspector George Kearns follows his seemingly young lover , Paula Gray , into the woods . However , after losing track of Paula , Kearns soon finds himself surrounded by approaching lights in the woods . He is then killed by an axe @-@ wielding assailant wearing a tribal mask . 
 When Kearns is reported missing ten weeks later and a witness claims to have seen foxfire near Dudley , Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) investigate . At the site of the alleged foxfire , the agents find the ground burnt and a witch 's peg staked into the ground . Arens , the local sheriff , arrives and disclaims anything unusual occurring in Dudley . After visiting Kearns ' wife , Doris , the agents discover that he was about to recommend a local chicken plant , Chaco Chicken , to be closed down for several health violations . While giving the agents a tour of the plant , floor manager Jess Harold claims that Kearns held a vendetta against Chaco Chicken . After hearing this , a hallucinatory Paula , who works at the plant , grabs and holds Harold at knife point . Mulder and Scully attempt to reason with Paula until she is shot and killed by Sheriff Arens . The plant 's physician , Dr. Vance Randolph , later claims that Paula was suffering from consistent headaches , which Kearns had also reported . 
 The agents later see Walter Chaco , Paula 's grandfather and the plant 's owner , who while shaken over Paula 's death gives the agents permission to perform an autopsy . The agents find that while Paula 's personnel file gives her age as 47 , she appears no older than her mid @-@ 20 's . They also discover that Paula suffered from Creutzfeldt – Jakob disease , a rare and fatal illness that causes dementia . When the agents nearly collide with a Chaco Chicken truck , they learn that the driver also suffered from the disease . Noticing the plant 's blood @-@ red runoff in a nearby stream , Mulder orders a reluctant Sheriff Arens to dredge it . They quickly find the bones of nine people , including Kearns . While inspecting the skeletal remains , the agents notice that the skeletons are all missing their skulls , and that the bones appear to have been boiled . Meanwhile , Randolph and Harold discuss the uncovered bones and increase of Creutzfeldt @-@ Jakob cases . While Randolph complains about Chaco 's inaction , Harold assures him that he will talk to Chaco . 
 Using FBI records , Mulder and Scully find that eighty @-@ seven people have vanished within a two @-@ hundred mile radius of Dudley over the past half @-@ century . Mulder suspects that the town 's residents are practicing cannibalism in order to prolong life , possibly explaining Paula 's youthful appearance . Mulder also realizes that Kearns originally had Creutzfeldt @-@ Jakob disease , and that the other residents caught the illness after consuming his body . The agents try to search the town 's birth records for confirmation of Paula 's age , but find that they have been destroyed . At Chaco 's mansion , Chaco and Harold meet with Doris , who tearfully implies that she " helped " Chaco kill her husband ; Chaco instructs her to obstruct the FBI 's investigation . 
 Doris calls Mulder , believing that Chaco wants to kill her ; after she hangs up , she is attacked by the masked figure . Scully goes to help Doris while Mulder searches for Chaco at his mansion . There , he finds the shrunken heads of Kearns and other victims in a cabinet . Mulder calls Scully on the phone and hears her being knocked out by Chaco . She is taken to a secluded field , where Harold has started a bonfire and led the townsfolk in consuming Doris . Chaco berates them for killing one of their own , but Harold chastises him for allowing the Creutzfeldt @-@ Jakob epidemic to occur and has Chaco executed by the masked figure . Scully herself is about to be killed when Mulder arrives and shoots the figure ; he is revealed to be Sheriff Arens . Harold tries to shoot Mulder , but is trampled to death by the fleeing townsfolk . 
 In narration , Scully explains that Chaco 's plant has been closed down by the Department of Agriculture , and that twenty @-@ seven Dudley residents have died from Creutzfeldt @-@ Jakob disease . She reveals that Chaco was ninety @-@ three years old at the time of his death , and had spent time with the allegedly cannibalistic " <unk> tribe " after his transport plane was shot down over New Guinea during World War II . She also states that his remains have never been found ; the final scene suggests that Chaco 's remains are being fed to chickens at his plant . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Our Town " was written by future executive producer Frank Spotnitz and directed by Rob Bowman . The episode was Spotnitz 's first stand @-@ alone episode for the show . He had wanted to do an episode about cannibalism occurring at a chicken processing plant , thinking it was one of the most despicable and vile things he could imagine . Spotnitz was inspired by the Spencer Tracy movie Bad Day at Black Rock , which is about a town holding a terrible secret . He was also inspired by an article he read at UCLA about salamanders getting sick from eating other salamanders ; Spotnitz 's brother later suggested him to include the theme in the episode . 
 The concept of discovering human bones that had been boiled in pots was inspired by research done for the episode " Anasazi " . Despite having trouble locating books on cannibalism , <unk> even named the characters after real life cannibals . Chaco Chicken was based on Chaco Canyon , New Mexico , which is where bones consumed by the Anasazi were found . The idea of cannibals being afflicted by a degenerative neurological disease was inspired by Kuru , a <unk> @-@ Jakob @-@ like prion disease that afflicted the Fore people of Papua New Guinea through cannibalism . Howard Gordon came up with the idea to start the episode with a love affair between George Kearns and Paula Gray . Gary Grubbs , the actor who played the sheriff , was later cast as the fire captain in the 1998 X @-@ Files film . 
 Of the end result , Spotnitz said " I was very pleased with the way it was executed , and I think it was a good mystery . He later wrote that he " liked [ it ] more as time has gone on . " Director Rob Bowman admitted to being tired and not inspired by the time this episode — the second to last of the season — was produced . This lack of interest later resulted in the episode taking extra time to finish . Bowman later recalled that the most difficult aspect of the episode was filming the climactic human sacrifice scene , if only because of the ceremonial mask featured . He explained , " the mask scared the hell out of me only because I thought , ' Boy , if I don 't shoot this right , it 's going to be silly . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Our Town " was first broadcast in the United States on May 12 , 1995 , on the Fox Broadcasting Company . In its original broadcast , it was watched by 9 million households , according to the Nielsen ratings system . It received a 9 @.@ 4 rating and a 17 share among viewers , meaning that 9 @.@ 4 percent of all households in the United States and 17 percent of all people watching television at the time , viewed the episode . 
 The episode received mostly mixed reviews from television critics . In a retrospective review of the second season , Entertainment Weekly gave " Our Town " a C + , describing it as " scary — but mostly because of what transpires in a chicken processing plant . " Writing for The A.V. Club , Zack Handlen rated the episode a B – , criticizing the clichéd opening sequence — " Haven 't we seen this before ? Like , a million times , in dozens of horror movies , and even on this very series " — the bland characters and lack of humor . However , he did compliment the fact that the plot explained enough of the villain 's motives and that the episode had " some sense of a community behind everything " . Furthermore , he wrote that the resolution worked well despite again resorting to Scully in danger . 
 Television Without Pity ranked " Our Town " the fifth most nightmare @-@ inducing episode of the show . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode two stars out of five . The two wrote positively of Spotnitz juxtapositions , praising the idea to frame the themes around cannibalism . However , they wrote that " Spotnitz pushes the metaphor too far " , citing the ending scene as evidence . Shearman and Pearson also criticized both Bowman 's directing , noting it lacked the flourishes to make " Spotnitz ' strange black comedy work " , and Mark Snow 's score . They noted that Snow was on " autopilot " and that his soundtrack was " the same horn anthem he gives any character who 's taken a little too much from a tribal culture . " The two further criticized the series ' use of the capture of Scully as a mechanism for Mulder to spring into action . 
 = 10 ( MercyMe album ) = 
 10 is a greatest hits album by American Christian rock band MercyMe . Released on April 7 , 2009 in commemoration of the tenth anniversary of the band 's single " I Can Only Imagine " . The album contains twelve of the band 's number @-@ one singles from five studio albums ( Almost There , Spoken For , Undone , Coming Up to Breathe , and All That Is Within Me ) as well as a re @-@ recording of " I Can Only Imagine " featuring the London Sessions Orchestra , in addition to two other bonus tracks . Additional content , which varies depending on the version of the album , includes music videos , featurettes , and live recordings . 
 10 received mostly positive reviews from music critics , and the amount of content as well as the videos included with the album received particular praise . It debuted at number 18 on the Billboard 200 and number one on the Billboard Christian Albums chart , selling 30 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . Billboard ranked the album as the 13th best @-@ selling Christian album of 2009 and the 40th best @-@ selling Christian album of 2010 in the United States . 
 = = Background = = 
 10 was released to commemorate the tenth anniversary of MercyMe 's single " I Can Only Imagine " . In 1999 , the band was working on an independent record , The Worship Project , and needed one more song to fill out the project . Lead singer Bart Millard wrote the song while reminiscing about his father 's death . Although the band was aiming to produce a worship record of easy @-@ to @-@ sing songs , they included it because it was important to Millard . It was later included on the band 's major @-@ label debut , 2001 's Almost There , where it became a hit on Christian radio before crossing over and becoming successful on mainstream radio in 2003 . Around eight months before the release of 10 , the band had been approached by their label about producing a greatest @-@ hits record . The band was initially against the idea , and according to Millard , they felt it had always meant a band was near the end of their career . However , Millard later remembered he had written the song in 1999 , and the idea shifted from a greatest @-@ hits record to a celebration of the song 's ten @-@ year anniversary , a concept the band was more comfortable with . 
 = = Content = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 10 includes fifteen songs : twelve of the band 's number @-@ one Christian radio singles ( three each from Undone , Coming Up to Breathe , and All That Is Within Me , two from Spoken For , and one from Almost There ) , as well as three bonus tracks . Live versions of ten of the band 's songs were also included on some versions of the album " I Can Only Imagine ( Symphony Edition ) " was recorded at Abbey Road Studios in London with the London Session Orchestra . " Ten Simple Rules " , described as having a " Fifties twist " sound , was originally included as music video on Hoop <unk> , a children 's video DVD . Lyrically , it relates the Ten Commandments . The band had begun playing it in concerts and , according to Millard , it developed a following of fans who wanted it to be put on CD . " Only Temporary " , a rock song with a " distinct southern influence " , was a new track , which the band had not included on any other album or project . 
 = = = Videos = = = 
 Physical versions of 10 were released with a ' Sight ' DVD containing video content . In addition to music videos for " I Can Only Imagine " , " So Long Self " , " God with Us " , " You Reign " , and " Finally Home " , it includes live videos for " Word of God Speak " , " Bring the Rain " , and " Hold Fast " that were recorded live throughout the band 's fall 2008 tour by one camera . " Spoken For " and " Homesick " were taken from the band 's 2004 live DVD MercyMe Live , while " In the Blink of an Eye " was taken from the collector 's edition of their 2007 album All That Is Within Me . Two featurettes were also included : " The Making of ' I Can Only Imagine ' " , which had previously appeared on MercyMe Live , and " Gospel Music Channel 's Faith & Fame : MercyMe " , which recounts the band 's career from their early years on . The iTunes version of 10 only includes the two featurettes . 
 = = Release and commercial performance = = 
 10 was released on April 7 , 2009 . Several different versions of the album were released . Physically , the album received a release in a two @-@ disc collection , featuring the ' Sound ' CD and ' Sight ' DVD , as well as in a three @-@ disc " Deluxe Edition " including an additional CD of 10 live songs . Digitally , 10 was released to iTunes on October 7 , 2009 , including the sound CD content and live recordings , as well as the two documentaries . 
 10 sold 30 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , debuting at number 18 on the Billboard 200 and number one on the Billboard Christian Albums chart . It spent two weeks atop the Christian Albums chart and 73 weeks on the chart in total . It ranked as the 13th best @-@ selling Christian album of 2009 in the United States and the 40th best @-@ selling Christian album of 2010 in the United States . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 10 received mostly positive reviews from music critics . Jared Johnson of AllMusic gave the album 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars and noted it as an ' Album Pick ' , calling it " one of the best and most long @-@ awaited greatest @-@ hits albums in recent memory " . Johnson praised the amount of content , saying " For fans , the videos alone make this worth picking up " . Jenna DeWitt of The Baylor Lariat gave it an A- , praising " I Can Only Imagine ( Symphony Edition ) " as " awe @-@ inspiring " as well as the DVD content , and saying " the only mistake in buying this album is if you are really tired of the extensive radio airplay that these hits have gotten " . Dave Derbyshire of Cross Rhythms gave the album nine out of ten squares , calling it a " brilliant introduction " to the band . His only criticism on the album was that he considered a few of the songs as being overly sentimental . Matt Johnson of Jesus Freak Hideout gave the album three out of five stars . Johnson noted the DVD content as being " what really makes this worth your money " , but was critical of the interface ; he also felt the CD content , while solid , did not include enough songs and that the new recordings weren 't particularly impressive . He noted the orchestra and Millard 's vocals as conflicting on the re @-@ recording of " I Can Only Imagine " , but also said that it " takes the song to new heights than previously conceived " . Justin Michael of Sight Magazine gave the album a positive review , calling it " A must for all MercyMe fans , for those who need a hooky melody with a message and for people who love getting a free DVD with their albums ! " ; he also praised the one @-@ camera tour videos , but noted " Ten Simple Rules " is " not their brightest musical moment " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits from the album liner notes 
 = = Charts = = 
 = French cruiser Chanzy = 
 Chanzy was an Amiral Charner @-@ class armored cruiser built for the French Navy in the 1890s . Upon completion , she served in the Mediterranean Squadron and she was assigned to the International Squadron off the island of Crete during the Greco @-@ Turkish War of 1897 to protect French interests and citizens . The ship was in reserve for several years in the middle of the first decade of the 20th century before she was transferred to French Indochina in 1906 . Chanzy ran aground off the Chinese coast in mid @-@ 1907 , where she proved impossible to refloat and was destroyed in place after her crew was rescued without loss . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Amiral Charner @-@ class ships were designed to be smaller and cheaper than the preceding armored cruiser design , the Dupuy de Lôme . Like the older ship , they were intended to fill the commerce @-@ raiding strategy of the Jeune École . 
 Chanzy measured 106 @.@ 12 meters ( 348 ft 2 in ) between perpendiculars , with a beam of 14 @.@ 04 meters ( 46 ft 1 in ) . The ship had a forward draft of 5 @.@ 55 meters ( 18 ft 3 in ) and drew 6 @.@ 06 meters ( 19 ft 11 in ) aft . She displaced 4 @,@ 748 metric tons ( 4 @,@ 673 long tons ) at normal load and 4 @,@ 990 metric tons ( 4 @,@ 910 long tons ) at deep load . 
 The Amiral Charner class had two triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving a single propeller shaft . Steam for the engines was provided by 16 Belleville boilers and they were rated at a total of 8 @,@ 300 metric horsepower ( 6 @,@ 100 kW ) using forced draft . Amiral Charner had a designed speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) and carried up to 535 metric tons ( 527 long tons ; 590 short tons ) of coal that allowed her to steam for 4 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 400 km ; 4 @,@ 600 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The ships of the Amiral Charner class had a main armament that consisted of two Canon de 194 mm Modèle 1887 guns that were mounted in single gun turrets , one each fore and aft of the superstructure . Their secondary armament comprised six Canon de 138 @.@ 6 mm Modèle 1887 guns , each in single gun turrets on each broadside . For anti @-@ torpedo boat defense , they carried four 65 @-@ millimeter ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) guns , four 47 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) and eight 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) five @-@ barreled revolving Hotchkiss guns . They were also armed with four 450 @-@ millimeter ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) pivoting torpedo tubes ; two mounted on each broadside above water . 
 The side of the Amiral Charner class was generally protected by 92 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 6 in ) of steel armor , from 1 @.@ 3 meters ( 4 ft 3 in ) below the waterline to 2 @.@ 5 meters ( 8 ft 2 in ) above it . The bottom 20 centimeters ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) tapered in thickness and the armor at the ends of the ships thinned to 60 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) . The curved protective deck of mild steel had a thickness of 40 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) along its centerline that increased to 50 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) at its outer edges . Protecting the boiler rooms , engine rooms , and magazines below it was a thin splinter deck . A watertight internal cofferdam , filled with cellulose , ran the length of the ship from the protective deck to a height of 1 @.@ 2 meters ( 4 ft ) above the waterline . Below the protective deck the ship was divided by 13 watertight transverse bulkheads with five more above it . The ship 's conning tower and turrets were protected by 92 millimeters of armor . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Chanzy , named after General Antoine Chanzy , was ordered from Chantiers et Ateliers de la Gironde on 18 December 1899 and laid down the following month at their shipyard in Bordeaux . She was launched on 24 January 1894 and initially was commissioned for her sea trials on 6 February . These began two days later and revealed so many problems with her engines and boilers that Chanzy was decommissioned for repairs on 6 December . Recommissioned on 1 May 1895 to test the repairs , she entered service on 20 July . 
 The ship was initially assigned to the 1st Light Division of the Mediterranean Squadron before she was transferred to the 4th Light Division on 18 May 1896 . Chanzy participated in the annual fleet maneuvers that summer before she was placed in reserve for repairs at Toulon in August . The ship began trials on 28 December before she was sent to Crete on 16 February 1897 as part of the French contingent of the International Squadron deployed there during the Greco @-@ Turkish War to protect Western interests and citizens . She remained with the squadron until 25 February 1898 . Upon arriving in France , Chanzy was assigned to the reserve squadron and did little for the rest of the year other than participate in the annual naval maneuvers . 
 On 1 January 1899 the ship was reassigned to the 1st Light Division and her most notable activities for the year were visits to the Balearic Islands and ports in the Aegean Sea and Middle East . Her main steam pipe fractured on 20 February and injured three crewmen . Chanzy was repaired in time to participate in the annual maneuvers and spent three weeks in September attached to the elderly gunnery ship Couronne before making a cruise to French North Africa . The ship began a brief deployment to the Levant on 1 February 1901 and returned on 4 April for the annual maneuvers before returning to the Levant on 30 October . She arrived back at Toulon on 1 February 1902 and began a long period of relative inactivity that lasted until she was formally placed in reserve when the new armored cruiser Marseillaise replaced her in the squadron in May 1904 . 
 Chanzy was recommissioned on 15 September 1906 for service with the Far Eastern Squadron and departed on 15 November . She arrived at Saigon , French Indochina , on 10 January 1907 and visited Hong Kong and ports in China , and Japan in April and May . While departing from Shanghai on 20 May in thick fog , she ran aground on rocks off Ballard Island in the Chusan Islands . Her sister ship Bruix and the protected cruisers D 'Entrecasteaux and Alger attempted to pull her off , but could not do so in the heavy seas . Her crew remained aboard attempting to get her off until they were evacuated without loss on 1 June when the ship began to founder and the wreck was demolished by the other cruisers on 12 June . 
 = Privy Garden of the Palace of Whitehall = 
 The Privy Garden of the Palace of Whitehall was a large enclosed space in Westminster , London , that was originally a pleasure garden used by the late Tudor and Stuart monarchs of England . It was created under Henry VIII and was expanded and improved under his successors , but lost its royal patronage after the Palace of Whitehall was almost totally destroyed by fire in 1698 . 
 From the start of the 18th century onwards , the garden went through major changes as it fell into neglect . It was painted in 1747 by Canaletto during a period of transition , as Westminster was being transformed by the construction of new buildings and roads . By the start of the 19th century it had been redeveloped as the site for a row of townhouses , some of which were occupied by prime ministers seeking homes near the government buildings nearby . The last remnants of the Privy Garden were destroyed in 1938 during the construction of government offices which now house the Ministry of Defence 's headquarters building . 
 = = Origins and layout = = 
 The Privy Garden originated in the 16th century as part of the estate of York Place ; Cardinal Wolsey 's London residence . The estate already had a privy , or private , garden that was located behind what is now the Banqueting House . An orchard , which was part of the estate , adjoined it to the south . When Henry VIII seized York Place , he bought more land to the south of the orchard to expand the estate . The old privy garden was cobbled over and later became known as the Pebble Court , while the orchard was converted into a new and much larger Privy Garden , known at first as the " great garden " . At the time , Westminster was not heavily built up as it is now , and York Place – later renamed Whitehall Palace – lay within a suburban area dominated by parks and gardens . St. James 's Park , across the other side of Whitehall , was a royal hunting ground . 
 Henry 's garden was very ornately decorated , as 16th @-@ century visitors noted . The Spanish Duke of Nájera wrote of a visit in 1544 in which he saw " a very pleasant garden with great walks and avenues in all directions , containing many sculptures of men and women , children and birds and monsters , and other strange figures in low and high relief . " Von Wedel recorded in 1584 that in the garden were " thirty @-@ four high columns , covered with various fine paintings ; also different animals carved in wood , with their horns gilt , are set on the top of the columns , together with flags bearing the queen 's arms . In the middle of the garden is a nice fountain with a remarkable sun @-@ dial , showing the time in thirty different ways . Between the spaces that are planted in the garden there are fine walks grown with grass , and the spaces are planted very artistically , surrounded by plants in the shape of seats . " 
 The earliest surviving depiction of the garden , from 1670 , shows a very different layout . By this time the garden had been redesigned in a grid pattern with sixteen squares of grass separated by paths . The relentless expansion of the Palace of Whitehall , which was by now a sprawling jumble of structures , had hemmed in the Privy Garden behind walls and buildings on all sides . A high wall to the west separated it from The Street , the main thoroughfare at the south end of Whitehall that bisected the palace in a north @-@ south direction . To the north , a range of buildings occupied by high @-@ ranking courtiers separated it from the Pebble Court that lay behind the Banqueting House , while to the east the Stone Gallery and state apartments , used by the king 's closest courtiers , blocked it off from the River Thames . The royal apartments were off the Stone Gallery and had a view of the Privy Garden , with a screen in place to prevent passers @-@ by from seeing the naked king in his 7 by 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 by 2 @.@ 1 m ) bathtub . A row of trees on the south side screened it from the Bowling Green , which had been an orchard in Henry VIII 's time but was converted for leisure use after the Restoration . A terrace also separated the Privy Garden from the Bowling Green , but this was removed in 1673 – 4 and part of the Bowling Green was added to the garden . 
 The Privy Garden was originally created as a private royal pleasure garden and continued to serve a similar purpose during the Interregnum ( 1649 – 1660 ) , when the English Council of State put considerable effort and money into repairing and improving the garden . They appear to have reserved it exclusively for their own use , with their own individual keys for access . By Samuel Pepys ' time , after the Restoration of the monarchy , it had become " a through @-@ passage , and common . " The wall that enclosed the garden was often used by ballad @-@ sellers to display their wares to passers @-@ by , and courtiers used it to air their laundry . Pepys recorded his titillation at the sight of the underwear of Charles II 's mistress , Lady Castlemaine , hanging out to dry in the Privy Garden . A century later , James Boswell wrote in his diary that he had taken a prostitute into the garden and " indulged sensuality " , but he was shocked to find when he got home that she had stolen his handkerchief . 
 = = Sculptures and other features = = 
 For a time , each of the grass squares in the garden had a statue in its centre , standing on its own pedestal . They were probably moved there from St James 's Palace in the 1650s but became the target of Puritan zealotry during the Interregnum , due to the perception that they were biblically prohibited " graven images " . A woman named Mary <unk> wrote to Oliver Cromwell to demand that they be taken down , demanding that he " demolish those monsters which are set up as ornaments in [ the ] privy garden , for whilst they stand , though you see no evil in them , yet there is much evil in it , for whilst the crosses and altars of the idols remained <unk> away in Jerusalem , the wrath of God continued against Israel . " One man took more direct action ; it was recorded in 1659 that " about this time there was a cook that lived by the Palace Gate , Westminster , that in Sermon time went into Whitehall Garden , and with him carried a smith 's great hammer ; he broke there those goodly statue of brass and marble , which report said they were the neatest made and the best workmanship in Europe , in half an hour 's time [ he ] did above £ 500 worth of hurt . " 
 The statues were eventually taken down when Charles II came to the throne and were either repaired or replaced . A bronze statue of James II by Grinling Gibbons , depicting the king wearing the robes of a Roman emperor , stood just outside the garden in the Pebble Court from 1686 to 1898 ( with a short interruption during the Glorious Revolution ) . It now occupies a spot in Trafalgar Square outside the National Gallery . 
 A large sundial , set up on the orders of James I , stood in the middle of the garden from 1624 . The dial was designed by Edmund Gunter , professor of astronomy at Gresham College . It consisted of a large stone pedestal with four dials at the four corners and " the great horizontal concave " in the centre , with east , west , north and south dials at the sides . It was subsequently vandalised , allegedly by an intoxicated courtier , and fell into ruin in Charles II 's reign . Andrew Marvell lamented that 
 In 1669 a new King 's Sun Dial was erected for Charles II , designed by Father Francis Hall , a Jesuit priest . It was an extremely elaborate construction that Hall detailed in a book , <unk> of the <unk> , that he published in 1673 to explain how it operated . It stood 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) high and was constructed of stone , brass and wood , with gilded ironwork and painted glass panels to accompany its 270 component dials . It resembled " a fountain of glass spheres , or a giant candelabrum with tiered , branching arms ending in crystal globes " , which showed not only the hours of the day but " many things also belonging to geography , astrology , and astronomy , by the sun 's shadow made visible to the eye . " 
 The King was fascinated by astronomy ; his personal association with the science was illustrated by the fact that the sundial was not only his personal pride and joy but was also designed to serve as a symbol of the Stuart family . It had glass portraits mounted on it , depicting Charles , Queen Catherine , the Duke of York , the Queen Mother and Prince Rupert . A watchman was posted to guard it against the kind of vandalism that had wrecked the earlier sundial , but in June 1675 it was severely damaged when it was attacked by John Wilmot , 2nd Earl of Rochester , much to the king 's fury . The fate of the ruined dial is unknown ; it was last recorded standing at Buckingham House ( later Buckingham Palace ) in 1710 . 
 = = From Privy Garden to Whitehall Gardens = = 
 After the destruction by fire of the Palace of Whitehall in 1698 , the surroundings of the Privy Garden changed dramatically . Most of the palace buildings had been burned down in the 1698 fire ; others were torn down as the last vestiges of the old Tudor and Stuart Palace were removed . With the demise of the Privy Gallery , the Privy Garden was extended north to include the Pebble Court behind the Banqueting House . 
 The garden remained in Crown ownership but it became neglected and filthy with the departure of the monarchy from Whitehall . In 1733 the Duke of Richmond and other residents of the surviving properties adjoining the garden petitioned that they be allowed to lease the " void ground " of the garden . The Crown agreed , and in 1734 most of the garden was leased to the Dukes of Richmond and Montagu , the Earl of Loudon and Sir Conyers D 'Arcy . 
 When Canaletto painted a view of the garden looking north from the Duke of Richmond 's dining room in Richmond House in 1747 , it was a last view of a prospect that was soon to disappear with the demolition of the old palace 's Holbein Gate adjoining the garden . Parliament Street was driven through the western side of the garden in 1750 to connect Whitehall to the Palace of Westminster . At the start of the 19th century the garden 's " decayed wall , long fringed by pamphlets , ballads , and ragged advertisements " was removed and replaced by an iron railing and newly planted trees . Its north side remained " most confused and unpleasant " , terminating in a maze of " fifty narrow passages , formed by sheds , blank walls , the residences of the nobility , and the workshops of the tradesmen . " 
 The area was ripe for redevelopment by the landholding elite , who wished to have suitably grand townhouses to occupy while attending Parliament and the court . The vestiges of the Privy Garden became the site of a new street . In 1808 a row of houses called Whitehall Gardens was constructed on the site . Behind each house , long grassy gardens planted with rows of trees led directly down to the river , until they were cut off by the construction of the Victoria Embankment along the river bank between 1865 and 1870 . Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli lived in one of the houses between 1873 and 1875 , while Sir Robert Peel lived in another ( and died there in 1850 after falling from his horse on Constitution Hill ) . The trees outside the front entrance to Whitehall Gardens were the last survivors of the original Privy Garden , and stood until as recently as the late 1930s . 
 Among the houses in Whitehall Gardens were Montagu House and Pembroke House , a Palladian riverside villa with elaborate interiors . The houses were demolished along with the rest of Whitehall Gardens in 1938 , in what the architectural historian John Harris described as " a monstrous act of vandalism " , to make way for the construction of the new offices of the Board of Trade and Air Ministry . The interior decorations of four of Pembroke House 's rooms were saved after its demolition and were reinstalled in the new government offices , now the Ministry of Defence 's Main Building . 
 = Prelude to a Million Years = 
 Prelude to a Million Years : A Book of Wood Engravings is a 1933 wordless novel consisting of thirty wood engravings by American artist Lynd Ward ( 1905 – 1985 ) . It was the fourth of Ward 's six wordless novels , a genre Ward discovered while studying wood engraving in Europe , and delved into under the influence of the works of Frans Masereel and Otto Nückel . The symbol @-@ rich story tells of a sculptor who , in his quest for ideal beauty , neglects the reality of the struggles of his neighbors in the depths of the Great Depression . The engravings are done in a softer Art Deco style in contrast to the German Expressionism @-@ influenced artwork of Ward 's earlier works . 
 = = Background = = 
 Lynd Ward ( 1905 – 1985 ) was a son of Methodist minister and social activist Harry F. Ward ( 1873 – 1966 ) . Throughout his career the younger Ward displayed in his work the influence of his father 's interest in social injustice . Ward married writer May McNeer in 1926 and the couple left for Europe , where Ward spent a year studying wood engraving in Leipzig , Germany . There he encountered German Expressionist art and read the wordless novel The Sun ( 1919 ) by Flemish woodcut artist Frans Masereel ( 1889 – 1972 ) . 
 Ward returned to the United States and freelanced his illustrations . In 1929 , he came across German artist Otto Nückel 's wordless novel Destiny ( 1926 ) in New York City . The work inspired Ward to create a wordless novel of his own , Gods ' Man ( 1929 ) , which he followed with Madman 's Drum ( 1930 ) and Wild Pilgrimage ( 1932 ) . In December 1931 , Ward and McNeer were among the nine cofounders of Equinox Cooperative Press , dedicated to a hands @-@ on approach to bookmaking . 
 = = Content and style = = 
 The book opens with a dream sequence in which a sculptor worships before a flower symbolizing beauty . The sculptor struggles to capture his vision of beauty in a sculpture of an idealized woman . In his artistic pursuits he neglects the reality around him and the toll the Depression of the 1930s has taken on the people whose paths he crosses — a neighbor who is beaten by her husband , violent social protest , jingoistic nationalists , and drunkenness . He is engulfed in flames when he returns to his studio trying to flee it all . 
 Ward returns to the theme of an artist in a decaying culture that he explored in his first wordless novel , Gods ' Man ( 1929 ) , and intended the work as a commentary on how the Depression that had colored outlooks since Gods ' Man ; headlines declaring endless layoffs , strikes , lock @-@ outs , and political spin . To Ward , " Inevitably a process of polarization of the citizenry was set in motion " . 
 The style has evolved from the angular German Expressionism of Ward 's earlier books to a softer Art Deco one . He uses symbols throughout the book , such as the spinning of a spiderweb to indicate the passage of time , a fire hydrant echoing the emotions of a street riot , towering city buildings for capitalism , and flags for patriotism . The most prominent symbol is a flower , representing the artist 's distracted quest for beauty while he remains indifferent to the turmoil around him . 
 = = Production , publication , and reception = = 
 Ward made thirty wood engravings for the book , ranging in size from 5 × 3 inches ( 12 @.@ 7 × 7 @.@ 6 cm ) to 5 1 ⁄ 4 × 3 1 ⁄ 4 inches ( 13 @.@ 3 × 8 @.@ 3 cm ) . It was published in 1933 by the Equinox Cooperative Press , a bookmaking cooperative that Ward had cofounded . The first edition was the third book Equinox published . It was limited to 920 copies and printed from the original woodblocks . It was hand @-@ bound in French folds and a gold foil spine . Modestly priced , it sold well and brought in revenue to sustain Equinox 's other book projects . 
 Reception was mixed . Reviewer E. L. Tinker praised Ward 's visual mastery , but denigrated Ward 's repetition of plot — the protagonist 's " revolt against the injustices of society his preoccupation with sex , his self @-@ loathing after he has succumbed to the scarlet woman , and his final disillusionment " . Wood engraver John <unk> considered Prelude to a Million Years his favorite of Ward 's wordless novels . 
 = Nemesis Inferno = 
 Nemesis Inferno is a steel inverted roller coaster at the Thorpe Park theme park in Surrey , England , UK . Its Layout was conceived and designed by John Wardley and then built by Bolliger & Mabillard with Werner Stengel providing the layout calculations ( as he has with hundreds of roller coasters ) , the same Swiss firm that built the related Nemesis inverted roller coaster at Alton Towers . As a result , Nemesis and Nemesis Inferno are often compared , with Nemesis being cited by many as a superior ride . 
 The 750 @-@ metre @-@ long ( 2 @,@ 460 ft ) Nemesis Inferno is themed around an erupting tropical volcano . The ride stands 29 metres ( 95 ft ) tall , features a top speed of 80 kilometres per hour ( 50 mph ) , and four inversions . 
 = = History = = 
 In 2002 , after the opening of Colossus , Thorpe Park officially announced the addition of Nemesis Inferno in 2003 . Construction took place throughout 2002 with the first test run being completed in December 2002 . Nemesis Inferno officially opened to the public on 5 April 2003 . According to Nikki Nolan of The Tussauds Group who operated the park at the time , the ride was installed just one year after Colossus to " help transform Thorpe Park into a real thrill park " . 
 In 2004 , Thorpe Park approached Guinness World Records to set the record for the " Most Naked People on a Rollercoaster " . In May 2004 , 81 students took part in the record , which was set at 28 – the number of seats on a single Nemesis Inferno train . In August 2004 , Nemesis at Alton Towers broke the record with 32 riders . 
 The roller coaster was used on an episode of The Inbetweeners . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The 750 @-@ metre @-@ long ( 2 @,@ 460 ft ) Nemesis Inferno stands 29 metres ( 95 ft ) tall . With a top speed of 77 kilometres per hour ( 48 mph ) , the ride features four inversions including a vertical loop , a zero @-@ g roll , and a set of interlocking corkscrews . Riders of Nemesis Inferno experience up to 4 @.@ 5 times the force of gravity on the near @-@ two @-@ minute ride . The ride is reported to have cost £ 8 million . 
 Nemesis Inferno operates with two steel and fiberglass trains , each containing seven cars . Each car seats four riders in a single row for a total of 28 riders per train . Two seats on Nemesis Inferno have been modified to cater for larger riders . 
 The ride is themed around an erupting volcano . The name of the ride suggests that it is related to the original Nemesis , an inverted coaster installed at Alton Towers in 1994 . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 After leaving the station , the train takes a right @-@ hand swing into a dark tunnel , where it is shot with simulated fire . It makes a brief left turn before entering the 29 @-@ metre @-@ tall ( 95 ft ) lift hill . At the top , it takes a long left @-@ swing drop into its first inversion , a vertical loop right . This is followed by a zero @-@ g roll , where riders experience a feeling of weightlessness . The ride then turns to the right and enters the first of the interlocking corkscrews , then enters a right @-@ handed , over @-@ banked turn before continuing through the second of the interlocking corkscrews . After a large right turn , followed by a sharp left turn , the car begins to brake . Following a small right turn , it continues to the station . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In Mitch Hawker 's worldwide Best Roller Coaster Poll , Nemesis Inferno entered at position 70 in 2003 , before peaking at 51 in 2006 . The ride 's ranking in subsequent polls is shown in the table below . 
 Nemesis Inferno is commonly compared with its Alton Towers counterpart , Nemesis , with many citing the latter as the superior ride . Nemesis has ranked favourably in Amusement Today 's annual Golden Ticket Awards , being one of only seven roller coasters to appear in the top 50 steel roller coasters for all 15 years . Nemesis Inferno , on the other hand , has never made an appearance . In Mitch Hawker 's worldwide Best Roller Coaster Poll Nemesis Inferno has an average ranking of 80 , while Nemesis ' average ranking is 6 . In a poll conducted by the Los Angeles Times , Nemesis received 37 @.@ 93 % of the vote for title of best roller coaster in England , while Nemesis Inferno received 0 @.@ 32 % . Jeremy Thompson of Roller Coaster Philosophy describes Nemesis as " a vastly superior ride " to Nemesis Inferno . Thompson describes Nemesis Inferno as " something a bit better " than his expectations ; however , he was " not sure if it was a particularly good ride or not " . 
 = 2007 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 2007 Atlantic hurricane season was an active Atlantic hurricane season that produced 17 tropical cyclones , 15 tropical storms , six hurricanes , and two major hurricanes . It officially started on June 1 and ended on November 30 , dates which conventionally delimit the period during which most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic Ocean . The first tropical cyclone , Subtropical Storm Andrea , developed on May 9 , while the last storm , Tropical Storm Olga , dissipated on December 13 . The most intense hurricane , Dean , is tied for the seventh most intense Atlantic hurricane ever recorded as well as the third most intense Atlantic hurricane at landfall . The season was one of only four on record for the Atlantic with more than one Category 5 storm . It was the second on record in which an Atlantic hurricane , Felix , and an eastern Pacific hurricane , Henriette , made landfall on the same day . September had a record @-@ tying eight storms , although the strengths and durations of most of the storms were low . Aside from hurricanes Dean and Felix , none of the storms in the season exceeded Category 1 intensity . 
 Pre @-@ season forecasts by Colorado State University called for 14 named storms and 7 hurricanes , of which three were expected to attain major hurricane status . The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) later issued its initial forecast , which predicted 13 to 17 named storms , 7 to 10 hurricanes and three to five major hurricanes . After several revisions in the projected number of storms , NOAA and CSU lowered their forecasts by the middle of the season . 
 Several storms made landfall or directly affected land . Hurricanes Dean and Felix made landfall at Category 5 intensity , causing severe damage in parts of Mexico and Central America , respectively . Both storm names , as well as Noel , the name of a hurricane that affected the Caribbean , were retired from the naming list of Atlantic hurricanes . The United States was affected by five cyclones , although the storms were generally weak ; three tropical depressions and only one tropical storm , Gabrielle , and one hurricane , Humberto , made landfall in the country . Elsewhere , three storms directly affected Canada , although none severely . The combined storms killed at least 423 people and caused about $ 3 billion ( 2007 USD , $ 3 @.@ 42 billion 2016 USD ) in damage . 
 = = Seasonal forecasts = = 
 Noted hurricane experts Philip J. Klotzbach , William M. Gray , and their associates at Colorado State University issue forecasts of hurricane activity each year , separately from NOAA . Klotzbach 's team , formerly led by Gray , determined the average number of storms per season between 1950 and 2000 to be 9 @.@ 6 tropical storms , 5 @.@ 9 hurricanes , and 2 @.@ 3 major hurricanes ( storms exceeding Category 3 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale ) . A normal season , as defined by NOAA , has 9 to 12 named storms , of which five to seven reach hurricane strength and one to three become major hurricanes . 
 = = = Pre @-@ season forecasts = = = 
 On December 8 , 2006 , Klotzbach 's team issued its first extended @-@ range forecast for the 2007 season , predicting above @-@ average activity ( 14 named storms , seven hurricanes , three of Category 3 or higher ) . It listed a 64 percent chance of at least one major hurricane striking the U.S. mainland . This included a 40 percent chance of at least one major hurricane strike on the East Coast , including the Florida peninsula , and a 40 percent chance of at least one such strike on the Gulf Coast from the Florida Panhandle westward . The potential for major hurricane activity in the Caribbean was forecast to be above average , and the team predicted that El Niño , associated with reduced hurricane activity in the Atlantic , would dissipate by the active portion of the season . 
 On April 3 a new forecast was issued , calling for a very active hurricane season of 17 named storms , nine hurricanes and five intense hurricanes . The increase in the forecast was attributed to the rapid dissipation of El Niño conditions . The team also forecast a neutral or weak @-@ to @-@ moderate La Niña and noted that sea surface temperatures were much higher than average . The estimated potential for at least one major hurricane to affect the U.S. was increased to 74 percent ; the East Coast potential increased to 50 percent , and from the Florida Panhandle westward to Brownsville , Texas , the probability rose to 49 percent . However , the team 's report noted that while they predicted an active season , it was not suggesting that 2007 would be " as active as the 2004 and 2005 seasons " . 
 = = = Midseason outlooks = = = 
 On June 19 the UK Met Office ( UKMO ) issued a forecast of 10 tropical storms in the July to November period with a 70 percent chance that the number would be in the range of 7 to 13 . On August 3 , 2007 , Klotzbach 's team lowered its season estimate to 15 named storms , of which eight were to become hurricanes and four to become major hurricanes . Team members noted that conditions had become slightly less favorable for storms than earlier in the year . Sea surface temperature anomalies were cooler , and several Saharan Air Layer events had suppressed development of tropical cyclones . El Niño @-@ Southern Oscillation ( ENSO ) conditions were also noted to have been slightly cooler . 
 On August 9 , 2007 , NOAA revised its season estimate slightly downwards to 13 to 16 named storms of which seven to nine were to be hurricanes and three to five major hurricanes . However , the agency reaffirmed its prediction of an above @-@ average season , citing warmer @-@ than @-@ normal sea surface temperatures in parts of the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea and the likelihood of La Niña conditions during the peak of the season . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 Overall , the season 's activity was reflected with a cumulative accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 74 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . ACE is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 34 knots ( 39 mph , 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . Although officially , subtropical cyclones , such as Andrea or the initial portions of Gabrielle , Jerry , and Olga , are excluded from the total , the figure above includes periods when storms were in a subtropical phase . 
 Only two major hurricanes — storms of Category 3 intensity or higher — formed during the season , the least since the 1997 season , although tied with the 2006 and 2002 seasons . Named storms were active for 33 @.@ 50 days during the season , the lowest number of active days since the 1994 season . There were only 11 @.@ 25 days with active hurricanes , the lowest value since the 2002 season . Despite this , the number of days with major hurricanes was above the long @-@ term average . Four named storms made landfall on the U.S. during the year , but damage from those storms totaled to only about $ 82 million ( 2007 USD ) ; this was the least damage the U.S. saw from any Atlantic hurricane season since the 1990 season . The season was one of only six Atlantic hurricane seasons to produce two Category 5 equivalent hurricanes , the others being the 1932 , 1933 , 1960 , 1961 , and 2005 seasons . The two Category 5 hurricanes , Dean and Felix , had both reached Category 5 strength on two separate occasions , the first time two Atlantic hurricanes have done so in a single season . This was also the first season during which two storms made landfall at Category 5 intensity . When Hurricane Felix was upgraded to a Category 5 storm on September 2 , it became the eighth to form in this basin since 2000 . This gave the decade more hurricanes of such strength than any other on record . 
 When Tropical Depression Fourteen was upgraded to Tropical Storm Melissa on September 29 , it was the eighth named storm to form in the month of September . That tied a record for the most storms during September , which was first set in 2002 . Hurricane Humberto was the first hurricane to make landfall in Texas since Hurricane Claudette in 2003 . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Subtropical Storm Andrea = = = 
 The first storm of the season , Subtropical Storm Andrea , originated from a large extratropical cyclone that formed off the mid @-@ Atlantic coast on May 6 . It deepened steadily along a cold front that pushed through Florida . When the system lost most of its baroclinic support , development ceased until its low moved into warmer waters near the Bahamas . However , interaction between the low and a strong high @-@ pressure system to the north generated hurricane @-@ force winds in the system . Decreasing vertical wind shear allowed the storm to generate deeper convection much closer to the center . By May 9 the previously extratropical cyclone had transformed into Subtropical Storm Andrea while located about 140 miles ( 225 km ) southeast of Savannah , Georgia . Andrea began its subtropical phase as it was weakening , and continued this deterioration as it moved southward into an environment with higher wind shear . By May 11 , Andrea had lost all significant convection and degenerated into a remnant low . Though it produced intermittent bursts of convection , Andrea 's chance of regeneration was extinguished when an advancing cold front pushed it northward and eventually absorbed the system . 
 Andrea was short @-@ lived , dissipating on May 11 . It was the first pre @-@ season storm to develop since Tropical Storm Ana in April 2003 and the first Atlantic named storm in May since Tropical Storm Arlene in 1981 . Six people drowned along the Southeast U.S. Coast . However , because Andrea never made landfall , most of the resulting damage was associated with large waves , higher than normal tides , associated coastal flooding , and beach erosion caused by the storm . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Barry = = = 
 On June 1 , Tropical Storm Barry developed on the first day of the hurricane season . It originated from a trough of low pressure in the southeastern Gulf of Mexico that previously formed in the northwestern Caribbean . It accelerated to the northeast before reaching a peak intensity of 997 mbar and making landfall on Florida . Barry dissipated on June 2 . In Florida , the rainfall resulted in slick roads , which caused two traffic @-@ related deaths , and a woman was killed after being injured by rough surf . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Chantal = = = 
 An area of low pressure formed near the Bahamas on July 28 and gradually began to organize while moving north @-@ northeast . On July 30 it was classified as Tropical Depression Three and was named Tropical Storm Chantal shortly thereafter while south of Nova Scotia . The storm weakened on August 1 and made landfall on Newfoundland ; it later tracked into the North Atlantic as an extratropical storm . 
 Chantal moved over the Avalon Peninsula of Newfoundland where flooding was observed , where about 4 inches ( 100 mm ) of rain caused the postponement of the annual Royal St. John 's Regatta . Insured damage across the area totaled $ 5 @.@ 8 million ( 2007 CAD ; $ 5 @.@ 5 million 2007 USD , $ 6 @.@ 28 million 2016 USD ) . 
 = = = Hurricane Dean = = = 
 On August 11 , a tropical wave moved off the west coast of Africa , and , encountering favorable conditions , quickly spawned Tropical Depression Four , roughly 520 miles ( 835 km ) west @-@ southwest of Cape Verde . The depression moved briskly westward , south of a deep layered ridge , and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Dean on August 14 . The storm continued to strengthen overnight as it gained organization , and became the first hurricane of the season on August 16 . On August 17 the eye of the hurricane passed into the Caribbean between the islands of Martinique and Saint Lucia as a Category 2 hurricane . 
 In the warm waters of the Caribbean , Dean rapidly strengthened into a Category 5 hurricane with 165 mph ( 266 km / h ) sustained winds . This made it the strongest Atlantic hurricane since Hurricane Wilma — and it was tied for the seventh most intense Atlantic storm of all time . An eyewall replacement cycle weakened Dean , which then passed just south of Jamaica as a Category 4 hurricane . Dean regained Category 5 status late on August 20 and at that strength it made landfall on the Yucatán Peninsula of Mexico near Costa Maya on August 21 . Hurricane Dean was the first storm to make landfall as a Category 5 hurricane in the Atlantic basin since Hurricane Andrew in 1992 . A dropsonde in the eye of the storm estimated a central pressure of 905 mbar , tying Dean with hurricanes Camille and Mitch for the seventh most intense Atlantic hurricane ever recorded . Dean was the third most intense landfalling Atlantic storm in history ( after the Labor Day Hurricane of 1935 and Hurricane Gilbert of 1988 ) . Dean weakened over land , but re @-@ intensified slightly in the Gulf of Mexico . It made its final landfall near Tecolutla , Veracruz on August 22 , dissipating the next day . 
 In Hispaniola , Dean killed 15 people and destroyed hundreds of homes . Dean also left $ 616 million ( 2007 USD , $ 703 million 2016 USD ) in damage on Martinique and $ 154 million ( 2007 USD , $ 176 million 2016 USD ) on Guadeloupe . In Mexico , Hurricane Dean made landfall on the Yucatán Peninsula on August 21 as a Category 5 hurricane . Throughout its track , Dean killed 44 people and caused several billion dollars in damage . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Erin = = = 
 Tropical Storm Erin formed on August 16 in the Gulf of Mexico from a persistent area of convection . Based on reconnaissance data received from an NOAA plane investigating the depression , it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Erin on August 15 . It weakened to a tropical depression as it made landfall near Lamar , Texas , on August 16 , and the NHC issued its last advisory on the system shortly thereafter as it moved inland . Early on August 19 after entering Oklahoma , the remnants of Erin suddenly re @-@ intensified to maximum sustained winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) a short distance west of Oklahoma City . 
 The storm flooded more than 40 homes and businesses . Along its path into the central states , Erin killed 16 people — 9 directly — and left about $ 25 million ( 2007 USD , $ 28 @.@ 5 million 2016 USD ) in total damage . 
 = = = Hurricane Felix = = = 
 An area of disturbed weather east of the Windward Islands was designated Tropical Depression Six on August 31 . Early on September 1 , it was named Tropical Storm Felix , and it was upgraded to a hurricane later that day . Tracking generally westward , it rapidly intensified to Category 5 , and after fluctuating in strength , made landfall on Nicaragua with 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) winds . At least 133 deaths and more than $ 50 million ( 2007 USD ) in damage have been attributed to Felix . With Felix , the 2007 Atlantic hurricane season became the only one of its kind known to include two hurricanes making landfall at Category 5 . 
 Hurricane Felix took a similar path as Hurricane Dean , although its effects were not severe ; damage on Tobago was estimated at $ 250 @,@ 000 ( 2007 <unk> ; $ 40 @,@ 000 2007 USD , $ 45 @.@ 6 thousand 2016 USD ) . Hurricane Felix made landfall just south of the border between Nicaragua and Honduras , in a region historically known as the Mosquito Coast , as a Category 5 hurricane with 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) winds on September 4 . Residents of the region were reported to have been given little warning of the oncoming hurricane , which left many fisherman stranded at sea . In all , Felix killed at least 130 people , and damage in Nicaragua totaled C $ 869 @.@ 3 million ( 2007 <unk> ; $ 46 @.@ 7 million 2007 USD , $ 53 @.@ 3 thousand 2016 USD ) . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Gabrielle = = = 
 A cold front that moved off the southeastern coast of the United States on September 1 developed a weak low over the waters near Georgia . The low drifted eastward and weakened over the next few days until it joined with convection from an upper @-@ level trough that had been moving over the western Atlantic . On September 8 , the center of circulation became sufficiently organized to be declared Subtropical Storm Gabrielle , about 360 nautical miles ( 670 km ) southeast of Cape Hatteras . For the next twelve hours , the system 's strongest winds and thunderstorms remained separated from the center . On September 8 new convection eventually united with the center , leading the transition of Gabrielle into a tropical storm . Gabrielle gradually strengthened as it traveled northwest towards North Carolina and Virginia . The storm reached its peak intensity of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) just before it arrived in Cape Lookout , though strong wind shear kept most of the convection and surface winds offshore . Gabrielle weakened over land , and moved back into the Atlantic on September 10 . The circulation deteriorated further , and the storm dissipated southwest of Nova Scotia the next day . 
 In advance of the storm , tropical cyclone watches and warnings were issued for coastal areas , while rescue teams and the U.S. Coast Guard were put on standby . The storm dropped heavy rainfall near its immediate landfall location but little precipitation elsewhere . Along the coast , high waves , rip currents , and storm surge were reported . Slight localized flooding was reported . Gusty winds also occurred , though no wind damage was reported . Overall damage was minor , and there were no fatalities . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Ingrid = = = 
 A large tropical wave exited Africa on September 6 and initially failed to develop due to strong easterly shear . On September 9 , a broad low pressure area developed about midway between Africa and the Lesser Antilles . The wind shear slowly weakened , and early on September 12 Tropical Depression Eight developed about 1125 miles ( 1815 km ) east of the Lesser Antilles . The system moved west @-@ northwestward due to a ridge to its north , and with continued wind shear , it remained a tropical depression for 24 hours before convection increased further . Early on September 13 it intensified into Tropical Storm Ingrid , reaching peak winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . Operationally , it was not upgraded to a tropical storm until that evening . 
 Ingrid remained a tropical storm until September 15 , when it weakened to a tropical depression due to high shear from a strong tropical upper tropospheric trough . Gradual weakening continued as it passed northeast of the Leeward Islands . Ingrid briefly reorganized on September 16 , before weakening further and degenerating into an open wave early on September 17 . The remnants turned northwestward within the low @-@ level steering flow , and dissipated on September 18 without redevelopment . There were no reports of damage or casualties associated with Ingrid because the storm never threatened land . 
 = = = Hurricane Humberto = = = 
 On September 12 , an area of thunderstorm activity in the Gulf of Mexico organized into Tropical Depression Nine , about 60 mi ( 97 km ) southeast of Matagorda , Texas . Within three hours of forming , it was named Tropical Storm Humberto , and it turned to the north @-@ northeast before rapidly intensifying . In the early morning hours of September 13 , a Hurricane Hunter aircraft found that Humberto had strengthened into a hurricane while located about 15 miles ( 20 km ) off the coast of Texas . Humberto quickly weakened and entered Southwest Louisiana as a tropical storm during the afternoon of September 13 , dissipating the next day . 
 Hurricane Humberto caused some structural damage on High Island and widespread tree and power line damage in the Beaumont @-@ Port Arthur area . Power outages caused four oil refineries to halt production in Beaumont . One person was reported dead as a result of the storm , a Bridge City man killed when his carport crashed on him outside his house . Damage was estimated at $ 50 million . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Ten = = = 
 A subtropical depression formed on September 21 in the northeastern Gulf of Mexico from the interaction of a tropical wave , the tail end of a cold front , and an upper @-@ level low . Initially containing a poorly defined circulation and intermittent thunderstorm activity , the system transitioned into a tropical depression after convection increased over the center . Tracking northwestward , the depression moved ashore near Fort Walton Beach early on September 22 , and shortly thereafter it dissipated over southeastern Alabama . 
 It was the first tropical cyclone to threaten the New Orleans area after the destructive 2005 hurricane season and Hurricane Katrina . Overall impact from the cyclone was minor and largely limited to light rainfall . However , the precursor system spawned a damaging tornado in Eustis , Florida , where 20 houses were destroyed and 30 more were damaged . Damage was estimated at $ 6 @.@ 2 million . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Jerry = = = 
 The origins of Jerry were from a non @-@ tropical low pressure area over the central Atlantic on September 21 . The system meandered for two days , gradually developing deeper convection and gaining organization . On September 23 , the National Hurricane Center declared it a subtropical depression , as a warm core had developed but the system was still involved with an upper @-@ level low , and its strongest winds were well removed from the center . Early on September 23 , both satellite estimates and QuikScat data determined that the depression had strengthened into Subtropical Storm Jerry , despite the lack of a well @-@ defined inner core . 
 The storm slowly acquired tropical characteristics including a better @-@ defined warm core , and Jerry became fully tropical that evening as a weak and sheared tropical storm with 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) winds over a small radius . It accelerated northeastward over cooler waters with sea surface temperatures below 75 ° F ( 24 ° C ) . On September 24 , it weakened to a tropical depression ahead of a powerful cold front with little deep convection remaining in the system . That evening , a QuikScat pass determined that Jerry opened up into a trough , which was being absorbed into the larger frontal system . It completely dissipated by early on September 25 . Jerry never approached land during its lifespan , and no damage or casualties were reported . 
 = = = Hurricane Karen = = = 
 A very large tropical wave accompanied by a large envelope of low pressure emerged from the coast of Africa on September 21 . As it moved westward , deep convection gradually increased over the disturbance as its broad low @-@ level circulation became better @-@ defined . By September 24 , as the system traveled northwestward it organized enough to become a tropical depression . Six hours later the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Karen . 
 Karen 's organization and intensity remained steady for the next day . Early on September 26 , however , the storm strengthened significantly . In post @-@ operational analysis the cyclone was determined to have reached hurricane @-@ strength for about twelve hours . The strengthening was short @-@ lived because a sharp upper @-@ level trough to the west of Karen increased the amount of vertical wind shear over the hurricane . By September 28 these unfavorable conditions had weakened Karen to a marginal tropical storm and left its low @-@ level circulation exposed . Meanwhile , the storm began heading northward and experiencing intermittent bursts of deep convection . However , the relentless wind shear exposed the system 's circulation until it dissipated in the mid @-@ Atlantic on September 29 . Karen 's remnants lingered near the Leeward Islands for the next few days , although the system never directly affected land . As a result , no reported damages or casualties were associated with Karen . 
 = = = Hurricane Lorenzo = = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the western coast of Africa on September 11 , traversed the Caribbean and crossed the Yucatán on September 21 . The disturbance developed a small surface low on September 24 while moving erratically over the southwestern Gulf of Mexico . Strong upper @-@ level winds initially prevented the system from developing convection ; however , the shear relaxed on the following day and convection increased . On the evening of September 25 , a Hurricane Hunter aircraft found evidence that the low qualified as a tropical depression . Under weak steering currents , the depression drifted south and southwest , executing a small cyclonic loop into the Bay of Campeche . Upper @-@ level winds gave way to an anticyclone above the depression , and the system became Tropical Storm Lorenzo on September 27 about 130 nautical miles ( 240 km ) east of Tuxpan . Rapid intensification brought Lorenzo to hurricane status early that evening , less than twelve hours after becoming a tropical storm . Lorenzo reached its peak intensity on September 28 , then weakened slightly before making landfall near Tecolutla , Mexico as a minimal hurricane . The small circulation weakened rapidly after landfall , and the system dissipated the next day . 
 Six deaths in Mexico were attributed to Lorenzo , mostly due to flash floods and mudslides . The states of Puebla and Veracruz reported damage from rain and high winds . Two hundred people were forced to evacuate in Hidalgo when the San Lorenzo River overflowed its banks . Lorenzo made landfall in virtually the same location that Hurricane Dean had struck a month earlier . Damage was estimated at $ 1 billion ( 2007 MXN ; $ 92 million 2007 USD , $ 105 million 2016 USD ) . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Melissa = = = 
 On September 26 , a tropical wave exited Africa and quickly developed a low pressure area . Following a convective increase and better @-@ defined outflow , it developed into Tropical Depression Fourteen about 115 miles ( 185 km ) west @-@ southwest of the southernmost Cape Verde Islands early on September 28 . Because the depression was isolated from the subtropical ridge , the depression drifted west @-@ northwestward . Westerly wind shear prevented significant development , but following an increase in convection , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Melissa early on September 29 . Similar to previous storms Ingrid and Karen , high wind shear in the deep tropics hindered Melissa 's development , and its peak winds were only 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) ; operationally , satellite imagery suggested the storm reached 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) . By September 30 , the shear and cooler waters weakened Melissa to a tropical depression with a poorly defined surface center . The system lost its deep convection and by that afternoon , Melissa degenerated into a remnant low . It continued west @-@ northwestward , producing intermittent convection , until being absorbed by a front northeast of the Lesser Antilles on October 5 . There were no reports of damage or casualties . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Fifteen = = = 
 An area of disturbed weather extended from the northwestern Caribbean Sea to the western Atlantic Ocean on October 4 , possibly related to the remnants of Hurricane Karen . The system slowly organized , developing a surface low pressure on October 8 to the northeast of the Turks and Caicos Islands . Convection associated with the storm steadily increased as the low moved towards the northeast . By October 11 , the low organized into Tropical Depression Fifteen about 740 mi ( 1 @,@ 190 km ) east @-@ southeast of Bermuda , after the convection had persisted for about 12 hours . An upper @-@ level low to the west caused strong southwesterly wind shear , which inhibited development . 
 On October 12 , a building ridge caused the depression to slow at the same time as the convection began decreasing . The storm 's center became exposed as the deep convection became limited to a few small cells north of the center . By that afternoon , the depression degenerated into a remnant low . The remnant low persisted for the next several days while picking up speed and taking a gradual turn towards the northeast . The low transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on October 14 and intensified , moving through the Azores with gale force winds . It reached winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) before being absorbed by a larger extratropical storm on October 18 . 
 = = = Hurricane Noel = = = 
 During the evening of October 27 a low pressure system that had been slowly developing over the eastern Caribbean organization into Tropical Depression Sixteen . The next day , it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Noel and made landfall on Haiti on October 29 . Noel meandered across the western Caribbean for the next three days ; the storm intensified into a hurricane on November 1 . Tracking northward , it began its transition into an extratropical cyclone on November 2 , becoming fully extratropical on November 4 while over Labrador . As a powerful extratropical cyclone , it crossed back into the Atlantic and began a track towards western Greenland . 
 Throughout the Caribbean , Hurricane Noel caused severe damage . Torrential rainfall and mudslides caused by the storm killed at least 87 people in the Dominican Republic and at least 73 in Haiti . Noel generated winds of 130 mph ( 210 km / h ) in the <unk> region of Newfoundland and Labrador . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Olga = = = 
 In the second week of December , after the official end of the hurricane season , a low developed east of the northernmost Lesser Antilles . It slowly acquired tropical characteristics , and late on December 10 , the National Hurricane Center declared it Subtropical Storm Olga while just north of Puerto Rico . It is the first post @-@ season storm since Tropical Storm Zeta in the 2005 season . Olga was only one of a few out of season tropical cyclones to make landfall . The storm made landfall on December 11 on the eastern tip of the Dominican Republic . Later that evening , Olga transitioned into a tropical storm just after making landfall . Olga tracked over Hispaniola and emerged in the Caribbean Sea . Strong wind shear and dry air caused Olga to weaken into a remnant low early on December 13 . 
 The storm impacted many areas affected by Tropical Storm Noel a month earlier . In Puerto Rico , moderate rainfall caused one death . According to the National Hurricane Center 's Tropical Cyclone Report on Olga , at least 22 occurred due to the release of floodgates at a dam in Santiago Province . Two deaths were also reported in Haiti , and one fatality was confirmed in Puerto Rico . Almost 12 @,@ 000 homes were damaged , of which 370 were completely destroyed . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The names to the right were used for storms that formed in the Atlantic basin in 2007 . This is the same list used in the 2001 season except for Andrea , Ingrid , and Melissa , which replaced Allison , Iris , and Michelle , respectively and were first used in 2007 . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 On May 13 , 2008 , at the 30th Session of the World Meteorological Organization 's Regional Association IV Hurricane Committee , the WMO retired the names Dean , Felix , and Noel from its rotating name lists . The names were replaced with Dorian , Fernand , and Nestor for the 2013 season . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 This is a table of the storms in the 2007 Atlantic hurricane season . It mentions all of the season 's storms and their names , landfall ( s ) , peak intensities , damages , and death totals . Deaths in parentheses are additional and indirect ( an example of such being a traffic accident or landslide ) , but are still related to that storm . The damage and death totals in this list include impacts when the storm was a precursor wave or post @-@ tropical low , and all of the damage figures are in 2007 USD . 
 = HMS Resolution ( 1892 ) = 
 HMS Resolution was a Royal Sovereign @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleship of the Royal Navy . The ship was built by Palmers Shipbuilding and Iron Company , starting with her keel laying in June 1890 . She was launched in May 1892 and , after completing trials , was commissioned into the Channel Squadron the following December . She was armed with a main battery of four 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch guns and a secondary battery of ten 6 @-@ inch guns . The ship had a top speed of 16 @.@ 5 knots . 
 Resolution served with the Channel Squadron up to 1901 ; she took part in the Diamond Jubilee Fleet Review and a number of manoeuvres in the Atlantic and the Southwest Approaches . She was recommissioned as a coast guard ship later in 1901 and underwent a refit in 1903 , after which she served at Sheerness as a port guard ship , before entering the Fleet Reserve at Chatham in June 1904 . She suffered damage while participating in combined manoeuvres in 1906 , and was recommissioned into the Special Service Division of the Home Fleet the following year . She was decommissioned in August 1911 and laid up at Motherbank for disposal , before being sold for scrap in April 1914 and towed to the Netherlands to be broken up the following month . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Royal Sovereign @-@ class battleships were based on Admiral @-@ class barbette ships , but contained several alterations . The freeboard was raised , the barbettes ' armour was extended and an upper belt and secondary armour were added . They could also obtain a higher speed , but were 4 @,@ 000 tonnes larger . Resolution was 410 feet ( 120 m ) long overall and had a beam of <unk> and a draft of <unk> 6in . She displaced up to 15 @,@ 580 tonnes at her full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two 3 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines powered by eight coal @-@ fired cylindrical boilers . With natural draught , her engines provided a top speed of 15 @.@ 5 knots at 9 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ; 16 @.@ 5 knots at 11 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower could be obtained with forced draught . She had a maximum complement of 712 officers and enlisted men , although her crew in 1903 amounted to 672 people . When built , ships of the Royal Sovereign class rolled too heavily under certain conditions . Bilge keels were added to compensate for the problem , and the ships " proved to be excellent seaboats quite capable ... of maintaining high speeds in a seaway " . The ships were well @-@ constructed and probably the most substantial built for the Royal Navy , even if they " suffered ... from excessive weight and fittings . " In the view of the maritime historian R. A. Burt , they were " highly successful ; at that time , they were probably unequalled in all @-@ round fighting efficiency . " 
 Resolution was armed with four breech @-@ loading 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch guns on two barbettes with armour ranging from 11 to 17 inches in thickness . Resolution also carried ten quick @-@ fire ( QF ) 6 @-@ inch guns , four of which were mounted in casemates on the main deck , plus sixteen QF 6 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns and twelve QF 3 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns . She was also equipped with seven 18 @-@ inch torpedo tubes , two of which were submerged . Between 1899 and 1902 , the 3 @-@ pounder guns were removed from the upper tops ; the above @-@ water torpedo tubes were removed in 1902 – 05 . The remaining 6 @-@ inch guns on the upper deck were mounted on 5 @-@ inch armoured casemates between 1902 and 1904 . All of the armour was supplied by the builders , Palmers Shipbuilding and Iron Company . The waterline belt was <unk> long by <unk> <unk> deep , and its armour varied in thickness between 14 and 18 inches ; the bulkheads were protected by 14 to 16 inches of armour . The middle deck covering the belt was 3 inches thick and the lower deck forward and aft of the belt was 2 @.@ 5 inches thick , while the upper belt between the middle and main decks was coated in 3 to 4 inches of armour . The casemates for the 6 @-@ inch guns were protected by an equal thickness of armour and the conning tower was protected with 14 inch armour on the forward side , and 3 inches of armour on the aft . The ship 's armoured deck was 2 @.@ 5 to 3 inches thick . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 Resolution was built by Palmer Shipbuilding and Iron Company , at a cost of £ 875 @,@ 522 , plus £ 78 @,@ 295 for guns . She was laid down on 14 June 1890 , launched on 28 May 1892 and completed the following November . She underwent trials in December 1893 , and was commissioned at Portsmouth on 5 December of that year for service in the Channel Squadron . In early August 1894 , Resolution was a unit of " Fleet Red " in the annual manoeuvres held in the Southwest Approaches . She was recommissioned for further Channel Fleet service on 9 April 1895 . On 18 July 1896 , she collided with her sister ship HMS Repulse , suffering slight plating and keel damage . She nonetheless took part in annual manoeuvres from 24 July 1896 to 30 July 1896 , this time off the south @-@ west coasts of England and Ireland as part of " Fleet A " . 
 On 26 June 1897 , Resolution was part of the Fleet Review at Spithead for the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria . From 29 July 1899 to 4 August 1899 , she participated in annual manoeuvres in the Atlantic as part of " Fleet A " . The next summer , she again took part in the annual manoeuvres in the Southwest Approaches in late @-@ July and early August , this time as a part of " Fleet A2 " . She paid off at Portsmouth 9 October 1901 and was placed in reserve , but she was recommissioned to serve as a coast guard ship at Holyhead with the officers and crew of the previous guardship , Colossus . On 8 April 1903 , she paid off into reserve again to undergo a refit . 
 Resolution was recommissioned on 5 January 1904 to relieve battleship HMS Sans Pareil as port guard ship at Sheerness . On 20 June 1904 , she was transferred to the Fleet Reserve at Chatham . In the summer of 1906 , she took part in manoeuvres during which she suffered slight damage when she collided with her sister ship HMS Ramillies near the Tongue Lightship on 15 July 1906 . Later that year , she underwent another refit at Chatham . On 12 February 1907 , Resolution transferred to the Special Service Division of the Home Fleet at Devonport . She remained in that service until 8 August 1911 . She was then laid up at the Motherbank , awaiting disposal . On 2 April 1914 , Resolution was sold as scrap for £ 35 @,@ 650 to F. <unk> ; the following month , she was towed to the Netherlands to be broken up . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = 2000 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 2000 Atlantic hurricane season was the first Atlantic hurricane season without a tropical cyclone in the month of July since 1993 . The hurricane season officially began on June 1 , and ended on November 30 . It was slightly above average due to a La Niña weather pattern . The first cyclone , Tropical Depression One , developed in the southern Gulf of Mexico on June 7 and dissipated after an uneventful duration . However , it would be almost two months before the first named storm , Alberto , formed near Cape Verde ; Alberto also dissipated with no effects on land . Several other tropical cyclones – Tropical Depression Two , Tropical Depression Four , Chris , Ernesto , Nadine , and an unnamed subtropical storm – did not impact land . Five additional storms – Tropical Depression Nine , Florence , Isaac , Joyce , and Leslie – minimally effected land areas . 
 The most significant storm of the season was Hurricane Keith , which caused extensive damage in Central America . After remaining nearly stationary offshore , Keith moved inland over the Yucatan Peninsula and later made a second landfall in Mexico at hurricane intensity . It caused $ 319 million ( 2000 USD ) in damage and 40 fatalities , mostly in Belize . The precursor to Tropical Storm Leslie brought severe flooding to South Florida , which losses reaching $ 950 million ( 2000 USD ) . Hurricane Gordon and Tropical Storm Helene both caused moderate damage in the Southeastern United States , mainly in Florida . Tropical Storm Beryl caused minor damage in Mexico and Hurricane Debby resulted in less than $ 1 million ( 2000 USD ) in damage in the Greater and Lesser Antilles . Hurricane Michael brought widespread effects to Atlantic Canada , though a specific damage toll is unknown . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 = = = Season outlooks = = = 
 Forecasts of hurricane activity are issued before each hurricane season by noted hurricane expert Dr. William M. Gray and his associates at Colorado State University ( CSU ) , and separately by forecasters with the U.S. Government 's National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) . According to CSU , the average season between 1950 and 2000 had 9 @.@ 6 tropical storms , 5 @.@ 9 hurricanes , and 2 @.@ 3 major hurricanes ( storms exceeding Category 3 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale ) . A normal season , as defined by NOAA , has 9 to 12 named storms , of which five to seven reach hurricane strength and one to three become major hurricanes . 
 Noted hurricane expert Dr. William M. Gray on April 7 predicted eleven named storms , with eight reaching hurricane strength and three of the eight reaching Category 3 strength . The prediction issued on June 7 was similar , increasing the named storms to twelve , eight hurricanes , and four major hurricanes . On May 10 , NOAA issued a season outlook , which gave the indication of an above @-@ average season . According to NOAA , the global scale atmospheric circulation pattern which was taking place was conducive to an above @-@ average hurricane season . However , La Niña was present it the Eastern Pacific , which was a factor in the activity in the season . NOAA issued a 75 % chance of above average activity . 
 After the season started on June 1 , CSU issued a mid @-@ season forecast on August 4 , which predicted 11 named storms , 7 hurricanes , and 3 major hurricanes . Six days after the CSU prediction , NOAA also released a mid @-@ season outlook , forecasting exactly the same amount of activity , 11 named storms , 7 hurricanes , and 3 major hurricanes . With a 75 % percent chance of above average activity , there was an elevated risk of landfalling hurricanes . 
 = = = Season activity = = = 
 The Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 1 , 2000 . It was an above average season in which 19 tropical cyclones formed . Fifteen depressions attained tropical storm status , and eight of these attained hurricane status . Three hurricanes further intensified into major hurricanes . The season was above average most likely because of an ongoing La Niña in the Pacific Ocean . Three hurricanes and two tropical storms made landfall during the season and caused 77 deaths and $ 1 @.@ 2 billion in damage ( 2000 USD ) . Hurricane Florence and Isaac and Tropical Storm Leslie also caused damage and fatalities , though none of the three made landfall . The last storm of the season , an unnamed subtropical storm , dissipated on October 29 , over a month before the official end of hurricane season on November 30 . 
 Tropical cyclogenesis first occurred in the month of June , with two tropical depressions developing in the Atlantic . However , no tropical cyclones developed in the month of July , the first phenomenon since 1993 . In August , five tropical cyclones developed , most notably , Hurricane Alberto . September was more active , with seven named storms forming ; that month featured Hurricane Keith , the strongest system of the 2000 Atlantic hurricane season . In addition , a quick succession of eight storms occurred in September , and lasted into early October . Six tropical cyclones existed in October and one additional subtropical storm developed in the last week of the month . Following an active October , no tropical cyclogenesis occurred in November , which is the final month of the season . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 119 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . ACE is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 34 knots ( 39 mph , 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . Subtropical cyclones , including the unnamed storm as well as the initial stages of Florence , Leslie , and Michael , are excluded from the total . 
 = = = Season timeline = = = 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Depression One = = = 
 A tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa on May 23 and tracked westward across the Atlantic Ocean and the Caribbean Sea . The system had entered into the Gulf of Mexico on June 6 . Another tropical wave merged with the system on June 7 and developed into a low pressure area in the Gulf of Mexico . Later that day , the National Hurricane Center began classifying the system as Tropical Depression One . Though the depression was predicted to intensify into a tropical storm , strong wind shear produced by an upper @-@ anticyclone prevented significant strengthening . 
 The depression tracked slowly and erratically through the Gulf of Mexico . By late on June 8 , a reconnaissance plane flight indicated that the depression had degenerated into a low pressure area . The remnants of the depression produced gusty winds and light to moderate rainfall along the Gulf Coast of Mexico ; some areas in the state of Tamaulipas reported precipitation amounts as high as 7 @.@ 18 inches ( 182 mm ) . In addition , heavy precipitation was reported in south @-@ central Texas . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Two = = = 
 A tropical wave emerged off the coast of Africa and quickly developed into Tropical Depression Two on June 23 . Although it was well @-@ organized , the National Hurricane Center did not initiate advisories on the depression until 1500 UTC on June 24 , since it operationally appeared that a surface circulation did not exist until then . However , the depression was less organized after the National Hurricane Center began advisories . Having formed at 19 @.@ 8 ° W , it was one of the easternmost developing tropical cyclones in the month of June , even further east than Tropical Storm Ana in 1979 and Tropical Depression Two in 2003 . Though light wind shear and marginally warm sea surface temperatures were in the path of the depression , no significant intensification occurred as it tracked generally westward . The depression began encountering a stable air mass , and degenerated back into a tropical wave on June 25 . 
 = = = Hurricane Alberto = = = 
 A well @-@ developed tropical wave was observed in satellite imagery over central Africa on July 30 . The system tracked westward and emerged into the Atlantic Ocean on August 3 . Thereafter , the system rapidly organized , and developed into Tropical Depression Three at 1800 UTC that day . The depression moved west @-@ northwestward and strengthened into Tropical Storm Alberto early on August 4 . While briefly turning westward on August 6 , Alberto reached hurricane status . It tracked west @-@ northwestward , and by early the following day , the storm reached an initial peak with winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) . Shortly thereafter , Alberto re @-@ curved northwestward . Wind shear then increased , which caused Alberto to weaken to a tropical storm on August 9 . However , it quickly re @-@ strengthened , and early on August 10 , Alberto was upgraded to a hurricane again . Due to a break in a subtropical ridge , Alberto gradually curved northward and north @-@ northeastward between August 11 and August 12 . While turning northeastward , Alberto strengthened into a Category 3 hurricane , becoming the first major hurricane of the season . By 1200 UTC on August 12 , Alberto attained its peak intensity with winds of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) . 
 Increasing upper @-@ level westerlies caused Alberto to weaken as it moved east @-@ northeastward , with the cyclone losing most of its convection . Early on August 14 , Alberto was downgraded to a tropical storm . A westerly trough that had been guiding Alberto outran the storm , and strong ridging developed to the north and west . As a result , Alberto turned southward on August 15 , southwestward on August 16 , and then to the west on August 17 . While curving northwestward and then northward , Alberto began to re @-@ strengthen , and was upgraded to a hurricane for the third occasion on August 18 . Alberto reached a third peak intensity as a Category 2 hurricane with winds of 105 mph ( 205 km / h ) on August 20 . After weakening back to a Category 1 hurricane , Alberto had completed a cyclonic loop , which it had started on August 13 . Due to decreasing ocean temperatures , Alberto was again downgraded to a tropical storm on August 23 as it accelerated northeastward . Six hours later , Alberto transitioned into an extratropical cyclone while centered about 780 miles ( 1 @,@ 260 km ) south @-@ southwest of Reykjavík , Iceland . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Four = = = 
 An area of low pressure detached from a frontal zone on August 4 and moved southwestward . After developing a minimal amount of deep convection , an Air Force Reserve Command reconnaissance aircraft found a well @-@ defined low level circulation on August 8 . The depression then moved westward without intensifying for two days . On August 10 , the depression was about 80 miles ( 130 km ) east of Cape Canaveral , Florida when it abruptly turned northeastward in advance of a deep @-@ layer trough over the eastern United States . After minimal strengthening , the depression dissipated to the north of the Bahamas on August 11 . While a tropical cyclone , a reconnaissance flight reported winds of 56 mph ( 91 km / h ) at 1 @,@ 500 feet ( 460 m ) . However , it was not upgraded to a tropical storm since the aforementioned wind speed did not represent the intensity of the depression . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Beryl = = = 
 A tropical wave emerged from the coast of Africa with a closed circulation on August 3 . The system split , with the northern portion developing into Hurricane Alberto , while the southern portion of the wave continued westward . Minimal deep convection persisted until the wave reached the Yucatán Peninsula on August 12 . After emerging into the Gulf of Mexico on the following day , satellite imagery and a reconnaissance aircraft flight indicated that the system developed into Tropical Depression Five at 1800 UTC . Early on August 13 , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Beryl . Despite predictions for Beryl to reach hurricane status , it remained disorganized and peaked as a 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) tropical storm . 
 By 0700 UTC on August 15 , Beryl made landfall about 35 miles ( 56 km ) north of La Pesca , Tamaulipas , Mexico with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . Beryl quickly weakened inland , and was downgraded to a tropical depression five hours after moving inland . Shortly thereafter , Beryl dissipated while centered near Monterrey . In Mexico , Beryl dropped light to moderate rainfall , especially in the state of Tamaulipas , which peaked at 9 @.@ 76 inches ( 248 mm ) . One person drowned due to flood waters in northeastern Mexico . Damage was light , totaling to $ 27 @,@ 000 ( 2000 USD ) . In southern Texas , Beryl brought light precipitation to some locations . Cloud cover and rainfall in the Brownsville area resulted in the coldest maximum temperature recorded for the city on the date of August 15 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Chris = = = 
 A tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa on August 12 . Although large amounts of deep convection accompanied the system , it was displaced from the poorly defined center . Over the next few days , convection consolidated and by 1200 UTC on August 17 , the system began as Tropical Depression Six , while centered about 690 miles ( 1 @,@ 110 km ) east of the Lesser Antilles . Outflow was initially limited due to light wind shear , though the depression was forecast to become a strong tropical storm by August 20 . It was " highly surprising " to the National Hurricane Center that the depression did not immediately begin to intensity , despite warm sea surface temperatures and light wind shear . Because of a burst in deep convection , as well as satellite imagery estimating winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Chris at 1200 UTC on August 18 . 
 Upon becoming a tropical storm , Chris attained its peak intensity with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 008 mbar ( 29 @.@ 8 inHg ) . Because wind shear was believed to be weak , further intensification seemed very likely . Unexpectedly , Chris weakened back to a tropical depression by 1800 UTC on August 18 , after having been a tropical storm for only six hours . However , the National Hurricane Center operationally held Chris at tropical storm intensity until early on the following day . Convection was nearly non @-@ existent early on August 19 , though there were a few small bursts in convection . Later that day , a reconnaissance aircraft flight into the storm found no circulation , while a QuikSCAT pass indicated an open wave . As a result , Chris dissipated while east of the northernmost Leeward Islands at 1200 UTC on August 19 . 
 = = = Hurricane Debby = = = 
 A strong tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa on August 16 . No development occurred until August 19 , when convection began consolidating around a well @-@ defined low @-@ level circulation . As a result , the system became Tropical Depression Seven at 1800 UTC on that same day , while located about 1 @,@ 035 miles ( 1 @,@ 665 km ) east of the Windward Islands . Favorable conditions allowed the depression to become Tropical Storm Debby early on August 20 and further strengthening into a hurricane occurred 24 hours later . At 1200 UTC on August 21 , sustained winds peaked at 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . Debby made three landfalls on August 22 , in Barbuda , Saint Barthélemy , and Virgin Gorda , before re @-@ entering the Atlantic north of Puerto Rico . As Debby paralleled the north coast of Hispaniola late on August 23 , it weakened to a tropical storm . Unexpectedly , the storm continued westward and weakened further , instead of approaching Florida and strengthening into a major hurricane . While south of eastern Cuba on August 24 , Debby was downgraded to a tropical depression , six hours becoming completely dissipating . 
 Light rainfall and gusty winds caused minor damage in Barbuda , Saint Martin , and Trinidad and Tobago . Brief blackouts and damage reaching $ 200 @,@ 000 was reported in the United States Virgin Islands . Effects were most severe in Puerto Rico , where some areas experienced more than 12 inches ( 300 mm ) of rainfall . Mudslides caused by flooding damaged roads , bridges , and houses . At 406 homes on the island were flooded , which five suffering at least moderate damage . In San Juan , slick roads caused several minor car accidents . One indirectly fatality was attributed to the storm after a man fell off his roof while attempting to remove a satellite dish . Damage on the island of Puerto Rico reached $ 501 @,@ 000 . According to the Civil Defense Force of Dominican Republic , severe flooding in the northern portions of that country caused the evacuation of more than 700 people . In Haiti , squalls tore tin roofs off of numerous shanty homes and subsequently flooded a few . Rainfall in Cuba brought relief to an 8 month long drought in eastern Cuba . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Ernesto = = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic from the west coast of Africa on August 28 . While tracking west @-@ northwestward , satellite imagery indicated a developing low @-@ level circulation . After significant deep convection formed , the system was classified as Tropical Depression Eight at 1200 UTC on September 1 . Because of potentially unfavorable wind shear , only slight intensification was forecast . The depression tracked west @-@ northwestward under the influence of a subtropical ridge to its north . Because of satellite intensity estimates of sustained winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) , increased deep convection , and improvements in outflow , the depression became Tropical Storm Ernesto at 0600 UTC on September 2 . 
 As it strengthened into a tropical storm , Ernesto attained its peak intensity with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 1 @,@ 008 mbar ( 29 @.@ 8 inHg ) . Because of vertical shear , the low @-@ level circulation did not become well @-@ defined . Because convection was being sheared away from the center , the National Hurricane Center noted the possibility of Ernesto weakening back to a tropical depression , though forecasts indicated otherwise . Later that day , no significant change in intensity was predicted , as persistent wind shear seemed to be weakening Ernesto , though the SHIPS and GFDL computer models called for significant strengthening . Although deep convection re @-@ developed near the center early on September 3 , no intensification occurred . At 1800 UTC on September 3 , Ernesto weakened to a tropical depression . Six hours later , Ernesto dissipated to the east @-@ northeast of the Leeward Islands . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Nine = = = 
 A low @-@ level trough and a cluster of convection associated with a tropical wave interacted in the Gulf of Mexico in early September 2000 . A disorganized low @-@ level center developed and thus , the system was classified as Tropical Depression Nine while located 185 miles ( 295 km ) south of Lake Charles , Louisiana on September 7 . Due to close proximity to land , the depression was unable to intensify into a tropical storm and attained a maximum wind speed of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . The depression weakened slightly before making landfall near Sabine Pass , Texas on September 9 . Eight hours later , the depression dissipated while barely inland . 
 The depression brought light to moderate rainfall to Louisiana , Mississippi , Arkansas , Alabama , and Texas , though it was generally less than 3 inches ( 76 mm ) . A few areas in southern Louisiana , Mississippi , and Alabama reported precipitation in excess of 6 inches ( 150 mm ) ; rainfall associated with the depression peaked at 6 @.@ 70 inches ( 170 mm ) in Buras @-@ Triumph , Louisiana . However , the depression caused no damage or fatalities . 
 = = = Hurricane Florence = = = 
 A cold front moved off the continent of North America in early September . The system spawned a low pressure area that gradually developed into a subtropical depression at 1800 UTC on September 10 , while located about 325 miles ( 525 km ) west @-@ southwest of Bermuda . It rapidly acquired tropical characteristics and became Tropical Depression Ten at 0600 UTC on September 11 . Thereafter , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Florence at 1200 UTC on that day and reached hurricane status only six hours later . Drier mid @-@ tropospheric air weaken Florence to a tropical storm , but re @-@ strengthen into a hurricane later on September 12 . 
 Due to a combination of north @-@ northwesterly shear and lower sea surface temperatures , Florence again weakened on September 13 and was downgraded to a tropical storm . After moving erratically for almost five days , Florence accelerated east @-@ northeastward in response to a short @-@ wave trough on September 15 . The storm soon began to re @-@ intensify , becoming a hurricane early on September 16 . Shortly thereafter , Florence curved northeastward . However , colder sea surface temperatures weakened it to a tropical storm September 17 . Early on the following day , Florence was absorbed by an extratropical low near Newfoundland . Rip current along the East Coast of the United States drowned three people in North Carolina . Tropical storm force winds were reported in Bermuda , though no damage occurred . 
 = = = Hurricane Gordon = = = 
 A tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa on September 4 and tracked westward across the Atlantic Ocean with minimal organization for four days . After slowly developing convection between September 8 and September 14 , an Air Force Reserve reconnaissance aircraft reported a closed circulation . As a result , the system was classified as Tropical Depression Eleven just offshore Quintana Roo . Shortly thereafter , the depression made landfall in Quintana Roo . On September 15 , the system emerged into the Gulf of Mexico . Due to warm sea surface temperatures , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Gordon on the following day and further to hurricane intensity on September 17 while tracking northeastward . However , vertical wind shear and dry air entrainment weakened Gordon to a tropical storm later that day . At 0300 UTC on September 18 , Gordon made landfall near Cedar Key , Florida with winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) . Gordon rapidly weakened inland and was only a tropical depression when it was absorbed by a frontal system over Georgia about 15 hours later . 
 While passing through the Lesser Antilles , the precursor tropical wave caused locally heavy rainfall and wind gusts between 29 and 35 mph ( 47 and 56 km / h ) . Shortly before developing into a tropical cyclone , flooding in mountainous areas of Guatemala caused 23 fatalities . In its early stages , Gordon produced locally heavy rainfall in Cuba and the Yucatan Peninsula . The storm produced abnormally high tides along the west coast of Florida , which caused widespread , but minor coastal flooding . At least 65 homes and businesses were flooded , while numerous coastal roads , including Bayshore Boulevard and the Courtney Campbell Causeway , were closed due to water inundation . One fatality occurred near Pensacola , after a surfer drowned in rough seas . Strong winds in the state caused damage to houses , businesses , power lines , and trees . Two tornadoes in Southwest Florida extensively damaged 2 condominiums and at least 24 houses . A third tornado along the east coast of Central Florida caused minimal damage to trees and roofs . Minor flooding occurred in some areas due to rainfall reaching 9 @.@ 48 inches ( 241 mm ) in Mayo . In North Carolina , flooding caused two indirect fatalities when a car lost control and crashed into a tractor trailer . In other states , light rainfall caused mostly minor effects . Overall , Gordon was responsible for $ 10 @.@ 8 million in damage . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Helene = = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic from the west coast of Africa on September 10 and gradually developed into Tropical Depression Twelve on September 15 , while located more than 600 miles ( 970 km ) east of the Leeward Islands . It did not intensify and degenerated to a tropical wave on the following day . The remnants continued westward and crossed the Leeward Islands on September 17 . Late on September 19 , the remnants redeveloped into Tropical Depression Twelve near Grand Cayman . Around 1200 UTC on September 20 , the depression crossed near the western tip of Cuba . Entering the Gulf of Mexico , the depression began strengthening , and became Tropical Storm Helene at early on September 21 , while tracking northward . Later that day , Helene peaked with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) , though due to increasing wind shear , the storm soon began to weaken . At 1200 UTC on September 22 , Helene made landfall near Fort Walton Beach , Florida with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . Although the storm weakened slightly inland , it later began re @-@ strengthening and became a tropical storm over North Carolina late on September 23 . After re @-@ emerging into the Atlantic Ocean , Helene re @-@ intensified to near hurricane status , though the storm was absorbed by a cold front on September 26 , while east @-@ southeast of Newfoundland . 
 The remnant tropical wave produced strong winds and flooding in the Lesser Antilles . Effects were the worst in Puerto Rico , where flash flooding and mudslides destroyed one houses and damaged at least 100 others . In addition , a bridge was also destroyed and many other roads were impassable due to flooding . Impact in Cuba , Jamaica , and Hispaniola is unknown . A combination of gusty winds , locally heavy rainfall , and a few tornadoes in the Florida Panhandle caused about 5 @,@ 000 power outages , damaged more than 220 homes , and destroyed 2 houses and 4 mobile homes . Heavy rainfall caused the Sopchoppy River to exceed its banks , flooding nearby houses . Outside of Florida , effects were most severe in South Carolina , where rainfall in excess of 9 inches ( 230 mm ) fell , and a tornado caused one fatality , six injuries , and damaged 12 houses . The other death in the state occurred when a car hydroplaned and crashed into a tree , which killed the driver . Throughout its path , Helene caused slightly more than $ 16 million in damage . 
 = = = Hurricane Isaac = = = 
 A well @-@ defined tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic from the west coast of Africa on September 20 . The cloud pattern quickly became better @-@ defined , and developed into Tropical Depression Thirteen on September 21 while centered south of Cape Verde . The depression quickly intensified due to low wind shear and became Tropical Storm Isaac early on September 22 as it headed west @-@ northwestward . Isaac continued to strengthen and was upgraded to a hurricane on September 23 . After reaching a preliminary peak with winds of 120 mph ( 200 km / h ) , the structure of the storm became less organized , possibly due to slightly colder ocean temperatures and increased wind shear . By 1200 UTC on September 26 , Isaac ceased weakening after winds dropped to 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . The storm began to re @-@ strengthen on September 27 after wind shear decreased . 
 On September 28 , Isaac peaked as a low @-@ end Category 4 hurricane with winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) . Following its peak intensity , Isaac began to weaken immediately thereafter , while turning north @-@ northwestward . Eventually , the storm turned northward before re @-@ curving north @-@ northeastward . Further weakening occurred after Isaac moved over decreasing sea surface temperatures and dropped down to Category 1 intensity by September 30 , while accelerating northeastward . On October 1 , Isaac was downgraded to a tropical storm shortly before transitioning into extratropical later that same day . The extratropical remnants affected the British Isles between October 3 and October 4 . Minimal impact was reported from Isaac . One fatality occurred when a passenger drowned after his boat capsized due to large waves produced by Isaac offshore Long Island , New York . 
 = = = Hurricane Joyce = = = 
 A poorly organized tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic from the west coast of Africa on September 22 . Over the next three days , the system tracked westward and slowly began to develop a closed circulation . By September 25 , the National Hurricane Center initiated advisories . Convection became further organized , and the depression continued to intensity . Twelve hours after becoming a cyclone , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Joyce early on September 26 . Joyce continued to strengthen and became a hurricane by September 27 . On the following day , a pinhole eye appeared , and shortly thereafter , Joyce peaked as a strong Category 1 hurricane with winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) on September 28 . 
 After peak intensity on September 28 , wind shear and a possible intrusion of dry air caused Joyce to become disorganized and weaken . Late on September 29 , Joyce was downgraded to a tropical storm while centered well east of the Lesser Antilles . Though it was always predicted to re @-@ intensify , Joyce continued to weaken and became a tropical depression on October 1 while crossing through the southern Windward Islands . Early on the following day , Joyce unexpectedly degenerated back into an open tropical wave over the southeast Caribbean Sea . The remnants were monitored for regeneration , but never developed back into a tropical cyclone . Overall , impact from Joyce was minimal , limited to mainly rainfall and near @-@ tropical storm force winds in Trinidad and Tobago and Barbados . The remnants of Joyce also caused similar effects on the ABC islands and Dominican Republic , which resulted in minor damage . 
 = = = Hurricane Keith = = = 
 A tropical wave emerged off the west coast of Africa on September 16 . The system uneventfully crossed the Atlantic and Caribbean , before developing into Tropical Depression Fifteen while near Honduras on September 28 . The depression gradually strengthened , and became Tropical Storm Keith on the following day . As the storm tracked westward , it continued to intensify and was upgraded to a hurricane on September 30 . Shortly thereafter , Keith began to rapidly deepen and peaked as a 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) Category 4 hurricane less than 24 hours later . Keith then began to meander erratically offshore of Belize , which significantly weakened the storm due to land interaction . By late on October 2 , Keith made landfall in Ambergris Caye , Belize as a minimal hurricane . It quickly weakened to a tropical storm , before another landfall occurred near Belize City early on the following day . While moving inland over the Yucatán Peninsula , Keith weakened further , and was downgraded to a tropical depression before emerging into the Gulf of Mexico on October 4 . Once in the Gulf of Mexico , Keith began to re @-@ strengthen and was upgraded to a tropical storm later that day , and a hurricane on the following day . By late on October 5 , Keith made its third and final landfall near Tampico , Tamaulipas , Mexico as a moderately strong Category 1 hurricane . The storm quickly weakened inland and dissipated as a tropical cyclone by 24 hours after landfall . 
 Keith brought heavy rainfall to several countries in Central America , which resulted in extensive flooding , especially in Belize and Mexico . In Guatemala , the storm flooded 10 towns , and caused one fatality . Similarly , one fatality also occurred in El Salvador , and at least 300 people were affected by flooding in that country . Thirteen communities in Nicaragua were completely isolated after Keith made roads impassable . Twelve deaths were reported in Nicaragua , all of which were flood @-@ related . Five people were presumed dead in Honduras after an aircraft disappeared near Roatán ; one other fatality occurred due to flooding . The storm brought torrential rainfall to Belize , with many areas reporting at least 10 inches ( 250 mm ) of rain , while highest reported amount of precipitation was 32 @.@ 67 inches ( 830 mm ) in Belize City . In Belize , a village reported that only 12 houses remained , while elsewhere in the country , at least 60 homes were destroyed or damaged ; several houses in Belize City suffered minor roof damage . At least 19 people were killed in Belize and damages totaled to $ 280 million ( 2000 USD ) . Heavy rainfall also occurred in Mexico , especially in the states of Nuevo León and Tamaulipas . Flooding by Keith caused several mudslides and a few rivers reached historic levels . Throughout Mexico , at least 460 houses were damage or destroyed and other losses in infrastructure occurred . In addition , one person drowned due to heavy rainfall . Damages incurred in associated with Keith in Mexico totaled approximately $ 365 @.@ 9 million ( 2000 MXN , $ 38 @.@ 7 million 2000 USD ) . Overall , Keith was responsible for 40 deaths and $ 319 million ( 2000 USD ) in damage . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Leslie = = = 
 A tropical wave , which likely spawned Hurricane Isaac , entered the eastern Caribbean Sea on September 27 . The system slowly organized while tracking westward and later moved to the north @-@ northwest around Hurricane Keith . Eventually , the system moved northward into the Gulf of Mexico and the Straits of Florida . The system interacted with a frontal boundary while crossing Florida on October 3 and October 4 , which caused torrential rainfall . Satellite imagery indicated the development of a circulation near Orlando . Because of its structure , the system became a subtropical depression at 1200 UTC on October 4 . About six hours later , the subtropical depression emerged into the Atlantic and low @-@ level circulation gradually moved toward the deep convection while tracking eastward . By 1200 UTC on October 5 , the subtropical depression was reclassified as Tropical Storm Leslie . While fully tropical , Leslie strengthened slightly and peaked with winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . However , it soon began interacting with a cold front and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on October 7 , while located northwest of Bermuda . 
 The system dropped heavy rainfall in Cuba , peaking at 8 @.@ 25 inches ( 210 mm ) in the Havana Province . While the precursor crossed Florida , it produced torrential rainfall across southern Florida , especially in the Miami metropolitan area . In Miami @-@ Dade County alone , 1 @,@ 005 houses were destroyed , 1 @,@ 358 were severely damaged , and 3 @,@ 443 had minor damage . Throughout the state , at least 93 @,@ 000 homes were flooded . Electrical stations were also damaged by floods , leaving more than 27 @,@ 000 people without power . Extensive agricultural damage occurred , with 40 @,@ 000 acres ( 160 km ² ) of farmland inundated by water . Overall , the precursor system of Leslie resulted in about $ 950 million ( 2000 USD ) in damage , slightly more than half of that figure was agriculture related . Additionally , three fatalities occurred , two of which due to drowning , while the third was a man that fell while attempting to unclog a roof drain . The remnants of Leslie caused near tropical storm force winds and waves up to 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) in Newfoundland , though damage in the region was minimal . 
 = = = Hurricane Michael = = = 
 A low pressure system developed after detaching from a cold front while between Florida and Bermuda . The low pressure area slowly formed a circulation and began to deepen on October 14 as it drifted north @-@ northeastward . By October 15 , the system developed into a subtropical depression while centered about midway between Florida and Bermuda . Later that day , satellite classifications using the Hebert @-@ Poteat technique indicated that the subtropical depression had strengthened into a subtropical storm , and it was upgraded at 0000 UTC on October 16 . Due to SST 's in excess of 82 ° F ( 28 ° C ) , the subtropical storm developed persistent convection near the low @-@ level center and it slowly acquired tropical characteristics . By 0000 UTC on October 17 , the subtropical storm was re @-@ classified as Tropical Storm Michael . Three hours later , the National Hurricane Center began advisories on Michael , though initially it was erroneously classified as Tropical Depression Seventeen . 
 Although Michael was predicted intensify modestly , it rapidly strengthened , and became a hurricane later on October 17 . Michael fluctuated slightly in intensity while tracking over an area of decreasing SST 's . However , another brief period of rapid intensification occurred due to baroclinic effects , and Michael peaked as a minimal Category 2 hurricane . Shortly thereafter , Michael transitioned into an extratropical cyclone before making landfall near Harbour Breton , Newfoundland . Throughout Newfoundland , Michael and the remnant extratropical cyclone produced high winds , which tore off roofs , ripped off roof shingles , caused sporadic power outages , shattered windows , and uprooted trees in a few communities . Precipitation produced by the storm was light and peaked at 3 @.@ 77 inches ( 96 mm ) in North Mountain , Nova Scotia . Michael also produced rainfall in Maine and Bermuda . There were no damage figures available , though damage was considered to be relatively light . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Nadine = = = 
 In mid @-@ October , a strong upper @-@ level trough and a tropical wave interacted while located in the central Atlantic . The system moved slowly westward and convection began increasing . By October 19 , the system became stationary and developed a surface circulation . Later that day , Tropical Depression Eighteen developed about 690 miles ( 1 @,@ 110 km ) southeast of Bermuda . Initially , the depression lacked a well @-@ defined center , though a broad circulation was evident . The depression tracked slowly northward and then northeastward around a subtropical ridge and ahead of a cold front . As wind shear decreased , convective activity became better organized on October 20 . By 1200 UTC on that day , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Nadine . Although it was strengthening , QuikSCAT suggested that the low @-@ level circulation was falling apart , as it appeared to be merging with the cold front . 
 At 0000 UTC on October 21 , Nadine attained its peak intensity with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 999 mbar ( 29 @.@ 5 inHg ) . Around the time of peak intensity , a possible eye @-@ like feature and an impressive outflow were observed on satellite imagery . As a result , the National Hurricane Center noted the possibility , but did not exclusively forecast Nadine to strengthen into a hurricane . However , shortly thereafter , wind shear increased and the storm resembled a frontal wave and appeared to possibly be interacting with the cold front . The cloud pattern then became ragged , while the low @-@ level circulation moved toward the southern edge of the deep convection . By 0000 UTC on October 22 , Nadine transitioned into an extratropical cyclone and merged with a frontal low about 18 hours later . 
 = = = Unnamed Subtropical Storm = = = 
 On October 25 , an extratropical low pressure system formed to the east of the Turks and Caicos Islands . It moved northwestward and gradually intensified , and by 1800 UTC the system transitioned into a subtropical storm . It turned to the north and later to the northeast . A burst of convection near the center allowed the storm to attain peak winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) ; due to its forward motion , it is possible the surface winds reached as high as 85 mph ( 135 km / h ) . An approaching cold front caused the storm to become extratropical on October 29 , and later that day a larger extratropical storm absorbed the previously subtropical storm near Nova Scotia . 
 The Marine Prediction Center issued some marine gale and storm warnings offshore , while the National Weather Service issued gale warnings for coastal North Carolina . It was not designated as a subtropical cyclone operationally . The storm produced tropical storm force winds in portions of Atlantic Canada , although it was associated with the larger extratropical storm at the time . Several ships also recorded tropical storm force winds , one of which recorded peak winds of 53 mph ( 85 km / h ) . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for system that attained at least tropical storm intensity within the Atlantic basin in the year 2000 . Although this was the same list used for the 1994 Atlantic hurricane season , storms were named Joyce , Leslie , Michael , and Nadine for the first time in 2000 due to inactivity in the former . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . 
