 = = = Retirement = = = 
 During the meeting in spring of 2001 , the World Meteorological Organization retired the name Keith from the list above due to its high impact and replaced with the name Kirk for use in the 2006 Atlantic hurricane season . Although the name Kirk was not used during 2006 , instead it was used during the 2012 season . The remaining storm names were re @-@ listed for the 2006 season . 
 = = Season impact = = 
 This is a table of all of the storms that formed in the 2000 Atlantic hurricane season . It includes their duration , names , landfall ( s ) – denoted by bold location names – damages , and death totals . Deaths in parentheses are additional and indirect ( an example of an indirect death would be a traffic accident ) , but are still related to that storm . Damage and deaths include totals while the storm was extratropical or a wave or low , and all of the damage figures are in 2000 USD . 
 = Judah P. Benjamin = 
 Judah Philip Benjamin , QC ( August 11 , 1811 – May 6 , 1884 ) was a lawyer and politician who was a United States Senator from Louisiana , a Cabinet officer of the Confederate States and , after his escape to the United Kingdom at the end of the American Civil War , an English barrister . Benjamin was the first Jew to be elected to the United States Senate who had not renounced the religion , and the first of that faith to hold a Cabinet position in North America . 
 Benjamin was born to Sephardic Jewish parents from London , who had moved to St. Croix in the Danish West Indies when it was occupied by Britain during the Napoleonic Wars . Seeking greater opportunities , his family emigrated to the United States , eventually settling in Charleston , South Carolina . Benjamin attended Yale College but left without graduating and moved to New Orleans , where he read law and passed the bar . 
 Benjamin rose rapidly both at the bar and in politics . He became a wealthy slaveowner and served in both houses of the Louisiana legislature prior to his election to the Senate in 1852 There , he was an eloquent supporter of slavery , and resigned as senator after Louisiana left the Union in early 1861 . He returned to New Orleans , but soon left when Confederate President Jefferson Davis appointed him Attorney General . Benjamin had little to do in that position , but Davis was impressed by his competence and appointed him Secretary of War . Benjamin firmly supported Davis , and the President reciprocated the loyalty by promoting him to Secretary of State in March 1862 while Benjamin was being criticized for the rebel defeat at the Battle of Roanoke Island . 
 As Secretary of State , Benjamin attempted to gain official recognition for the Confederacy by France and the United Kingdom , but his efforts were ultimately unsuccessful . To preserve the Confederacy as military defeat made its situation increasingly desperate , he advocated freeing and arming the slaves , but his proposals were not accepted until it was too late . When Davis fled the Confederate capital of Richmond in early 1865 , Benjamin went with him , but left the presidential party and was successful in escaping , whereas Davis was captured by Union troops . Benjamin made his way to Britain and became a barrister , again rising to the top of his profession before retiring in 1883 . He died in Paris the following year . 
 = = Early and personal life = = 
 Judah Philip Benjamin was born on August 11 , 1811 , in St. Croix of the Danish West Indies ( today the United States Virgin Islands ) , a colony then occupied by the British during the Napoleonic Wars . His parents were Sephardic Jews , Philip Benjamin and the former Rebecca de Mendes . Philip and Rebecca had been shopkeepers in London , and emigrated to the West Indies in search of better opportunities . Rebecca 's family had been prominent in Spain before being forced to leave under the Expulsion Edict of 1492 . 
 Judah , the third of seven children , was given the same name as an older brother who died in infancy . Following a tradition adhered to by some Sephardi , he was named for his paternal grandfather , who performed the brit milah , or circumcision ceremony . The Benjamins encountered hard times in the Danish West Indies , as normal trade was blocked by the British occupation . In 1813 the Benjamin family moved to Fayetteville , North Carolina , where they had relatives . Philip Benjamin was not financially successful there , and around 1821 moved with his family to Charleston , South Carolina . That city had the largest Jewish community in the United States and a reputation for religious tolerance . Philip was learned in his faith but was again unsuccessful in business ; Rebecca earned money for the family by operating a fruit stand near the harbor . 
 Judah and two siblings were boarded with relatives in Fayetteville for about 18 months after the rest of the family moved to Charleston . He attended the Fayetteville Academy , a well @-@ regarded school where his intelligence was recognized . In Charleston , his father was among the founders of the first Reform congregation in the United States , with shorter services conducted in English rather than Hebrew . Philip was ultimately expelled from that community , as he did not keep the Sabbath , and the extent of Judah 's religious education is uncertain . The boy 's intelligence was noted by others in Charleston , one of whom offered to finance his education . 
 At the age of 14 , in 1825 , Benjamin entered Yale College , an institution popular among white Southerners ; Vice President John C. Calhoun , a South Carolinian , was among its alumni . Although Benjamin was successful as a student at Yale , he left abruptly in 1827 without completing his course of study . The reasons for this are uncertain : in 1861 , when Louisiana left the Union and Benjamin resigned as a U.S. senator , an abolitionist newspaper alleged that he had been caught as a thief at Yale . He considered bringing suit for libel but litigation was impractical . In 1901 , his sole surviving classmate wrote that Benjamin had been expelled for gambling . One of his biographers , Robert Meade , considered the evidence of wrongdoing by Benjamin to be " too strong to be ignored " , but noted that at the time Benjamin left Yale , he was only 16 years old . 
 After a brief return to Charleston , Benjamin moved to New Orleans , Louisiana . According to Rabbi Bernard W. Korn 's volume on that city 's Jews , he " arrived in New Orleans in 1828 , with no visible assets other than the wit , charm , omnivorous mind and boundless energy with which he would find his place in the sun " . After working in a mercantile business , he became a clerk for a law firm , where he began to read law , studying as an apprentice . Knowledge of French was important in practicing law in Louisiana , as the state 's code is and was based on French and Spanish law . To earn money , he tutored French Creoles in English ; he taught the language to Natalie <unk> de St. Martin on the condition that she teach him French . In late 1832 , at age 21 , he was admitted to the bar . 
 Early the following year , Benjamin married Natalie , who was Catholic and from a wealthy French Creole family . As part of her dowry , she brought with her $ 3 @,@ 000 and two female slaves , aged 11 and 16 ( together worth about $ 1 @,@ 000 ) . Even before the marriage , Natalie St. Martin had scandalized New Orleans society by her conduct , and William De Ville , in his journal article on the Benjamin marriage contract , suggests that the " St. Martin family was not terribly distraught to be rid of their young daughter " and that " Benjamin was virtually <unk> to marry [ Natalie ] , and did so without hesitation in order to further his ambitions " . 
 The marriage was not a success . By the 1840s , Natalie Benjamin was living in Paris with the couple 's only child , Ninette , whom she raised as a Catholic . Benjamin would visit them annually . While a senator , in the late 1850s he persuaded Natalie to rejoin him and expensively furnished a home in Washington for all three to live in . Natalie and their daughter soon embarked again for France . Benjamin , publicly humiliated by his failure to keep Natalie , consigned the household goods to auction . There were rumors , never substantiated , both that Benjamin was impotent , and that Natalie was unfaithful . 
 Benjamin 's troubled married life has led to speculation that he was gay . Daniel Brook , in a 2012 article about Benjamin , suggests that early biographies read as though " historians are presenting him as an almost <unk> stereotypical gay man and yet wear such impervious heteronormative blinders that they themselves know not what they write " . These conjectures were not given scholarly weight until 2001 , when in an introduction to a reprinting of Meade 's biography of Benjamin , Civil War historian William C. Davis acknowledged " cloaked suggestions that he [ Benjamin ] was a homosexual " . 
 = = Louisiana lawyer = = 
 Within months of his admission to the bar , Benjamin argued his first case before the Supreme Court of Louisiana and won . Still , clients were slow to come in his first years in practice , and he had enough free time to compile and publish , with Thomas Slidell , the Digest of the Reported Decisions of the Superior Court of the Late Territory of Orleans and the Supreme Court of the State of Louisiana in 1834 , which required the analysis of 6 @,@ 000 cases . The book was an immediate success and helped launch Benjamin 's career . When Slidell published a revised edition in 1840 , he did so alone , as Benjamin was too busy trying cases to allow him to participate . 
 Benjamin became a specialist in commercial law , of which there was a great deal in New Orleans ' busy river port — a center of international commerce and the domestic slave trade . By 1840 , the city had become the fourth largest in the United States and among the wealthiest . Many of the best lawyers in the country practiced commercial law there , and Benjamin successfully competed with them . In one case , he successfully represented the seller of a slave against allegations that the seller knew the slave had incurable tuberculosis . Although Benjamin tried some jury cases , he preferred bench trials in commercial cases and was an expert at appeals . 
 In 1842 , Benjamin had a group of cases with international implications . He represented insurance companies being sued for the value of slaves who had revolted aboard the ship Creole in 1841 , as they were being transported in the coastwise slave trade from Virginia to New Orleans . The rebels had sailed the ship to Nassau in the Bahamas , British territory , where most were freed , as Britain had abolished slavery . The owners of the slaves brought suit for $ 150 @,@ 000 against their insurers , who declined to pay . Benjamin made several arguments , the most prominent of which was that the slaveowners had brought the revolt on themselves by packing the slaves in overcrowded conditions . 
 Benjamin asked in his brief to the court : 
 What is a slave ? He is a human being . He has feelings and passion and intellect . His heart , like the heart of the white man , swells with love , burns with jealousy , aches with sorrow , pines under restraint and discomfort , boils with revenge , and ever cherishes the desire for liberty ... Considering the character of the slave , and the peculiar passions which , generated by nature , are strengthened and stimulated by his condition , he is prone to revolt in the near future of things , and ever ready to conquer his liberty where a probable chance persons itself . 
 The court ruled for Benjamin 's clients , although on other grounds . Benjamin 's brief was widely reprinted , including by abolitionist groups . Historian Eli Evans , Benjamin 's biographer , does not believe that the argument in the Creole case represented Benjamin 's personal view ; rather , he was an advocate for his clients in an era when it was usual to write dramatically to distract attention from the weaker points of a case . Evans finds it remarkable and a testament to Benjamin that he could be elected to office in antebellum Louisiana , a slave society , after writing such words ; however , this may reflect more our present understanding of an antebellum slave society than their reality . 
 = = Electoral career = = 
 = = = State politician = = = 
 Benjamin was a supporter of the Whig Party from the time of its formation in the early 1830s . He became increasingly involved in the party , and in 1841 ran unsuccessfully for the New Orleans Board of Aldermen . The following year , he was nominated for the Louisiana House of Representatives . He was elected , though the Democrats alleged fraud : Whig supporters , to obtain the vote at a time when the state had a restrictive property qualification for suffrage , acquired licenses for carriages . A voter did not have to demonstrate that the carriage existed , but his license had to be accepted as evidence of ownership by election officials . The Democratic press blamed Benjamin as the strategist behind this maneuver . In 1844 , the legislature voted to hold a constitutional convention , and Benjamin was chosen as a delegate from New Orleans . At the convention , Benjamin successfully opposed counting a slave as three @-@ fifths of a human being for purposes of representation in state elections , as was done in federal elections . His position prevailed , and slaves were not counted at all for electoral purposes in Louisiana state elections . According to Evans , his " tact , courtesy , and ability to find compromises impressed the political elders in all corners of the state " . 
 Rabbi Myron Berman , in his history of Jews in Richmond , describes the attitude of antebellum white Southerners toward Jews : 
 Hidden beneath the free and easy relationships between Jew and Gentile in the antebellum South was a layer of prejudice that derived from historic anti @-@ Semitism . The obverse of the picture of the Jew as the Biblical patriarch and apostle of freedom was the image of the Judas @-@ traitor and the Shylock @-@ materialist who preyed on the misfortunes of the country . But the high incidence of Jewish assimilation , the availability of the black as a scapegoat for social ills , and the relative absence of crises — economic and otherwise — were factors which repressed , at least temporarily , the latent anti @-@ Jewish feeling in the South . 
 By the early 1840s , Benjamin was wealthy from his law practice and , with a partner , bought a sugar cane plantation , Bellechasse . This purchase , and the subsequent construction of a grand house there , advanced Benjamin 's ambitions ; the planter class controlled Louisiana politics and would only trust a man who also owned substantial land and slaves . The Benjamin marriage was by then failing , and he hoped in vain that his wife would be content at the plantation . Benjamin threw his energy into improving Bellechasse , importing new varieties of sugar cane and adopting up @-@ to @-@ date methods and equipment to extract and process the sugar . He purchased 140 slaves to work the plantation , and had a reputation as a humane slaveowner . 
 Benjamin scaled back his involvement in politics in the late 1840s , distracted by his plantation and law practice . His mother Rebecca , whom he had brought to New Orleans , died in 1847 during a yellow fever epidemic . In 1848 , Benjamin was a Whig member of the Electoral College ; he voted for fellow Louisiana planter , General Zachary Taylor , who was elected U.S. President . He and other Louisianans accompanied President @-@ elect Taylor to Washington for his inauguration , and Benjamin attended a state dinner given by outgoing president James K. Polk . In 1850 , Millard Fillmore , who succeeded Taylor after his death earlier that year , appointed Benjamin as judge of the United States District Court for the Northern District of California . He was confirmed by the Senate , but he declined the appointment as the salary of $ 3 @,@ 500 was too small . The following year , Benjamin assisted the United States Attorney in New Orleans in prosecuting American adventurers who had tried to spark a rebellion against Spanish rule in Cuba , but two trials both ended in hung juries . 
 = = = Mexican railroad = = = 
 Benjamin became interested in strengthening trade connections between New Orleans and California , and promoted an infrastructure project to build a railroad across the Mexican isthmus near Oaxaca . This would speed passenger traffic and cargo shipments . According to The New York Times , in an 1852 speech to a railroad builders ' convention , Benjamin said this trade route " belongs to New Orleans . Its commerce makes empires of the countries to which it flows . " Benjamin lobbied fellow lawmakers about the project , gained funds from private New York bankers , and even helped organize construction crews . In private correspondence he warned backers of problems ; project workers suffered yellow fever , shipments of construction materials hit rough seas , and actions or inaction by both U.S. and Mexican officials caused delays and increases in construction costs . Backers had invested several hundred thousand dollars by the time the project died after the outbreak of the American Civil War in 1861 . 
 = = = Election to the Senate = = = 
 Benjamin spent the summer of 1851 abroad , including a visit to Paris to see Natalie and Ninette . He was still away in October 1851 , when the Whigs nominated him for the state Senate . Despite his absence , he was easily elected . When the new legislature met in January 1852 , Benjamin emerged as one of the leading Whig candidates for election to the U.S. Senate seat that would become vacant on March 4 , 1853 . As the Louisiana legislature , responsible for electing the state 's senators , met once in two years under the 1845 constitution , it was not scheduled to meet again before the seat became vacant . Some Whig newspapers thought Benjamin too young and inexperienced at forty , despite his undoubted talent , but the Whig legislative caucus selected him on the second ballot , and he was elected by the two houses over Democrat Solomon W. Downs . 
 The outgoing president , Fillmore , offered to nominate Benjamin , a fellow Whig , to fill a Supreme Court vacancy after the Senate Democrats had defeated Fillmore 's other nominees for the post . The New York Times reported on February 15 , 1853 that " if the President nominates Benjamin , the Democrats are determined to confirm him . " The new president , Franklin Pierce , a Democrat , also offered Benjamin a place on the Supreme Court . Pierce Butler , a future Supreme Court justice , suggested in his 1908 biography of Benjamin that the newly elected senator likely declined these offers not only because he preferred active politics , but because he could maintain his law practice and substantial income as a senator , but could not as a justice . As an advocate before the U.S. Supreme Court , Benjamin won 13 of his first 18 cases . 
 Judah Benjamin was sworn in as senator from Louisiana on March 4 , 1853 , at a brief meeting called just prior to President Pierce 's inauguration . These new colleagues included Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois , Robert M. T. Hunter of Virginia , and Sam Houston of Texas . The slavery issue was in a brief remission as much of the country wished to accept the Compromise of 1850 as a final settlement . When the Senate was not in session , Benjamin remained in Washington , D.C. , conducting a lucrative practice including many cases before the Supreme Court , then conveniently located in a room of the Capitol . His law partners in New Orleans took care of his firm 's affairs there . About this time Benjamin sold his interest in Bellechasse , lacking the time to deal with plantation business . 
 = = = Spokesman for slavery = = = 
 Benjamin 's view that slavery should continue was based in his belief that citizens had a right to their property as guaranteed by the Constitution . As Butler put it , " he could no more see that it was right for Northern people to rob him of his slave than it would be for him to connive at horse stealing " . He avoided the arguments of some that the slaves were inferior beings , and that their position was ordained by God : Evans ascribes this to Benjamin not being raised as a slaveowner , but coming to it later in life . Benjamin joined in a widespread view of white Southerners that the African American would not be ready for emancipation for many years , if ever . They feared that freeing the slaves would ruin many and lead to murders and rapes by the newly liberated of their former masters and mistresses . Such a massacre had been feared by Southerners since the Haitian Revolution , the violent revolt known as " Santo Domingo " in the South , in which the slaves of what became Haiti killed many whites and mulattoes in 1804 while gaining independence from French control . When the anti @-@ slavery book Uncle Tom 's Cabin was published in 1852 , Benjamin spoke out against Harriet Beecher Stowe 's portrayal . He said that slaves were for the most part well treated , and plantation punishments , such as whipping or branding , were more merciful than sentences of imprisonment that a white man might receive in the North for similar conduct . 
 In early 1854 , Senator Douglas introduced his Kansas – Nebraska Bill , calling for popular sovereignty to determine whether the Kansas and Nebraska territories should enter the Union as slave or free states . Depending on the outcome of such elections , slavery might spread to territories closed to it under the Compromise of 1850 . In the debate over the bill , Benjamin defended this change as returning to " the traditions of the fathers " , that the federal government not legislate on the subject of slavery . He said that the South merely wished to be left alone . The bill passed , but its passage had drastic political effects , as the differences between North and South that had been settled by the Compromise were reopened . The Whig Party was torn apart North from South , with many Northern Whigs joining the new Republican Party , a group pledged to oppose the spread of slavery . Benjamin continued to caucus with the remains of the Whig Party through 1854 and 1855 , but as a member of a legislative minority , he had little influence on legislation , and received no important committee assignments . 
 In May 1856 , Benjamin joined the Democrats , stating they had the principles of the old @-@ time Whig Party . He indicated , in a letter to constituents , that as Northern Whigs had failed to vote to uphold the rights granted to Southern states in the Constitution , the Whigs , as a national party , were no more . 
 At a state dinner given by Pierce , Benjamin first met Secretary of War Jefferson Davis , whose wife Varina described the Louisiana senator as having " rather the air of a witty bon vivant than of a great senator " . The two men , both ambitious for leadership in the South and the nation , formed a relationship that Evans describes as " respectful but wary " . The two had occasional differences ; when in 1858 , Davis , by then a Mississippi senator , was irritated by Benjamin 's questioning him on a military bill and suggested that Benjamin was acting as a paid attorney , the Louisianan challenged him to a duel . Davis apologized . 
 Benjamin , in his speeches in the Senate , took the position that the Union was a compact by the states from which any of them could secede . Nevertheless , he understood that any dissolution would not be peaceful , stating in 1856 that " dreadful will be the internecine war that must ensue " . In 1859 , Benjamin was elected to a second term , but allegations of involvement in land scandals and the fact that upstate legislators objected to both of Louisiana 's senators being from New Orleans stretched the contest to 42 ballots before he prevailed . 
 = = = Secession crisis = = = 
 Benjamin worked to deny Douglas the 1860 Democratic presidential nomination , feeling he had turned against the South . Douglas contended that although the Supreme Court , in Dred Scott v. Sandford , had stated Congress could not restrict slavery in the territories , the people of each territory could pass legislation to bar it . This position was anathema to the South . Benjamin praised Douglas 's opponent in his re @-@ election bid , former congressman Abraham Lincoln , for at least being true to his principles as an opponent of the expansion of slavery , whereas the senator considered Douglas to be a hypocrite . Benjamin was joined in his opposition to Douglas by Senator Davis ; the two were so successful that the 1860 convention was not able to nominate anyone and split into Northern and Southern factions . The Northerners backed Douglas while Southern delegates chose Vice President John C. Breckinridge of Kentucky . Despite their agreement in opposing Douglas , Benjamin and Davis differed on some race issues : in May , Benjamin voted for a bill to aid Africans liberated by U.S. naval vessels from illegal slave ships , in order to return them to their native continent from Key West . Davis and many other Southerners opposed the bill . 
 Between June and December 1860 , Benjamin was almost entirely absorbed in the case of United States v. <unk> , that was tried in San Francisco during the latter part of that period . The case concerned a land grant by the former Mexican government of California . <unk> had leased part of his land to British mining companies , and when American authorities ruled the grant invalid , they hired Benjamin ; he spent four months in San Francisco working on the case . The trial began in October , and Benjamin gave an address lasting six days . The local correspondent for the New York Times wrote that Benjamin , " a distinguished stranger " , drew the largest crowds to the courtroom and " the Senator is making this terribly tedious case interesting " . Benjamin sailed for New York once the case was submitted for decision in early November . The court 's ruling , rendered in January 1861 , was substantially for the company but , not satisfied , it appealed . It lost the case entirely to an adverse decision by the U.S. Supreme Court , three justices dissenting , the following year . Benjamin was by then a Confederate Cabinet officer , and could not argue the case . His co @-@ counsel filed his brief with the court . 
 By the time Benjamin returned to the East Coast , the Republican candidate , Lincoln , had been elected president , and there was talk , in Louisiana and elsewhere , of secession from the Union . The New Orleans Picayune reported that Benjamin favored secession only in the last resort . On December 23 , 1860 , another Louisiana periodical , the Delta , printed a letter from Benjamin dated the eighth stating that , as the people of the North were of unalterable hostility to their Southern brethren , the latter should depart from the government common to them . He also signed a joint letter from Southern congressmen to their constituents , urging the formation of a confederation of the seceding states . According to a letter reportedly written by Benjamin during the crisis , he saw secession as a means of obtaining more favorable terms in a reformed Union . 
 With Southern opinion turning in favor of secession , Benjamin made a farewell speech in the Senate on December 31 , 1860 , to a packed gallery , desirous of hearing one of the South 's most eloquent voices . They were not disappointed ; Evans writes that " historians consider Benjamin 's farewell ... one of the great speeches in American history " . Benjamin foresaw that the South 's departure would lead to civil war : 
 What may be the fate of this horrible contest none can foretell ; but this much I will say : the fortunes of war may be adverse to our arms ; you may carry desolation into our peaceful land , and with torch and firebrand may set our cities in flames ... you may do all this , and more , but you never can subjugate us ; you never can convert the free sons of the soil into vassals , paying tribute to your power ; you never can degrade them to a servile and inferior race . Never ! Never ! 
 According to Geoffrey D. Cunningham in his article on Benjamin 's role in secession , " Swept up in the popular cries for independence , Benjamin willingly went out with the Southern tide . " He and his Louisiana colleague , John Slidell , resigned from the U.S. Senate on February 4 , 1861 , nine days after their state voted to secede from the Union . 
 = = Confederate statesman = = 
 = = = Attorney General = = = 
 Fearful of arrest as a rebel once he left the Senate , Benjamin quickly departed Washington for New Orleans . On the day of Benjamin 's resignation , the Provisional Confederate States Congress gathered in Montgomery , Alabama , and soon chose Davis as president . Davis was sworn in as provisional Confederate States President on February 18 , 1861 . At home in New Orleans for , it would prove , the last time , Benjamin addressed a rally on Washington 's Birthday , February 22 , 1861 . On February 25 , Davis appointed Benjamin , still in New Orleans , as attorney general ; the Louisianan was approved immediately and unanimously by the provisional Congress . Davis thus became the first chief executive in North America to appoint a Jew to his Cabinet . 
 Davis , in his memoirs , remarked that he chose Benjamin because he " had a very high reputation as a lawyer , and my acquaintance with him in the Senate had impressed me with the lucidity of his intellect , his systematic habits , and capacity for labor " . Meade suggested that Davis likely wanted to have a Louisianan in his Cabinet , but that a smarter course of action would have been to send Benjamin abroad to win over the European governments . Butler called Benjamin 's appointment " a waste of good material " . Historian William C. Davis , in his volume on the formation of the Confederate government , notes , " For some there was next to nothing to do , none more so than Benjamin . " The role of the attorney general in a Confederacy that did not yet have federal courts or marshals was so minimal that initial layouts for the building housing the government in Montgomery allowed no space to the Justice Department . 
 Meade found the time that Benjamin spent as attorney general to be fruitful , as it allowed him the opportunity to judge Davis 's character and to ingratiate himself with the president . Benjamin served as a host , entertaining dignitaries and others Davis had no time to see . At the first Cabinet meeting , Benjamin counseled Davis to have the government buy 150 @,@ 000 bales of cotton for shipment to the United Kingdom , with the proceeds used to buy arms and for future needs . His advice was not taken , as the Cabinet believed the war would be short and successful . Benjamin was called upon from time to time to render legal opinions , writing on April 1 to assure Treasury Secretary Christopher Memminger that lemons and oranges could enter the Confederacy duty @-@ free , but walnuts could not . 
 Once Virginia joined the Confederacy , the capital was moved to Richmond , though against Benjamin 's advice — he believed that the city was too close to the North . Nevertheless , he traveled there with his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Jules St. Martin ; the two lived in the same house throughout the war , and Benjamin probably procured the young man 's job at the War Department . Although Alabama 's Leroy Walker was Secretary of War , Davis — a war hero and former U.S. War Secretary — considered himself more qualified and gave many orders himself . When the Confederates were unable to follow up their victory at the First Battle of Manassas by threatening Washington , Walker was criticized in the press . In September , Walker resigned to join the army as a brigadier general , and Davis appointed Benjamin in his place . Butler wrote that Davis had found the cheerfully competent Benjamin " a most useful member of the official family , and thought him suited for almost any post in it . " In addition to his appointment as War Secretary , Benjamin continued to act as Attorney General until November 15 , 1861 . 
 = = = Secretary of War = = = 
 As War Secretary , Benjamin was responsible for a territory stretching from Virginia to Texas . It was his job , with Davis looking over his shoulder , to supervise the Confederate Army and to feed , supply , and arm it — in a nascent country with almost no arms manufacturers . Accordingly , Benjamin saw his job as closely tied to foreign affairs , as the Confederacy was dependent on imports to supply its troops . Davis had determined on a " defensive war " strategy — the Confederacy would await invasion by the North , then seek to defeat its armies until Lincoln tired of sending them . Davis and Benjamin worked together closely , and as Davis came to realize that his subordinate was loyal both to the Confederacy and to Davis personally , he returned complete trust in Benjamin . Varina Davis wrote , " It was to me a curious spectacle , the steady approximation to a thorough friendliness of the President and his War Minister . It was a very gradual rapprochement , but all the more solid for that reason . " 
 In his months as War Secretary , Benjamin sent thousands of communications . According to Evans , Benjamin initially " turn [ ed ] prejudice to his favor and play [ ed ] on the Southerner 's instinctive respect for the Jewish mind with a brilliant performance " . Nevertheless , Benjamin faced difficulties that he could do little about . The Confederacy lacked sufficient soldiers , trained officers to command them , naval and civilian ships , manufacturing capacity to make ships and many weapons , and powder for guns and cannon . The Union had these things , and moved to block the South 's access to European supplies , both by blockade and by buying up supplies the South might have secured . Other problems included drunkenness among the men — and their officers — and uncertainty as to when and where the expected Northern invasion would begin . Further , Benjamin had no experience of the military , or of the executive branch of the government , placing him in a poor position to contradict President Davis . 
 An insurgency against the Confederacy developed in eastern Tennessee in late 1861 , and at Davis 's order , Benjamin sent troops to crush it . Once it was put down , Benjamin and Davis were in a quandary about what to do about its leader , William " Parson " Brownlow , who had been captured , and eventually allowed him to cross to Union @-@ controlled territory in the hope that it would cause Lincoln to release Confederate prisoners . While Brownlow was in Southern custody , he stated that he expected , " no more mercy from Benjamin than was shown by his illustrious predecessors towards Jesus Christ " . 
 Benjamin had difficulty in managing the Confederacy 's generals . He quarreled with General P.G.T. Beauregard , a war hero since his victory at First Manassas . Beauregard sought to add a rocket battery to his command , an action Benjamin stated was not authorized by law . He was most likely relaying Davis 's views , and when challenged by Beauregard , the president backed Benjamin , advising the general to " dismiss this small matter from your mind . In the hostile masses before you , you have a subject more worthy of your contemplation " . In January 1862 , Thomas J. " Stonewall " Jackson 's forces had advanced in western Virginia , leaving troops under William W. Loring at the small town of Romney . Distant from Jackson 's other forces and ill @-@ supplied , Loring and other officers petitioned the War Department to be recalled , and Benjamin , after consulting Davis , so ordered , using the pretext of rumored Union troop movements in the area . Jackson complied , but in a letter to Benjamin asked to be removed from the front , or to resign . High @-@ ranking Confederates soothed Jackson into withdrawing his request . 
 The power of state governments were another flaw in the Confederacy and a problem for Benjamin . Georgia Governor Joseph E. Brown repeatedly demanded arms and the return of Georgian troops to defend their state . North Carolina 's governor , Henry T. Clark , also wanted troops returned to him to defend his coastline . After Cape Hatteras , on North Carolina 's coast , was captured , Confederate forces fell back to Roanoke Island . If that fell , a number of ports in that area of the coast would be at risk , and Norfolk , Virginia , might be threatened by land . 
 General Henry A. Wise , commanding Roanoke , also demanded troops and supplies . He received little from Benjamin 's War Department that had no arms to send , as the Union blockade was preventing supplies from being imported . That Confederate armories were empty was a fact not publicly known at the time . Benjamin and Davis hoped the island 's defenses could hold off the Union forces , but an overwhelming number of troops were landed in February 1862 at an undefended point , and the Confederates were quickly defeated . Combined with Union General Ulysses S. Grant 's capture of Fort Henry and Fort Donelson in Tennessee , this was the most severe military blow yet to the Confederacy , and there was a public outcry against Benjamin , led by General Wise . 
 It was revealed , a quarter century after the war , that Benjamin and Davis had agreed for the secretary to act as scapegoat rather than reveal the shortage of arms . Not knowing this , the Richmond Examiner accused Benjamin of " stupid complacency " . Diarist Mary Chestnut recorded , " the mob calls him Mr. Davis 's pet Jew " . The Wise family never forgave Benjamin , to the detriment of his memory in Southern eyes . The general 's son , Captain Jennings Wise , fell at Roanoke Island , and Henry 's grandson John Wise , interviewed in 1936 , told Meade that " the fat Jew sitting at his desk " was to blame . Another of the general 's sons , also named John Wise , wrote a highly popular book about the South in the Civil War , The End of an Era ( 1899 ) , in which he said that Benjamin " had more brains and less heart than any other civic leader in the South ... The Confederacy and its collapse were no more to Judah P. Benjamin than last year 's birds nest . " 
 The Confederate Congress established a special committee to investigate the military losses ; Benjamin testified before it . The Secretary of State , Virginia 's Robert M. T. Hunter , had quarreled with Davis and resigned and in March 1862 , Benjamin was appointed as his replacement . Varina Davis noted that some in Congress had sought Benjamin 's ouster " because of reverses which no one could have averted , [ so ] the President promoted him to the State Department with a personal and aggrieved sense of injustice done to the man who had now become his friend and right hand . " Richmond diarist Sallie Ann Brock Putnam wrote , " Mr. Benjamin was not forgiven ... this act on the part of the President [ in promoting Benjamin ] , in defiance of public opinion , was considered as unwise , arbitrary , and a reckless risking of his reputation and popularity ... [ Benjamin ] was ever afterwards unpopular in the Confederacy , and particularly in Virginia " . Despite the promotion , the committee reported that any blame for the defeat at Roanoke Island should attach to Wise 's superior , Major General Benjamin Huger , " and the late secretary of war , J.P. Benjamin " . 
 = = = Confederate Secretary of State = = = 
 Throughout his time as Secretary of State , Benjamin tried to induce Britain and France to recognize the Confederacy — no other nation was likely to do so unless these powerful states led the way . The protection this would bring to the Confederacy and its foreign trade was hoped to be enough to save it . 
 = = = = Basis of Confederate foreign policy = = = = 
 By the 1850s , cheap Southern cotton fueled the industries of Europe . The mills of Britain , developed during the first half of the 19th century , by 1860 used more cotton than the rest of the industrialized world combined . Cotton imports to Britain came almost entirely from the American South . According to an article in The Economist in 1853 , " let any great social or physical convulsion visit the United States , and England would feel the shock from Land 's End to John O <unk> 's . The lives of nearly two million of our countrymen ... hang upon a thread . " 
 In 1855 , an Ohioan , David Christy , published Cotton Is King : or Slavery in the Light of Political Economy . Christy argued that the flow of cotton was so important to the industrialized world that cutting it off would be devastating — not least to the Northern United States , as cotton was by far the largest U.S. export . This became known as the " King Cotton " theory , to which Davis was an enthusiastic subscriber . Benjamin also spoke in favor of the theory , though Butler suspected he may have " known better " , based on his firsthand knowledge of Europe . 
 When war came , Davis , against Benjamin 's advice , imposed an embargo on exports of cotton to nations that had not recognized the Confederate government , hoping to force such relations , especially with Britain and France . As the Union was attempting to prevent cotton from being exported from Confederate ports by a blockade and other means , this played to a certain extent into the hands of Lincoln and his Secretary of State , William H. Seward . Additionally , when the war began , Britain had a large surplus of cotton in warehouses , enough to keep the mills running at least part @-@ time for a year or so . Although many prominent Britons believed the South would prevail , there was a reluctance to recognize Richmond until it had gained the military victories to put its foe at bay . Much of this was due to hatred of slavery , though part of it stemmed from a desire to remain on good terms with the U.S. government — due to a drought in 1862 , Britain was forced to import large quantities of wheat and flour from the United States . Also , Britain feared the expansionist Americans might invade the vulnerable Canadian colonies , as Seward hinted they might . 
 = = = = Appointment = = = = 
 Davis appointed Benjamin as Secretary of State on March 17 , 1862 . He was promptly confirmed by the Confederate Senate . A motion to reconsider the confirmation was lost , 13 – 8 . According to Butler , the appointment of Benjamin brought Davis little political support , as the average white Southerner did not understand Benjamin and somewhat disliked him . As there was not much open opposition to Davis in the South at the time , Benjamin 's appointment was not criticized , but was not given much praise either . Meade noted , " the silence of many influential newspapers was ominous . [ Benjamin 's ] promotion in the face of such bitter criticism of his conduct in the war office caused the first serious lack of confidence in the Davis government . " 
 Meade wrote that , since the Secretary of State would have to work closely with Jefferson Davis , Benjamin was likely the person best suited to the position . In addition to his relationship with the President , Benjamin was very close to the Confederate First Lady , Varina Davis , with whom he exchanged confidences regarding war events and the President 's health . " Together , and by turns , they could help him over the most difficult days . " 
 For recreation , Benjamin frequented Richmond 's gambling dens , playing poker and faro . He was incensed when British correspondent William Howard Russell publicized his gambling , feeling that it was an invasion of his private affairs . He was also displeased that Russell depicted him as a losing gambler , when his reputation was the opposite . 
 = = = = Early days ( 1862 – 1863 ) = = = = 
 The Trent Affair had taken place before Benjamin took office as Secretary of State : a U.S. warship had in October 1861 removed Confederate diplomats James Mason and James Slidell ( Benjamin 's former Louisiana colleague in the U.S. Senate ) and their private secretaries from a British @-@ flagged vessel . The crisis brought the U.S. and Britain near war , and was resolved by their release . By the time of Benjamin 's appointment , Mason and Slidell were at their posts in London and Paris as putative ministers from the Confederacy , seeking recognition by the governments of Britain and France . With difficult communications between the South and Europe ( dispatches were often lost or intercepted ) , Benjamin was initially reluctant to change the instructions given the agents by Secretary Hunter . Communications improved by 1863 , with Benjamin ordering that dispatches be sent to Bermuda or the Bahamas , from where they reached the Confederacy by blockade runner . 
 As a practical matter , Benjamin 's chances of gaining European recognition rose and fell with the military fortunes of the Confederacy . When , at the end of June 1862 , Confederate General Robert E. Lee turned back Union General George B. McClellan 's Peninsula Campaign in the Seven Days Battles , ending the immediate threat to Richmond , Emperor Napoleon III of France favorably received proposals from Benjamin , through Slidell , for the French to intervene on the Confederacy 's behalf in exchange for trade concessions . Nevertheless , the Emperor proved unwilling to act without Britain . In August 1862 , Mason , angered by the refusal of British government ministers to meet with him , threatened to resign his post . Benjamin soothed him , stating that while Mason should not submit to insulting treatment , resignation should not take place without discussion . 
 The bloody standoff at Antietam in September 1862 , that ended Lee 's first major incursion into the North , gave Lincoln the confidence in Union arms he needed to announce the Emancipation Proclamation . British newspapers mocked Lincoln for hypocrisy in freeing slaves only in Confederate @-@ held areas , where he could exercise no authority . British officials had been shocked by the outcome of Antietam — they had expected Lee to deliver another brilliant victory — and now considered an additional reason for intervening in the conflict . Antietam , the bloodiest day of the war , had been a stalemate ; they read this as presaging an overall deadlock in the war , with North and South at each other 's throats for years as Britain 's mills sat empty and its people starved . France agreed with this assessment . 
 The final few months of 1862 saw a high water mark for Benjamin 's diplomacy . In October , the British Chancellor of the Exchequer , William E. Gladstone , expressed confidence in Confederate victory , stating in Newcastle , " There is no doubt that Jefferson Davis and other leaders of the South have made an army . They are making , it appears , a navy , and they have made what is more than either — they have made a nation . " Later that month , Napoleon proposed to the British and Russians ( a U.S. ally ) that they combine to require a six months ' armistice for mediation , and an end to the blockade ; if they did so , it would likely lead to Southern independence . The proposal divided the British Cabinet . In mid @-@ November , at the urgings of Palmerston and War Secretary George Cornewall Lewis , members decided to continue to wait for the South to defeat Lincoln 's forces before recognizing it . Although proponents of intervention were prepared to await another opportunity , growing realization among the British public that the Emancipation Proclamation meant that Union victory would be slavery 's end made <unk> the South politically infeasible . 
 Benjamin had not been allowed to offer the inducement for intervention that might have succeeded — abolition of slavery in the Confederacy , and because of that , Meade deemed his diplomacy " seriously , perhaps fatally handicapped " . The Secretary of State blamed Napoleon for the failure , believing the Emperor had betrayed the Confederacy to get the ruler the French had installed in Mexico , Maximilian , accepted by the United States . 
 In Paris , Slidell had been approached by the banking firm Erlanger et Cie . The company offered to float a loan to benefit the Confederacy . The proposed terms provided a large commission to Erlanger and would entitle the bondholder to cotton at a discounted price once the South won the war . Baron Frederic Emile d 'Erlanger , head of the firm , journeyed to Richmond in early 1863 , and negotiated with Benjamin , although the transaction properly fell within the jurisdiction of Treasury Secretary Memminger . The banker softened the terms somewhat , though they were still lucrative for his firm . Benjamin felt the deal was worth it , as it would provide the Confederacy with badly needed funds to pay its agents in Europe . 
 = = = = Increasing desperation ( 1863 – 1865 ) = = = = 
 The twin rebel defeats at Gettysburg and Vicksburg in early July 1863 made it unlikely that Britain , or any other nation , would recognize a slaveholding Confederacy staggering towards oblivion . Accordingly , in August , Benjamin wrote to Mason telling him that as Davis believed the British unwilling to recognize the South , he was free to leave the country . In October , with Davis absent on a trip to Tennessee , Benjamin heard that the British consul in Savannah had forbidden British subjects in the Confederate Army from being used against the United States . The Secretary of State convened a Cabinet meeting , that expelled the remaining British consuls in Confederate @-@ controlled territory , then notified Davis by letter . Evans suggests that Benjamin 's actions made him the Confederacy 's acting president — the first Jewish president . 
 Benjamin supervised the Confederate Secret Service , responsible for covert operations in the North , and financed former federal Interior Secretary Jacob Thompson to work behind the scenes financing operations that might undermine Lincoln politically . Although efforts were made to boost Peace Democrats , the most prominent actions proved to be the St. Albans Raid ( an attack on a Vermont town from Canada ) and an unsuccessful attempt to burn New York City . In the aftermath of the war , these activities led to accusations that Benjamin and Davis were involved in the assassination of Abraham Lincoln , as one Confederate courier , John H. Surratt , who had received money from Benjamin , was tried for involvement in the conspiracy , though Surratt was acquitted . 
 As the Confederacy 's military fortunes flagged , there was increasing consideration of what would have been unthinkable in 1861 — enlisting male slaves in the army and emancipating them for their service . In August 1863 , B. H. Micou , a relative of a former law partner , wrote to Benjamin proposing the use of black soldiers . Benjamin responded that this was not feasible , principally for legal and financial reasons , and that the slaves were performing valuable services for the Confederacy where they were . According to Meade , " Benjamin did not offer any objections to Micou 's plan except on practical grounds — he was not repelled by the radical nature of the proposal " . A British financial agent for the Confederacy , James Spence , also urged emancipation as a means of gaining British recognition . Benjamin allowed Spence to remain in his position for almost a year despite the differences with Confederate policy , before finally dismissing him in late 1863 . Despite official neutrality , tens of thousands from British @-@ ruled Ireland were enlisting in the Union cause ; Benjamin sent an agent to Ireland hoping to impede those efforts and Dudley Mann to Rome to urge Pope Pius IX to forbid Catholic Irish from enlisting . The Pope did not do so , though he responded sympathetically . 
 In January 1864 , Confederate General Patrick Cleburne , of the Army of the Tennessee , proposed emancipating and arming the slaves . Davis , when he heard of it , turned it down and ordered it kept secret . Evans notes that Benjamin " had been thinking in similar terms for much longer , and perhaps the recommendation of so respected an officer was just the impetus he needed . " The year 1864 was a disastrous one for the Confederacy , with Lee forced within siege lines at Petersburg and Union General William T. Sherman sacking Atlanta and devastating Georgia on his march to the sea . Benjamin urged Davis to send the secretary 's fellow Louisianan , Duncan Kenner , to Paris and London , with an offer of emancipation in exchange for recognition . Davis was only willing to offer gradual emancipation , and both Napoleon and Palmerston rejected the proposal . Benjamin continued to press the matter , addressing a mass meeting in Richmond in February 1865 in support of arming the slaves and emancipating them . A bill eventually emerged from the Confederate Congress in March , but it had many restrictions , and it was too late to affect the outcome of the war . 
 In January 1865 , Lincoln , who had been re @-@ elected the previous November , sent Francis Blair as an emissary to Richmond , hoping to secure reunion without further bloodshed . Both sides agreed to a meeting at Fort Monroe , Virginia . Benjamin drafted vague instructions for the Southern delegation , led by Vice President Alexander Stephens , but Davis insisted on modifying them to refer to North and South as " two nations " . This was the point that scuttled the Hampton Roads Conference ; Lincoln would not consider the South a separate entity , insisting on union and emancipation . 
 = = Escape = = 
 By March 1865 , the Confederate military situation was desperate . Most major population centers had fallen , and General Lee 's defense of Richmond was faltering against massive Union forces . Nevertheless , Benjamin retained his usual good humor ; on the evening of April 1 , with evacuation likely , he was at the State Department offices , singing a silly ballad of his own composition , " The Exit from <unk> Hill " , a graveyard district located in Richmond . On April 2 , Lee sent word that he could only keep Union troops away from the line of the Richmond and Danville Railroad for a short time . Those who did not leave Richmond would be trapped . At 11 : 00 pm that night , the Confederate President and Cabinet left aboard a Danville @-@ bound train . Navy Secretary Stephen R. Mallory recorded that Benjamin 's " hope and good humor [ was ] inexhaustible ... with a ' never @-@ give @-@ up @-@ the @-@ ship ' sort of air , referred to other great national causes which had been redeemed from far gloomier reverses than ours " . 
 In Danville , Benjamin shared a room with another refugee , in the home of a banker . For a week , Danville served as capital of the Confederacy , until word came of Lee 's surrender at Appomattox Court House . With no army to shield the Confederate government , it would be captured by Union forces within days , so Davis and his Cabinet , including Benjamin , fled south to Greensboro , North Carolina . Five minutes after the train passed over the Haw River , Union cavalry raiders burned the bridge , trapping the trains that followed Davis 's . 
 Greensboro , fearing wrathful reprisal from the Union , gave the fugitives little hospitality , forcing Benjamin and the other Cabinet members to bunk in a railroad boxcar . Davis hoped to reach Texas , where rumor had it large Confederate forces remained active . The Cabinet met in Greensboro , and Generals Beauregard and Joseph E. Johnston sketched the bleak military situation . Davis , backed as usual by Benjamin , was determined to continue to fight . The refugee government moved south on April 15 . With the train tracks cut , most Cabinet members rode on horseback , but the heavyset Benjamin declared he would not ride on one until he had to , and shared an ambulance with Jules St. Martin and others . For the entertainment of his companions , Benjamin recited Tennyson 's " Ode on the Death of the Duke of Wellington " . 
 In Charlotte , Benjamin stayed in the home of a Jewish merchant as surrender negotiations dragged . Here , Benjamin abandoned Davis 's plan to fight on , telling him and the Cabinet that the cause was hopeless . When negotiations failed , Benjamin was part of the shrunken remnant around Davis that moved on with him . The party reached Abbeville , South Carolina on May 2 , and Benjamin told Davis that he wanted to separate from the presidential party temporarily , and go to the Bahamas to be able to send instructions to foreign agents before rejoining Davis in Texas . According to historian William C. Davis , " the pragmatic Secretary of State almost certainly never had any intention of returning to the South once gone " . When he bade John Reagan goodbye , the postmaster general asked where Benjamin was going . " To the farthest place from the United States , if it takes me to the middle of China . " 
 With one companion , Benjamin travelled south in a poor carriage , pretending to be a Frenchman who spoke no English . He had some gold with him , and left much of it for the support of relatives . He was traveling in the same general direction as the Davis party , but evaded capture whereas Davis was taken by Union troops . Benjamin reached Monticello , Florida , on May 13 to learn Union troops were in nearby Madison . Benjamin decided to continue alone on horseback , east and south along Florida 's Gulf Coast , pretending to be a South Carolina farmer . He eventually reached Gamble Mansion in Ellenton , on the southwest coast of Florida . From there , assisted by the blockade runner Captain Archibald McNeill , he reached Bimini in the Bahamas . His escape from Florida to England was not without hardship : at one point he pretended to be a Jewish cook on McNeill 's vessel , to deceive American soldiers who inspected it — one of whom stated it was the first time he had seen a Jew do menial labor . The small sponge @-@ carrying vessel on which he left Bimini bound for Nassau exploded on the way , and he and the three black crewmen eventually managed to return to Bimini . McNeill 's ship was still there , and he chartered it to take him to Nassau . From there , he took a ship for Havana , and on August 6 , 1865 , left there for Britain . He was not yet done with disaster ; his ship caught fire after departing St. Thomas , and the crew put out the flames only with difficulty . On August 30 , 1865 , Judah Benjamin arrived at Southampton , in Britain . 
 = = Exile = = 
 In Britain , Benjamin spent a week in London assisting Mason in winding up Confederate affairs . He then went to Paris to visit his wife and daughter for the first time since before the war . Friends in Paris urged him to join a mercantile firm there , but Benjamin felt that such a career would be subject to interference by Seward and the United States . Accordingly , Benjamin sought to shape his old course in a new country , resuming his legal career as an English barrister . Most of Benjamin 's property had been destroyed or confiscated , and he needed to make a living for himself and his relatives . He had money in the United Kingdom as he had , during the war , purchased cotton for transport to Liverpool by blockade runner . 
 On January 13 , 1866 , Benjamin enrolled at Lincoln 's Inn , and soon thereafter was admitted to read law under Charles Pollock , son of Chief Baron Charles Edward Pollock , who took him as a pupil at his father 's direction . Benjamin , despite his age of 54 , was initially required , like his thirty @-@ years @-@ younger peers , to attend for twelve terms , that is , three years . According to Benjamin 's obituary in The Times , though , " the secretary of the Confederacy was dispensed from the regular three years of unprofitable dining , and called to the bar " on June 6 , 1866 . 
 Once qualified as a barrister , Benjamin chose to join the Northern Circuit , as it included Liverpool , where his connections in New Orleans and knowledge of mercantile affairs would do him the most good . In an early case , he defended two former Confederate agents against a suit by the United States to gain assets said to belong to that nation . Although he lost that case ( United States v Wagner ) on appeal , he was successful against his former enemies in United States v McRae ( 1869 ) . He had need of rapid success , as most of his remaining assets were lost in the collapse of the firm of Overend , Gurney and Company . He was reduced to penning columns on international affairs for The Daily Telegraph . 
 According to Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg , " repeating his Louisiana progress , Benjamin made his reputation among his new peers by publication " . In an early representation , he wrote a complex governing document for an insurance firm that other counsel had declined despite the substantial fee , due to the early deadline . After brief study , Benjamin wrote out the document , never making a correction or erasure . In 1868 , Benjamin published A Treatise on the Law of Sale of Personal Property , With Reference to the American Decisions , to the French Code , and Civil Law . This work , known for short as Benjamin on Sales , became a classic in both Britain and America , and launched his career as a barrister . It went through three editions prior to Benjamin 's death in 1884 ; an eighth edition was published in 2010 . Today Benjamin 's Sale of Goods forms part of the " common law library " of key practitioner texts on English civil law . 
 In 1867 , Benjamin had been indicted in Richmond , along with Davis , Lee , and others , for waging war against the United States . The indictment was soon quashed . Davis visited London in 1868 , free on bail , and Benjamin advised him not to take legal action against the author of a book that had angered Davis , as it would only give the book publicity . Benjamin corresponded with Davis , and met with him on the former rebel president 's visits to Europe during Benjamin 's lifetime , though the two were never as close as they had been during the war . 
 Benjamin was created a " Palatine silk " , entitled to the precedence of a Queen 's Counsel within Lancashire , in July 1869 . There was a large creation of Queen 's Counsel in early 1872 , but Benjamin was not included ; it was stated in his Times obituary that he had put his name forward . Later that year , he argued the case of Potter v Rankin before the House of Lords and so impressed Lord Hatherley that a patent of precedence was soon made out , giving Benjamin the privileges of a Queen 's Counsel . As he became prominent as a barrister , he discontinued practice before juries ( at which he was less successful ) in favor of trials or appeals before judges . In his last years in practice , he demanded an additional fee of 100 guineas ( £ 105 ) to appear in any court besides the House of Lords and the Privy Council . In 1875 , he was made a bencher of Lincoln 's Inn . 
 In 1881 , Benjamin represented Arthur Orton , the Tichborne claimant , before the House of Lords . Orton , a butcher from Wagga Wagga , New South Wales , had claimed to be Sir Roger Tichborne , a baronet who had vanished some years previously , and Orton had perjured himself in the course of defending his claim . Benjamin sought to overturn the sentence of 14 years passed on Orton , but was not successful . 
 In his final years , Benjamin suffered from health issues . In 1880 , he was badly injured in a fall from a tram in Paris . He also developed diabetes . He suffered a heart attack in Paris at the end of 1882 , and his doctor ordered him to retire . His health improved enough to allow him to travel to London in June 1883 for a dinner in his honor attended by the English bench and bar . He returned to Paris and suffered a relapse of his heart trouble in early 1884 . Natalie Benjamin had the last rites of the Catholic Church administered to her Jewish husband before his death in Paris on May 6 , 1884 , and funeral services were held in a church prior to Judah Benjamin 's interment at Père Lachaise Cemetery in the St. Martin family crypt . His grave did not bear his name until 1938 , when a plaque was placed by the Paris chapter of the United Daughters of the Confederacy . 
 = = Appraisal = = 
 Benjamin was the first U.S. senator to profess the Jewish faith . In 1845 , David Yulee , born David Levy , had been sworn in for Florida , but he had renounced Judaism and eventually formally converted to Christianity . As an adult , Benjamin was a <unk> Jew , who was not a member of a synagogue and took no part in communal affairs . He rarely spoke of his religion publicly , but was not ashamed of it . Some of the stories told of Benjamin that touch on his faith come from Rabbi Isaac Mayer Wise , who related that Benjamin delivered an address in a San Francisco synagogue on Yom Kippur in 1860 , though whether this occurred is open to question as Wise was not there and it was not reported in the city 's Jewish newspaper . One quote from Senate debate that remains " part of the Benjamin legend " , according to Evans , followed an allusion to Moses as a freer of slaves by a Northern senator , hinting that Benjamin was an " Israelite in Egyptian clothing " . Benjamin is supposed to have replied , " It is true that I am a Jew , and when my ancestors were receiving their Ten Commandments from the immediate hand of deity , amidst the <unk> and <unk> of Mount Sinai , the ancestors of my opponent were herding swine in the forests of Great Britain . " 
 Edgar M. Kahn , in his journal article on the 1860 California sojourn , wrote , " Benjamin 's life is an example of a man 's determination to overcome almost insurmountable barriers by industry , perseverance , and intelligent use of a remarkable brain . " This brilliance was recognized by contemporaries ; Salomon de Rothschild , in 1861 , deemed Benjamin " the greatest mind " in North America . Nevertheless , according to Meade , " he was given to quixotic enthusiasms and was sometimes too cocksure of his knowledge . " Ginsburg said of Benjamin , " he rose to the top of the legal profession twice in one lifetime , on two continents , beginning his first ascent as a raw youth and his second as a fugitive minister of a vanquished power . " Davis , after Benjamin 's death , deemed him the most able member of his Cabinet , and said that the lawyer 's postwar career had fully vindicated his confidence in him . 
 According to Brook , " in every age , a heroic sage struggles to rescue Benjamin from obscurity — and invariably fails . " Benjamin left no memoir and destroyed his personal papers , by which " the task of future researchers and historians was made exceedingly difficult and laborious " . After his death , Benjamin was rarely written about , in contrast to Davis and other Confederate leaders . Part of this was due to Benjamin depriving his potential biographers of source material , but even Davis , in his two @-@ volume war memoir , mentions him only twice . Evans suggests that as Davis wrote the books in part to defend and memorialize his place in history , it would not have been characteristic of him to give much credit to Benjamin . Davis , in the midst of postwar business struggles , may have resented Benjamin 's success as a barrister , or may have feared that allegations of involvement in Lincoln 's assassination would again be made against the two men . Brook concurs that Benjamin 's postwar success , that began as Davis lay in prison and other Confederates struggled for survival , may have soured Southerners towards the former secretary , but that anti @-@ Semitism was also likely a factor . " For the guardians of Confederate memory after Reconstruction , Benjamin became a kind of pet Jew , generally ignored , but then trotted out at opportune moments to defend the segregated South against charges of bigotry . " 
 Those writing on Jewish history were reluctant to glorify a slaveowner , and reacted to Benjamin 's story with " embarrassed dismay " . This was especially so in the two generations following 1865 , when the question of the civil war remained an active issue in American politics . It was not until the 1930s that Benjamin began to be mentioned as a significant figure in the history of the United States , and in the chronicle of the Jews there . Nevertheless , Tom Mountain , in his 2009 article on Benjamin , points out that Benjamin was respected in the South as a leader of the rebel cause for a century after the Civil War , and that Southern schoolchildren who could not name the current Secretary of State in Washington knew about Benjamin . Reform Rabbi Daniel Polish noted in 1988 that Benjamin " represent [ ed ] a significant dilemma [ in ] my years growing up as a Jew both proud of his people and with an intense commitment to the ideals of liberalism and human solidarity that I found embodied in the civil rights movement . " 
 Berman recounts a story that during the Civil War , Benjamin was called to the Torah at Beth <unk> synagogue in Richmond . However , there is no proof of this , nor does Benjamin 's name appear in any surviving record of the Jews of that city . " But whether or not Benjamin practiced Judaism overtly or contributed to Jewish causes , to the Jews of the South , he was a symbol of a <unk> who was a man among men " . According to Evans , " Benjamin survives , as he willed it : a shadowy figure in Civil War history " . Kahn noted that Benjamin " is epitomized as a foremost orator , lawyer , and statesman , without a peer at the bars of two of the world 's greatest nations " . Meade questioned whether Benjamin 's character can ever be fully understood : 
 We can easily prove that Benjamin was the only genius in the Confederate cabinet . We can demonstrate that his career , with its American and English phases , was more glamorous than that of any other prominent Confederate . But we are still confronted by one perplexing problem : Judah P. Benjamin was an enigmatic figure — the most incomprehensible of all the Confederate leaders . Lee , Jackson , even Jefferson Davis , are crystal clear in comparison with the Jewish lawyer and statesman . The acrimonious debate about his character began before the Civil War and has not ceased to this day . 
 = Gotta Be You ( One Direction song ) = 
 " Gotta Be You " is a song by English @-@ Irish boy band One Direction from their debut studio album , Up All Night ( 2011 ) . Written by August Rigo and the song 's producer , Steve Mac , it was released in the United Kingdom by Syco Music in November 2011 , as the album 's second single . The track is a mid @-@ tempo pop rock ballad incorporating an orchestral arrangement . The lyrical content is characterised by love sentiments . 
 The single peaked at number three in the United Kingdom , marking the group 's second top ten appearance there . Upon the United States release of Up All Night , " Gotta Be You " peaked at number 24 on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart . Directed by John Urbano , the accompanying music video depicts the group spending time on the banks of Lake Placid , New York . One Direction performed the ballad on televised programmes and during their Up All Night Tour ( 2011 – 12 ) . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 After being formed and finishing third in the seventh series of The X Factor in 2010 , One Direction were signed to Syco Music . The number was written by August Rigo and Steve Mac , and was produced by Mac . One Direction premiered the single on BBC Radio 1 on 19 October 2011 , with confirmation that it would serve as the second cut from Up All Night , following their debut single , " What Makes You Beautiful " , which topped the UK Singles Chart in September of that year . Member Zayn Malik , in an October interview with Digital Spy , characterised " Gotta Be You " as " a bit more emotive " than their debut single . It was released by Syco Music via digital download in Ireland and United Kingdom on 11 November 2011 and 13 November , respectively . In both countries , the digital download contains the principal recording , its B @-@ side , " Another World " , and two remixes of the song itself . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Gotta Be You " is a mid @-@ tempo pop rock ballad . According to the digital sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , One Direction 's vocal range in the song span from the note of Eb4 to <unk> . Written in the key of Ab major , the song is set in common time at a moderate tempo of 85 beats per minute . Set in an orchestral arrangement , its instrumentation includes a guitar , piano lines , and abundant strings . The chorus of the song opens with falsettos that are followed by vocal harmonies . The lyrical content is characterised by love notions and prominently revolves around its main declaration , " It 's gotta be you , only you " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Both USA Today writer Brian Mansfield , who appreciated the lyrical content , and PopMatters contributor Zachary Houle , who favoured the instrumentation , described " Gotta Be You " as one of Up All Night 's highlights . Billboard reviewer Jason Lipshutz commended the vocal elements at play in its refrain and the track 's " smooth " lyricism . Robert Copsey for Digital Spy opined that the single 's memorable refrain is its strongest attribute and rated it four out of five stars . Matthew Horton of Virgin Media classified the song as one of the record 's " superior tracks " , and credited the ballad with keeping the album 's " pecker up " . Cosmopolitan 's Sarah Kwong lauded the lyrics and instrumentation of " Gotta Be You " and noted its appeal to a more mature audience in comparison to their debut single " What Makes You Beautiful " . Writing for Allmusic , Matthew Chisling , however , described the ballad as " a bit tepid . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Gotta Be You " debuted and peaked at number three on the Irish Singles Chart in the week ending 17 November 2011 , marking the group 's second top five appearance in Ireland . In the United Kingdom , the piece sold substantially less than their first single " What Makes You Beautiful " , selling 59 @,@ 461 copies in its first week . Despite the single reaching number one on the mid @-@ week chart update , it entered the UK Singles Chart dated 20 November 2011 at number three behind the seventh week sales of Rihanna 's " We Found Love " and the release of " Good Feeling " by Flo Rida . The song marks their second top ten hit and was One Direction 's third best @-@ selling track in the UK by August 2012 . Upon the release of Up All Night in the United States , " Gotta Be You " did not enter the US Billboard Hot 100 , but peaked at number 24 on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart in the week of 28 April 2012 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The single 's accompanying music video was directed by John Urbano , who had previously directed the band 's music video for " What Makes You Beautiful " . While predominantly filmed in Lake Placid , New York , in October 2011 , the clip 's opening sequences were shot at the State University of New York at Plattsburgh . In October , the group told Digital Spy that they feared a crocodile attack when shooting the video . They also told Capital FM correspondent Kevin Hughes that the clip would be a significant transition from their previous music video ; Malik described it as poignant and Louis Tomlinson reflected , " The first one was all about having a very fun song , but this song is a bit different . " 
 The music video premiered on 8 November 2011 on YouTube , and predominantly depicts the group spending time on the banks of Lake Placid . As of February 2016 , the music video has garnered more than 180 million Vevo views . In the music video , the five @-@ some end up meeting with girls in a camping spot in a forest . As the music ends , the group watch fireworks as Malik walks towards his significant other and kisses her . The clip attracted positive commentary from fans of the group . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 One Direction performed the single for the first time on The X Factor UK on 13 November 2012 , to open the BBC 's Children in Need 2011 telethon on 19 November 2012 , and at Capital FM 's Jingle Bell Ball on 4 December 2011 , at the The O2 Arena . One Direction also performed the track during their first headlining concert tour , the Up All Night Tour . " Gotta Be You " was performed as the sixth song on the set list , in the second segment of the show 's synopsis . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Ian McKellen = 
 Sir Ian Murray McKellen , CH , CBE ( born 25 May 1939 ) is an English actor . He is the recipient of six Laurence Olivier Awards , a Tony Award , a Golden Globe Award , a Screen Actors Guild Award , a <unk> Award , two Saturn Awards , four Drama Desk Awards and two Critics ' Choice Awards . He has also received two Academy Award nominations , four BAFTA nominations and five Emmy Award nominations . 
 McKellen 's work spans genres ranging from Shakespearean and modern theatre to popular fantasy and science fiction . The BBC states his " performances have guaranteed him a place in the canon of English stage and film actors " . His most well known film roles include Gandalf in The Lord of the Rings and The Hobbit trilogies and Magneto in the X @-@ Men films . 
 McKellen was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire in 1979 , was knighted by Elizabeth II in 1991 for services to the performing arts , and made a Companion of Honour for services to drama and to equality in the Queen 's 2008 New Year Honours . He has been openly gay since 1988 , and continues to be a champion for LGBT social movements worldwide . He was made a Freeman of the City of London in October 2014 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 McKellen was born on 25 May 1939 in Burnley , Lancashire , the son of Margery Lois ( née Sutcliffe ) and Denis Murray McKellen , a civil engineer . He was their second child , with a sister , Jean , five years his senior . Shortly before the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939 , his family moved to Wigan . They lived there through the war and his early childhood . They relocated to Bolton in 1951 , after his father had been promoted . The experience of living through the war as a young child had a lasting impact on him , and he later claimed that " only after peace resumed ... did I realise that war wasn 't normal . " When an interviewer remarked that he seemed quite calm in the aftermath of 11 September attacks , McKellen said : " Well , darling , you forget — I slept under a steel plate until I was four years old . " 
 McKellen 's father was a civil engineer and lay preacher , and was of Protestant Irish and Scottish descent . Both of McKellen 's grandfathers were preachers , and his great @-@ great @-@ grandfather , James McKellen , was a " strict , evangelical Protestant minister " in Ballymena , County Antrim . His home environment was strongly Christian , but non @-@ orthodox . " My upbringing was of low nonconformist Christians who felt that you led the Christian life in part by behaving in a Christian manner to everybody you met . " When he was 12 , his mother died ; his father died when he was 24 . Of his coming out of the closet to his stepmother , Gladys McKellen , who was a member of the Religious Society of Friends , he said , " Not only was she not fazed , but as a member of a society which declared its indifference to people 's sexuality years back , I think she was just glad for my sake that I wasn 't lying anymore . " 
 McKellen attended Bolton School ( Boys ' Division ) , of which he is still a supporter , attending regularly to talk to pupils . McKellen 's acting career started at Bolton Little Theatre , of which he is now the patron . An early fascination with the theatre was encouraged by his parents , who took him on a family outing to Peter Pan at the Opera House in Manchester when he was three . When he was nine , his main Christmas present was a wood and bakelite , fold @-@ away Victorian theatre from <unk> Toy Theatres , with cardboard scenery and wires to push on the cut @-@ outs of Cinderella and of Laurence Olivier 's Hamlet . 
 His sister took him to his first Shakespeare play , Twelfth Night , by the amateurs of Wigan 's Little Theatre , shortly followed by their Macbeth and Wigan High School for Girls ' production of A Midsummer Night 's Dream , with music by Mendelssohn , with the role of Bottom played by Jean McKellen , who continued to act , direct , and produce amateur theatre until her death . 
 When he was 18 years old , McKellen won a scholarship to St Catharine 's College , Cambridge , where he read English literature . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 While at Cambridge McKellen was a member of the Marlowe Society , appearing in Henry IV ( as Shallow ) alongside Trevor Nunn and Derek Jacobi ( March 1959 ) , Cymbeline ( as Posthumus , opposite Margaret Drabble as Imogen ) and Doctor Faustus . His first professional appearance was in 1961 at the Belgrade Theatre , as Roper in A Man for All Seasons , although an audio recording of the Marlowe Society 's Cymbeline had gone on commercial sale as part of the Argo Shakespeare series . 
 After four years in regional repertory theatres he made his first West End appearance , in A Scent of Flowers , regarded as a " notable success " . In 1965 he was a member of Laurence Olivier 's National Theatre Company at the Old Vic , which led to roles at the Chichester Festival . With the Prospect Theatre Company , McKellen made his breakthrough performances of Richard II ( directed by Richard Cottrell ) and Marlowe 's Edward II ( directed by Toby Robertson ) at the Edinburgh festival in 1969 , the latter causing a storm of protest over the enactment of the homosexual Edward 's lurid death . 
 In the 1970s and 1980s McKellen became a well @-@ known figure in British theatre , performing frequently at the Royal Shakespeare Company and the Royal National Theatre , where he played several leading Shakespearean roles , including the title role in Macbeth ( which he had first played for Trevor Nunn in a " gripping ... out of the ordinary " production , with Judi Dench , at Stratford in 1976 ) , and Iago in Othello , in award @-@ winning productions directed by Nunn . Both of these productions were adapted into television films , also directed by Nunn . 
 In 2007 he returned to the Royal Shakespeare Company , in productions of King Lear and The Seagull , both directed by Trevor Nunn . In 2009 he appeared in a very popular revival of Waiting for Godot at London 's Haymarket Theatre , directed by Sean Mathias , and playing opposite Patrick Stewart . He is Patron of English Touring Theatre and also President and Patron of the Little Theatre Guild of Great Britain , an association of amateur theatre organisations throughout the UK . In late August 2012 , he took part in the opening ceremony of the London Paralympics , portraying Prospero from The Tempest . 
 = = = Popular success = = = 
 McKellen had taken film roles throughout his career — beginning in 1969 with his role of George Matthews in A Touch of Love , and his first leading role was in 1980 as D. H. Lawrence in Priest of Love , but it was not until the 1990s that he became more widely recognised in this medium after several roles in blockbuster Hollywood films . In 1993 he had a supporting role as a South African tycoon in the critically acclaimed Six Degrees of Separation , in which he starred with Stockard Channing , Donald Sutherland , and Will Smith . In the same year , he appeared in minor roles in the television miniseries Tales of the City , based on the novel by his friend Armistead Maupin , and the film Last Action Hero , in which he played Death . 
 Later in 1993 , McKellan appeared in the television film And the Band Played On , about the discovery of the AIDS virus , for which McKellen won a CableACE Award for Supporting Actor in a Movie or Miniseries and was nominated for the Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie . In 1995 , he played the title role in Richard III , which transported the setting into an alternative 1930s in which England is ruled by fascists . The film was a critical success . McKellen co @-@ produced and co @-@ wrote the film , adapting the play for the screen based on a stage production of Shakespeare 's play directed by Richard Eyre for the Royal National Theatre , in which McKellen had appeared . As executive producer he returned his £ 50 @,@ 000 fee to complete the filming of the final battle . In his review of the film , Washington Post film critic Hal Hinson , called McKellen 's performance a " lethally flamboyant incarnation " , and said his " florid mastery ... dominates everything " . His performance in the title role garnered BAFTA and Golden Globe nominations for Best Actor , and won the European Film Award for Best Actor . His screenplay was nominated for the BAFTA Award for Best Adapted Screenplay . 
 He appeared in the modestly acclaimed film Apt Pupil , which was directed by Bryan Singer and based on a story by Stephen King . McKellen portrayed a fugitive Nazi officer , living under a false name in the US , who is befriended by a curious teenager ( Brad Renfro ) who threatens to expose him unless he tells his story in detail . He was subsequently nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor for his role in the 1998 film Gods and Monsters , wherein he played James Whale , the director of Show Boat ( 1936 ) and Frankenstein . 
 In 1999 McKellen was cast , again under the direction of Bryan Singer , to play the comic book supervillain Magneto in the 2000 film X @-@ Men and its sequels X2 : X @-@ Men United and X @-@ Men : The Last Stand . While filming X @-@ Men McKellen was cast as the wizard Gandalf in Peter Jackson 's three @-@ film adaptation of The Lord of the Rings ( consisting of The Fellowship of the Ring , The Two Towers , and The Return of the King ) . He received honors from the Screen Actors Guild for Best Supporting Actor in a Motion Picture for his work in The Fellowship of the Ring , and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for the same role . He also provided the voice of Gandalf for several video game adaptations of the films . On 10 January 2011 it was officially confirmed that <unk> would reprise the role of Gandalf in the three @-@ part film adaptation of The Hobbit . 
 On 16 March 2002 , he hosted Saturday Night Live . In 2003 , McKellen made a guest appearance as himself on the American cartoon show The Simpsons , in a special British @-@ themed episode entitled " The Regina Monologues " , along with the then UK Prime Minister Tony Blair and author J. K. Rowling . In April and May 2005 , he played the role of Mel <unk> in Granada Television 's long running soap opera , Coronation Street , fulfilling a lifelong ambition . He narrated Richard Bell 's film Eighteen , as a grandfather who leaves his World War II memoirs on audio @-@ cassette for his teenage grandson . 
 McKellen has appeared in limited release films , such as Emile ( which was shot in three weeks following the X2 shoot ) , <unk> and Asylum . He appeared as Sir Leigh <unk> in The Da Vinci Code . During a 17 May 2006 interview on The Today Show with the Da Vinci Code cast and director , Matt Lauer posed a question to the group about how they would have felt if the film had borne a prominent disclaimer that it is a work of fiction , as some religious groups wanted . McKellen responded , " I 've often thought the Bible should have a disclaimer in the front saying ' This is fiction . ' I mean , walking on water ? It takes ... an act of faith . And I have faith in this movie – not that it 's true , not that it 's factual , but that it 's a jolly good story . " He continued , " And I think audiences are clever enough and bright enough to separate out fact and fiction , and discuss the thing when they 've seen it " . McKellen appeared in the 2006 series of Ricky Gervais ' comedy series Extras , where he played himself directing Gervais ' character Andy Millman in a play about gay lovers . McKellen received a 2007 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actor - Comedy Series nomination for his performance . In 2009 he portrayed Number Two in The Prisoner , a remake of the 1967 cult series The Prisoner . In 2013 , McKellen co @-@ starred in the ITV sitcom Vicious as Freddie Thornhill , alongside Derek Jacobi . The series revolves around an elderly gay couple who have been together for 50 years . On 23 August 2013 the show was renewed for a six @-@ episode second series which began airing in June 2015 . 
 In November 2013 , McKellen appeared in the Doctor Who 50th anniversary comedy homage The Five ( ish ) Doctors Reboot . He reprised his role as Magneto in X @-@ Men : Days of Future Past , released in May 2014 ; he shared the role with Michael Fassbender , who played a younger version of the character in 2011 's X @-@ Men : First Class . In October 2015 , McKellen appeared as Norman to Anthony Hopkins ' Sir in a BBC Two production of Ronald Harwood 's The Dresser , alongside Edward Fox and Emily Watson . In 2017 , McKellen will voice Cogsworth , the Beast 's loyal butler , who was cursed into a pendulum clock , in a live @-@ action adaptation of Beauty and the Beast . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 McKellen and his first partner , Brian Taylor , a history teacher from Bolton , began their relationship in 1964 . Their relationship lasted for eight years , ending in 1972 . They lived in London , where McKellen continued to pursue his career as an actor . For over a decade , he has lived in a five @-@ story Victorian conversion in Narrow Street , Limehouse . In 1978 he met his second partner , Sean Mathias , at the Edinburgh Festival . This relationship lasted until 1988 . According to Mathias , the ten @-@ year love affair was tempestuous , with conflicts over McKellen 's success in acting versus Mathias 's somewhat less @-@ successful career . Mathias later directed McKellen in Waiting For Godot at the Theatre Royal Haymarket in 2009 . The pair entered into a business partnership with Evgeny Lebedev , purchasing the lease on The Grapes public house in Narrow Street . 
 McKellen is an atheist . In the late 1980s , McKellen lost his appetite for meat except for fish , and so mostly excludes it from his diet . In 2001 , Ian McKellen received the Artist Citizen of the World Award ( France ) . 
 He has a tattoo of the Elvish number nine , written using J. R. R Tolkien 's artificial script of Tengwar , on his shoulder in reference to his involvement in the Lord of the Rings and the fact that his character was one of the original nine companions of the Fellowship of the Ring . The other actors of " The Fellowship " ( Elijah Wood , Sean Astin , Orlando Bloom , Billy Boyd , Sean Bean , Dominic Monaghan and Viggo Mortensen ) have the same tattoo . John Rhys @-@ Davies , whose character was also one of the original nine companions , arranged for his stunt double to get the tattoo instead . 
 He was diagnosed with prostate cancer in 2006 . In 2012 , McKellen stated on his blog that " There is no cause for alarm . I am examined regularly and the cancer is contained . I 've not needed any treatment . " 
 He became an ordained minister of the Universal Life Church in early 2013 in order to preside over the marriage of his X @-@ Men co @-@ star Patrick Stewart to his then fiancée Sunny Ozell . 
 McKellen was awarded an honorary Doctorate of Letters by Cambridge University on 18 June 2014 . He was made a Freeman of the city of London on Thursday 30 October 2014 . The ceremony took place at Guildhall in London . McKellen was nominated by London 's Lord Mayor Fiona Woolf , who said he was chosen as he was an " exceptional actor " and " tireless campaigner for equality " . He is also a Fellow of St Catherine 's College , Oxford . 
 = = Activism = = 
 = = = LGBT rights campaigning = = = 
 While McKellen had made his sexual orientation known to fellow actors early on in his stage career , it was not until 1988 that he came out to the general public , in a programme on BBC Radio . The context that prompted McKellen 's decision – overriding any concerns about a possible negative effect on his career – was that the controversial Section 28 of the Local Government Bill , known simply as Section 28 , was then under consideration in the British Parliament . Section 28 proposed prohibiting local authorities from promoting homosexuality " ... as a kind of pretended family relationship " . McKellen became active in fighting the proposed law , and , during a BBC Radio 3 programme where he debated Section 28 with the conservative journalist Peregrine Worsthorne , declared himself gay . McKellen has stated that he was influenced in his decision by the advice and support of his friends , among them noted gay author Armistead Maupin . In a 1998 interview that discusses the 29th anniversary of the Stonewall riots , McKellen commented , 
 I have many regrets about not having come out earlier , but one of them might be that I didn 't engage myself in the politicking . 
 He has said of this period : 
 My own participating in that campaign was a focus for people [ to ] take comfort that if Ian McKellen was on board for this , perhaps it would be all right for other people to be as well , gay and straight . 
 Section 28 was , however , enacted and remained on the statute books until 2000 in Scotland and 2003 in England and Wales . Section 28 never applied in Northern Ireland . 
 In 2003 , during an appearance on Have I Got News For You , McKellen claimed when he visited Michael Howard , then Environment Secretary ( responsible for local government ) , in 1988 to lobby against Section 28 , Howard refused to change his position but did ask him to leave an autograph for his children . McKellen agreed , but wrote , " Fuck off , I 'm gay . " McKellen described Howard 's junior ministers , Conservatives David Wilshire and Dame Jill Knight , who were the architects of Section 28 , as the ' ugly sisters ' of a political pantomime . 
 McKellen has continued to be very active in LGBT rights efforts . In a statement on his website regarding his activism , the actor commented that : 
 I have been reluctant to lobby on other issues I most care about – nuclear weapons ( against ) , religion ( atheist ) , capital punishment ( anti ) , AIDS ( fund @-@ raiser ) because I never want to be forever spouting , diluting the impact of addressing my most urgent concern ; legal and social equality for gay people worldwide . 
 McKellen is a co @-@ founder of Stonewall , an LGBT rights lobby group in the United Kingdom , named after the Stonewall riots . McKellen is also patron of LGBT History Month , Pride London , Oxford Pride , <unk> @-@ <unk> , The Lesbian & Gay Foundation , and <unk> where he appears in their video " Parents Talking " . 
 In 1994 , at the closing ceremony of the Gay Games , he briefly took the stage to address the crowd , saying , " I 'm Sir Ian McKellen , but you can call me Serena " : This nickname , given to him by Stephen Fry , had been circulating within the gay community since McKellen 's knighthood was conferred . In 2002 , he was the Celebrity Grand Marshal of the San Francisco Pride Parade and he attended the Academy Awards with his then @-@ boyfriend , New Zealander Nick <unk> . In 2006 , McKellen spoke at the pre @-@ launch of the 2007 LGBT History Month in the UK , lending his support to the organisation and its founder , Sue Sanders . In 2007 , he became a patron of The Albert Kennedy Trust , an organisation that provides support to young , homeless and troubled LGBT people . 
 In 2006 , he became a patron of Oxford Pride , stating : 
 I send my love to all members of Oxford Pride , their sponsors and supporters , of which I am proud to be one ... Onlookers can be impressed by our confidence and determination to be ourselves and gay people , of whatever age , can be comforted by the occasion to take the first steps towards coming out and leaving the closet forever behind . 
 McKellen has taken his activism internationally , and caused a major stir in Singapore , where he was invited to do an interview on a morning show and shocked the interviewer by asking if they could recommend him a gay bar ; the programme immediately ended . In December 2008 , he was named in Out 's annual Out 100 list . 
 In 2010 , McKellen extended his support for Liverpool 's <unk> festival in which a group of gay and lesbian Merseyside teenagers helped to produce an anti @-@ homophobia campaign pack for schools and youth centres across the city . In May 2011 , he called Sergey <unk> , Moscow 's mayor , a " coward " for refusing to allow gay parades in the city . 
 In 2014 , he was named in the top 10 on the World Pride Power list . 
 = = = Charity work = = = 
 In April 2010 , along with actors Brian Cox and Eleanor Bron , McKellen appeared in a series of TV advertisements to support Age UK , the charity recently formed from the merger of Age Concern and Help the Aged . All three actors gave their time free of charge . 
 A cricket fan since childhood , McKellen umpired in March 2011 for a charity cricket match in New Zealand to support earthquake victims of the February 2011 Christchurch earthquake . 
 McKellen is an honorary board member for the New York and Washington , DC based organization Only Make Believe . Only Make Believe creates and performs interactive plays in children 's hospitals and care facilities . He was honoured by the organisation in 2012 and hosted their annual Make Believe on Broadway Gala in November 2013 . He garnered publicity for the organisation by stripping down to his Lord of the Rings underwear on stage . 
 = = = Isaac Theatre Royal , Christchurch = = = 
 While in New Zealand filming The Hobbit in 2012 , McKellen announced a special New Zealand tour " Shakespeare , Tolkien , and You ! " , with proceeds from the shows going to help save the Isaac Theatre Royal , which suffered extensive damage during the 2011 Christchurch earthquake . McKellen said he opted to help save the building as it was the last theatre he played in New Zealand ( Waiting for Godot in 2010 ) and the locals ' love for it made it a place worth supporting . 
 = = Selected credits = = 
 = = = Stage = = = 
 Much Ado About Nothing , Royal National Theatre , Old Vic , London , 1965 
 Trelawny of the ' Wells ' , National Theatre , London & Chichester Festival , 1965 
 The Promise , West End ; Broadway , 1967 
 Edward II ( in title role ) , Edinburgh Festival & West End , 1969 
 Hamlet ( title role ) , UK / European Tour , 1971 
 'Tis Pity She 's a Whore , UK Tour , 1972 
 Dr Faustus ( title role ) , Royal Shakespeare Company , Edinburgh Festival & Aldwych Theatre ( London ) , 1974 
 King John , RSC , 1975 
 Romeo and Juliet ( as Romeo ) , RSC , Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon & London , 1976 
 The Winter 's Tale , RSC , Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon , 1976 
 Macbeth ( title role ) , RSC , Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon & Young Vic ( London ) , 1976 – 1977 
 The Alchemist , RSC , Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon & London , 1977 
 Every Good Boy <unk> Favour , RSC , Barbican Arts Centre ( London ) , 1977 
 Three Sisters , RSC , UK Tour , 1978 
 Bent , ( as Max ) Royal Court and Criterion , London , 1979 
 Acting Shakespeare ( as Himself ) , Copenhagen , 1980 
 Amadeus ( as Salieri ) , Broadway , 1980 
 Coriolanus ( title role ) , National Theatre , 1984 
 Wild Honey , National Theatre , 1984 ( & Broadway , 1986 ) 
 The Cherry Orchard ( as Lopakhin ) , National Theatre , 1985 
 The Duchess of Malfi , National Theatre , 1985 
 The Real Inspector Hound , National Theatre , London & Paris , 1985 
 Othello ( as Iago ) , RSC , London & Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon , 1989 
 Richard III ( title role ) , National Theatre , world tour , 1990 & US tour , 1992 
 Uncle Vanya ( title role ) , National Theatre , 1992 
 Peter Pan ( as Mr. Darling / Captain Hook ) , National Theatre , 1997 
 An Enemy of the People , National Theatre , 1997 & Ahmanson Theatre ( Los Angeles ) , 1998 
 Present Laughter , West Yorkshire Playhouse ( Leeds , England ) , 1998 
 Dance of Death , at the Broadhurst Theatre ( New York ) in 2001 . At the Lyric Theatre ( London , England ) in 2003 
 Aladdin , ( as Widow <unk> ) Old Vic , 2004 & 2005 
 The Cut , Donmar Warehouse , 2006 
 King Lear by William Shakespeare , ( as Lear ) , Courtyard Theatre , Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon , 2007 ; New Zealand , 2007 ; New York ( Brooklyn Academy of Music ) , 2007 , Minneapolis , 2007 , New London Theatre ( West End ) , 2007 – 8 
 The Seagull by Anton Chekhov , ( as Sorin ) , Courtyard Theatre , Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon , 2007 ; New York ( Brooklyn Academy of Music ) , 2007 Minneapolis , 2007 , New London Theatre ( West End ) , 2007 – 8 
 Waiting for Godot by Samuel Beckett , ( as <unk> ) , Theatre Royal Haymarket , London , 2009 and 2010 ; Comedy Theatre , Melbourne , Australia , 2010 and Fugard Theatre , Cape Town , South Africa , 2010 
 The Syndicate by Eduardo De Filippo , Chichester Festival , 2011 
 No Man 's Land and Waiting for Godot ( double bill ) , Broadway , 2013 – 2014 
 Letters Live , Freemasons Hall , 2015 
 No Man 's Land , Wyndham 's , London , 2016 
 = = = Filmography , awards and nominations = = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 In 1987 , McKellen appeared reciting Shakespeare while the Super Rock group The <unk> improvised behind him on Andy Warhol 's Fifteen Minutes which ran on MTV . 
 Vampire in the music video " Heart " by Pet Shop Boys 
 The man who 's " falling out of reach " in the music video " Falling Out of Reach " by <unk> 
 Appears on the Scissor Sisters track " Invisible Light " from their 2010 album " Night Work " , reciting a passage regarding the " Invisible Light " of the title . 
 Appeared as himself alongside George Ezra in the latter 's music video for " Listen to the Man " . Whilst Ezra is singing his song , McKellen joins in and lip @-@ syncs Ezra 's voice . 
 = = = Audiobooks = = = 
 Audiobook narrator of Michelle <unk> 's series Wolf Brother , Spirit Walker , Soul Eater , Outcast , Oath Breaker , and Ghost Hunter , as well as a version of Homer 's The Odyssey . 
 = = = Other work = = = 
 A friend of Ian Charleson and an admirer of his work , McKellen contributed an entire chapter to For Ian Charleson : A Tribute . A recording of McKellen 's voice is heard before performances at the Royal Festival Hall , reminding patrons to ensure their mobile phones and watch alarms are switched off and to keep coughing to a minimum . He also took part in the 2012 Summer Paralympics opening ceremony as Prospero . 
 = Denise Phua = 
 Denise Phua Lay Peng ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> , born 9 December 1959 ) is a Singaporean politician and disability rights activist . After a successful corporate career spanning two decades , she became the president of the Autism Resource Centre ( Singapore ) and co @-@ founded Pathlight School . She is currently a member of parliament ( MP ) representing the ruling People 's Action Party ( PAP ) in Moulmein @-@ Kallang GRC . She was previously a MP representing Jalan Besar GRC from 6 May 2006 to 18 April 2011 . As a MP , she has focused on developing programmes for the disabled and special needs communities in Singapore . 
 = = Early years and corporate career = = 
 Phua studied at Balestier Girls ' Primary School , Raffles Girls ' School and Hwa Chong Junior College . She graduated from the National University of Singapore with a Bachelor of Arts degree in English and earned a Master of Business Administration degree from Golden Gate University . In a career spanning two decades , she held management positions at Hewlett @-@ Packard and the <unk> Group . She then founded a regional leadership training firm , the Centre of Effective Leadership . 
 = = Volunteer work = = 
 Her son was diagnosed with autism at the age of three . As Phua consulted professionals and did research on how to help him , she thought about how she could help other autistic children . She subsequently founded <unk> , a charity which helps caregivers of autistic people and offers early intervention programmes for autistic preschoolers . 
 In 2005 , Phua left the corporate world to be a full @-@ time special needs volunteer . She and her partners sold the Centre of Effective Leadership to Right Management , a Manpower Inc. subsidiary . Phua then became president of the Autism Resource Centre . She often wrote to newspapers and government agencies on issues affecting the special needs community . 
 Phua was co @-@ founder and former acting principal of Pathlight School , the first special school for autistic children in Singapore . The school offers mainstream curriculum and life skills education to its students . A believer in helping autistic people realise their potential and integrate into society , Phua helped develop many of the school 's programmes . These include employability skills training through a student @-@ run café , specialised vocational training , and satellite classes where Pathlight students mix with mainstream students . In four years , enrolment increased tenfold and the school attracted media attention for its impact on students . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Phua joined the ruling PAP 's Jalan Besar branch in 2004 . The following year , she was appointed to the Feedback Supervisory Panel , which leads the government 's Feedback Unit . In the 2006 general election , she was fielded as a PAP candidate in Jalan Besar GRC , which was contested by the Singapore Democratic Alliance . During the election campaign , she promised to make Singapore a more inclusive society by representing the disabled and special needs communities . The PAP team won Jalan Besar GRC with 69 @.@ 26 % of the vote . 
 In July 2006 , the PAP formed a workgroup , headed by Phua , to explore initiatives to improve the financial security of disabled and special needs children . Phua also led a committee that drew up a five @-@ year plan to improve services for special needs children . The PAP studied their proposals and later implemented some , such as a National non @-@ profit Special Needs Trust Fund . Laws were also drafted to prohibit abuse of the mentally disabled and to allow parents to appoint someone to look after their special needs children after they die . 
 Phua criticised the PAP 's " many helping hands " approach , where social services are provided by charities and overseen by the PAP . She said that special education should be led by the Ministry of Education ( MOE ) , as it had more resources and expertise . Minister for Community Development , Youth and Sports Vivian Balakrishnan defended the policy , arguing that it reduced bureaucracy and left jobs to the right people . However , the MOE agreed to play a more active role in special education , with increased funding and teacher training . The MOE also introduced more satellite classes in mainstream schools and helped special schools set targets for learning outcomes , such as O @-@ Level passes . In 2014 Phua also spoke out during the second reading of the Remote Gambling Bill , calling for a complete ban on remote gambling . 
 In April 2016 , Phua caused widespread controversy when , during a debate on the Ministry of Home Affairs ' budget in Parliament , she suggested the installation of fences at communal areas in Little India , like playgrounds , to prevent the congregation of foreign workers there and to allow residents to use the facilities away from them . " Congregations of such high density are walking time @-@ bombs and public disorder incidents waiting to happen , " she remarked . She apologised two days later . 
 = School District 53 Okanagan Similkameen = 
 School District 53 Okanagan Similkameen is a school district that serves fragments of the southern Okanagan and lower Similkameen regions , which include Cawston , Hedley , <unk> , Okanagan Falls , Oliver , and Osoyoos , totaling to six communities in the district , all of which are in British Columbia , Canada . Its main " maintenance department " office is held in Oliver , consisting of ten schools , five of which are elementary , three are high or secondary schools , while two are alternative schools . This district 's superintendent is Beverly Young , while 2 @,@ 665 students attend schools in it ; there are 480 employees for the Okanagan <unk> school district . Their motto is " Learning Today for Living Tomorrow " , and all places within the district are towns or villages . 
 In addition to the conventional school programs , School District 53 offers three adult learning outlets , an outreach school , three early learning centres , as well as one elementary hockey academy ; the district supports Aboriginal people . It provides a school bus transportation service , in order for children to get to their school and home , being responsible to the Director of Facilities . This bus service has been considered for expansion . School District 53 maintains a policy on emergency , which was amended on April 30 , 2008 . There is also a " smoke @-@ free " policy that was amended on September 26 , 2007 . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 School District 53 Okanagan Similkameen consists of ten schools , five of which are elementary , three are high or secondary schools , while two are alternative schools , within a total of six communities in British Columbia , Canada , in fragments of the southern Okanagan and lower Similkameen regions . The schools of the latter region include Cawston Primary School — held in the town of Cawston — whose principal is Linda Thiel , who also served as a principal for the Hedley Elementary School — held in the Hedley town — before its closure in January 2008 , after the Okanagan <unk> district voted four to two to close the school . 
 Both schools held students from grades from Kindergarten to Grade 4 . The village of <unk> is home to Similkameen Elementary Secondary School , which holds students from Grades 5 to 12 , with the principal being Marcus <unk> . In addition to the schools of the lower Similkameen , the southern Okanagan holds seven of the ten schools part of the district , as well as its main " maintenance department " office , which is held in the town of Oliver . All schools in the district which are part of the Okanagan region maintain the same format : elementary schools have children from Kindergarten to Grade 8 , while secondary schools consist of pupils from Grade 8 to 12 . This includes Okanagan Falls Elementary School , which is held in the Okanagan Falls town , with Lisa McCall serving as the school 's principal . 
 The Osoyoos town is home to Osoyoos Elementary School — whose principal is David Foster — and Osoyoos Secondary School , which is principled by G. Heinrichs . Since 2001 , British Columbia has invested over 4 @.@ 8 Canadian million dollars on replacing Osoyoos Elementary School , as well as Okanagan Falls Elementary School . It offers the Okanagan Similkameen Learning Centre , which consists of students from Grades 8 to 12 ; the principal of the learning centre is B. Hansen . Its neighboring town , Oliver , is home to , as of September 2011 , Oliver Elementary School and Tuc @-@ el @-@ Nuit Elementary School — the former 's principal is Mike <unk> , while the latter 's is D. Foster . 
 The community also had a secondary school , named Southern Okanagan Secondary School , until it was burnt by a fire in September 2011 , during the school 's multi @-@ million dollar renovation project . The Royal Canadian Mounted Police 's ( RCMP ) investigation found no conclusion . The Government of British Columbia are contributing to the school 's rebuilding ; its construction began in spring 2012 , being slated for completion in 2013 . 
 In addition to the conventional school programs , School District 53 offers three adult learning outlets , an outreach school , three early learning centres , as well as one elementary hockey academy . It also works with a number of Aboriginal people , having signed an enhancement agreement to improve academic achievement of them . 2 @,@ 665 students attend schools in this district , whose superintendent is Beverley Young . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 1 @,@ 303 of those 2 @,@ 665 students within the district attend elementary schools , while 1 @,@ 202 attend secondary schools ; 102 are adult education students . School District 53 contains 480 employees , and its motto is " Learning Today for Living Tomorrow " . While its board chair is <unk> Tarr , its secretary treasurer is Lynda <unk> and its MLA is John Slater . The district has five trustees . It provides a school bus transportation service , in order to get children to their school and home , being responsible to the Director of Facilities . The bus service has been considered for expansion . 
 The British Columbia province gives funds to the school district , so that it can maintain their schools correctly . The amount given is based on the number of kids that are enrolled for the year . Further money is often left over by the end of the year . <unk> BC , an " early learning initiatives " program , operates at three schools within the district , Okanagan Falls Elementary School , Oliver Elementary School , Cawston Primary School , and Osoyoos Elementary School . The district 's boundaries include three First Nations Bands : the Osoyoos Indian Band and the upper and lower Similkameen Bands , all of which are Indian governments . 
 An emergency — a " sudden " , " unexpected " occurrence that requires action for a situation — at schools within the district 53 scope can result in school or bus transportation facilities . This district 's policy on emergency was amended on April 30 , 2008 , which includes fire , threats or facilities , violence , school bus accident , serve weather , earthquake , hazardous spills , accidents , explosions , or floods . The policy was amended because the district recognizes the importance of emergencies , specifically during school 's session , that could be both natural and human , hence why it necessitates to develop plans for emergencies . It also maintains a " smoke @-@ free " policy , meaning that it is prohibited to smoke in a district 53 area . This rule was amended on September 26 , 2007 . 
 = It 's Better If You Don 't Understand = 
 It 's Better If You Don 't Understand is the first extended play ( EP ) and debut release recorded by American singer @-@ songwriter and music producer Bruno Mars . Its title comes from the final lyrics of one of its songs , " The Other Side " . The EP consists of four tracks and incorporates pop , pop rock , and rap music genres . The record was made available for digital download on May 11 , 2010 through Elektra Records in the United States , and on August 11 , 2010 through Atlantic Records in France . The song " Count on Me " was not featured on the track list of the latter release . To promote the album , Mars released a home video for the recording " The Other Side " . All of the material on the EP was produced by The Smeezingtons members Mars , Philip Lawrence and Ari Levine , with the closing track being co @-@ produced by Jeff Bhasker . 
 It 's Better If You Don 't Understand received generally rave reviews from music critics – AllMusic 's David <unk> praised the album as showcasing Mars ' songwriting abilities and a genre that " leans towards " pop , while About.com 's Bill Lamb viewed the EP positively as " music that should be on your radio " , calling it a " pop pleasure " . All of the songs from It 's Better If You Don 't Understand were later included on Mars ' debut studio album , Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans ( 2010 ) , and , with the exception of " Somewhere in Brooklyn " , were performed on the tour of the same name . The EP peaked at number 99 on the Billboard 200 in the United States , and at number 97 on the UK Albums Chart . As of 2011 , it has sold 27 @,@ 000 copies in the US . " The Other Side " peaked on the UK Singles Charts at number 117 . In an interview , with Los Angeles Times , Mars ' admitted he regrets to have " wasted " the title of this record . 
 = = Background = = 
 In an interview with Rap @-@ Up , Mars explained that the song " Somewhere in Brooklyn " is dedicated to his father who is from Brooklyn , adding that : " everyone can agree that New York is a special place " . Lyrically , a girl is the subject of Mars ' attention . After they met briefly , he tries to find her again somewhere in Brooklyn . 
 Ari Levine talked in an interview with Sound on Sound about producing some of Mars ' songs . " The Other Side " , whose production was re @-@ arranged , was intended for somebody else , and several people wrote parts of the track . Concerning the lyrics ' concept Mars said that they describe : " the lifestyle you end up living as an artist " . He also explained that the title of the record came from the final lyrics of one of its songs , " The Other Side " . 
 In the same interview , Levine explained that " Talking to the Moon " took a long time to record , while he , Mars , and Lawrence decided which drums to use . As a result , the song was arranged and produced " in four different ways " . When the team started composing the track , they " only had the first verse and the horns " . However their gut told them they were onto something . At one point the team : " had three different bridges and [ they ] spent a lot of time trying to find out which one was the best " . Jeff Bhasker also collaborated on the track 's composition . " Talking to the Moon " was the first song written for Mars ' debut release once the three of them finished working with other artists and focused on the EP . 
 = = Composition = = 
 It 's Better If You Don 't Understand is composed of four songs employing pop , pop rock , and rap genres . Mars explained that the EP is hard to classify since : " I just write songs that I strongly believe in and that are coming from inside . There 's no tricks . It 's honesty with big melodies . And I 'm singing the s * * * out of them " . A romantic soft and smooth recording , the opening track , " Somewhere in Brooklyn " , was composed by The Smeezingtons . It features " an emo @-@ pop backing " beat , " electronic pops and bleeps " , a piano and synthesizers . Lyrically , the tune is about Mars chasing the " perfect woman " who got away , and wishing to find her again . Mars ' vocals have been highly praised in this track . The second release , " The Other Side " , features a vocal collaboration with Cee Lo Green and B.o.B. , and is considered the best on the EP by several critics . The track has been described as incorporating 60 's and 70 's soulful feeling . Its instrumentation uses guitar , organ and a : " drum and bass pace that slowly builds through the verse and into the chorus " . It is reminiscent of compositions by Daniel Merriweather and Chris Isaak ’ s " Wicked Game " . " The Other Side " addresses the " excitement of courting " sung in a falsetto voice . 
 The two final tracks were described as " bittersweet ballads " , with the third being called a " slow burner " . " Count On Me " draws from the works of Jason Mraz and David Cook , featuring a laid back groove , tropical vibes , " Elvis @-@ esque adlibs at the beginning " and Mars " roots in Hawaii " . Pardalis of 411mania.com found its hook " simple but effective " . The vocals were described as powerful , " yet pleasant " . It conveys the message of comfort found in a friend and shows Mars ' " soft side " . The closing track , " Talking to the Moon " , was described as a pop song with power ballad influences . It was met with mixed reviews , with some reviewers calling it " the weakest because the heavy production threatens to overwhelm Mars ' singing " , and others feeling that " the song just gets better " . The recording features a " soft piano " , " layers of synthesizers " , " beautiful vocals " on a chorus with a " phenomenal hook " and " perfect balance " culminating in an " over the top production " . The track 's sentiment has been highly praised , with some saying that " anyone could feel it " . Its lyrics describe Mars trying to reach his " lost former lover " hoping that his words reach their destiny . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 It 's Better If You Don 't Understand was released exclusively for digital download on May 11 , 2010 by Elektra Records in the US , and in France , on August 11 , 2010 by Atlantic Records ; this edition did not feature " Count on Me " on the track list . 
 " The Other Side " was released as the first single from the EP in July 2010 . The song featured guest vocals by Atlanta @-@ based rappers Cee Lo Green and B.o.B. The home video for " The Other Side " was directed by Nick <unk> and Cameron Duddy , and premiered on MTV 's website on August 23 , 2010 . " The Other Side " , " Count on Me " , and " Talking to the Moon " were later included on the standard edition of Mars ' debut studio album , Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans ( 2010 ) . " Somewhere in Brooklyn " was included as a bonus track on the deluxe version of the record . All of the songs were featured on the set list of Mars ' Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans Tour , with the exception of " Somewhere in Brooklyn " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Upon its release , It 's Better If You Don 't Understand received rave reviews from music critics . 411Mania 's Dan Pardalis complimented the EP by calling it " pop music at its finest " , noting the song " Somewhere in Brooklyn " was " good " , describing the other three as " great " . He added that the four tracks tell " one love story " . Pardalis complement not only Mars ' " extraordinary versatility , pop sensibility , and appeal " , but also his talent at creating " memorable vocal melodies and his naturally emotive writing " , easily making a connection with the audience . Bill Lamb of About.com labelled the EP a " pop pleasure " , further praising the record by saying " with justice in the pop music world , this is the music that should be on your radio " , rating It 's Better If You Don 't Understand four and a half out of five stars . Writing for Allmusic , David <unk> called the EP 's four songs a " sparse effort that leans towards pop " and drew attention to " the man ’ s songwriting " . He also deemed the album a " short set of easy , breezy tunes " , which doesn 't necessarily leave people " begging for more , but it will make most pop fans open to the idea " . Harris Decker of the website The Truth About Music also gave the EP a positive review , calling the record " impressive " and Mars " talented " . Nevertheless , he felt the release was " rushed " since it was made : " in order to capitalize on the success of the mainstream singles " . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 It 's Better If You Don 't Understand failed to achieve commercial success . It debuted at number 99 on the Billboard 200 , the week of May 29 , 2010 , where it remained for only one week ; it peaked at number thirteen on the Billboard Digital Albums chart . As of 2011 , it has sold 27 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . It 's Better If You Don 't Understand reached number 97 on the UK Albums Chart on the week of August 28 , 2010 , while " The Other Side " charted on the UK Singles Charts at number 117 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Credits adapted from It 's Better If You Don 't Understand liner notes . 
 ^ a signifies a co @-@ producer 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from It 's Better If You Don 't Understand liner notes and AllMusic . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Invasion of the Bane = 
 " Invasion of the Bane " is the first episode of the British science fiction television series The Sarah Jane Adventures . It was originally broadcast on 1 January 2007 . Since the series was commissioned before the script for the episode was written , it is not a pilot , but a bank holiday special , and serves the introductory functions of a pilot . 
 The episode focuses upon a thirteen @-@ year @-@ old girl , Maria Jackson , discovering the existence of aliens . After discovering that the Bane , creators of a soft drink called Bubble Shock ! , harbour a destructive secret , she teams up with investigative journalist Sarah Jane Smith to prevent their plans . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A thirteen @-@ year @-@ old girl , Maria Jackson ( Yasmin Paige ) , and her recently divorced father Alan ( Joseph Millson ) move into a house opposite journalist and former time @-@ traveller Sarah Jane Smith ( Elisabeth Sladen ) . The night after they have moved in , Maria is woken by an ethereal light emanating from Sarah Jane 's house , which she discovers , to her horrified fascination , to be Sarah Jane conversing with a star poet , or <unk> . 
 The next morning , a neighbour Kelsey Hooper ( Porsha Lawrence <unk> ) visits and welcomes Maria before inviting her into town , using the free " Bubble Shock ! " bus to travel there and tour the factory . Once they arrive at the factory , they are led to a security scanner , which surreptitiously collects their DNA to transfer to an " Archetype " ( Thomas Knight ) under the supervision of the factory 's owner , Mrs Wormwood ( Samantha Bond ) . 
 Sarah Jane , having overheard the girls making plans , follows them to the factory and interviews Mrs Wormwood , and how she was able to get approval for the drink so fast , and why the Bane , an ingredient unique to the drink , was " resisting " analysis , to which she is told that all that Bubble Shock ! is doing is satisfying the needs of the Western world . On Sarah Jane 's way out , she is almost killed by Wormwood 's secretary . 
 Kelsey wanders from the tour and attempts to phone Maria , but disturbs an unknown beast , the Bane Mother , to the annoyance of the staff , to which Wormwood orders the alarms switched off and Sarah Jane killed . Maria attempts to phone Kelsey , but sets off the alarms again , causing the Archetype to escape , transferring the focus upon him . Maria , while escaping , encounters him , who just mimics her , and they escape into a women 's bathroom . Sarah Jane then enters , and although they are surprised to see each other , they manage to escape the factory , albeit without Kelsey . When they arrive back on Bannerman Road , Sarah warns Maria not to get involved as her life is too dangerous . 
 Meanwhile , Kelsey is accosted by the factory guards , which causes her to rant about the treatment she has received . Wormwood subdues her by revealing her true form , and having discovered Kelsey and Sarah Jane live on the same street , uses her PR representative Davey ( Jamie Davis ) to escort her home . Once there , Maria realises upon sight of Kelsey that Davey had discovered Sarah and tries to run into Sarah Jane 's house . Eventually realising their intent , Sarah Jane brings them inside , with Davey , now as a Bane , giving chase . Sarah Jane is able to repel Davey and then , upon discovery of the attic by Kelsey , tells the teenagers about aliens : years ago , she met the Doctor , a man like no other , who took her through time and space . The adventures suddenly ended , but when they met by chance ( in " School Reunion " ) not long ago , they realised they were still fond of each other . Sarah Jane has a brief reunion with K9 , who is in her safe , sealing off a black hole . 
 Once Sarah Jane has analysed that the Bane ingredient was sentient , she activates her computer , Mr Smith - after some shouting by Kelsey - and contacts Wormwood and politely requests that she leaves Earth . Wormwood refuses , and in retaliation takes control of the majority of the human race . Sarah Jane races to the factory , but cannot enter until she drives the bus into a wall . Wormwood reveals the Bane Mother , and explains the Archetype is a conglomerate of human DNA designed to be investigated so that Bubble Shock could be improved . The Archetype uses an alien communicator Sarah Jane had been given , realising that the signal would be strong enough to kill the Bane Mother , and Sarah Jane , Maria , and the Archetype escape as the factory explodes . 
 The following evening , Sarah Jane agrees to adopt the Archetype and agrees with Maria to call him " Luke " , since that was what she wanted to name her child if she ever had one . The episode closes with a monologue by Sarah Jane that while space may be strange , adventures may be had on Earth , if one knows where to look . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 Mrs Wormwood reappears in the series 2 serial Enemy of the Bane . 
 When trying to find a name for Luke , Sarah Jane mentions Harry , referring to Harry Sullivan and Alastair , which is the first name of Brigadier Lethbridge @-@ Stewart before deciding on Luke . 
 = = Outside Reference = = 
 The plot is similar to that of Futurama 's " Fry and the <unk> Factory " with an alien 's bodily fluid being used in a soft drink to take control of humans and the world . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Sladen and Doctor Who = = = 
 Elisabeth Sladen previously played Sarah Jane between 1973 and 1976 . In 1981 , she was offered the role again to ease the transition between the Fourth and Fifth Doctors , which she declined , but agreed to star in the pilot ( and only episode ) for the spin @-@ off series K @-@ 9 and Company , which brought her together with K @-@ 9 , another popular character . After her appearance in The Five Doctors in 1983 , she temporarily stopped acting in order to raise her family , but lent her voice to several Big Finish audio productions . She returned to Doctor Who in the aptly titled Tenth Doctor episode , " School Reunion " . Sladen and Tommy Knight have also appeared as Sarah Jane and Luke Smith in the series 4 finale , " The Stolen Earth " / " Journey 's End " , and in the second and final part of David Tennant 's swan song as the Tenth Doctor , The End of Time . 
 = = = Concept and writing = = = 
 In 2005 , Russell T Davies had envisioned using a previous companion to explore the role and eventual fate of the Doctor 's companions . Sladen was convinced to appear in the second series episode " School Reunion " . Meanwhile , CBBC proposed a spin @-@ off to Davies about a teenage Doctor , which he denied in favour of a spin @-@ off revolving around Sarah Jane . While surprised , Sladen agreed to sign on the project . However , the rights for K @-@ 9 to appear in the series were not secured . To explain the non @-@ appearance of K @-@ 9 , the production team gave him a cameo fixing a black hole inadvertently created in Switzerland . 
 The episode was written by Davies and Gareth Roberts . Roberts drew from several outside sources several parts of the plot , for example the allusion to the star of Wormwood from the Book of Revelation . Roberts also used the name of a beverage called " <unk> " in his novel The Highest Science for inspiration for Bubble Shock ! . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 The first scene of " Invasion of the Bane " to be shown was on 8 December 2006 , during a BBC Breakfast interview with Sladen , and was released a day later on the interactive advent calendar on the Doctor Who microsite . The clip , lasting one minute in length , was of Sarah Jane 's interview with Mrs Wormwood . 
 The episode 's airing on BBC1 gathered 2 @.@ 9 million viewers , 15 % of the audience share , of which 20 % were under 16 . While the film Chitty Chitty Bang Bang , which aired against " Invasion of the Bane " on ITV1 , had a higher overall reach , " Invasion of the Bane " had a slightly higher number of viewers head @-@ to @-@ head . The episode 's audience Appreciation Index was 77 , the average score for an episode of a drama programme . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 This was the first of eleven Sarah Jane Adventures serials to be adapted as a novel . Written by Terrance Dicks , the book was first published in Paperback on 1 November 2007 . 
 = William Morris = 
 William Morris ( 24 March 1834 – 3 October 1896 ) was an English textile designer , poet , novelist , translator , and socialist activist . Associated with the British Arts and Crafts Movement , he was a major contributor to the revival of traditional British textile arts and methods of production . His literary contributions helped to establish the modern fantasy genre , while he played a significant role in propagating the early socialist movement in Britain . 
 Born in Walthamstow , Essex , to a wealthy middle @-@ class family , Morris came under the strong influence of medievalism while studying Classics at Oxford University , there joining the Birmingham Set . After university he trained as an architect , married Jane Burden , and developed close friendships with the Pre @-@ Raphaelite artists Edward Burne @-@ Jones and Dante Gabriel Rossetti and with the Neo @-@ Gothic architect Philip Webb . Webb and Morris designed a family home , Red House , then in Kent , where the latter lived from 1859 to 1865 , before moving to Bloomsbury , central London . In 1861 , Morris founded a decorative arts firm with Burne @-@ Jones , Rossetti , Webb , and others : the Morris , Marshall , Faulkner & Co . Becoming highly fashionable and much in demand , the firm profoundly influenced interior decoration throughout the Victorian period , with Morris designing tapestries , wallpaper , fabrics , furniture , and stained glass windows . In 1875 , Morris assumed total control of the company , which was renamed Morris & Co . 
 Although retaining a main home in London , from 1871 Morris rented the rural retreat of Kelmscott Manor , Oxfordshire . Greatly influenced by visits to Iceland , with Eiríkr Magnússon he produced a series of English @-@ language translations of Icelandic Sagas . He also achieved success with the publication of his epic poems and novels , namely The Earthly Paradise ( 1868 – 1870 ) , A Dream of John Ball ( 1888 ) , the utopian News from Nowhere ( 1890 ) , and the fantasy romance The Well at the World 's End ( 1896 ) . In 1877 he founded the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings to campaign against the damage caused by architectural restoration . Embracing Marxism and influenced by anarchism , in the 1880s Morris became a committed revolutionary socialist activist ; after an involvement in the Social Democratic Federation ( SDF ) , he founded the Socialist League in 1884 , but broke with that organization in 1890 . In 1891 he founded the Kelmscott Press to publish limited @-@ edition , illuminated @-@ style print books , a cause to which he devoted his final years . 
 Morris is recognised as one of the most significant cultural figures of Victorian Britain ; though best known in his lifetime as a poet , he posthumously became better known for his designs . Founded in 1955 , the William Morris Society is devoted to his legacy , while multiple biographies and studies of his work have seen publication . Many of the buildings associated with his life are open to visitors , much of his work can be found in art galleries and museums , and his designs are still in production . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Youth : 1834 – 52 = = = 
 Morris was born at Elm House in Walthamstow , Essex , on 24 March 1834 . Raised into a wealthy middle @-@ class family , he was named after his father , a financier who worked as a partner in the Sanderson & Co. firm , bill brokers in the City of London . His mother was Emma Morris ( née Shelton ) , who descended from a wealthy bourgeois family from Worcester . Morris was the third of his parents ' surviving children ; their first child , Charles , had been born in 1827 but died four days later . Charles had been followed by the birth of two girls , Emma in 1829 and Henrietta in 1833 , before William 's birth . These children were followed by the birth of siblings Stanley in 1837 , Rendall in 1839 , Arthur in 1840 , Isabella in 1842 , Edgar in 1844 , and Alice in 1846 . The Morris family were followers of the evangelical Protestant form of Christianity , and William was baptised four months after his birth at St. Mary 's Church , Walthamstow . 
 As a child , Morris was kept largely housebound at Elm House by his mother ; there , he spent much time reading , favouring the novels of Walter Scott . Aged 6 , Morris moved with his family to the Georgian Italianate mansion at Woodford Hall , Woodford , Essex , which was surrounded by 50 acres of land adjacent to Epping Forest . He took an interest in fishing with his brothers as well as gardening in the Hall 's grounds , and spent much time exploring the Forest , where he was fascinated both by the Iron Age earthworks at Loughton Camp and <unk> Banks and by the Early Modern Hunting Lodge at Chingford . He also took rides through the Essex countryside on his pony , and visited the various churches and cathedrals throughout the country , marveling at their architecture . His father took him on visits outside of the county , for instance to Canterbury Cathedral , the Chiswick Horticultural Gardens , and to the Isle of Wight , where he adored <unk> Chine . Aged 9 , he was then sent to Misses Arundale 's Academy for Young Gentlemen , a nearby preparatory school ; although initially riding there by pony each day , he later began boarding , intensely disliking the experience . 
 In 1847 , Morris 's father died unexpectedly . From this point , the family relied upon continued income from the copper mines at Devon Great Consols , and sold Woodford Hall to move into the smaller Water House . In February 1848 Morris began his studies at Marlborough College in Marlborough , Wiltshire , where he gained a reputation as an eccentric nicknamed " Crab " . He despised his time there , being bullied , bored , and homesick . He did use the opportunity to visit many of the prehistoric sites of Wiltshire , such as Avebury and Silbury Hill , which fascinated him . The school was Anglican in faith and in March 1849 Morris was confirmed by the Bishop of Salisbury in the college chapel , developing an enthusiastic attraction towards the Anglo @-@ Catholic movement and its Romanticist aesthetic . At Christmas 1851 , Morris was removed from the school and returned to Water House , where he was privately tutored by the Reverend Frederick B. Guy , Assistant Master at the nearby Forest School . 
 = = = Oxford and the Birmingham Set : 1852 – 56 = = = 
 In June 1852 Morris entered Oxford University 's Exeter College , although since the college was full , he only went into residence in January 1853 . He disliked the college and was bored by the manner in which they taught him Classics . Instead he developed a keen interest in Medieval history and Medieval architecture , inspired by the many Medieval buildings in Oxford . This interest was tied to Britain 's growing Medievalist movement , a form of Romanticism that rejected many of the values of Victorian industrial capitalism . For Morris , the Middle Ages represented an era with strong chivalric values and an organic , pre @-@ capitalist sense of community , both of which he deemed preferable to his own period . This attitude was compounded by his reading of Thomas Carlyle 's book Past and Present ( 1843 ) , in which Carlyle championed Medieval values as a corrective to the problems of Victorian society . Under this influence , Morris 's dislike of contemporary capitalism grew , and he came to be influenced by the work of Christian socialists Charles Kingsley and Frederick Denison Maurice . 
 At the college , Morris met fellow first @-@ year undergraduate Edward Burne @-@ Jones , who became his lifelong friend and collaborator . Although from very different backgrounds , they found that they had a shared attitude to life , both being keenly interested in Anglo @-@ Catholicism and <unk> . Through Burne @-@ Jones , Morris joined a group of undergraduates from Birmingham who were studying at Pembroke College : William Fulford , Richard Watson Dixon , Charles Faulkner , and <unk> Price . They were known among themselves as the " Brotherhood " and to historians as the Birmingham Set . Morris was the most affluent member of the Set , and was generous with his wealth toward the others . Like Morris , the Set were fans of the poet Alfred , Lord Tennyson , and would meet together to recite the plays of William Shakespeare . 
 Morris was heavily influenced by the writings of the art critic John Ruskin , being particularly inspired by his chapter " On the Nature of Gothic Architecture " in the second volume of The Stones of Venice ; he later described it as " one of the very few necessary and inevitable utterances of the century " . Morris adopted Ruskin 's philosophy of rejecting the tawdry industrial manufacture of decorative arts and architecture in favour of a return to hand @-@ craftsmanship , raising artisans to the status of artists , creating art that should be affordable and hand @-@ made , with no hierarchy of artistic mediums . Ruskin had achieved attention in Victorian society for championing the art of a group of painters who had emerged in London in 1848 calling themselves the Pre @-@ Raphaelite Brotherhood . The Pre @-@ Raphaelite style was heavily Medievalist and Romanticist , emphasising abundant detail , intense colours and complex compositions ; it greatly impressed Morris and the Set . Influenced both by Ruskin and by John Keats , Morris began to spend more time writing poetry , in a style that was imitative of much of theirs . 
 Both he and Burne @-@ Jones were influenced by the Romanticist milieu and the Anglo @-@ Catholic movement , and decided to become clergymen in order to found a monastery where they could live a life of chastity and dedication to artistic pursuit , akin to that of the contemporary Nazarene movement . However , as time went on Morris became increasingly critical of Anglican doctrine and the idea faded . In summer 1854 , Morris travelled to Belgium to look at Medieval paintings , and in July 1855 went with Burne @-@ Jones and Fulford across northern France , visiting Medieval churches and cathedrals . It was on this trip that he and Burne @-@ Jones committed themselves to " a life of art " . For Morris , this decision resulted in a strained relationship with his family , who believed that he should have entered either commerce or the clergy . On a subsequent visit to Birmingham , Morris discovered Thomas Malory 's Le Morte d 'Arthur , which became a core Arthurian text for him and Burne @-@ Jones . In January 1856 , the Set began publication of The Oxford and Cambridge Magazine , designed to contain " mainly Tales , Poetry , friendly critiques and social articles " . Mainly funded by Morris , who briefly served as editor and heavily contributed to it with his own stories , poems , reviews and articles , the magazine lasted for twelve issues , and garnered praise from Tennyson and Ruskin . 
 = = = Apprenticeship , the Pre @-@ Raphaelites , and marriage : 1856 – 59 = = = 
 Having passed his finals and been awarded a BA , Morris began an apprenticeship with the Oxford @-@ based Neo @-@ Gothic architect George Edmund Street in January 1856 . His apprenticeship focused on architectural drawing , and there he was placed under the supervision of the young architect Philip Webb , who became a close friend . Morris soon relocated to Street 's London office , in August 1856 moving into a flat in Bloomsbury , Central London with Burne @-@ Jones , an area perhaps chosen for its avant @-@ garde associations . Morris was fascinated by London but dismayed at its pollution and rapid expansion into neighbouring countryside , describing it as " the spreading sore " . 
 Morris became increasingly fascinated with the idyllic Medievalist depictions of rural life which appeared in the paintings of the Pre @-@ Raphaelites , and spent large sums of money purchasing such artworks . Burne @-@ Jones shared this interest , but took it further by becoming an apprentice to one of the foremost Pre @-@ Raphaelite painters , Dante Gabriel Rossetti ; the three soon became close friends . Through Rossetti , Morris came to associate with poet Robert Browning , and the artists Arthur Hughes , Thomas Woolner , and Ford Madox Brown . Tired of architecture , Morris abandoned his apprenticeship , with Rossetti persuading him to take up painting instead , which he chose to do in the Pre @-@ Raphaelite style . Morris aided Rossetti and Burne @-@ Jones in painting the Arthurian murals at Oxford Union , although his contributions were widely deemed inferior and unskilled compared to those of the others . At Rossetti 's recommendation , Morris and Burne @-@ Jones moved in together to the flat at Bloomsbury 's No. 17 Red Lion Square by November 1856 . Morris designed and commissioned furniture for the flat in a Medieval style , much of which he painted with Arthurian scenes in a direct rejection of mainstream artistic tastes . 
 Morris also continued writing poetry and began designing illuminated manuscripts and embroidered hangings . In March 1857 , Bell and Dandy published a book of Morris 's poems , The Defence of Guenevere , which was largely self @-@ funded by the author himself . It did not sell well and garnered few reviews , most of which were unsympathetic . <unk> , Morris would not publish again for a further eight years . In October 1857 Morris met Jane Burden , a woman from a poor working @-@ class background , at a theatre performance and asked her to model for him . Smitten with her , they entered into a relationship and were engaged in spring 1858 ; Burden would later admit however that she never loved Morris . They were married in a low @-@ key ceremony held at St Michael at the North Gate church in Oxford on 26 April 1859 , before honeymooning in Bruges , Belgium , and settling temporarily at 41 Great Ormond Street , London . 
 = = Career and fame = = 
 = = = Red House and the Firm : 1859 – 65 = = = 
 Morris desired a new home for himself and his wife , resulting in the construction of the Red House in the Kentish hamlet of Upton near Bexleyheath , ten miles from central London . The building 's design was a co @-@ operative effort , with Morris focusing on the interiors and the exterior being designed by Webb , for whom the House represented his first commission as an independent architect . Named after the red bricks and red tiles from which it was constructed , Red House rejected architectural norms by being L @-@ shaped . Influenced by various forms of contemporary Neo @-@ Gothic architecture , the House was nevertheless unique , with Morris describing it as " very mediaeval in spirit " . Situated within an orchard , the house and garden were intricately linked in their design . It took a year to construct , and cost Morris £ 4000 at a time when his fortune was greatly reduced by a dramatic fall in the price of his shares . Burne @-@ Jones described it as " the <unk> place on Earth . " 
 After construction , Morris invited friends to visit , most notably Burne @-@ Jones and his wife Georgiana , as well as Rossetti and his wife Lizzie <unk> . They aided him in painting murals on the furniture , walls , and ceilings , much of it based on Arthurian tales , the Trojan War , and Geoffrey Chaucer 's stories , while he also designed floral embroideries for the rooms . They also spent much time playing tricks on each other , enjoying games like hide and seek , and singing while accompanied by the piano . Siddall stayed at the House during summer and autumn 1861 as she recovered from a traumatic miscarriage and an addiction to laudanum ; she would die of an overdose in February 1862 . 
 In April 1861 , Morris founded a decorative arts company , Morris , Marshall , Faulkner & Co . , with six other partners : Burne @-@ Jones , Rossetti , Webb , Ford Madox Brown , Charles Faulkner , and Peter Paul Marshall . Operating from premises at No. 6 Red Lion Square , they referred to themselves as " the Firm " and were intent on adopting Ruskin 's ideas of reforming British attitudes to production . They hoped to reinstate decoration as one of the fine arts and adopted an ethos of affordability and anti @-@ elitism . For additional staff , they employed boys from the Industrial Home for Destitute Boys in Euston , central London , many of whom were trained as apprentices . 
 Although working within the Neo @-@ Gothic school of design , they differed from Neo @-@ Gothic architects like Gilbert Scott who simply included certain Gothic features on modern styles of building ; instead they sought to return completely to Medieval Gothic methods of craftmanship . The products created by the Firm included furniture , architectural carving , metalwork , stained glass windows , and murals . Their stained glass windows proved a particular success in the firm 's early years as they were in high demand for the surge in the Neo @-@ Gothic construction and refurbishment of churches , many of which were commissioned by the architect George Frederick Bodley . Despite Morris 's anti @-@ elitist ethos , the Firm soon became increasingly popular and fashionable with the bourgeoisie , particularly following their exhibit at the 1862 International Exhibition in South Kensington , where they received press attention and medals of commendation . However , they faced much opposition from established design companies , particularly those belonging to the Neo @-@ Classical school . 
 Morris was slowly abandoning painting , recognising that his work lacked a sense of movement ; none of his paintings are dated later than 1862 . Instead he focused his energies on designing wallpaper patterns , the first being " Trellis " , designed in 1862 . His designs would be produced from 1864 by Jeffrey and Co. of Islington , who created them for the Firm under Morris 's supervision . Morris also retained an active interest in various groups , joining the Hogarth Club , the Mediaeval Society , and the Corps of Artist Volunteers , the latter being in contrast to his later pacifism . 
 Meanwhile , Morris 's family continued to grow . In January 1861 , Morris and Janey 's first daughter was born : named Jane Alice Morris , she was commonly known as " Jenny " . Jenny was followed in March 1862 by the birth of their second daughter , Mary " May " Morris . Morris was a caring father to his daughters , and years later they both recounted having idyllic childhoods . However , there were problems in Morris 's marriage as Janey became increasingly close to Rossetti , who often painted her . It is unknown if their affair was ever sexual , although by this point other members of the group were noticing Rossetti and Janey 's closeness . 
 Imagining the creation of an artistic community at Upton , Morris helped develop plans for a second house to be constructed adjacent to Red House in which Burne @-@ Jones could live with his family ; the plans were abandoned when Burne @-@ Jones ' son Philip died from scarlet fever . By 1864 , Morris had become increasingly tired of life at Red House , being particularly unhappy with the 3 to 4 hours spent commuting to his London workplace on a daily basis . He sold Red House , and in autumn 1865 moved with his family to No. 26 Queen Square in Bloomsbury , the same building that the Firm moved its base of operations to earlier in the summer . 
 = = = Queen Square and The Earthly Paradise : 1865 – 70 = = = 
 At Queen Square , the Morris family lived in a flat directly above the Firm 's shop . They were joined by Janey 's sister Bessie Burton and a number of household servants . Meanwhile , changes were afoot at the Firm as Faulkner left , and to replace him they employed a business manager , Warrington Taylor , who would remain with them till 1866 . Taylor pulled the Firm 's finances into order and spent much time controlling Morris and ensuring that he worked to schedule . During these years the Firm carried out a number of high @-@ profile designs ; from September 1866 to January 1867 , they redecorated the Armoury and Tapestry Room in St. James ' Palace , in the latter year also designing the Green Dining Room at the South Kensington Museum ( it is now the Morris Room at the Victoria and Albert Museum ) . The Firm 's work received increasing interest from people in the United States , resulting in Morris 's acquaintance with Henry James and Charles Eliot Norton . However , despite its success , the Firm was not turning over a large net profit , and this , coupled with the decreasing value of Morris ' stocks , meant that he had to decrease his spending . 
 Janey 's relationship with Rossetti had continued , and by the late 1860s gossip regarding their affair had spread about London , where they were regularly seen spending time together . Morris biographer Fiona MacCarthy argued that it was likely that Morris had learned of and accepted the existence of their affair by 1870 . In this year he developed an affectionate friendship with Aglaia <unk> , the daughter of wealthy Greek refugees , although there is no evidence that they had an affair . Meanwhile , Morris 's relationship with his mother had improved , and he would regularly take his wife and children to visit her at her house in Leyton . He also went on various holidays ; in the summer of 1866 he , Webb , and Taylor toured the churches of northern France . 
 In August 1866 Morris joined the Burne @-@ Jones family on their holiday in Lymington , while in August 1867 both families holidayed together in Oxford . In August 1867 the Morrises holidayed in Southwold , Suffolk , while in the summer of 1869 Morris took his wife to Bad Ems in Rhineland @-@ Palatinate , central Germany , where it was hoped that the local health waters would aid her ailments . While there , he enjoyed walks in the countryside and focused on writing poetry . 
 Morris had continued to devote much time to writing poetry . In 1867 Bell and Dandy published Morris 's epic poem , The Life and Death of Jason , at his own expense . The book was a retelling of the ancient Greek myth of the hero Jason and his quest to find the Golden Fleece . In contrast to Morris 's former publication , The Life and Death of Jason was well received , resulting in the publishers paying Morris a fee for the second edition . From 1865 to 1870 , Morris worked on another epic poem , The Earthly Paradise . Designed as a homage to Chaucer , it consisted of 24 stories , adopted from an array of different cultures , and each by a different narrator ; set in the late 14th century , the synopsis revolved around a group of Norsemen who flee the Black Death by sailing away from Europe , on the way discovering an island where the inhabitants continue to venerate the ancient Greek gods . Published in four parts by F. S. Ellis , it soon gained a cult following and established Morris ' reputation as a major poet . 
 = = = Kelmscott Manor and Iceland : 1870 – 75 = = = 
 By 1870 , Morris had become a public figure in Britain , resulting in repeated press requests for photographs , which he despised . That year , he also reluctantly agreed to sit for a portrait by establishment painter George Frederic Watts . Morris was keenly interested in Icelandic literature , having befriended the Icelandic theologian Eiríkr Magnússon . Together they produced prose translations of the Eddas and Sagas for publication in English . Morris also developed a keen interest in creating hand @-@ written illuminated manuscripts , producing 18 such books between 1870 and 1875 , the first of which was A Book of Verse , completed as a birthday present for Georgina Burne @-@ Jones . 12 of these 18 were handwritten copies of Nordic tales such as Halfdan the Black , Frithiof the Bold , and The Dwellers of <unk> . Morris deemed calligraphy to be an art form , and taught himself both Roman and italic script , as well as learning how to produce gilded letters . In November 1872 he published Love is Enough , a poetic drama based on a story in the Medieval Welsh text , the Mabinogion . Illustrated with Burne @-@ Jones woodcuts , it was not a popular success . By 1871 , he had begun work on a novel set in the present , The Novel on Blue Paper , which was about a love triangle ; it would remain unfinished and Morris later asserted that it was not well written . 
 By early summer 1871 , Morris began to search for a house outside London where his children could spend time away from the city 's pollution . He settled on Kelmscott Manor in the village of Kelmscott , Oxfordshire , obtaining a joint tenancy on the building with Rossetti in June . Morris adored the building , which was constructed circa 1570 , and would spend much time in the local countryside . Conversely , Rossetti would be unhappy at Kelmscott , and eventually suffered a mental breakdown . Morris divided his time between London and Kelmscott , however when Rossetti was there he would not spend more than three days at a time at the latter . He was also fed up with his family home in Queen Square , deciding to obtain a new house in London . Although retaining a personal bedroom and study at Queen Square , he relocated his family to <unk> House in Turnham Green Road , West London , in January 1873 . This allowed him to be far closer to the home of Burne @-@ Jones , with the duo meeting on almost every Sunday morning for the rest of Morris ' life . 
 Leaving Jane and his children with Rossetti at Kelmscott , in July 1871 Morris left for Iceland with Faulkner , W.H. Evans , and Magnússon . Sailing from the Scottish port of Granton aboard a Danish mail boat , they proceeded to the island via Tórshavn in the Faroe Islands before arriving at Reykjavik , where they disembarked . There they met the President of the Althing , Jón Sigurðsson , with Morris being sympathetic to the Icelandic independence movement . From there , they proceeded by Icelandic horse along the south coast to <unk> , <unk> , Geysir , Þingvellir , and then back to <unk> , where they departed back to Britain in September . In April 1873 , Morris and Burne @-@ Jones holidayed in Italy , visiting Florence and Siena . Although generally disliking the country , Morris was interested in the Florentine Gothic architecture . Soon after , in July , Morris returned to Iceland , revisiting many of the sites he had previously seen , but then proceeding north to Varna glacier and <unk> . His two visits to the country profoundly influenced him , in particular in his growing leftist opinions ; he would comment that these trips made him realise that " the most grinding poverty is a trifling evil compared with the inequality of classes . " 
 Morris and Burne @-@ Jones then spent time with one of the Firm 's patrons , the wealthy George Howard , 9th Earl of Carlisle and his wife Rosalind , at their Medieval home in <unk> Castle , Cumberland . In July 1874 , the Morris family then took Burne @-@ Jones ' two children with them on their holiday to Bruges , Belgium . However , by this point Morris ' friendship with Rossetti had seriously eroded , and in July 1874 their acrimonious falling out led Rossetti to leave Kelmscott , with Morris ' publisher F.S. Ellis taking his place . With the company 's other partners drifting off to work on other projects , Morris decided to consolidate his own control of the Firm and become sole proprietor and manager . In March 1875 , he paid £ 1000 each in compensation to Rossetti , Brown , and Marshall , although the other partners waived their claims to financial compensation . That month , the Firm was officially disbanded and replaced by Morris & Co , although Burne @-@ Jones and Webb would continue to produce designs for it in future . This accomplished , he resigned his directorship of the Devon Great Consols , selling his remaining shares in the company . 
 = = = Textile experimentation and political embrace : 1875 – 80 = = = 
 Now in complete control of the Firm , Morris took an increased interest in the process of textile dyeing and entered into a co @-@ operative agreement with Thomas Wardle , a silk dyer who operated the <unk> Works in Leek , Staffordshire . As a result , Morris would spend time with Wardle at his home on various occasions between summer 1875 and spring 1878 . Deeming the colours to be of inferior quality , Morris rejected the chemical aniline dyes which were then predominant , instead emphasising the revival of organic dyes , such as indigo for blue , walnut shells and roots for brown , and cochineal , kermes , and madder for red . Living and working in this industrial environment , he gained a personal understanding of production and the lives of the proletariat , and was disgusted by the poor living conditions of workers and the pollution caused by industry ; these factors greatly influenced his political views . After learning the skills of dyeing , in the late 1870s Morris turned his attention to weaving , experimenting with silk weaving at Queen 's Square . 
 In the Spring of 1877 , the Firm opened a store at No. 449 Oxford Street and obtained new staff who were able to improve its professionalism ; as a result , sales increased and its popularity grew . By 1880 , Morris & Co. had become a household name , having become very popular with Britain 's upper and middle classes . The Firm was obtaining increasing numbers of commissions from aristocrats , wealthy <unk> , and provincial entrepreneurs , with Morris furnishing parts of St. James ' Palace and the chapel at Eaton Hall . As a result of his growing sympathy for the working @-@ classes and poor , Morris felt personally conflicted in serving the interests of these individuals , privately describing it as " ministering to the swinish luxury of the rich " . 
 Continuing with his literary output , Morris translated his own version of Virgil 's Aeneid , titling it The <unk> of Vergil ( 1876 ) . Although many translations were already available , often produced by trained Classicists , Morris claimed that his unique perspective was as " a poet not a pedant " . He also continued producing translations of Icelandic tales with Magnússon , including Three Northern Love Stories ( 1875 ) and <unk> Saga ( 1876 ) . In 1877 Morris was approached by Oxford University and offered the largely honorary position of Professor of Poetry . He declined , asserting that he felt unqualified , knowing little about scholarship on the theory of poetry . 
 In summer 1876 Jenny Morris was diagnosed with epilepsy . Refusing to allow her to be societally marginalised or institutionalised , as was common in the period , Morris insisted that she be cared for by the family . When Janey took May and Jenny to Oneglia in Italy , the latter suffered a serious seizure , with Morris rushing to the country to see her . They then proceeded to visit a number of other cities , including Venice , Padua , and Verona , with Morris attaining a greater appreciation of the country than he had on his previous trip . In April 1879 Morris moved the family home again , this time renting an 18th @-@ century mansion on Hammersmith 's Upper Mall in West London . Owned by the novelist George MacDonald , Morris would name it Kelmscott House and re @-@ decorate it according to his own taste . In the House 's grounds he set up a workshop , focusing on the production of hand @-@ knotted carpets . Excited that both of his homes were along the course of the River Thames , in August 1880 he and his family took a boat trip along the river from Kelmscott House to Kelmscott Manor . 
 Morris became politically active in this period , coming to be associated with the <unk> current within British liberalism . He joined the Eastern Question Association ( EQA ) and was appointed the group 's treasurer in November 1876 . EQA had been founded by campaigners associated with the centre @-@ left Liberal Party who opposed Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli 's alliance with the Ottoman Empire ; the Association highlighted the Ottoman massacre of Bulgarians and feared that the alliance would lead Disraeli to join the Ottomans in going to war with the Russian Empire . Morris took an active role in the EQA campaign , authoring the lyrics for the song " Wake , London Lads ! " to be sung at a rally against military intervention . Morris eventually became disillusioned with the EQA , describing it as being " full of wretched little personalities " . He nevertheless joined a regrouping of predominantly working @-@ class EQA activists , the National Liberal League , becoming their treasurer in summer 1879 ; the group remained small and politically ineffective , with Morris resigning as treasurer in late 1881 , shortly before the group 's collapse . 
 However , his discontent with the British liberal movement grew following the election of the Liberal Party 's William Ewart Gladstone to the Premiership in 1880 . Morris was particularly angered that Gladstone 's government did not reverse the Disraeli regime 's occupation of the Transvaal , introduced the Coercion Bill , and oversaw the Bombardment of Alexandria . Morris later related that while he had once believed that " one might further real <unk> progress by doing what one could on the lines of ordinary middle @-@ class Radicalism " , following Gladstone 's election he came to realise " that Radicalism is on the wrong line , so to say , and will never <unk> [ sic ] into anything more than Radicalism : in fact that it is made for and by the middle classes and will always be under the control of rich capitalists . 
 In 1876 , Morris visited Burford Church in Oxfordshire , where he was appalled at the restoration conducted by his old mentor , G.E. Street . He recognised that these programs of architectural restoration led to the destruction or major alteration of genuinely old features in order to replace them with " sham old " features , something which appalled him . To combat the increasing trend for restoration , in March 1877 he founded the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings ( SPAB ) , which he personally referred to as " Anti @-@ Scrape " . Adopting the role of honorary secretary and treasurer , most of the other early members of SPAB were his friends , while the group 's program was rooted in Ruskin 's The Seven Lamps of Architecture ( 1849 ) . As part of SPAB 's campaign , Morris tried to build connections with art and antiquarian societies and the custodians of old buildings , and also contacted the press to highlight his cause . He was particularly strong in denouncing the ongoing restoration of Tewkesbury Abbey and was vociferous in denouncing the architects responsible , something that deeply upset Street . Turning SPAB 's attention abroad , in Autumn 1879 Morris launched a campaign to protect St Mark 's Basilica in Venice from restoration , garnering a petition with 2000 signatures , among whom were Disraeli , Gladstone , and Ruskin . 
 = = Later life = = 
 = = = Merton Abbey and the Democratic Federation : 1881 – 84 = = = 
 In summer 1881 , Morris took out a lease on the seven @-@ acre former silk weaving factory at Merton Abbey Mills , in Merton , Southwest London . Moving his workshops to the site , the premises were used for weaving , dyeing , and creating stained glass ; within three years , 100 craftsmen would be employed there . Working conditions at the Abbey were better than at most Victorian factories . However , despite Morris 's ideals , there was little opportunity for the workers to display their own individual creativity . Morris had initiated a system of profit sharing among the Firm 's upper clerks , however this did not include the majority of workers , who were instead employed on a piecework basis . Morris was aware that , in retaining the division between employer and employed , the company failed to live up to his own egalitarian ideals , but defended this , asserting that it was impossible to run a socialist company within a competitive capitalist economy . The Firm itself was expanding , opening up a store in Manchester in 1883 and holding a stand at that year 's Foreign Fair in Boston . 
 Janey 's relationship with Rossetti had continued through a correspondence and occasional visits , although she found him extremely paranoid and was upset by his addiction to chloral . She last saw him in 1881 , and he died in April the following year . Morris described his mixed feelings toward his deceased friend by stating that he had " some of the very greatest qualities of genius , most of them indeed ; what a great man he would have been but for the arrogant misanthropy which marred his work , and killed him before his time " . In August 1883 , Janey would be introduced to the poet Wilfrid Scawen Blunt , with whom she embarked on a second affair , which Morris might have been aware of . 
 In January 1881 Morris was involved in the establishment of the Radical Union , an amalgam of radical working @-@ class groups which hoped to rival the Liberals , and became a member of its executive committee . However , he soon rejected liberal radicalism completely and moved toward socialism . In this period , British socialism was a small , fledgling and vaguely defined movement , with only a few hundred adherents . Britain 's first socialist party , the Democratic Federation ( DF ) , had been founded by Henry Hyndman , an adherent of the socio @-@ political ideology of Marxism , with Morris joining the DF in January 1883 . Morris began to read voraciously on the subject of socialism , including Henry George 's Progress and Poverty , Alfred Russel Wallace 's Land Nationalisation , and Karl Marx 's Das Kapital , although admitted that Marx 's economic analysis of capitalism gave him " agonies of confusion on the brain " . Instead he preferred the writings of William Cobbett and Sergius Stepniak , although he also read the critique of socialism produced by John Stuart Mill . 
 In May 1883 , Morris was appointed to the DF 's executive , and was soon elected to the position of treasurer . <unk> himself to the socialist cause , he regularly lectured at meetings across Britain , hoping to gain more converts , although was regularly criticised for doing so by the mainstream press . In November 1883 he was invited to speak at University College , Oxford , on the subject of " Democracy and Art " and there began espousing socialism ; this shocked and embarrassed many members of staff , earning national press coverage . With other DF members , he travelled to Blackburn , Lancashire in February 1884 amid the great cotton strike , where he lectured on socialism to the strikers . The following month he marched in a central London demonstration commemorating the first anniversary of Marx 's death and the thirteenth anniversary of the Paris Commune . 
 Morris aided the DF using his artistic and literary talents ; he designed the group 's membership card , and helped author their manifesto , Socialism Made Plain , in which they demanded improved housing for workers , free compulsory education for all children , free school meals , an eight @-@ hour working day , the abolition of national debt , nationalisation of land , banks , and railways , and the organisation of agriculture and industry under state control and co @-@ operative principles . Some of his DF comrades found it difficult to reconcile his socialist values with his position as proprietor of the Firm , although he was widely admired as a man of integrity . The DF began publishing a weekly newspaper , Justice , which soon faced financial losses that Morris covered . Morris also regularly contributed articles to the newspaper , in doing so befriending another contributor , George Bernard Shaw . 
 His socialist activism monopolised his time , forcing him to abandon a translation of the Persian Shahnameh . It also led to him seeing far less of Burne @-@ Jones , with whom he had strong political differences ; although once a republican , Burne @-@ Jones had become increasingly conservative , and felt that the DF were exploiting Morris for his talents and influence . While Morris devoted much time to trying to convert his friends to the cause , of Morris ' circle of artistic comrades , only Webb and Faulkner fully embraced socialism , while Swinburne expressed his sympathy with it . 
 In 1884 the DF renamed itself the Social Democratic Federation ( SDF ) and underwent an internal reorganisation . However , the group was facing an internal schism between those ( such as Hyndman ) , who argued for a parliamentary path toward socialism , and those ( like Morris ) who deemed the Houses of Parliament intrinsically corrupt and capitalist . Personal issues between Morris and Hyndman were exacerbated by their attitude to British foreign policy ; Morris was staunchly anti @-@ imperialist while Hyndman expressed patriotic sentiment encouraging some foreign intervention . The division between the two groups developed into open conflict , with the majority of activists sharing Morris ' position . In December 1884 Morris and his supporters – most notably Ernest Belfort Bax and Edward Aveling – left the SDF ; the first major schism of the British socialist movement . 
 = = = Socialist League : 1884 – 89 = = = 
 In December 1884 , Morris founded the Socialist League ( SL ) with other SDF defectors . He composed the SL 's manifesto with Bax , describing their position as that of " Revolutionary International Socialism " , advocating proletarian internationalism and world revolution while rejecting the concept of socialism in one country . In this , he committed himself to " making Socialists " by educating , organising , and agitating to establish a strong socialist movement ; calling on activists to boycott elections , he hoped that socialists would take part in a proletariat revolution and help to establish a socialist society . Bax taught Morris more about Marxism , and introduced him to Marx 's collaborator , Friedrich Engels ; Engels thought Morris honest but lacking in practical skills to aid the proletariat revolution . Morris remained in contact with other sectors of London 's far left community , being a regular at the socialist International Club in Shoreditch , East London , however he avoided the recently created Fabian Society , deeming it too middle @-@ class . Although a Marxist , he befriended prominent anarchist activists Stepniak and Peter Kropotkin , and came to be influenced by their anarchist views , to the extent that biographer Fiona MacCarthy described his approach as being " Marxism with visionary libertarianism " . 
 As the leading figure in the League Morris embarked on a series of speeches and talks on street corners , in working men 's clubs , and in lecture theatres across England and Scotland . He also visited Dublin , there offering his support for Irish nationalism , and formed a branch of the League at his Hammersmith house . By the time of their first conference in July 1885 , the League had eight branches across England and had affiliations with several socialist groups in Scotland . However , as the British socialist movement grew it faced increased opposition from the establishment , with police frequently arresting and intimidating activists . To combat this , the League joined a Defence Club with other socialist groups , including the SDF , for which Morris was appointed treasurer . Morris was passionate in denouncing the " bullying and hectoring " that he felt socialists faced from the police , and on one occasion was arrested after fighting back against a police officer ; a magistrate dismissed the charges . The Black Monday riots of February 1886 led to increased political repression against left @-@ wing agitators , and in July Morris was arrested and fined for public obstruction while preaching socialism on the streets . 
 Morris oversaw production of the League 's monthly — soon to become weekly — newspaper , Commonweal , serving as its editor for six years , during which time he kept it financially afloat . First published in February 1885 , it would contain contributions from such prominent socialists as Engels , Shaw , Paul Lafargue , Wilhelm Liebknecht , and Karl Kautsky , with Morris also regularly writing articles and poems for it . In Commonweal he serialised a 13 @-@ episode poem , The Pilgrims of Hope , which was set in the period of the Paris Commune . From November 1886 to January 1887 , Morris ' novel , A Dream of John Ball , was serialised in Commonweal . Set in Kent during the Peasants ' Revolt of 1381 , it contained strong socialist themes although proved popular among those of different ideological viewpoints , resulting in its publication in book form by Reeves and Turner in 1888 . Shortly after , a collection of Morris ' essays , Signs of Change , was published . 
 From January to October 1890 , Morris serialised his novel , News from Nowhere , in Commonweal , resulting in improved circulation for the paper . In March 1891 it was published in book form , before being translated into French , Italian , and German by 1898 and becoming a classic among Europe 's socialist community . Combining utopian socialism and soft science fiction , the book tells the tale of a contemporary socialist , William Guest , who falls asleep and awakes in the mid @-@ 20th century , discovering a future society based on common ownership and democratic control of the means of production . In this society there is no private property , no big cities , no authority , no monetary system , no divorce , no courts , no prisons , and no class systems ; it was a depiction of Morris ' ideal socialist society . 
 Morris had also continued with his translation work ; in April 1887 , Reeves and Turner published the first volume of Morris ' translation of Homer 's Odyssey , with the second following in November . Venturing into new territory , Morris also authored and starred in a play , The Tables Turned ; Or <unk> Awakened , which was performed at a League meeting in November 1887 . It told the story of socialists who are put on trial in front of a corrupt judge ; the tale ends with the prisoners <unk> freed by a proletariat revolution . In June 1889 , Morris traveled to Paris as the League 's delegate to the International Socialist Working Men 's Congress , where his international standing was recognised by being chosen as English spokesman by the Congress committee . The Second International emerged from the Congress , although Morris was distraught at its chaotic and disorganised proceedings . 
 At the League 's Fourth Conference in May 1888 , factional divisions became increasingly apparent between Morris ' anti @-@ parliamentary socialists , the parliamentary socialists , and the anarchists ; the Bloomsbury Branch were expelled for supporting parliamentary action . Under the leadership of Charles Mowbray , the League 's anarchist wing were growing and called on the League to embrace violent action in trying to overthrow the capitalist system . By autumn 1889 the anarchists had taken over the League 's executive committee and Morris was stripped of the editorship of Commonweal in favour of the anarchist Frank Kitz . This alienated Morris from the League , which had also become a financial burden for him ; he had been subsidising its activities with £ 500 a year , a very large sum of money at the time . By the autumn of 1890 , Morris left the Socialist League , with his Hammersmith branch seceding to become the independent Hammersmith Socialist Society in November 1890 . 
 = = = The Kelmscott Press and Morris ' final years : 1889 – 96 = = = 
 The work of Morris & Co. continued during Morris 's final years , producing an array of stained glass windows designed by Burne @-@ Jones and the six narrative tapestry panels depicting the quest for the Holy Grail for Stanmore Hall , Shropshire . Morris 's influence on Britain 's artistic community became increasingly apparent as the Art Workers ' Guild was founded in 1884 , although , at the time , he was too preoccupied with his socialist activism to pay it any attention . Although the proposal faced some opposition , Morris would be elected to the Guild in 1888 , and was elected to the position of master in 1892 . Morris similarly did not offer initial support for the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society , but changed his opinion after the success of their first exhibit , held in Regents Street in October 1888 . Giving lectures on tapestries for the group , in 1892 he would be elected president . At this time , Morris also re @-@ focused his attentions on SPAB campaigning ; those causes he championed including the preservation of St. Mary 's Church in Oxford , Blythburgh Church in Suffolk , Peterborough Cathedral , and Rouen Cathedral . 
 Although his socialist activism had decreased , he remained involved with the Hammersmith Socialist Society , and in October 1891 oversaw the creation of a short @-@ lived newsletter , the Hammersmith Socialist Record . Coming to oppose factionalism within the socialist movement , he sought to rebuild his relationship with the SDF , appearing as a guest lecturer at some of their events , and supporting SDF candidate George Lansbury when he stood in the Wandsworth by @-@ election of February 1894 . In 1893 the Hammersmith Socialist Society co @-@ founded the Joint Committee of Socialist Bodies with representatives of the SDF and Fabian Society ; Morris helped draw up its " Manifesto of English Socialists " . He offered support for far left activists on trial , including a number of militant anarchists whose violent tactics he nevertheless denounced . He also began using the term " communism " for the first time , stating that " Communism is in fact the completion of Socialism : when that ceases to be militant and becomes triumphant , it will be communism . " In December 1895 he gave his final open @-@ air talk at Stepniak 's funeral , where he spoke alongside prominent far left activists Eleanor Marx , Kier Hardie , and Errico Malatesta . Liberated from internal factional struggles , he retracted his anti @-@ Parliamentary position and worked for socialist unity , giving his last public lecture in January 1896 on the subject of " One Socialist Party . " 
 In December 1888 , the Chiswick Press published Morris ' The House of the Wolfings , a fantasy story set in Iron Age Europe which provides a reconstructed portrait of the lives of Germanic @-@ speaking Gothic tribes . It contained both prose and aspects of poetic verse . A sequel , The Roots of the Mountains , followed in 1890 . Over the coming years he would publish a number of other fantasy novels : The Story of the Glittering Plain ( 1890 ) , The Wood Beyond the World ( 1894 ) , Child Christopher and <unk> the Fair ( 1895 ) , The Well at the World 's End ( 1896 ) , The Water of the Wondrous Isles ( 1897 ) and The Sundering Flood ( 1898 ) . He also embarked on a translation of the Anglo @-@ Saxon tale , Beowulf ; because he could not fully understand Old English , his poetic translation was based largely on that already produced by Alfred John Wyatt . On publication , Morris ' Beowulf would be critically panned . Following the death of the sitting Poet Laureate of Great Britain and Ireland , Alfred , Lord Tennyson , in October 1892 , Morris was offered the position , but turned it down , disliking its associations with the monarchy and political establishment ; instead the position went to Alfred Austin . 
 In January 1891 , Morris began renting a cottage near to Kelmscott House , No. 16 Upper Mall in Hammersmith , which would serve as the first premises of the Kelmscott Press , before relocating to the neighbouring No. 14 in May , that same month in which the company was founded . Devoted to the production of books which he deemed beautiful , Morris was artistically influenced by the illustrated manuscripts and early printed books of Medieval and Early Modern Europe . Before publishing its first work , Morris ensured that he had mastered the techniques of printing and secured supplies of hand @-@ made paper and vellum which would be necessary for production . Over the next seven years , they would publish 66 volumes . The first of these would be one of Morris ' own novels , The Story of the Glittering Plain , which was published in May 1891 and soon sold out . The Kelmscott Press would go on to publish 23 of Morris ' books , more than those of any other author . The press also published editions of works by Keats , Shelley , Ruskin , and Swinburne , as well as copies of various Medieval texts . A number of the Press ' books contained illustrations provided by Burne @-@ Jones . The Press ' magnum opus would be the Kelmscott Chaucer , which had taken years to complete and included 87 illustrations from Burne @-@ Jones . Morris still remained firmly in an employer relation with those working at the Press , although organised outings for them and paid them above average wages . 
 By the early 1890s , Morris was increasingly ill and living largely as an invalid ; aside from his gout , he also exhibited signs of epilepsy . In August 1891 , he took his daughter Jenny on a tour of Northern France to visit the Medieval churches and cathedrals . Back in England , he spent an increasing amount of time at Kelmscott Manor . Seeking treatment from the prominent doctor William Broadbent , he was prescribed a holiday in the coastal town of Folkestone . In December 1894 he was devastated upon learning of his mother 's death ; she had been 90 years old . In July 1896 , he went on a cruise to Norway with construction engineer John Carruthers , during which he visited <unk> and Trondheim ; during the trip his physical condition deteriorated and he began experiencing hallucinations . Returning to Kelmscott House , he became a complete invalid , being visited by friends and family , before dying of tuberculosis on the morning of 4 October 1896 . Obituaries appearing throughout the national press reflected that , at the time , Morris was widely recognised primarily as a poet . Mainstream press obituaries trivialised or dismissed his involvement in socialism , although the socialist press focused largely on this aspect of his career . His funeral was held on 6 October , during which his corpse was carried from Hammersmith to Paddington rail station , where it was transported to Oxford , and from there to Kelmscott , where it was buried in the churchyard of St. George 's Church . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Morris ' biographer E.P. Thompson described him as having a " robust bearing , and a slight roll in his walk " , alongside a " rough beard " and " disordered hair " . The author Henry James described Morris as " short , burly , corpulent , very careless and unfinished in his dress ... He has a loud voice and a nervous restless manner and a perfectly unaffected and businesslike address . His talk indeed is wonderfully to the point and remarkable for clear good sense . " Morris ' first biographer Mackail described him as being both " a typical Englishman " and " a typical Londoner of the middle class " albeit one who was transformed into " something quite individual " through the " force of his genius " . MacCarthy described Morris ' lifestyle as being " late Victorian , mildly bohemian , but bourgeois " , with Mackail commenting that he exhibited many of the traits of the bourgeois Victorian class : " industrious , honest , fair @-@ minded up their lights , but <unk> and unsympathetic " . Although he generally disliked children , Morris also exhibited a strong sense of responsibility toward his family . Mackail nevertheless thought he " was interested in things much more than in people " and that while he did have " lasting friendships " and " deep affections " , he did not allow people to " penetrate to the central part of him . " 
 Politically , Morris was a staunch revolutionary socialist and anti @-@ imperialist , and although raised a Christian he came to identify as a non @-@ religious atheist . He came to reject state socialism and large centralized control , instead emphasising localised administration within a socialist society . Later political activist Derek Wall suggested that Morris could be classified as an <unk> . Morris was greatly influenced by Romanticism , with Thompson asserting that Romanticism was " bred into his bones , and formed his early consciousness . " Thompson argued that this " Romantic Revolt " was part of a " passionate protest against an intolerable social reality " , that of the industrial capitalism of Britain 's Victorian era . However , he believed that it led to little more than a " yearning nostalgia or a sweet complaint " and that Morris only became " a realist and a revolutionary " when he adopted socialism in 1882 . However , Mackail was of the opinion that Morris had an " innate Socialism " which had " penetrated and dominated all he did " throughout his life . Given the conflict between his personal and professional life and his socio @-@ political views , MacCarthy described Morris as " a conservative radical " . 
 Morris 's behaviour was often erratic . He was of a nervous disposition , and throughout his life relied on networks of male friends to aid him in dealing with this . Morris ' friends nicknamed him " Topsy " after a character in Uncle Tom 's Cabin . He had a wild temper , and when sufficiently enraged could suffer seizures and blackouts . Rossetti was known to taunt Morris with the intention of trying to enrage him for the amusement of himself and their other friends . Biographer Fiona MacCarthy suggests that Morris might have suffered from a form of Tourette 's syndrome as he exhibited some of the symptoms . In later life he suffered from gout , a common complaint among middle @-@ class males in the Victorian period . Morris 's ethos was that one should " have nothing in your houses that you do not know to be useful , or believe to be beautiful . " He also held to the view that " No work which cannot be done with pleasure in the doing is worth doing " , and adopted as his personal motto " If I can " from the fifteenth @-@ century Flemish painter Jan van Eyck . 
 = = Work = = 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 William Morris was a prolific writer of poetry , fiction , essays , and translations of ancient and medieval texts . His first poems were published when he was 24 years old , and he was polishing his final novel , The Sundering Flood , at the time of his death . His daughter May 's edition of Morris 's Collected Works ( 1910 – 1915 ) runs to 24 volumes , and two more were published in 1936 . 
 Morris began publishing poetry and short stories in 1856 through the Oxford and Cambridge Magazine which he founded with his friends and financed while at university . His first volume , The Defence of Guenevere and Other Poems ( 1858 ) , was the first book of Pre @-@ Raphaelite poetry to be published . The dark poems , set in a sombre world of violence , were coolly received by the critics , and he was discouraged from publishing more for a number of years . " The Haystack in the Floods " , one of the poems in that collection , is probably now one of his better @-@ known poems . It is a grimly realistic piece set during the Hundred Years War in which the doomed lovers <unk> and Robert have a last parting in a convincingly portrayed rain @-@ swept countryside . One early minor poem was " Masters in this Hall " ( 1860 ) , a Christmas carol written to an old French tune . Another Christmas @-@ themed poem is " The Snow in the Street " , adapted from " The Land East of the Sun and West of the Moon " in The Earthly Paradise . 
 Morris met Eiríkr Magnússon in 1868 , and began to learn the Icelandic language from him . Morris published translations of The Saga of Gunnlaug Worm @-@ Tongue and <unk> Saga in 1869 , and the Story of the Volsungs and Niblungs in 1870 . An additional volume was published under the title of Three Northern Love Stories in 1873 . 
 In the last nine years of his life , Morris wrote a series of imaginative fictions usually referred to as the " prose romances " . These novels – including The Wood Beyond the World and The Well at the World 's End – have been credited as important milestones in the history of fantasy fiction , because , while other writers wrote of foreign lands , or of dream worlds , or the future ( as Morris did in News from Nowhere ) , Morris 's works were the first to be set in an entirely invented fantasy world . These were attempts to revive the genre of medieval romance , and written in imitation of medieval prose . Morris 's prose style in these novels has been praised by Edward James , who described them as " among the most lyrical and enchanting fantasies in the English language . " 
 On the other hand , L. Sprague de Camp considered Morris 's fantasies to be not wholly successful , partly because Morris eschewed many literary techniques from later eras . In particular , De Camp argued the plots of the novels are heavily driven by coincidence ; while many things just happened in the romances , the novels are still weakened by the dependence on it . Nevertheless , large subgenres of the field of fantasy have sprung from the romance genre , but indirectly , through their writers ' imitation of William Morris . 
 Early fantasy writers like Lord Dunsany , E. R. Eddison and James Branch Cabell were familiar with Morris 's romances . The Wood Beyond the World is considered to have heavily influenced C. S. Lewis ' Narnia series , while J. R. R. Tolkien was inspired by Morris 's reconstructions of early Germanic life in The House of the Wolfings and The Roots of the Mountains . The young Tolkien attempted a retelling of the story of Kullervo from the Kalevala in the style of The House of the Wolfings ; Tolkien considered much of his literary work to have been inspired by an early reading of Morris , even suggesting that he was unable to better Morris 's work ; the names of characters such as " Gandolf " and the horse <unk> appear in The Well at the World 's End . 
 Sir Henry Newbolt 's medieval allegorical novel , <unk> , was influenced by Morris 's fantasies . James Joyce also drew inspiration from his work . 
 = = = Textile design = = = 
 During his lifetime , Morris produced items in a range of crafts , mainly those to do with furnishing , including over 600 designs for wall @-@ paper , textiles , and embroideries , over 150 for stained glass windows , three typefaces , and around 650 borders and ornamentations for the Kelmscott Press . He emphasised the idea that the design and production of an item should not be divorced from one another , and that where possible those creating items should be designer @-@ craftsmen , thereby both designing and manufacturing their goods . In the field of textile design , Morris revived a number of dead techniques , and insisted on the use of good quality raw materials , almost all natural dyes , and hand processing . He also observed the natural world first hand to gain a basis for his designs , and insisted on learning the techniques of production prior to producing a design . 
 Mackail asserted that Morris became " a manufacturer not because he wished to make money , but because he wished to make the things he manufactured . " Morris & Co . ' s designs were fashionable among Britain 's upper and middle @-@ classes , with biographer Fiona MacCarthy asserting that they had become " the safe choice of the intellectual classes , an exercise in political <unk> . " The company 's unique selling point was the range of different items that it produced , as well as the ethos of artistic control over production that it emphasised . 
 It is likely that much of Morris 's preference for medieval textiles was formed – or crystallised – during his brief apprenticeship with G. E. Street . Street had co @-@ written a book on Ecclesiastical Embroidery in 1848 , and was a staunch advocate of abandoning faddish woolen work on canvas in favour of more expressive embroidery techniques based on Opus Anglicanum , a surface embroidery technique popular in medieval England . 
 He was also fond of hand knotted Persian carpets and advised the South Kensington Museum in the acquisition of fine Kerman carpets . 
 Morris taught himself embroidery , working with wool on a frame custom @-@ built from an old example . Once he had mastered the technique he trained his wife Jane , her sister Bessie Burden and others to execute designs to his specifications . When " embroideries of all kinds " were offered through Morris , Marshall , Faulkner & Co. catalogues , church embroidery became and remained an important line of business for its successor companies into the twentieth century . By the 1870s , the firm was offering both embroidery patterns and finished works . Following in Street 's footsteps , Morris became active in the growing movement to return originality and mastery of technique to embroidery , and was one of the first designers associated with the Royal School of Art Needlework with its aim to " restore Ornamental Needlework for secular purposes to the high place it once held among decorative arts . " 
 Morris took up the practical art of dyeing as a necessary adjunct of his manufacturing business . He spent much of his time at Staffordshire dye works mastering the processes of that art and making experiments in the revival of old or discovery of new methods . One result of these experiments was to reinstate indigo dyeing as a practical industry and generally to renew the use of those vegetable dyes , such as the red derived from madder , which had been driven almost out of use by the anilines . Dyeing of wools , silks , and cottons was the necessary preliminary to what he had much at heart , the production of woven and printed fabrics of the highest excellence ; and the period of incessant work at the dye @-@ vat ( 1875 – 76 ) was followed by a period during which he was absorbed in the production of textiles ( 1877 – 78 ) , and more especially in the revival of carpet @-@ weaving as a fine art . 
 Morris 's patterns for woven textiles , some of which were also machine made under ordinary commercial conditions , included intricate double @-@ woven furnishing fabrics in which two sets of warps and wefts are interlinked to create complex gradations of colour and texture . Morris long dreamed of weaving tapestries in the medieval manner , which he called " the noblest of the weaving arts . " In September 1879 he finished his first solo effort , a small piece called " Cabbage and Vine " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 President of the William Morris Society Hans Brill referred to Morris as " one of the outstanding figures of the nineteenth century " , while Linda Parry termed him the " single most important figure in British textile production " . At the time of Morris ' death , his poetry was known internationally and his company 's products were found all over the world . In his lifetime , he was best known as a poet , although by the late twentieth @-@ century he was primarily known as a designer of wallpapers and fabrics . 
 He was a major contributor to the revival of traditional British textile arts and methods of production . Morris ' ethos of production was an influence on Bauhaus . Another aspect of Morris 's <unk> was his desire to protect the natural world from the ravages of pollution and industrialism , causing some historians of the green movement to regard Morris as an important forerunner of modern environmentalism . 
 Aymer Vallance was commissioned to produce the first biography of Morris , published in 1897 , after Morris ' death , as per the latter 's wishes . This presented the creation of SPAB as Morris ' greatest achievement . Morris 's next biographer was Burne @-@ Jones ' son @-@ in @-@ law John William Mackail , who authored the two @-@ volume Life of William Morris ( 1899 ) in which he provided a sympathetic portrayal of Morris that largely omitted his political activities , treating them as a passing phase that Morris overcame . 
 MacCarthy 's biography , William Morris : A Life for Our Time , was first published in 1994 and a paperback edition was published by Faber & Faber in 2010 . For the 2013 Venice Biennale , artist Jeremy Deller selected Morris as the subject of a large @-@ scale mural titled " We Sit Starving Amidst our Gold " , in which Morris returns from the dead to hurl the yacht of Russian billionaire Roman Abramovich into the waves of an ocean . 
 MacCarthy curated the " Anarchy & Beauty " exhibition — a commemoration of Morris ' legacy — for the National Portrait Gallery in 2014 , for which she recruited around 70 artists who were required to undertake a test regarding Morris ' News from Nowhere to be accepted . Writing for the Guardian prior to the opening of the exhibition on 16 October 2014 , MacCarthy asserted : 
 Morris has exerted a powerful influence on thinking about art and design over the past century . He has been the constant niggle in the conscience . How can we combat all this luxury and waste ? What drove him into revolutionary activism was his anger and shame at the injustices within society . He burned with guilt at the fact that his " good fortune only " allowed him to live in beautiful surroundings and to pursue the work he adored . 
 " Anarchy & Beauty " ' s arts and crafts section featured Morris ' own copy of the French edition of Karl Marx 's Das Kapital <unk> in a gold @-@ tooled leather binding that MacCarthy describes as " the ultimate example of Morris 's conviction that perfectionism of design and craftsmanship should be available to everyone . " 
 = = = Notable collections and house museums = = = 
 A number of galleries and museums house important collections of Morris 's work and decorative items commissioned from Morris & Co . The William Morris Gallery in Walthamstow , England , is a public museum devoted to Morris 's life , work and influence . The William Morris Society is based at Morris 's final London home , Kelmscott House , Hammersmith , and is an international members society , museum and venue for lectures and other Morris @-@ related events . The Art Gallery of South Australia is " fortunate in holding the most comprehensive collection of Morris & Co. furnishings outside Britain " . The collection includes books , embroideries , tapestries , fabrics , wallpapers , drawings & sketches , furniture and stained glass , and forms the focus of two published works ( produced to accompany special exhibitions ) . 
 The former " green dining room " at the Victoria and Albert Museum is now its " Morris Room " . The V & A 's British Galleries house other decorative works by Morris and his associates . 
 One of the meeting rooms in the Oxford Union , decorated with the wallpaper in his style , is named the Morris Room . 
 Wightwick Manor in the West Midlands , England , is a notable example of the Morris & Co. style , with original Morris wallpapers and fabrics , De Morgan tiles , and Pre @-@ Raphaelite works of art , managed by the National Trust . Standen in West Sussex , England , was designed by Webb between 1892 and 1894 and decorated with Morris carpets , fabrics and wallpapers . The illustrator Edward Linley Sambourne chose to decorate his London family home 18 Stafford Terrace with many Morris & Co wallpapers , which have been preserved and can still be seen today . Morris 's homes Red House and Kelmscott Manor have been preserved . Red House was acquired by the National Trust in 2003 and is open to the public . Kelmscott Manor is owned by the Society of Antiquaries of London and is open to the public . 
 The Huntington Library , Art Collections and Botanical Gardens in San Marino , California acquired the collection of Morris materials amassed by Sanford and Helen Berger in 1999 . The collection includes stained glass , wallpaper , textiles , embroidery , drawings , ceramics , more than 2000 books , original woodblocks , and the complete archives of both Morris , Marshall , Faulkner & Co. and Morris & Co . These materials formed the foundation for the 2002 exhibition William Morris : Creating the Useful and the Beautiful and 2003 exhibition The Beauty of Life : William Morris and the Art of Design and accompanying publication . 
 A Greater London Council blue plaque at the Red House commemorates Morris and architect Philip Webb . 
 7 , Hammersmith Terrace is the former home of Sir Emery Walker , a close friend and colleague of Morris . The house is decorated in the Arts & Crafts style , including with extensive collections of Morris wallpaper , furniture , and textiles . 7 , Hammersmith Terrace is operated by the Emery Walker Trust , and is open to the public for tours . 
 In 2013 , the Cary Graphic Arts Collection at Rochester Institute of Technology bought William Morris 's London @-@ built Hopkinson & Cope Improved Albion press ( No. <unk> ) at auction for $ 233 @,@ 000 . This printing press was specially reinforced to produce Morris 's Chaucer in 1896 . Other owners of Morris 's Albion press include Frederic Goudy and J. Ben Lieberman . 
 = = Literary works = = 
 = = = Collected poetry , fiction , and essays = = = 
 The Hollow Land ( 1856 ) 
 The Defence of Guenevere , and other Poems ( 1858 ) 
 The Life and Death of Jason ( 1867 ) 
 The Earthly Paradise ( 1868 – 1870 ) 
 Love is Enough , or The Freeing of <unk> : A Morality ( 1872 ) 
 The Story of Sigurd the Volsung and the Fall of the Niblungs ( 1877 ) 
 Hopes and Fears For Art ( 1882 ) 
 The Pilgrims of Hope ( 1885 ) 
 A Dream of John Ball ( 1888 ) 
 Signs of Change ( 1888 ) 
 A Tale of the House of the Wolfings , and All the <unk> of the Mark Written in Prose and in Verse ( 1889 ) 
 The Roots of the Mountains ( 1890 ) 
 Poems By the Way ( 1891 ) 
 News from Nowhere ( or , An Epoch of Rest ) ( 1890 ) 
 The Story of the Glittering Plain ( 1891 ) 
 The Wood Beyond the World ( 1894 ) 
 Child Christopher and <unk> the Fair ( 1895 ) 
 The Well at the World 's End ( 1896 ) 
 The Water of the Wondrous Isles ( 1897 ) 
 The Sundering Flood ( 1897 ) ( published posthumously ) 
 A King 's Lesson ( 1901 ) 
 The World of Romance ( 1906 ) 
 Chants for Socialists ( 1935 ) 
 Golden Wings and Other Stories ( 1976 ) 
 = = = Translations = = = 
 <unk> Saga : The Story of Grettir the Strong with Eiríkr Magnússon ( 1869 ) 
 The Saga of Gunnlaug the Worm @-@ tongue and Rafn the <unk> with Eiríkr Magnússon ( 1869 ) 
 Völsung Saga : The Story of the Volsungs and Niblungs , with Certain Songs from the Elder Edda with Eiríkr Magnússon ( 1870 ) ( from the Volsunga saga ) 
 Three Northern Love Stories , and Other Tales with Eiríkr Magnússon ( 1875 ) 
 The Odyssey of Homer Done into English Verse ( 1887 ) 
 The <unk> of Virgil Done into English ( 1876 ) 
 Of King Florus and the Fair <unk> ( 1893 ) 
 The Tale of Beowulf Done out of the Old English Tongue ( 1895 ) 
 Old French Romances Done into English ( 1896 ) 
 = = = Published Lectures and Papers = = = 
 Lectures on Art delivered in support of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings ( Morris lecture on The Lesser Arts ) . London , Macmillan , 1882 
 Architecture and History & Westminster Abbey " . Papers read to SPAB in 1884 and 1893 . Printed at The Chiswick Press . London , Longmans , 1900 
 Communism : a lecture London , Fabian Society , 1903 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = = = Morris & Co. stained glass = = = 
 Stained glass 
 = = = Morris & Co. textiles = = = 
 Textiles 
 = = = Kelmscott Press = = = 
 Kelmscott Press 
 = Grammy Award for Best Zydeco or Cajun Music Album = 
 The Grammy Award for Best Zydeco or Cajun Music Album was an honor presented to recording artists at the 50th , 51st , 52nd and 53rd Annual Grammy Awards ( 2008 – 2011 ) for quality zydeco or cajun music albums . The Grammy Awards , an annual ceremony that was established in 1958 and originally called the Gramophone Awards , are presented by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences of the United States to " honor artistic achievement , technical proficiency and overall excellence in the recording industry , without regard to album sales or chart position " . 
 Beginning in 2001 , advocates began lobbying for a Grammy category specifically for cajun and zydeco music . Award recipients , in chronological order , included Terrance Simien and the Zydeco Experience , BeauSoleil avec Michael Doucet , Buckwheat Zydeco , and Chubby Carrier and the Bayou Swamp Band ; no artist received the award more than once . Awards were presented to the engineers , mixers , and / or producers in addition to the performing artists . The group Pine Leaf Boys holds the record for the most nominations , with four . Though nominated each year the honor was presented , the group failed to receive an award . Doucet and Cedric Watson each received three nominations . 2009 marked the only year in which a musician received more than one nomination as well as the only time two artists were nominated for works appearing on the same album — Doucet was nominated as a member of BeauSoleil for Live at the 2008 New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival as well as for his solo album From Now On , and Steve Riley and the <unk> Playboys were also nominated for their contribution to the New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival compilation album . Many nominated artists were from Louisiana , specifically Lafayette . 
 In 2011 , the Academy announced the retirement of the award category . Beginning in 2012 , zydeco or cajun recordings were eligible for the Best Regional Roots Music Album category . 
 = = Background = = 
 According to Cody Daigle of The Daily Advertiser , advocates lobbied for nearly seven years in an attempt to create a Grammy category specifically for zydeco and cajun music . The effort was led by musician Terrance Simien , along with his wife and manager Cynthia . Mitch <unk> , Lieutenant Governor of Louisiana at the time , also supported the effort . Cynthia , a trustee of the Memphis chapter of the Recording Academy , claimed hundreds of dollars and hours were invested in the lobbying effort she described as an " uphill battle " . Prior to the Best Zydeco or Cajun Music category , works in the genre competed in the Best Contemporary Folk Album or Best Traditional Folk Album categories . 
 = = Recipients = = 
 For the 50th Annual Grammy Awards ( 2008 ) , Best Zydeco or Cajun Music Album nominees included Geno Delafose & French Rockin ' Boogie for Le Cowboy Creole , Lisa Haley for King Cake , The Lost Bayou Ramblers for Live : <unk> La Blue Moon , the French language cajun band Pine Leaf Boys for their second album Blues de <unk> , <unk> for <unk> , <unk> Romero and the Hub City All @-@ Stars for The La <unk> Sessions , and Terrance Simien and the Zydeco Experience for Live ! Worldwide . Of the seven nominees , only one was based outside Lafayette , Louisiana . Le Cowboy Creole , Delafose 's fifth album , contained cover versions of Chuck Berry 's " Promised Land " , the Commodores ' " Easy " , The Everly Brothers ' " When Will I Be Loved " , Ronnie Milsap 's " ( There 's ) No Gettin ' Over Me " , and Van Morrison 's " Domino " . Blues de Musician included a French adaptation of the country music song " The Wild Side of Life " . Live ! Worldwide contained recordings of live performances from around the world during Simien 's 25 @-@ year career , including " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " and traditional songs such as " Zydeco Boogaloo " and <unk> Chavis ' " Uncle Bud " . Simien and the Zydeco Experience performed as the opening act to the pre @-@ telecast for the 50th Grammy Awards ceremony . The award was presented to Terrance Simien and the Zydeco Experience , members of which included Jose Alvarez , Ralph Fontenot , Keith <unk> , William Terry , and Danny Williams . Joshua Murrell was also recognized as the engineer and producer of the album . Simien was described as " exuberant " during his acceptance speech in which he acknowledged the five other nominees . Simien and his band were also honored by Billboard , which ranked their live performance in support of the album as one of the top ten acts of the year . 
 2009 nominees included BeauSoleil avec Michael Doucet for Live at the 2008 New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival , Michael Doucet for From Now On , Pine Leaf Boys for Homage Au <unk> , Steve Riley and the <unk> Playboys for Live at the 2008 New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival , and Cedric Watson for Cedric Watson . Doucet , the founder , lead singer and fiddler of BeauSoleil , is the only artist to receive more than one nomination for Best Zydeco or Cajun Music Album within the same year . According to Doucet , From Now On was recorded " live in three sessions with no rehearsals , overdubs , or song lists . " The album contains original tracks , covers by Hoagy Carmichael and Allen Toussaint , and standards such as " St. Louis Blues " and " You Gotta Move " . The award was presented to BeauSoleil avec Michael Doucet . Recipients included Doucet , band members Tommy Alesi , Jimmy Breaux , David Doucet , Mitchell Reed , Billy Ware , and Ben Williams , along with Eli Kelly and Woods Drinkwater as engineers . BeauSoleil 's set was recorded in April 2008 and released with the group 's approval without further involvement . According to Michael Doucet , the album " was on iTunes , and then all of a sudden it was nominated for a Grammy . " 
 Nominees for the 52nd Annual Grammy Awards in 2010 included BeauSoleil avec Michael Doucet for Alligator Purse , Buckwheat Zydeco ( stage name for Stanley Dural , Jr . ) for Lay Your Burden Down , The Magnolia Sisters for Stripped Down , Pine Leaf Boys for Live at 2009 New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival , and Cedric Watson et Bijou Créole for L <unk> Créole . Alligator Purse included guest appearances by Garth Hudson of The Band , Natalie Merchant of 10 @,@ 000 Maniacs , Roswell Rudd , and John Sebastian of The Lovin ' Spoonful . Lay Your Burden Down reunited Dural with producer Steve Berlin and contained versions of Captain Beefheart 's " Too Much Time " , Jimmy Cliff 's " Let Your Yeah Be Yeah " , Gov 't Mule 's " Lay Your Burden Down " , Memphis Minnie 's " When the Levee Breaks " , and Bruce Springsteen 's " Back in Your Arms " . Members of The Magnolia Sisters , an all @-@ female cajun group of multi @-@ instrumentalists , included Anya Burgess , Ann Savoy , Lisa Trahan and Jane <unk> . The award was presented to Buckwheat Zydeco , members of which included Reginald Dural , Stanley " Buckwheat " Dural , Michael <unk> , Kevin Menard , Olivier <unk> , Curtis Watson , and Lee Allen Zeno . David Farrell and Steven Maxwell Berlin were also honored as the engineer / mixer and producer of the album , respectively . 
 For the 53rd Annual Grammy Awards ( 2011 ) , the nominees were Chubby Carrier and the Bayou Swamp Band for Zydeco Junkie , <unk> for En Couleurs , D. L. Menard for Happy Go Lucky , the Pine Leaf Boys for Back Home , and Cedric Watson et Bijou Créole for Creole Moon : Live at the Blue Moon Saloon . 2011 marked the fourth consecutive nomination for the Pine Leaf Boys . Group member Wilson Savoy was unable to attend the award ceremony , but admitted the nominations have " acted as vindication " of their " new @-@ traditionalist sound " . Zydeco Junkie , released through Carrier 's own record label <unk> Records , featured his " trademark party songs " and an " accordion @-@ flavored " cover of " Movin ' On Up " , the theme song for the television series The Jeffersons . Geno Delafose and Jamie Bergeron made guest appearances on the album . The award was presented to Chubby Carrier and the Bayou Swamp Band . 
 = = Category retirement = = 
 In 2011 , the category Best Zydeco or Cajun Music Album was eliminated along with thirty others due to a major overhaul by the Recording Academy . Four additional categories in the American Roots Music field were eliminated ( Best Contemporary Folk Album , Best Hawaiian Music Album , Best Native American Music Album , Best Traditional Folk Album ) . Zydeco and cajun works became eligible for the Best Regional Roots Music Album category . Chubby Carrier was reportedly " broken @-@ hearted " by the news , and concerned that the category 's elimination would not give the music genre the attention deserved . Carrier stated : " This category inspired musicians to fight for the music . It strengthened us . I 'd say to all the young zydeco musicians out there ; don 't give up this fight . " Simien also expressed sadness and called the elimination " a disappointment for local music " . Showing signs of optimism , Terrance Simien said : " The category might be gone today , but we 'll get it back . " 
 = = = General = = = 
 = = = Specific = = = 
 = Goathouse Refuge = 
 The Goathouse Refuge in Pittsboro , North Carolina , is a nonprofit no @-@ kill animal sanctuary for cats that is run on a volunteer @-@ basis . The refuge is cage @-@ free so the cats can freely roam around within the boundaries of the property . Founded in 2007 by Italian @-@ born artist <unk> Scarpa , the refuge can hold up to 300 cats on a 16 @-@ acre farm . There is an art gallery located on the first floor of the house where Scarpa sells her handmade art such as pottery , sculptures , and cookware to help support the refuge . 
 = = Founding = = 
 <unk> Scarpa says she had issues with communication as a child , stating that “ people were not seeing me , that they were talking , but never to me . ” It was not until her father brought a stray kitten home and placed it under her sheets that Scarpa felt she could communicate with someone . The kitten was a year old when he became very ill and died . After his death , Scarpa decided to take in as many cats as possible , with the hopes of eventually creating a safe haven for cats . Scarpa created the Goathouse Refuge in 2007 , naming it after an old goat who came with the dilapidated plantation house and the 16 acre property . Originally , the land was just intended for her pottery studio . After the house and studio burned down Scarpa rebuilt it with plans that included a sanctuary for cats , using personal resources and proceeds from her pottery sales to make it possible . 
 = = Adoption = = 
 The Refuge has found homes for at least 900 cats since they opened in 2007 . They ensure that the cats have been tested , de @-@ wormed , and have had their first shots . The adoption fee covers spaying / neutering , micro @-@ chipping , and vaccinations although some cats may have sponsors who donate to cover for some or all of the adoption fee . There is also an application that must be filled out which asks very thorough in @-@ depth questions to ensure that the cat will go to a good home . The applications are reviewed first by staff to see if the applicants are a good fit for the cat . Afterwards , a home visit is required to see if the house is suitable for the cat . 
 The Goathouse Refuge differs from many other shelters in that all cats are welcome , and none are subject to euthanasia unless past all hope of recovery . Neither disposition , age , nor illness affect whether a cat will be accepted to stay at the Refuge . Adoption is the ultimate goal , but <unk> cats may live out their lives on the property as well . 
 = = Operations = = 
 As a nonprofit shelter , the Refuge is run mainly by volunteers who clean litter boxes , change food and water , wash dishes and blankets , sanitize areas and perform other duties . There are two shifts of at least two volunteers each , early morning and late afternoon , which revolve around the feeding habits of the cats . The volunteers also need to socialize new kittens and cats with behavior issues to make them ready for adoption . New volunteers are introduced to the cats who need to receive special attention for conditions such as allergies to certain cleaning products and dietary restrictions , which are made clear by charts and signs on the cats ' cages . 
 Because the Goathouse Refuge offers their 300 cats ( number as of January 2013 ) medical treatment on @-@ site , quality food , toys and comfort items such as lots of blankets , the cost of maintaining is higher than the average shelter . Contributors help in many ways to the shelter , including providing items the cats need , donating money , or attending fundraisers . Scarpa 's fundraisers use themes such as Burrito Bash , Venetian Carnival , Garden <unk> , and Mad Hatter 's Tea Party . These events are listed in such online and written publications as Raleigh 's Indy Week , Chatham County 's Chatham <unk> , Chapel Hill 's The Daily Tar Heel as well as on the Refuge 's website and Facebook page . 
 The Goathouse Refuge also provides alternative solutions for those who wish to see a particular cat go to a good home , but cannot adopt the cat themselves . There is the option to sponsor a cat by donating to cover their adoption fees so that the cat may have a higher chance of being adopted . The refuge also provides " virtual cats " as gifts and will send the donor a photo of a cat of their choice as well as a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes story about him / her . For those who wish to donate regularly there is a program called " Coffee Cat " , sponsoring a particular cat at the cost of approximately a cup of coffee a day . The donations from Coffee Cat are spent on food , medical needs , and litter for that particular cat . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 In March 2013 , the Goathouse Refuge was a cover story in the Indy Week paper . The article claims that there are too many cats falling prey to illness , and that the sanctuary is out of control : " One local veterinarian has treated about 35 cats from owners who had recently adopted from the Goathouse . " The author , Lisa Sorg , says that according to former volunteers at the Goathouse Refuge , there are twice as many cats on the premises as recommended by a veterinarian , and that Scarpa makes volunteers sign an anti @-@ defamation agreement and instructs them to lie to state inspectors , among other allegations that Scarpa denied or justified . Just over a day after the article 's release the comments section on the Indy Week website became so heated that Denise <unk> , <unk> Editorial Web Director , posted " We have closed comments on this story for the weekend . We will reopen comments Monday morning . All future comments must respond directly to the story and must be civil . Comments that do not follow these guidelines will be removed . " 
 = Ryan Boyle = 
 Ryan J. Boyle ( born November 22 , 1981 in Hunt Valley , Maryland ) is a former lacrosse player who last played professional field lacrosse for the Boston Cannons of Major League Lacrosse ( MLL ) . He most recently played professional box lacrosse for the Philadelphia Wings of the National Lacrosse League ( NLL ) until his release in 2011 . Boyle starred in both lacrosse and American football for Gilman School from 1996 to 2000 . He starred as a member of the Princeton Tigers men 's lacrosse team from 2001 through 2004 . Boyle was also a member of the Men 's Lacrosse Team USA for the 2002 , 2006 and 2010 World Lacrosse Championships . 
 At Gilman , he was an All @-@ American lacrosse player who was named All @-@ city four times and All @-@ metro three times ( Player of the Year once ) , leading his team to two championships . He was a two @-@ time All @-@ metro quarterback who led his school through two consecutive undefeated championship seasons and set a Maryland Interscholastic Athletic Association record for pass completion percentage . 
 During his time at Princeton University , the team qualified for the NCAA Men 's Lacrosse Championship all four years , reached the championship game twice , won the championship game once and won four Ivy League championships . He was a four @-@ time All @-@ American ( twice first team ) and four @-@ time All @-@ Ivy League selection ( first team three times and second team once ) . He was Ivy League Player of the Year twice and Ivy League Rookie of the Year . He established numerous Ivy League records and won numerous NCAA statistical championships during his career . In addition to his All @-@ American recognitions from the United States Intercollegiate Lacrosse Association ( USILA ) , he was recognized by USILA as a Scholar All @-@ American . 
 As a professional , he has earned four MLL championships , and has been rookie of the year in both the MLL and NLL . He has participated in five MLL All @-@ Star games and two NLL All @-@ star games . He is also a three @-@ time Team USA representative and two @-@ time gold medalist at the World Lacrosse Championship . 
 = = High school career = = 
 Boyle is from Hunt Valley , Maryland . Some of his early lacrosse experiences were at the Cockeysville Rec program . He attended high school at the prestigious Gilman School in Baltimore , graduating in 2000 . Boyle was the number one boy 's lacrosse recruit in the nation as a senior . The Baltimore Sun selected him as their boy 's lacrosse player of the year on the 2000 All @-@ Metro boys lacrosse team as well as the 2000 All @-@ Baltimore City / County boys lacrosse team . Boyle was a three @-@ time All @-@ Metro ( 1998 , 1999 , and 2000 ) , four @-@ time All @-@ City ( first team : 1998 , 1999 , and 2000 ; second team : 1997 ) attackman in lacrosse and two @-@ time All @-@ Metro quarterback in football ( 1998 and 1999 ) . He led the lacrosse team to two Maryland Interscholastic Athletic Association A Conference championships in lacrosse ( 1998 and 2000 ) and two in football ( 1998 and 1999 ) including a 21 – 0 undefeated streak , while carrying a 4 @.@ 0 grade point average . As a starting quarterback , his record was 26 – 2 . Boyle , who started calling his own plays as a junior , amassed career totals of 3 @,@ 593 passing yards and 2 @,@ 051 rushing yards . In lacrosse he totaled 258 points . Boyle also played basketball in high school and was co @-@ winner of the Greater Baltimore Chapter National Football Foundation Hall of Fame scholar athlete award as a senior . Boyle intended to play both football and lacrosse at Princeton . 
 As a sophomore option offense quarterback , he totaled 812 yards and five touchdowns rushing as well as 465 yards and four touchdowns passing . As a junior , he set the Maryland state high school single @-@ season pass completion percentage record of 78 percent ( surpassing 69 @.@ 4 established by Ryan Fleetwood of Cambridge ) on 117 of 150 passing for 1 @,@ 908 yards and 20 touchdowns in addition to rushing for 535 yards and five touchdowns . As a senior , he went 76 @-@ for @-@ 107 passing ( 71 percent ) for 1 @,@ 220 yards and 14 touchdowns and 704 yards rushing with eight touchdowns as a senior . In the 1999 championship game 42 – 10 victory over <unk> High School to cap a 10 – 0 season , Boyle rushed for 100 yards and completed 14 of 20 passes for 146 yards . 
 In lacrosse , as a freshman he made the second team of the 1997 All @-@ Baltimore City / County boys lacrosse team . As a sophomore , he was All @-@ Metro with 47 goals , 41 assists and 53 ground <unk> in the 1998 championship game 16 – 12 victory over St. Paul 's High School , he scored four goals and had an assist . As a junior he totaled 23 goals and 28 assists to go with 60 ground balls , even though he missed three games for a surgical procedure . The surgical procedure removed a hernia . He was voted All @-@ American as a junior . He totaled 36 goals and 44 assists as a senior in 2000 . In the 2000 lacrosse championship game , he had four goals and assist in the 10 – 8 victory over Boys ' Latin School of Maryland . 
 = = College career = = 
 He attended college at Princeton University , graduating in 2004 where he was a four @-@ time All @-@ American , including being named First Team Attack twice . Ryan led the Tigers to three NCAA Final Four appearances , two National title games and a National Championship in 2001 . He finished his career with 70 goals and 162 assists good for 232 total points . 
 He was a first team USILA All @-@ American Team selection in 2003 and 2004 , a second team selection in 2002 and a third team selection in 2001 . He was also first team All @-@ Ivy League in 2002 , 2003 and 2004 and a second team selection in 2001 . He was the Ivy League Rookie of the Year in 2001 and the Ivy League Player of the Year in 2002 and 2004 . He was the second player to be named Rookie of the Year as a freshman and Player of the Year as a sophomore . He was one of five finalists for the Tewaaraton Trophy in 2004 . He was a 2004 USILA Scholar All @-@ American . 
 Princeton earned NCAA Men 's Lacrosse Championship invitations each year of Boyle 's four @-@ year career and won the 2001 NCAA Division I Men 's Lacrosse Championship tournament . They were Ivy League champion or co @-@ champion each year of his career : The 2001 team was 6 – 0 undefeated outright champions ; the 2002 team was 5 – 1 outright champions ; the 2003 and 2004 teams were 5 – 1 co @-@ champions . 
 The arrival of freshman Boyle necessitated that senior Matt Striebel move from attack to midfield and the demotion of head coach Bill Tierney 's son , Brendan , to the bench . Striebel had previously orchestrated the Princeton offense from behind the goal and both players had started in the 2000 NCAA Division I Men 's Lacrosse Championship game , but on March 25 , 2001 , which was the first practice after the team lost 14 – 8 to Syracuse , Tierney made the switch . Striebel and Boyle would later earn two golds medals and a silver medal together in World Lacrosse Championship play and three MLL Steinfeld Cups together with the Philadelphia Barrage . 
 In the 2001 game against Dartmouth to clinch the Ivy League championship , he scored three goals and had two assists as part of a 14 @-@ point 3 @-@ game stretch . In the 2001 NCAA championship tournament quarterfinal 8 – 7 victory over Loyola , he had three assists including two that broke a 4 – 4 tie in the second half . He added two assists in the semifinal 12 – 11 victory over Towson State . In the 2001 NCAA championship game , Boyle assisted on B. J. Prager 's overtime game @-@ winning goal against Syracuse from behind the net . It was one of a game @-@ high three assists for Boyle in the 10 – 9 victory . 
 In the 2002 NCAA Division I Men 's Lacrosse Championship tournament , he scored the game @-@ winning goal in the quarterfinal game against Georgetown with four seconds left in regulation time . The goal came on a broken play after the designed play from the time @-@ out with 13 seconds left did not work . On the day Boyle had two goals and three assists in the 14 – 13 victory . He added three assists in the semifinal 11 – 9 victory over Johns Hopkins . In the championship game against Syracuse , he scored two goals in the first quarter but was held scoreless for the rest of the 13 – 12 loss . 
 Boyle 's 2003 tournament performances were not notable . In the 2004 victory over Brown to earn a share of the Ivy League championship , he had four assists . In the 2004 NCAA Division I Men 's Lacrosse Championship tournament opening round , he scored a career @-@ high four goals as Princeton defeated Rutgers 12 – 4 . In the quarterfinals , he had two late goals and assisted on Peter Trombino 's overtime game @-@ winning goal against Maryland . He then had a goal ( to tie the score at 5 ) and three assists in the 8 – 7 semifinals loss to Navy . He made the All @-@ tournament team . 
 Boyle holds several Ivy League conference records : single @-@ season assists ( 32 , 2003 ) , career assists ( 86 , 2001 – 04 ) and career points ( 120 , 2001 – 04 ) . Note that the Ivy League records are for conference games only . Boyle ( 2003 ) tied Jon Hess ( 1997 ) for the Princeton single @-@ season assists record with 48 . He was also a NCAA national <unk> champion in several statistics : points per game ( 2003 , 4 @.@ 54 ) , assists per game ( 2003 , 3 @.@ 77 ) , assists per game ( 2004 , 2 @.@ 93 ) , assists ( 2003 , 49 ) , assists ( 2004 , 44 ) . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = NLL = = = 
 Boyle played box lacrosse in the NLL for the San Jose Stealth ( 2005 – 2006 ) , New York Titans ( 2007 – 2009 ) , and Orlando Titans ( 2010 ) . He has also played field lacrosse in the MLL for the Philadelphia Barrage ( 2004 – 2008 ) and Boston Cannons ( 2009 – present ) . Boyle was selected 3rd overall by the Stealth in the 2004 National Lacrosse League entry draft . In 2005 , he was named NLL Rookie of the Year . He won the rookie scoring title . He participated in the 2005 and 2007 National Lacrosse League All @-@ Star Games . In the January 20 , 2007 first box lacrosse game played at Madison Square Garden , he scored two goals and two assists , but made more news off the field when he was photographed signing autographs for Cody Lohan and his picture appeared on Perez Hilton 's blog . He was picked 8th in the 2010 Orlando Titans dispersal draft by the Philadelphia Wings . Boyle also played box lacrosse in the National Lacrosse League ( NLL ) for seven years before being released by the Philadelphia Wings in 2011 . 
 = = = MLL = = = 
 Boyle was named 2004 Major League Lacrosse Rookie of the Year , and he has helped lead the Philadelphia Barrage to win MLL Steinfeld Cup Championships in 2004 , 2006 , and 2007 . In the 2004 championship game against the Boston Cannons , he helped break a 6 – 6 tie with one of the goals giving Philadelphia an 8 – 6 halftime lead on the way to their 13 – 11 victory . In the 2006 MLL championship game , he assisted on an early goal by Justin Smith . He has made other MLL playoff appearances . In the 2008 MLL semifinals , Boyle scored two goals and had three assists in the Philadelphia Barrage 16 – 15 overtime loss to the Rochester Rattlers . In the 2010 MLL semifinals , Boyle scored two goals for the Boston Cannons in the 13 – 9 loss to the Chesapeake Bayhawks . The following season , he helped lead the Cannons to their first league championship , while earning his fourth . 
 Boyle has appeared in five MLL All @-@ Star games . During the 2006 Major League Lacrosse All @-@ Star Game weekend , Boyle won the skills competition for accuracy and then scored two goals and an assist for Team USA in the All @-@ Star game . He was joined by Striebel on the team in 2007 . In the 2010 All @-@ Star game , he had four goals for Team USA . 
 = = = International = = = 
 Boyle has been named to Team USA for the World Lacrosse Championship in 2002 , 2006 and 2010 . The team won gold medals in 2002 and 2010 and a silver in 2006 . In 2002 , Boyle scored 23 points ( 14 goals and 9 assists ) , including two goals against Team Canada in the championship game and a hat trick in a qualification game against them . He also had a hat trick against the Iroquois Nation in a qualification game . He then had a goal and three assists against them in the semifinals . In 2006 , he totaled five goals and eleven assists . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Ryan 's passion for lacrosse and youth education is exemplified by his involvement with Trilogy Lacrosse a leader in lacrosse education . He runs lacrosse camps through Trilogy as do many other successful Lacrosse players and coaches through their own various companies . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Boyle is from a self @-@ described middle @-@ class family with six children . Boyle 's father , Darby , played attack for West Point men 's lacrosse in the late 1960s and his older brother Michael played lacrosse for Georgetown . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = = NLL = = = 
 = = = MLL = = = 
 = = = Princeton University = = = 
 = You Belong with Me = 
 " You Belong with Me " is a song performed by American singer @-@ songwriter Taylor Swift . The song was co @-@ written by Swift and Liz Rose and produced by Nathan Chapman with Swift 's aid . It was released on April 18 , 2009 , by Big Machine Records as the third single from Swift 's second studio album , Fearless ( 2008 ) . Swift was inspired to write " You Belong with Me " after overhearing a male friend of hers arguing with his girlfriend through a phone call ; she continued to develop a story line afterward . The song contains many pop music elements and its lyrics have Swift desiring an out @-@ of @-@ reach love interest . 
 The song won Favorite song at 2010 Kids ' Choice Awards , and received nominations for the Grammy Awards for Song of the Year , Record of the Year , and Best Female Pop Vocal Performance . " You Belong with Me " enjoyed commercial success as well ; it became a top ten hit in Australia , Canada , New Zealand , and the United States . In the United States , the song became Swift 's highest @-@ charting single on the Billboard Hot 100 at the time and has become Swift 's third best @-@ selling single . It managed to gain the largest crossover radio audience since Faith Hill 's " Breathe " did in 2000 . The single was certified 6 × Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . The song is one of the best @-@ selling singles worldwide , with worldwide sales of more than 5 @.@ 1 million units ( according to the IFPI ) . 
 The song 's accompanying music video was directed by Roman White . The video featured Swift portraying two characters , a nerd ( the protagonist and narrator ) and a popular girl ( the antagonist and girlfriend ) , while American actor Lucas Till portrayed the male lead . The video 's plot centers on the protagonist secretively loving the male lead , although he has a girlfriend . The video won the MTV Video Music Award for Best Female Video at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards , but during Swift 's acceptance speech , rapper Kanye West interrupted , protesting in support of Beyoncé . The incident caused a reaction in the media , with most people coming to Swift 's defense . The song was performed live at numerous venues , including the 2009 – 10 Fearless Tour , where it was the opening number . It was covered by various artists , including Butch Walker and Selena Gomez & the Scene , and parodied by " Weird Al " Yankovic . 
 = = Background = = 
 Swift became inspired to write " You Belong with Me " after she overheard a male friend of hers speaking to his girlfriend through a phone call . He acted defensive as his girlfriend yelled at him , and said to her , " No , baby ... I had to get off the phone really quickly ... I tried to call you right back ... Of course I love you . More than anything ! Baby , I ’ m so sorry . " Out of the sympathy she felt towards him in the situation , Swift developed a concept for a song . In a writing session with co @-@ writer Liz Rose , Swift explained the situation along with her idea and conceived the song 's opening line , " You ’ re on the phone with your girlfriend / she ’ s upset / she 's going off about something that you said . " Together , they developed a story line , which described Swift being in love with the male friend and her having the desire for him to break up with his current girlfriend for her . Swift described the song 's concept as " basically about wanting someone who is with this girl who doesn 't appreciate him at all . Basically like ' girl @-@ next @-@ door @-@ itis . ' You like this guy who you have for your whole life , and you know him better than she does but somehow the popular girl gets the guy every time . " Swift recalled , " It was really fun for us to write the line , ' She wears short skirts , I wear T @-@ shirts ' . " " You Belong with Me " was first released as a promotional single from Fearless on November 4 , 2008 , as part of Countdown to Fearless , an exclusive campaign by the iTunes Store ; the song was then released as the third single from Fearless on April 18 , 2009 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " You Belong with Me " is a pop song with a length of three minutes and 52 seconds . According to Kate Kiefer of Paste magazine , it is " a straight @-@ up pop song . " The song is set in common time and has a moderate tempo of 130 beats per minute . It is written in the key of F ♯ major and Swift 's vocals spans a little below two octaves , from F # 3 to C # 5 . Swift hints at her country music background in the banjo @-@ inflected introduction of the song . Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly felt Swift 's vocals were light and twangy while the melody was " lilting " . It follows the chord progression F ♯ – C ♯ – G ♯ -B . The instrumentation consists of clucking banjos alongside new wave electric guitars . 
 The lyrics to " You Belong with Me " alternate between narrative modes , where she speaks of herself , a male friend whom she has an unrequited crush on , and his girlfriend . Greenblatt described Swift 's role as a storyteller , the song being a narrative set to music , which describes concerning about love and boys " just [ being ] very hard to catch " . Craig Rosen of The Hollywood Reporter believes " You Belong with Me " ' s plot is " confessional " and regards scenarios themed with high school , while Swift " is the girl next door who 's had her heart broken and takes refuge in music " . Lucy Davies of the BBC noted , " Swift deals in the prosaic imagery of high school boys " . In one verse , Swift contrasts herself with her friend 's girlfriend and states , " She wears high heels , I wear sneakers / She 's cheer captain , I 'm on the bleachers " , which Davies interpreted as the song 's protagonist feeling envy towards cheerleaders , in particular , the one dating her male friend . In the choruses , Swift attempts " to persuade some boy to come to his senses and submit to her <unk> charms " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Sean Dooley of About.com labeled " You Belong with Me " as one of the " best songs on Fearless " , while Johnny Davis of The Observer believed some parts of the song " may needle British ears " , although he felt that it was better than single releases by pop singer Hilary Duff . Lucy Davies of the BBC was not impressed by the song 's theme being similar to those of other songs on Fearless or on her eponymous debut album , Taylor Swift . She opined that " You Belong with Me " ' s " lyrical palette has few colours [ ... ] and it 's repetitive " . Jonathan Keefe of Slant Magazine said , " ' You Belong with Me ' isn 't her best @-@ written song by a long shot , but it 's hard to fault its construction . " Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone commented , " It 's hard not to be won over by the guilelessness " . 
 A Times Editor review from The St. Petersburg Times also described it as sounding similar to other hits : " She <unk> for a boy who either doesn 't love her back or wants to ditch this small town . " Josh Love of The Village Voice thought " preternatural wisdom and inclusiveness " shined through the lyrics and theme of " You Belong with Me " ; Love also mentioned that it was one of Fearless ' " great songs " . The same magazine later ranked the song at number 10 on its annual Pazz & Jop critics ' poll . Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly said Swift 's vocals fit the song 's melody and instrumentation , which , according to her , is " slick " and " radio @-@ friendly " . Rob Sheffield of Blender magazine recommended for readers to download " You Belong with Me " , and <unk> Webb , also from About.com , predicted that the song would reach different age groups . Webb said , " It continues the artist 's tradition of having a little something for everyone , so it 's no wonder she has such a large fanbase . " 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 At the 52nd Grammy Awards , " You Belong with Me " received nominations for three awards . The song received a nomination for the Grammy Award for Song of the Year but lost to Beyoncé Knowles ' " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " ( 2008 ) , for the Grammy Award for Record of the Year but lost to Kings of Leon 's " Use Somebody " ( 2008 ) , and for the Grammy Award for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance but lost to Knowles ' " Halo " ( 2009 ) . " You Belong with Me " won Favorite Song at the 2010 Kids Choice Awards and was nominated for Song of the Year at the 45th Academy of Country Music Awards , but lost to Lady Antebellum 's " Need You Now " ( 2009 ) . Although " You Belong with Me " did not receive an award for any of the nominations it received at the 52nd Grammy Awards , Swift did win album of the year for Fearless , which the song was a part of . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = = North America = = = 
 Upon its release as a promotional single , on the week ending November 22 , 2008 , " You Belong with Me " debuted at number twelve on the Billboard Hot 100 due to sales of 172 @,@ 000 digital downloads , tying her with the Jonas Brothers for most top twenty debuts in 2008 , a record which she later beat ; the song fell from the Billboard Hot 100 in the following week . Following its single release , the song re @-@ entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number eighty @-@ seven on the week ending May 16 , 2009 . " You Belong with Me " moved to number three on the Billboard Hot 100 on the week ending August 15 , 2009 , thus making the song Swift 's second highest @-@ charting effort , surpassing her previous second best @-@ charting effort " Love Story " , which peaked at number four in January 2009 . Driven by non @-@ country radio airplay , the song established the largest crossover radio audience since Faith Hill 's " Breathe " ( 2000 ) . The following week , it peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 , being blocked at the top spot by The Black Eyed Peas 's " I Gotta Feeling " . The song is one of thirteen songs from Fearless charted within the top forty of the Billboard Hot 100 , breaking the record for the most top forty entries from a single album . The single was certified quadruple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America for shipments exceeding four million copies . As of November 2014 , " You Belong with Me " has sold 4 @.@ 5 million copies in the United States . 
 " You Belong With Me " became Swift 's first song to reach Billboard Radio Songs summit with 117 million all @-@ format audience impressions . It also became the first country crossover single to rule Radio Songs since Billboard began incorporating Nielsen BDS @-@ monitored data in 1990 . It stayed at number one for two consecutive weeks . On Billboard Hot Country Songs , the single debuted at number thirty @-@ two . On the week @-@ ending June 13 , 2009 , it jumped from number thirteen to ten in the chart , scoring Swift 's eight consecutive top ten hit . " You Belong With Me " became Swift 's fourth number one song on Billboard Hot Country Songs after it reached the summit on the week @-@ ending August 22 , 2009 . It stayed on the top for two weeks and fell at number six afterwards . The single charted in Billboard Hot Country Songs for a total of twenty weeks . On Billboard Pop Songs , it debuted at number forty . It jumped at number twenty six of the following week and on its fifth week , on the week @-@ ending July 25 , 2009 , it entered the top ten at number ten . It reached its peak at number two of the week @-@ ending September 5 , 2009 and held from the top spot by Black Eyed Peas 's I Gotta Feeling for five weeks . It also reach the top spot on Adult Contemporary for fourteen weeks while reaching number two in Billboard Adult Pop Songs . 
 In Canada , " You Belong with Me " entered at number eighty @-@ four . It jumped at the top ten at number nine and peaked at number three for three non @-@ consecutive weeks . It charted in Canada for forty @-@ five weeks . It also reached number one on Canadian Country Radio after only eleven weeks at radio . It was also certified double platinum by Music Canada for sales of 160 @,@ 000 digital downloads . 
 = = = Europe and Oceania = = = 
 " You Belong with Me " debuted at number ninety @-@ nine on the week ending July 18 , 2009 , in United Kingdom . It reached its peak in United Kingdom at number thirty on the week ending September 26 , 2009 . In Ireland , it peaked at number twelve and spent a total of six weeks on the chart . In mainland Europe , " You Belong with Me " peaked at number sixty @-@ one on the Eurochart Hot 100 Singles Chart , number eleven in Belgium ( Flanders ) , and number thirty @-@ two in Denmark . " You Belong with Me " experienced similar commercial outcomes throughout the rest of Europe ; it became a top forty hit in Belgium ( Wallonia ) and a top fifty hit in Sweden . 
 " You Belong with Me " was a success in Australia and New Zealand . On the week ending May 24 , 2009 , the song entered in Australia at number fifty . On the week ending July 5 , 2009 , the song reached its peak at number five , a position it maintained on for three non @-@ consecutive weeks . " You Belong with Me " was placed at number eighty @-@ eight on the decade @-@ end Austrian Singles Chart . It was certified double platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association for shipments exceeding 140 @,@ 000 copies . On the week ending May 25 , 2009 , " You Belong with Me " debuted at number twenty @-@ eight in New Zealand and , after two weeks of ascended positions , it peaked at number five . The single was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand for shipments exceeding 15 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Music video = = 
 " You Belong with Me " ' s accompanying music video was directed by Roman White . In the video , Swift portrays both the protagonist and antagonist , which she respectively described as " the nerd , who is pining away for this guy that she can 't have " and " the popular girl . " Swift described the popular girl 's persona as " horrible and scary and intimidating and perfect " . Her love interest is portrayed by American actor Lucas Till ; Swift met Till while acting on the set of Hannah Montana : The Movie in April 2008 . She later asked him to act in the video , as she was intrigued by his " cool look " , embodying a " dreamy guy " . In regards to his acting on the video , Swift said , " He 's absolutely perfect for the part and really fun to be around , too . " According to her , the video 's plot is " charming " ; she also said that , " the whole video , I 'm just sitting there pining away , wishing I could be in her position . " In regards to the video 's conclusion , White explained that Swift " becomes who she really is " , while Swift thought it was a happy ending . Swift commented , " One of my favorite things about this video is that there wasn 't a standard performance scene . This video was pretty much all story line and I 'm narrating it in the moment , basically narrating while all this is happening around me . " 
 The video was shot in two days in Gallatin and Hendersonville , Tennessee . On the first day of filming , Swift used a body double in order for both Swift , as the protagonist and antagonist , to appear in one shot . In a scene where she appeared dancing , White replaced Swift 's routine with a one having no rhythm ; she recalled , " It was some of the most fun I 'd had in a long time , just freaking out and doing the dumbest moves . " On the second day , they first filmed a prom scene and , lastly , the football game , both being filmed at Pope John Paul II High School . The school supplied many students as extras , including football players , band members , cheerleaders and students . The final prom scene used the school 's decorations for its real prom the next night . When filming for a touchdown , Till was unable to catch the ball , furthering the length of the shoot . " You put a lot of good solid effort in it and it looks good " , Swift stated about filming . 
 The video commences with Till arguing with his girlfriend through a phone call . As soon as Swift , as the protagonist , notices , they begin to communicate by holding up signs through their bedroom windows . Till closes his curtains , and Swift holds up a sign saying , " I love you " . As the song 's chorus approaches , Swift starts to sing and dance in front of a mirror , changing to different clothing multiple times . Afterward , Swift is sitting in a bench while reading a book . Till arrives and the two converse . Then , Swift , as the antagonist , arrives in a red convertible car and Till gets in it ; Swift , the antagonist , kisses him and gives a hostile look towards the protagonist . Suddenly , she is seen cheerleading at a football game while Swift 's other persona is in the bleachers , performing in the school band . After scoring the winning touchdown , Till moves toward his girlfriend and finds her flirting with a teammate , resulting in a heated argument which results in their breakup . Meanwhile , Swift , the protagonist stares in amazement . Back in their bedroom windows , they again communicate through signs , Till asked Swift , the protagonist , if she was attending prom and she responded , " no , studying " . Swift , however , notices Till has a dejected expression as he leaves and changes her mind . Shortly after , Swift is seen entering prom with a white dress , no longer looking like a nerd , while all her peers stare in amazement . When Till spots her , he walks towards her and Swift , the antagonist in a red dress , attempts to impede him , but he ignores her . Ending the video , Till and Swift reveal folded signs saying " I love you " and kiss . To date , the video has over 600 million views on YouTube . 
 = = = Video reception = = = 
 The video premiered on May 2 , 2009 , on CMT . Chris Ryan of MTV commented , " ' You Belong With Me ' was a teen rom @-@ com wrapped up in a music video , wherein Taylor plays two roles . See Dooley of About.com believed Swift worked " doubly hard " , playing two roles . A Times Editor review from The St. Petersburg Times compared the large glasses Swift wore to those of Clark Kent . Michael Deacon of The Daily Telegraph felt the video suited the song , " in that they ’ re equally sappy and dull " . 
 At the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards , the video won the MTV Video Music Award for Best Female Video . During Swift 's acceptance speech , rapper Kanye West interrupted Swift , grabbing the microphone and stating , " Yo Taylor , I 'm really happy for you and I 'ma let you finish , but Beyoncé [ Knowles ] had one of the best videos of all time " , regarding her video for " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " . According to Jayson Rodriguez of MTV News , Knowles " looked on from the crowd , stunned " . Later in the evening , during her acceptance speech for winning the MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year , Knowles told about her first experience winning her first Video Music Award with Destiny 's Child and how much it meant to her . She then called Swift from backstage to complete her acceptance speech . Numerous critics , celebrities , and fans criticized West 's actions , including the President of the United States , Barack Obama , who called West a " jackass " . At first , West made no effort in contacting Swift , but he later issued an apology , which Swift accepted . The video was nominated for Video of the Year at the 45th Academy of Country Music Awards . At the 2010 CMT Music Awards , the video received nominations for the CMT Music Award for " Video of the Year " and " Female Video of the Year " , but lost to Carrie Underwood 's " Cowboy Casanova " and Miranda Lambert 's " White Liar " , respectively . The video was nominated for the MuchMusic Video Award for Best International Artist Video and the MuchMusic Video Award for People 's Choice : Favourite International Video , but lost to Miley Cyrus ' video for " Party in the U.S.A. " and Adam Lambert 's video for " <unk> Want From Me " at the 2010 MuchMusic Video Awards , respectively . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Swift 's first televised performance of " You Belong with Me " was at a free outdoor concert on May 29 , 2009 , broadcast by The Today Show . Following promotion for the song , she performed it on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno , Studio 330 Sessions , at the 2009 CMA Music Festival , at the 2009 CMT Music Awards , and at the 2009 V Festival , in the summer of 2009 . Swift performed " You Belong with Me " at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards on September 13 , 2009 , the same day in which Kanye West interrupted her acceptance speech . She began the performance in a subway station , dressed in a brown trench coat and black beanie , and continued it in a subway , taking off the trench coat and revealing a red cocktail dress . Once the subway docked at a stop , Swift completed the performance atop a yellow taxi cab . Swift later performed the song on The View and Saturday Night Live . In the fall of 2009 and winter of 2009 through 2010 , Swift commenced promotion for " You Belong with Me " countries outside of the United States ; she performed the song on the United Kingdom channel GMTV , the Australian charity concert Sydney Sound Relief , and the Japanese talk show The <unk> Morning Show . 
 Swift performed a medley , which included " You Belong with Me " at the 52nd Grammy Awards . Wearing casual white blouse and black skinny jeans , Swift performed " Today Was a Fairytale " and then announced , " Its a fairly tale and an honor to share the stage with Stevie Nicks " . Following , the two performed a cover of Fleetwood Mac 's " Rhiannon " ( 1976 ) . Swift then grabbed her acoustic guitar for the third and final part in her medley , jumping into a twangy version of " You Belong with Me " . Nicks stood back , tapping her tambourine and nodding , every so often stepping up to the microphone to sing with Swift . Eric Ditzian of MTV News was disappointed at Swift 's and Nicks ' harmonies , but said the two " made for a compelling twosome " . The performance followed much backlash in regards to Swift 's off key singing , which caused Scott Borchetta , CEO of Big Machine Records , to issue a statement defending the performance . 
 " You Belong with Me " is performed as the opening number on all 2009 and 2010 dates of Swift 's first headlining tour , the Fearless Tour . Before Swift or the dancers entered the stage , a video played on the overhead screens ; it showed various celebrities , including Miley Cyrus , Demi Lovato , Faith Hill , Lucas Till and Swift herself , sharing their definitions of the word " fearless " . Following the video 's completion , the band and backup dancers appeared , dressed in yellow cheerleading uniforms . Swift , dressed in a white marching band uniform , then emerges from the bottom of the stage and commences singing . Swift roams around the stage singing and backup dancers perform cheerleading routines while projections of cheerleaders are shown on the stage . Midway through the performance , the backup dancers removed Swift 's marching band uniform to reveal a sparkly cocktail dress ; she is then handed a rhinestoned acoustic guitar and finishes the performance . Craig Rosen of The Hollywood Reporter believed Swift 's performance of " You Belong with Me " , coupled with the performance of " Should 've Said No " , at the May 22 , 2009 , concert in Los Angeles at the Staples Center made the show a success . The song is also performed on the Speak Now World Tour and The Red Tour . " You Belong with Me " also was performed on The 1989 World Tour in several venues in place of " You Are in Love " . 
 = = Cover versions and media usage = = 
 In November 2009 , American rock singer Butch Walker covered " You Belong with Me " for a digital single release . James Christopher Monger of Allmusic said the cover was infused " with the same karaoke glee that fueled previous installments " . Bill Lamb of About.com described the composition as a " folksy almost honky @-@ tonk sound " and " a bit more country than Taylor Swift 's original " . According to Mikael Wood of Billboard , the cover 's instrumentation is fueled by banjo ; he claimed it was an " online success " . Jonathan Keefe of Slant Magazine described the cover 's arrangement as " fantastic " and , to him , it " emphasized the terrific melody and structure that are the song 's real selling points " . After hearing Walker 's cover , Swift posted via her official Twitter account , " I 'm losing my MIND listening to it ! Blown away . " Band Hero for consoles features " You Belong with Me " as one of sixty @-@ five songs from " mainstream acts " . 
 A parody entitled " TMZ " was included on " Weird Al " Yankovic 's studio album Alpocalypse ( 2011 ) . A music video for the parody , directed by Bill Plympton , was filmed in October 2010 , and was included on the album 's DVD . The music video was released on " Weird Al " ' s Vevo on June 24 , 2011 . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Chart procession and succession = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 Since May 2013 RIAA certifications for digital singles include on @-@ demand audio and / or video song streams in addition to downloads . 
 = 1986 – 87 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season = 
 The 1986 – 87 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season was below average due to an ongoing El Niño and a weak monsoon that suppressed convection and storms . There were only five named storms tracked by the Météo @-@ France office ( MFR ) on Réunion . The United States @-@ based Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) followed four other storms in the basin , which is the waters of the Indian Ocean south of the equator and west of 90 ° E to the coast of Africa . The JTWC tracked a storm on August 1 in the northeastern portion of the basin , unusual for the time of year . The first named storm was Severe Tropical Storm Alinina , which originated from the intertropical convergence zone east of Madagascar in the middle of January . However , there was an unnamed tropical depression that produced heavy rainfall in Réunion and Madagascar , causing two deaths in the latter country . 
 In February , two tropical storms were active near the Mascarene Islands . Tropical Storm Bemezava was a weak storm that took an erratic track around the island of Rodrigues . Tropical Storm Clotilda , the most damaging of the season , stalled near Réunion for three days , producing 2 @,@ 723 mm ( 107 @.@ 2 in ) of rainfall at Bébourg . The rainfall totals approached the world record precipitation totals set by Cyclone Hyacinthe in 1980 . The rains killed 10 people , destroyed 120 houses , and caused $ 2 million ( 1987 USD ) in damage . Later , Daodo in March was the strongest storm of the season and the only to attain tropical cyclone status , reaching of 135 km / h ( 85 mph ) . Elizabeta was the final storm of the season tracked by the MFR , forming south of Madagascar in April and dissipating on April 29 . 
 = = Seasonal summary = = 
 During the season , the Météo @-@ France office ( MFR ) on Réunion island issued warnings in tropical cyclones within the basin . Using satellite imagery from National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , the agency estimated intensity through the Dvorak technique , and warned on tropical cyclones in the region from the coast of Africa to 90 ° E , south of the equator . The World Meteorological Organization would later label the MFR as a Regional Specialized Meteorological Center in 1993 . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) , which is a joint United States Navy – United States Air Force task force , also issued tropical cyclone warnings for the southwestern Indian Ocean . The season 's five named storms and one tropical cyclone – a storm attaining maximum sustained winds of at least 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) - were both below the average of nine and five , respectively . The MFR considered the tropical cyclone year to begin on August 1 and continue to July 31 of the following year . There was an ongoing El Niño by December , and by January , the monsoon was weaker than normal across the region . This caused below normal thunderstorm activity in February . 
 In addition to the storms classified by the MFR , the JTWC tracked four additional storms . The first , classified as Tropical Cyclone 01S , formed on August 1 in the northeastern portion of the basin , an infrequent event for the time of year . The storm moved westward with peak 1 minute winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) . It gradually weakened , dissipating on August 3 near Diego Garcia . The JTWC also tracked a short @-@ lived storm in January that they classified as Tropical Cyclone 06S . The storm formed on January 7 in the eastern portion of the basin near Diego Garcia , and reached winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) while moving southeastward . After stalling on January 9 , the system dissipated three days later . Later , the agency monitored Tropical Cyclone 26S beginning on April 24 . The storm formed south of Diego Garcia and moved in a counterclockwise direction , first to the southeast and later to the north . After reaching peak 1 minute winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) , the storm dissipated on April 26 . The final storm tracked by the agency originated on June 25 in the far northeastern portion of the basin between Diego Garcia and the Cocos Islands . It moved slowly to the southwest , failing to intensify beyond winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . Turning to the southeast , the system dissipated on June 27 . 
 The MFR did not track any tropical depressions before January , making Alinina in January the first official storm of the season . However , there was an earlier tropical depression that originated as a low pressure area on January 1 near Tromelin Island . It was a large system that spread rainfall between Madagascar and the Mascarene Islands for several days . By January 2 , the depression consisted of a circulation with spiral rainbands about 150 km ( 95 mi ) west of Tromelin . The system moved southward without intensifying much , and it passed about 130 km ( 80 mi ) west of Réunion on January 4 . While near the island , the depression dropped heavy rainfall that broke 24 ‑ hour totals at 10 locations , peaking at 600 mm ( 24 in ) at Dos d <unk> . The system intensified slightly afterward , although it turned to the east due to a ridge to the south and was no longer tracked after January 6 . In Madagascar , the heavy rainfall led to flooding around the capital Antananarivo , displacing 40 @,@ 220 people . The floodwaters covered rice fields and entered houses , killing two people . Local Red Cross offices provided shelter and food to victims . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Alinina = = = 
 Toward the middle of January , the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) spawned an area of convection between Diego Garcia and St. Brandon . A tropical disturbance formed the next day , characterized by spiral rainbands around a circulation . The JTWC classified the system as Tropical Cyclone 09S on January 16 . The system moved to the southeast , intensifying into tropical storm status on January 17 , whereupon it was named Alinina by the Mauritius Meteorology Service . Later that day , the JTWC upgraded the storm to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane due to the storm 's quick organization while passing east of Rodrigues . On January 18 , the MFR estimated peak 10 minute winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) , while the JTWC assessed peak 1 minute winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) . Subsequently the storm weakened , and Alinina turned sharply westward on January 20 due to a building ridge to the south . On that day , the storm weakened to tropical depression status , and the JTWC discontinued advisories . However , Alinina quickly retained tropical storm status . Once the ridge turned to the east , the storm turned to the southeast , the same day that the JTWC reissued advisories . Shortly thereafter , the agency upgraded Alinina to the equivalent of a hurricane for a second time . This was short @-@ lived , as Alinina rapidly weakened while accelerating to the southeast , dissipating on January 23 as it was absorbed by the westerlies . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm <unk> = = = 
 The ITCZ produced an area of convection north of the Mascarene Islands on February 5 , organizing into a tropical disturbance that day about 590 km ( 365 mi ) northeast of Rodrigues . The system initially consisted spiral rainbands around an organizing center . Moving quickly to the southwest , the disturbance passed west of Rodrigues on February 6 , producing wind gusts of 117 km / h ( 72 mph ) likely due to a localized vortex . Despite only being a disturbance , the Mauritius Meteorology Service named the system Bemezava on February 6 . On the next day , the depression turned sharply to the east due to a nearby ridge , passing 350 km ( 215 mi ) southeast of Mauritius . Bemezava intensified into a moderate tropical storm on February 8 , attaining peak 10 minute winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . It turned back to the northeast and weakened , tracked only by satellite imagery as a weak circulation . Bemezava looped to the west beginning on February 10 , turning to the southeast and back to the west . It dissipated on February 17 about 200 km ( 125 mi ) southeast of Rodrigues , or about 680 km ( 425 mi ) south of where it first formed . Bemezava was not tracked by the JTWC . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Clotilda = = = 
 While Bemezava was still active , another circulation was present between Réunion and Madagascar on February 8 . On the next day , a tropical disturbance formed about 150 km ( 95 mi ) east @-@ southeast of Toamasina , Madagascar . A ridge to the south caused the nascent system to move erratic , although generally to the southeast and east . It intensified into Tropical Storm Clotilda on February 10 , and on the next day that the JTWC classified it as Tropical Cyclone 17S . The storm slowed and approached within 50 km ( 30 mi ) of Réunion before stalling . It moved slowly near the island for two days , during which it remained about 30 km ( 18 mi ) off the northern coast . On February 13 , Clotilda attained peak 10 minute winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) . A weak ridge steered the storm back to the southwest , and on February 14 , Clotilda struck northern Réunion at Sainte @-@ Suzanne . The ridge moved to the east , causing the storm to accelerate and gradually weaken . On February 17 , Clotilda became extratropical while turning southeastward due to an approaching trough . The remnants persisted several days until dissipating on February 22 near Île Amsterdam . 
 While stalling , Clotilda affected Mauritius with gusty winds and heavy rainfall , which flooded several homes . However , effects were worst on Réunion , where wind gusts reached 173 km / h ( 107 mph ) and rainfall totaled 2 @,@ 723 mm ( 107 @.@ 2 in ) at Bébourg . The deluge approached the record @-@ setting rains from Cyclone Hyacinthe in 1980 over a 72 ‑ hour period . Clotilda damaged 250 houses , of which 120 were destroyed . About 150 @,@ 000 people on the island lost access to water , and many roads were damaged . Clotilda killed 10 people on the island , and damage totaled around $ 2 million ( USD ) . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Daodo = = = 
 Several areas of convection persisted within the ITCZ in early March across the open Indian Ocean . One of these organized into a tropical storm on March 2 about 700 km ( 430 mi ) south of Diego Garcia and was given the name Daodo . On the following day , the JTWC began tracking it as Tropical Cyclone 21S . Daodo moved slowly initially while quickly strengthening into a severe tropical storm . On March 4 , a weak ridge steered the storm to the east , and the storm weakened slightly during this time . Three days later a stronger ridge to the east turned Daodo to the southwest , bringing it over its former path . On March 8 , the JTWC upgraded the storm to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane . On the following day , the MFR upgraded Daodo to tropical cyclone status , estimating peak 10 minute winds of 135 km / h ( 85 mph ) , although it weakened back into a tropical storm on March 10 . The storm accelerated to the southeast on the next day and maintained much of its intensity due to baroclinic interactions with a nearby anticyclone . On March 13 , Daodo turned back to the southwest before moving more southward and later to the southeast . On March 18 , the storm dissipated within a polar trough northwest of Île Amsterdam . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Elizabeta = = = 
 In the middle of April , a plume of moist air from the equator reached a circulation southeast of Madagascar , which was associated with a trough . On April 20 , a tropical disturbance formed about 350 km ( 215 mi ) southeast of the southernmost point of Madagascar . A strong ridge to the south steered the system westward , bringing it south of the island on April 22 . After several days without much strengthening , the system began intensifying steadily on April 23 , becoming a moderate tropical storm . That day , the Madagascar Meteorological Service named it Elizabeta , and the JTWC classified it as Tropical Cyclone 24S . Around that time , the storm turned sharply to the south due to a passing trough . Late on April 23 , the JTWC upgraded Elizabeta to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane . On the next day , the MFR estimated peak 10 minute winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) , and the JTWC estimated 1 minute winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) . A ridge turned the storm eastward , and Elizabeta gradually weakened , deteriorating to tropical depression status by April 25 . Two days later , the system turned to a westward drift due to small ridge , although it turned back to the south the next day due to another ridge . The weak circulation accelerated to the southeast into a polar trough , dissipating on April 29 . 
 Although Elizabeta passed just south of the Madagascar , effects were minimal there . However , the storm caused a large fall in barometric pressure at Fort Dauphin , with a drop of 8 @.@ 3 mbar ( 0 @.@ 25 inHg ) over 24 hours . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 = E. Urner Goodman = 
 Edward Urner Goodman ( May 15 , 1891 – March 13 , 1980 ) was an influential leader in the Boy Scouts of America ( BSA ) movement for much of the twentieth century . Goodman was the national program director from 1931 until 1951 , during the organization 's formative years of significant growth when the Cub Scouting and Exploring programs were established . He developed the BSA 's national training center in the early 1930s and was responsible for publication of the widely read Boy Scout Handbook and other Scouting books , writing the Leaders Handbook used by Scout leaders in the United States during the 1930s and 1940s . In the 1950s , Goodman was Executive Director of Men 's Work for the National Council of Churches in New York City and active in church work . 
 Goodman is best remembered today for having created the Order of the Arrow ( OA ) , a popular and highly successful program of the BSA that continues to honor Scouts for their cheerful service . Since its founding in 1915 , the Order of the Arrow has grown to become a nationwide program having thousands of members , which recognizes those Scouts who best exemplify the virtues of cheerful service , camping , and leadership by membership in BSA 's honor society . As of 2007 , the Order of the Arrow has more than 183 @,@ 000 members . 
 = = Early years and marriage = = 
 Goodman was born and raised in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , where his father , George , was a printer and real estate agent . His mother , Ella , died of typhoid fever in early 1895 when Goodman was just three years old . He attended Central High School , graduating in 1909 . He enjoyed writing and began keeping a detailed journal of daily activities during his senior year of high school , expressing his aspirations for the future along with occasional doubts . With several classmates , he began a literary club and published a newsletter , The <unk> . He also showed interest in music , playing the piano and violin , and composed a song for his high school senior class . When it was not selected by the class officers , he wrote in his journal of his disappointment . 
 Goodman also took an early interest in church activities as a youth , participating in a boys ' brotherhood group and Sunday school and becoming a member of Tioga Presbyterian Church at age 14 , an event he described as " the most important step I ever took or ever will take in my life . " Just barely out of his teens , Goodman became a popular and highly respected Sunday school teacher and led the Philadelphia chapter of a young men 's group called the Brotherhood of Andrew and Philip . 
 Aspiring to a career in education , Goodman enrolled in the Philadelphia School of Pedagogy in 1911 . He was selected to be the commencement speaker at his graduation in 1913 and his address was entitled , " The Call to Teach " . Goodman then did graduate work in education at Temple University , while teaching at the Potter School in Philadelphia . 
 On June 18 , 1920 , Goodman married Louise <unk> <unk> , the daughter of a Presbyterian minister and a 1918 honors graduate of Swarthmore College . They had three children : Theodore ( born 1921 ) , George ( born 1923 ) , and Lydia Ann ( born 1927 ) . He was a member of Kiwanis , Rotary International , and a Freemason , joining Robert A. Lamberton Lodge No. 487 , Free and Accepted Masons of Philadelphia on March 5 , 1918 . 
 = = Scouting career = = 
 = = = As a volunteer and local council leader = = = 
 While studying for his degree in Education , Goodman first became involved in Boy Scouting in 1911 when only 20 years old , as a volunteer Scoutmaster of Troop 1 , the first Scout troop in Philadelphia . As far as can be established , this would make him the second @-@ youngest Scoutmaster in the history of the BSA . In his four years as Scoutmaster , the troop grew to more than 100 Scouts . A contemporary of Goodman described him in 1912 as " well beloved by the boys , enjoys their confidence and is heart and soul in this phase of the work . " In later years , he would recall with nostalgia his troop , noting that renowned composer Albert Hay <unk> was " one of his boys " in Troop 1 . In April 1915 , he entered full @-@ time professional service in Boy Scouting as a field executive , serving that summer as director of the Philadelphia Scout Council 's summer camp . He was promoted in December 1917 to Scout executive of the Philadelphia Council . 
 Goodman 's professional Scouting career was interrupted during World War I , when he was drafted into the U.S. Army shortly after his promotion to Scout executive . He served in the infantry as a first lieutenant , but his unit was never sent overseas . In December 1918 , he was discharged from the Army and resumed his professional career as Scout executive in Philadelphia . He served as Scout executive there until May 1927 , when he was promoted to the larger Chicago Area Council as Scout executive ( 1927 – 1931 ) . During his four @-@ year tenure in the " Windy City " , he reversed a decline in finances and increased Scout membership from 11 @,@ 806 to 16 @,@ 920 . 
 = = = As a national leader = = = 
 On April 1 , 1931 , Goodman was promoted by Chief Scout Executive James E. West to become national program director of the BSA , as part of an organizational restructuring . Goodman was one of four division directors reporting to West ( the other divisions were operations , personnel , and business ) . As national program director , he was responsible for professional and volunteer training , relations with sponsoring organizations , public relations , and program development . The Cub Scouting and Exploring programs were established under his leadership . He greatly expanded BSA training programs for adult leaders , establishing the BSA 's highly regarded national training center at Schiff Scout Reservation in New Jersey in 1932 and , later , the training program at Philmont Scout Ranch , beginning in 1938 . He also oversaw the publication of the Boy Scout Handbook , edited by his good friend and colleague William " Green Bar Bill " Hillcourt , as well as the Handbook for Scoutmasters and the first edition of the widely read Scout Field Book . Goodman also wrote the Leader 's Handbook , a key instructional guide for Scout leaders . 
 In early July 1937 , the BSA held its first national Scout jamboree in Washington , D. C. , attended by 25 @,@ 000 Scouts and Scouters . In addition to overseeing the innovative event itself , Goodman 's public relations service did yeoman work to ensure extensive news media coverage . A jamboree press tent accommodated 626 news media reporters , photographers , and broadcasters . Sixty @-@ four news releases were issued and the public relations service assisted in the making of 11 newsreels and 53 magazine articles . The three major U.S. radio networks of the time , NBC , CBS and Mutual , all set up complete broadcasting studios near the jamboree headquarters to produce almost 19 hours of live , on @-@ site jamboree coverage broadcast coast @-@ to @-@ coast . Celebrities also visited the jamboree , including well @-@ known broadcaster Lowell Thomas and U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt . While at the jamboree , Scouts also attended a three @-@ game baseball series between the Washington Senators and the Boston Red Sox at Griffith Stadium , with Goodman arranging for Eagle Scouts to have a place of honor with President Roosevelt in the stands ( pictured ) . 
 In his comprehensive biography of E. Urner Goodman , Nelson Block writes that the mutual respect between Goodman and West grew over their 12 years of working together at the national BSA office : " West , the hardworking , detail @-@ oriented executive , came to rely on Goodman and his style of accomplishing big things through diligent organization and planning , executed by carefully recruited staff ... " . 
 When the venerable youth leader and longtime National Scout Commissioner Daniel Carter Beard died shortly before his 91st birthday in June 1941 , Goodman was selected to be in charge of the beloved pioneer 's funeral in Suffern , New York . An estimated 2 @,@ 000 people lined the funeral route to the cemetery in Monsey , New York , where 127 Boy Scouts formed an honor guard and assisted with traffic control . 
 As war clouds cast an ominous shadow over Europe in the late 1930s amidst the rise of fascism , West , Goodman , and other BSA leaders considered how Scouting might better train youth in democratic principles of government . Referring to the Nazi Kristallnacht rampage against Jews in 1938 , Goodman wrote shortly afterwards : " ... the program of persecution has stirred up our hearts and minds as nothing else that has happened before has done . It has furnished the impetus of a wave of resentment against the evil ; but more than that , for a surge of satisfaction and thanksgiving concerning our own happier state under a democracy . " During World War II , various BSA programs were developed under his leadership in support of the nation 's war effort , such as the collection of scrap aluminum , tires , and waste paper for recycling into war material , distribution of war bond and air raid posters , assisting Civil Defense officials , and planting of fruit and vegetable " victory gardens " . 
 On September 16 , 1951 , Goodman retired as national program director , ending a professional Scouting career spanning 36 years . He was given the title of National Field Scout Commissioner , to continue his service to Scouting on the national level as a layman . 
 = = = Founding and development of the Order of the Arrow = = = 
 As the Philadelphia Council 's newly hired field executive in 1915 , one of Goodman 's assignments was to serve as director of the council 's summer camp at Treasure Island Scout Reservation on the Delaware River . He believed that the summer camp experience should do more than just teach proficiency in Scoutcraft skills ; rather , the principles embodied in the Scout Oath and Scout Law should become realities in the lives of Scouts . Along with his assistant camp director , Carroll A. Edson , he started an experimental program to recognize those Scouts best exemplifying those traits as an example to their peers . 
 Goodman and Edson were strongly influenced by the use of American Indian culture by Ernest Thompson Seton in his Woodcraft Indians program . They decided to create an honor society of their own at camp that summer , in a manner befitting a boy 's interest and understanding . Goodman utilized the appeal of Indian lore and recognition by a Scout 's peers as motivational tools . He devised a program where troops chose , at the camp 's conclusion , those boys from among their number who best exemplified the ideals of Scouting . Those elected were acknowledged as having displayed , in the eyes of their fellow Scouts , a spirit of unselfish service and brotherhood . Edson helped Goodman research the traditions and language of the Lenni Lenape — also known as the Delaware — who had once inhabited Treasure Island . 
 The brotherhood of Scout honor campers with its American Indian overtones was a success and was repeated again the following summer at Treasure Island . Those Scouts honored at Treasure Island in 1915 and 1916 would eventually become members of the Order of the Arrow 's Unami Lodge . 
 By 1921 , Goodman had spoken to Scout leaders in surrounding states about the OA , and lodges were established in a score of Scout councils in the northeast . In October 1921 , he convened the first national meeting of what was then called the National Lodge of the Order of the Arrow in Philadelphia , and Goodman was elected Grand Chieftain . Committees were organized to formulate a constitution , refine ceremonial rituals , devise insignia , and plan future development . Reflecting Goodman 's ongoing interest in music , he composed the words to the Order of the Arrow 's song , " Firm Bound in Brotherhood " , set to the stirring melody of a hymn found in the Presbyterian hymnal of the 1920s , " God the Omnipotent " in 11 @.@ 10 @.@ 11 @.@ 9 meter , which was adapted from the Russian national anthem , " God Save the Tsar ! " , composed by Alexei Lvov in 1833 . 
 In the early 1920s , many Scout executives were skeptical of what they called " secret camp fraternities " . By September 1922 , opposition to the Order of the Arrow was such that a formal resolution opposing " camp fraternities " was proposed at a national meeting of Scout executives . Goodman argued against the motion : " Using the Scout ideals as our great objective " , he said , a camp activity that will " further the advancement of those ideals " should not be suppressed . The motion was narrowly defeated , and the fledgling Order continued as an experimental program throughout the 1920s and 1930s . 
 Goodman maintained his active support of the OA 's National Lodge , as it was then called , during his years as Scout executive in Chicago and then BSA national program director . In observance of the 15th anniversary of the brotherhood 's founding , the National Lodge presented Goodman with a medal in 1930 formally recognizing him as founder . In 1940 , the National Lodge presented him with the first Distinguished Service Award on the OA 's 25th anniversary . The citation said , in part , " As the founder of the Order of the Arrow , through his ability , wisdom , and foresight , his vision of service to others was transformed into a national honor brotherhood which has been a positive influence in the lives of thousands of boys ... " . When he was first appointed as director in 1931 , there were OA lodges in seven percent of BSA councils nationwide . By 1948 , about two @-@ thirds of the BSA councils had established OA lodges . In that year , three years before Goodman 's retirement from the BSA , his " honor society of Scout camping " innovation was fully integrated as an official part of the Scouting program . Kenneth Davis , in his book The Brotherhood of Cheerful Service : A History of the Order of the Arrow , concludes that the National Council 's approval in 1948 " ... was due largely to his [ Goodman 's ] personal efforts and recommendation ... " . 
 Over the decades since the Order of the Arrow 's founding , more than one million Scouts and Scouters have worn the OA sash on their uniforms , denoting membership in the Brotherhood of Cheerful Service . There are presently 183 @,@ 000 members of the Order of the Arrow in all but two of BSA councils nationwide . Summarizing what he felt the order signified , E. Urner Goodman wrote in the foreword to the Order of the Arrow Handbook from the perspective of more than a half century after the brotherhood 's inception : 
 " The Order of the Arrow is a ' thing of the spirit ' rather than of mechanics . Organization , operational procedure , and paraphernalia are necessary in any large and growing movement , but they are not what count in the end . The things of the spirit count : 
 Brotherhood – in a day when there is too much hatred at home and abroad . 
 <unk> – in a day when the <unk> have the floor . 
 Service – in a day when millions are interested only in getting or grasping rather than giving . 
 These are of the spirit , blessed of God , the great Divine Spirit . " 
 = = National Council of Churches leadership = = 
 Following his retirement from professional Scouting , Goodman served the National Council of Churches ( NCC ) during 1951 – 1954 as the NCC 's first general director of the United Church Men , a laymen 's program he formed to strengthen men 's ties to local churches and their communities . Goodman publicly inaugurated the laymen 's group on October 7 , 1951 in Cincinnati , Ohio . By the end of 1952 , United Church Men departments were formed in more than 24 states , providing financial support to NCC @-@ affiliated colleges and missionary work . His new post entailed working closely with Eugene Carson Blake , NCC president ( 1954 – 1957 ) , and meeting frequently with officials of the participating denominations in the NCC . Speaking with various men 's church groups in the U.S. and abroad was , he believed , a means of promoting brotherhood . Reflecting on his NCC service with these notable church leaders , Goodman said more than a decade later , " Great faith and devoted service , I am very sure , are for ordinary folk as well as for the clergy . ... I have been privileged to know some great clergymen in my day ... but I have also known and loved some truly great laymen , men whose lives and works matched their faith " . Goodman retired from his NCC post on September 1 , 1954 because of tuberculosis . 
 = = Later years = = 
 Maintaining his lifelong interest in music , Goodman was active in the Hymn Society of America ( now the Hymn Society in the United States and Canada ) in the 1960s and 1970s , and three hymns he composed were published : " Christ Calls Men " , " As Within the <unk> Temple " , and " O God of Love , Who <unk> Life " . 
 In 1965 , Goodman wrote The Building of a Life , a collection of reminiscences recounting some of his Scouting experiences and giving advice to young men . Summing up his years in Scouting and church work , he wrote , " In the last analysis , it is the things of the spirit rather than material possessions that count . " Later that year , the Goodmans moved to the Penney Retirement Community at Penney Farms , Florida . Goodman then served as Director of Christian Education at Flagler Presbyterian Church in St. Augustine , Florida . 
 In retirement , the Goodmans enjoyed a rich family life , visiting often with son Theodore ( " Ted " ) and his wife Carol , and daughter Lydia Ann ( " Ann " ) and son @-@ in @-@ law Bob . To his unabashed delight , Urner and Louise Goodman had nine grandchildren . Their son George was killed in action in France during World War II , however . Upon hearing the news in December 1944 , Goodman was deeply grieved , and Louise , his wife of 60 years , said it was the only time she ever saw him cry . 
 Although retired , Goodman remained active in Order of the Arrow affairs during the 1960s and 1970s . Acclaimed as an eloquent orator , his keynote addresses at the OA 's biennial National Order of the Arrow Conferences reportedly made an unforgettable impression upon his youthful audiences . Nelson Block writes in A Thing of the Spirit , that even in the 1970s the octogenarian founder " crisscrossed the country to attend lodge and section events ... surrounded by young Arrowmen ... witty and charming , keeping everyone enthralled with his stories . " Displaying his self @-@ deprecating humor , Goodman himself was more prosaic about all of the adulation he received at OA gatherings , writing that , " to many of the young men I was a museum piece . In fact I have been informed that there was considerable surprise because I didn 't hobble in on a cane and mumble in my dentures . " But , he added , " I looked upon them with deep emotion , for there was a spiritual bond " . 
 Reflecting on his career , Goodman said late in life : 
 " I had indeed found my life mission ... Those 36 years of professional service , 16 years as executive in Philadelphia and Chicago , and 20 years as national program director , brought rich rewards , far beyond any salary considerations . They represented the work , above all others , that I wanted to do . " 
 He continued speaking with OA members until shortly before his death at age 88 , when he succumbed to pneumonia on March 13 , 1980 , at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City . He was buried at Penney Farms , Florida , on March 29 , 1980 . At his funeral , held at the Penney Memorial Church in Penney Farms , Goodman was eulogized by Executive Secretary of the Order of the Arrow William F. Downs : " The shake of [ his ] hand , sincerity of greeting , twinkle in the eye , smile and dignity immediately relayed ... the feeling of confidence from the leader , so necessary to build teamwork . Urner made you feel important " . 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 Upon his retirement from full @-@ time professional Scouting in 1951 , Goodman was awarded an honorary Doctorate in Humanics from Missouri Valley College , the first such degree awarded by the college . He was also honored in 1947 when he was made an honorary chief of the Blackfoot Tribe of American Indians and given the name " Chief Eagle " . 
 In his memory , the BSA confers the E. Urner Goodman Camping Award , recognizing lodges that have excelled in the promotion of camping within their host council . The Founder 's Award is given by Order of the Arrow lodges in honor of OA co @-@ founders Goodman and Edson . Up until 2004 , the BSA administered the E. Urner Goodman Scholarship Fund program , providing financial grants towards the college education of Arrowmen aspiring to professional Scouting careers . 
 = Andrew Wodrow = 
 Andrew Wodrow ( 1752 – 1814 ) was a prominent Scottish American merchant , militia officer , clerk of court , lawyer , and landowner in the colony ( and later U.S. state ) of Virginia . 
 Wodrow was born in Scotland in 1752 and immigrated to Virginia in 1768 . In Fredericksburg , he engaged in a thriving import business . Following the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War , Wodrow placed his entire inventory up for public auction and contributed the profits to the American Revolutionary patriot cause . During the war , Wodrow served as a lieutenant colonel in command of cavalry in the Continental Army . 
 Wodrow was the first resident clerk of court for Hampshire County , Virginia ( now West Virginia ) , a position in which he served for a tenure lasting 32 years ( 1782 – 1814 ) . There , Wodrow served in the position of major in the Hampshire County militia . In addition , he represented Hampshire County at the Virginia Ratifying Convention , held to ratify the United States Constitution in 1788 . He was appointed by the Virginia General Assembly as a trustee of the towns of Romney and Watson Town ( present @-@ day Capon Springs ) . Wodrow amassed numerous properties which included landholdings along the Cacapon River and the Wilson @-@ Wodrow @-@ Mytinger House in Romney , and became a prosperous landholder in Hampshire County . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Andrew Wodrow was born in Scotland , possibly in Glasgow , in 1752 . He was descended from a family of scholars and professors . His father Robert Wodrow was a historian of the Church of Scotland with a " national reputation " and published his history in 1752 , the same year as Wodrow 's birth . Two other members of Wodrow 's family filled , in succession , the " chair of theology " at the University of Glasgow and another Wodrow family member served as the university 's librarian . Wodrow immigrated to the Colony of Virginia in 1768 . 
 = = Business career = = 
 During the 1770s , Wodrow established and expanded what became a thriving import business in Fredericksburg . Following the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War , he abandoned his business rather than import and sell goods from the Kingdom of Great Britain . He placed his entire inventory of British goods up for public auction in January 1775 and contributed the resulting profits totaling 19 pounds and 14 shillings to the American Revolutionary patriot cause in Boston . Wodrow became affiliated with the King George Association of 1770 , which called on " every freeholder " in King George County , Virginia to carry the revolution through to its fullest extent . 
 = = Political career = = 
 = = = American Revolutionary War posts = = = 
 Following the cessation of his import business , Wodrow was appointed to serve in the political post of clerk for the Revolutionary Committee for King George County on May 6 , 1775 . During the American Revolutionary War in 1779 , Wodrow joined the Virginia militia where he was commissioned an officer with the rank of major and served under the Continental Army . He then served as a lieutenant colonel in command of cavalry until 1781 after which he became a member of the Society of the Cincinnati of Virginia . 
 Wodrow relocated from King George County to Romney in Hampshire County during the latter years of the American Revolutionary War . In 1781 , Wodrow was promoted to the military rank of colonel in command of the Hampshire County militia . 
 = = = Hampshire County Clerk of Court tenure = = = 
 In 1782 , he was elected to serve as the clerk of court for Hampshire County following the retirement of Gabriel Jones , who had been appointed by Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron . Wodrow was the first clerk of court to reside in Hampshire County while serving in the post . Because of his key position as clerk , Wodrow performed a significant role in the conveying and settling of lands in Hampshire County . 
 On January 10 , 1788 , Wodrow was recommended to the position of major in the Hampshire County militia . Later , in March 1788 , Wodrow , along with Ralph Humphreys , was elected to represent Hampshire County at the Virginia Ratifying Convention held to ratify the United States Constitution . The Virginia Ratifying Convention convened in Richmond in June 1788 , with Wodrow and Humphreys both voting " aye " in favor of ratification . 
 During the lead up to the War of 1812 , Wodrow chaired an anti @-@ war meeting in Hampshire County at which those assembled objected to a heedless rush to war with the British , which was in line with contemporary Federalist principles . According to historian Stuart L. Butler , Wodrow and the meeting 's attendees felt that : 
 to involve [ the United States ] in an expensive and uncertain war , for purposes not absolutely necessary , and entail taxes and misery on ourselves and our posterity , when we might enjoy the blessings of peace and plenty and a good price for our produce on terms as honorable at least as those for the last fifteen years past , would appear to them the extreme of folly , little short of madness . 
