 Wodrow and the committee believed that within two years of the war 's beginning , it would become unpopular because of the need for increased taxation and prolonged military service . Wodrow and the committee stated , " the nation would rise in its constitutional strength , and say to those who brought about such an unpropitious state of things , ' depart from ye wicked . ' " 
 Wodrow served as the clerk of court for Hampshire County for a tenure spanning 32 years until his death at his residence in Romney in 1814 . Following his death , Wodrow 's son @-@ in @-@ law Samuel McGuire served the remainder of his term for fifteen months until 1815 when he was succeeded by John Baker White . West Virginia historian Wilmer L. Kerns said of Wodrow in Hampshire County , West Virginia , 1754 – 2004 ( 2004 ) that he " was a prominent and scholarly man , successful in his business , and a good politician . " 
 = = Land affairs and holdings = = 
 In 1782 , Wodrow served as an executor of the last will and testament of his uncle Alexander Wodrow , a wealthy merchant , and sold his personal estate , a moiety of two land lots in Falmouth , and 212 acres ( 0 @.@ 86 km2 ) along the Rappahannock River in Stafford County to pay his uncle 's debts , with the remainder of the proceeds directed to his other family members . Wodrow sought permission from the Virginia General Assembly to sell the remainder of Alexander Wodrow 's landholdings in Frederick , Hampshire , and Stafford counties , which he was granted . In addition to his landholdings , Wodrow was also charged with the sale of his uncle 's slaves , furniture , watches , buckles , and several personal items . Wodrow personally inherited his uncle 's riding horse and " wearing apparel . " 
 After his move to Romney , Wodrow began to amass numerous properties and became a prosperous landholder in Hampshire County . In 1788 , Wodrow purchased a land tract consisting of 100 acres ( 0 @.@ 40 km2 ) along the Cacapon River in Hampshire County . On December 4 , 1789 , Wodrow was appointed by an act of the Virginia General Assembly as a trustee of the town of Romney . He served as a trustee alongside Isaac Miller , Isaac Parsons , Stephen Colvin , Jonathan Purcell , Nicholas Casey , William McGuire , Perez Drew , and James Murphy . Wodrow and his fellow trustees were given authority by the Virginia General Assembly to settle disputes regarding the town 's land lots and to " open and clear " the town 's " streets and lanes " in accordance with the original survey and plan for Romney . Wodrow was again appointed by an act of the Virginia General Assembly on December 27 , 1800 to a second board of trustees governing Watson Town ( present @-@ day Capon Springs ) , and charged with laying off land lots , streets , and a half @-@ acre lot containing the mineral spring for public use along Capon Springs Run . On October 4 , 1808 , Wodrow and fellow trustee Henry Beattie conveyed Lot No. 2 in Watson Town to Lawrence Augustine Washington a nephew of then former President George Washington . The location of Watson Town is the present @-@ day site of Capon Springs Resort . 
 = = = Wilson @-@ Wodrow @-@ Mytinger House = = = 
 Wodrow and his wife Mary Ann inherited her father Colonel George Wilson 's residence on the eastern boundary of Lot 48 in Romney following his death in 1777 and made it their home . During the 1770s and 1780s , Wodrow 's residence was located on what was then the " main street " in Romney , presently known as Gravel Lane . During his tenure as clerk of court , Wodrow constructed a two @-@ and @-@ one @-@ half story office building adjacent to this residence and its kitchen , all three of which are extant and contribute to the structure presently known as the Wilson @-@ Wodrow @-@ Mytinger House at 51 West Gravel Lane . The adjoining edifice , built by Wodrow for the handling of his clerk of court affairs , is believed to be the oldest extant public office building within the present @-@ day state of West Virginia . Wodrow " went to great expense to add beauty and dignity " to his office building , incorporating architectural styles of panelling and woodworking prevalent in both Fredericksburg and Williamsburg . Following Wodrow 's death , his residence was owned by his son @-@ in @-@ law John McDowell . 
 = = = Old Presbyterian Churchyard = = = 
 Wodrow was a dynamic and influential member of the Presbyterian Church , and in his will , he granted two land lots ( Lots No. 59 and No. 60 ) south of West Gravel Lane from his residence for the construction of Romney 's first Presbyterian church building and the establishment of a cemetery . Wodrow 's executor , James Dailey , deeded the two land lots on April 1 , 1816 to Mount Bethel Congregation trustees James Beach , William Inskeep , Adam Hare , and John Lawson for these purposes . Wodrow was interred in this cemetery ( later known as " the Old Presbyterian Cemetery " ) which was located atop the hill of the two lots . The Presbyterian church was built near the corner of West Gravel Lane and South High Streets between 1812 and 1816 . The Old Presbyterian Cemetery fell into neglect by the late 19th century and was destroyed around 1940 when the hill on which it was located was cut away and leveled for the construction of a factory . Although some human remains and headstones were relocated to Indian Mound Cemetery , Wodrow 's remains were likely lost during the destruction of the cemetery . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Marriage and issue = = = 
 Wodrow married Mary Ann Wilson , the daughter of Colonel George Wilson . Wodrow and his wife Mary Ann had at least five children : Matilda Wodrow McDowell , married to John McDowell ; an unnamed daughter , married to Samuel McGuire ; Craig Wodrow ; Emily Jean Wodrow Kercheval , married to lawyer Samuel Kercheval , Jr . , son of Virginia historian Samuel Kercheval ; and Elizabeth Wodrow Dailey , married to James Dailey . Wodrow 's son , Craig Wodrow , was a scholar , but due to his chronic poor health , he was unable to pursue active roles in business or politics . Craig Wodrow was also interred in the Old Presbyterian Cemetery in Romney . 
 = The Byrds = 
 The Byrds / <unk> / were an American rock band , formed in Los Angeles , California in 1964 . The band underwent multiple line @-@ up changes throughout its existence , with frontman Roger McGuinn ( known as Jim McGuinn until mid @-@ 1967 ) remaining the sole consistent member , until the group disbanded in 1973 . Although they only managed to attain the huge commercial success of contemporaries like the Beatles , the Beach Boys , and the Rolling Stones for a short period ( 1965 – 66 ) , the Byrds are today considered by critics to be one of the most influential bands of the 1960s . Initially , they pioneered the musical genre of folk rock , melding the influence of the Beatles and other British Invasion bands with contemporary and traditional folk music . As the 1960s progressed , the band was also influential in originating psychedelic rock , raga rock , and country rock . 
 The band 's signature blend of clear harmony singing and McGuinn 's jangly twelve @-@ string Rickenbacker guitar has continued to be influential on popular music up to the present day . Among the band 's most enduring songs are their cover versions of Bob Dylan 's " Mr. Tambourine Man " and Pete Seeger 's " Turn ! Turn ! Turn ! ( to Everything There Is a Season ) " , along with the self @-@ penned originals , " I 'll Feel a Whole Lot Better " , " Eight Miles High " , " So You Want to Be a Rock ' n ' Roll Star " , " Ballad of Easy Rider " and " Chestnut Mare " . 
 The original five @-@ piece line @-@ up of the Byrds consisted of Jim McGuinn ( lead guitar , vocals ) , Gene Clark ( tambourine , vocals ) , David Crosby ( rhythm guitar , vocals ) , Chris Hillman ( bass guitar , vocals ) , and Michael Clarke ( drums ) . However , this version of the band was relatively short @-@ lived and by early 1966 , Clark had left due to problems associated with anxiety and his increasing isolation within the group . The Byrds continued as a quartet until late 1967 , when Crosby and Clarke also departed the band . McGuinn and Hillman decided to recruit new members , including country rock pioneer Gram Parsons , but by late 1968 , Hillman and Parsons had also exited the band . McGuinn , who by this time had changed his name to Roger after a flirtation with the Subud religion , elected to rebuild the band 's membership and between 1968 and 1973 , he helmed a new incarnation of the Byrds , featuring guitarist Clarence White among others . McGuinn disbanded the then current line @-@ up in early 1973 , to make way for a reunion of the original quintet . The Byrds ' final album was released in March 1973 , with the reunited group disbanding soon afterwards . 
 Several former members of the band went on to successful careers of their own , either as solo artists or as members of such groups as Crosby , Stills , Nash & Young , the Flying Burrito Brothers and the Desert Rose Band . In the late 1980s , Gene Clark and Michael Clarke both began touring as the Byrds , prompting a legal challenge from McGuinn , Crosby , and Hillman over the rights to the band 's name . As a result of this , McGuinn , Crosby , and Hillman performed a series of reunion concerts as the Byrds in 1989 and 1990 , and also recorded four new Byrds ' songs . 
 In January 1991 , the Byrds were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame , an occasion that saw the five original members performing together for the last time . McGuinn , Crosby , and Hillman still remain active but Gene Clark died of a heart attack in May 1991 , and Michael Clarke died of liver failure in December 1993 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation ( 1964 ) = = = 
 The nucleus of the Byrds formed in early 1964 , when Jim McGuinn , Gene Clark , and David Crosby came together as a trio . All three musicians had a background rooted in folk music , with each one having worked as a folk singer on the acoustic coffeehouse circuit during the early 1960s . In addition , they had all served time , independently of each other , as sidemen in various " collegiate folk " groups : McGuinn with the Limeliters and the Chad Mitchell Trio , Clark with the New Christy Minstrels , and Crosby with Les Baxter 's Balladeers . McGuinn had also spent time as a professional songwriter at the Brill Building in New York City , under the tutelage of Bobby Darin . By early 1964 , McGuinn had become enamored with the music of the Beatles , and had begun to intersperse his solo folk repertoire with acoustic versions of Beatles ' songs . While performing at The Troubadour folk club in Los Angeles , McGuinn was approached by fellow Beatles fan Gene Clark , and the pair soon formed a Peter and Gordon @-@ style duo , playing Beatles ' covers , Beatlesque renditions of traditional folk songs , and some self @-@ penned material . Soon after , David Crosby introduced himself to the duo at The Troubadour and began harmonizing with them on some of their songs . Impressed by the blend of their voices , the three musicians formed a trio and named themselves the Jet Set , a moniker inspired by McGuinn 's love of aeronautics . 
 Crosby introduced McGuinn and Clark to his associate Jim Dickson , who had access to World Pacific Studios , where he had been recording demos of Crosby . Sensing the trio 's potential , Dickson quickly took on management duties for the group , while his business partner , Eddie Tickner , became the group 's accountant and financial manager . Dickson began utilizing World Pacific Studios to record the trio as they honed their craft and perfected their blend of Beatles pop and Bob Dylan @-@ style folk . It was during the rehearsals at World Pacific that the band 's folk rock sound — an amalgam of their own Beatles @-@ influenced material , their folk music roots and their Beatlesque covers of contemporary folk songs — began to coalesce . Initially , this blend arose organically , but as rehearsals continued , the band began to actively attempt to bridge the gap between folk music and rock . Demo recordings made by the Jet Set at World Pacific Studios would later be collected on the compilation albums Preflyte , In the Beginning , The Preflyte Sessions and Preflyte Plus . 
 Drummer Michael Clarke was added to the Jet Set in mid @-@ 1964 . Clarke was recruited largely due to his good looks and Brian Jones @-@ esque hairstyle , rather than for his musical experience , which was limited to having played congas in a semi @-@ professional capacity in and around San Francisco and L.A. Clarke did not even own his own drum kit and initially had to play on a makeshift setup consisting of cardboard boxes and a tambourine . As the band continued to rehearse , Dickson arranged a one @-@ off single deal for the group with Elektra Records ' founder Jac Holzman . The single , which coupled the band originals " Please Let Me Love You " and " Don 't Be Long " , featured McGuinn , Clark , and Crosby , augmented by session musicians Ray <unk> on bass and Earl Palmer on drums . In an attempt to cash in on the British Invasion craze that was dominating the American charts at the time , the band 's name was changed for the single release to the suitably British @-@ sounding the Beefeaters . " Please Let Me Love You " was issued by Elektra Records on October 7 , 1964 , but it failed to chart . 
 In August 1964 , Dickson managed to acquire an acetate disc of the then @-@ unreleased Bob Dylan song " Mr. Tambourine Man " , which he felt would make an effective cover for the Jet Set . Although the band were initially unimpressed with the song , they began rehearsing it with a rock band arrangement , changing the time signature from 2 / 4 to a rockier 4 / 4 configuration in the process . In an attempt to bolster the group 's confidence in the song , Dickson invited Dylan himself to World Pacific to hear the band perform " Mr. Tambourine Man " . Impressed by the group 's rendition , Dylan enthusiastically commented " Wow , man ! You can dance to that ! " , and his ringing endorsement erased any lingering doubts that the band had over the song 's suitability . 
 Soon after , inspired by the Beatles ' film A Hard Day 's Night , the band decided to equip themselves with similar instruments to the Fab Four : a Rickenbacker twelve @-@ string guitar for McGuinn , a Ludwig drum kit for Clarke , and a Gretsch Tennessean guitar for Clark ( although Crosby commandeered it soon after , resulting in Clark switching to tambourine ) . In October 1964 , Dickson recruited mandolin player Chris Hillman as the Jet Set 's bassist . Hillman 's background was more oriented towards country music than folk or rock , having been a member of the bluegrass groups the Scottsville Squirrel Barkers , the <unk> ( also known as the Golden State Boys ) , and , concurrently with his recruitment into the Jet Set , the Green Grass Group . 
 Through connections that Dickson had with impresario Benny Shapiro , and with a helpful recommendation from jazz trumpeter Miles Davis , the group signed a recording contract with Columbia Records on November 10 , 1964 . Two weeks later , during a Thanksgiving dinner at Eddie Tickner 's house , the Jet Set decided to rename themselves the Byrds , a moniker that retained the theme of flight and also echoed the deliberate misspelling of " The Beatles " . 
 = = = Folk rock ( 1965 – 66 ) = = = 
 On January 20 , 1965 , the Byrds entered Columbia Studios in Hollywood to record " Mr. Tambourine Man " for release as their debut single on Columbia . Since the band had not yet completely gelled musically , McGuinn was the only Byrd to play on " Mr. Tambourine Man " and its Gene Clark penned B @-@ side , " I Knew I 'd Want You " . Rather than using band members , producer Terry Melcher hired a collection of top session musicians , retroactively known as the Wrecking Crew , including Hal Blaine ( drums ) , Larry Knechtel ( bass ) , Jerry Cole ( guitar ) , and Leon Russell ( electric piano ) , who ( along with McGuinn on guitar ) provided the instrumental backing track over which McGuinn , Crosby and Clark sang . By the time the sessions for their debut album began in March 1965 , however , Melcher was satisfied that the band was competent enough to record its own musical backing . However , the use of outside musicians on the Byrds ' debut single has given rise to the persistent myth that all of the playing on their debut album was done by session musicians . 
 While the band waited for " Mr. Tambourine Man " to be released , they began a residency at Ciro 's Le Disc nightclub on the Sunset Strip in Hollywood . The band 's regular appearances at Ciro 's during March and April 1965 allowed them to hone their ensemble playing , perfect their aloof stage persona , and expand their repertoire . In addition , it was during their residency at the nightclub that the band first began to accrue a dedicated following among L.A. ' s youth culture and hip Hollywood fraternity , with <unk> like Kim Fowley , Peter Fonda , Jack Nicholson , Arthur Lee , and Sonny & Cher regularly attending the band 's performances . On March 26 , 1965 , the author of the band 's forthcoming debut single , Bob Dylan , made an impromptu visit to the club and joined the Byrds on stage for a rendition of Jimmy Reed 's " Baby What You Want Me to Do " . The excitement generated by the Byrds at Ciro 's quickly made them a must @-@ see fixture on L.A. ' s nightclub scene and resulted in hordes of teenagers filling the sidewalks outside the club , desperate to see the band perform . A number of noted music historians and authors , including Richie Unterberger , Ric Menck , and Peter Buckley , have suggested that the crowds of young Bohemians and hipsters that gathered at Ciro 's to see the Byrds perform represented the first stirrings of the West Coast hippie counterculture . 
 Columbia Records eventually released the " Mr. Tambourine Man " single on April 12 , 1965 . The full , electric rock band treatment that the Byrds and producer Terry Melcher had given the song effectively created the template for the musical subgenre of folk rock . McGuinn 's melodic , jangling twelve @-@ string Rickenbacker guitar playing — which was heavily compressed to produce an extremely bright and sustained tone — was immediately influential and has remained so to the present day . The single also featured another major characteristic of the band 's sound : their clear harmony singing , which usually featured McGuinn and Clark in unison , with Crosby providing the high harmony . Additionally , Richie Unterberger has noted that the song 's abstract lyrics took rock and pop songwriting to new heights ; never before had such intellectual and literary wordplay been combined with rock instrumentation by a popular music group . 
 Within three months " Mr. Tambourine Man " had become the first folk rock smash hit , reaching number 1 on both the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart and the UK Singles Chart . The single 's success initiated the folk rock boom of 1965 and 1966 , during which a number of Byrds @-@ influenced acts had hits on the American and British charts . The term " folk rock " was itself coined by the American music press to describe the band 's sound in June 1965 , at roughly the same time as " Mr. Tambourine Man " peaked at number 1 in the U.S. 
 The Mr. Tambourine Man album followed on June 21 , 1965 , peaking at number 6 on the Billboard Top LPs chart and number 7 on the UK Albums Chart . The album mixed reworkings of folk songs , including Pete Seeger 's musical adaptation of the Idris Davies ' poem " The Bells of Rhymney " , with a number of other Dylan covers and the band 's own compositions , the majority of which were written by Gene Clark . In particular , Clark 's " I 'll Feel a Whole Lot Better " has gone on to become a rock music standard , with many critics considering it one of the band 's and Clark 's best songs . Upon release , the Mr. Tambourine Man album , like the single of the same name , was influential in popularizing folk rock and served to establish the band as an internationally successful rock act , representing the first effective American challenge to the dominance of the Beatles and the British Invasion . 
 The Byrds ' next single was " All I Really Want to Do " , another interpretation of a Dylan song . Despite the success of " Mr. Tambourine Man " , the Byrds were reluctant to release another Dylan @-@ penned single , feeling that it was too formulaic , but Columbia Records were insistent , believing that another Dylan cover would result in an instant hit for the group . The Byrds ' rendition of " All I Really Want to Do " is noticeably different in structure to Dylan 's original : it features an ascending melody progression in the chorus and utilizes a completely new melody for one of the song 's verses , in order to turn it into a Beatlesque , minor @-@ key bridge . Issued on June 14 , 1965 , while " Mr. Tambourine Man " was still climbing the U.S. charts , the single was rush @-@ released by Columbia in an attempt to bury a rival cover version that Cher had released simultaneously on Imperial Records . A chart battle ensued , but the Byrds ' rendition stalled at number 40 on the Billboard Hot 100 , while Cher 's version reached number 15 . The reverse was true in the UK , however , where the Byrds ' version reached number 4 , while Cher 's peaked at number 9 . 
 Author John Einarson has noted that during this period of their career , the Byrds enjoyed tremendous popularity among teenage pop fans , with their music receiving widespread airplay on Top 40 radio and their faces adorning countless teen magazines . Much was made at the time of the Byrds ' unconventional dress sense , with their casual attire strikingly at odds with the prevailing trend for uniformity among contemporary beat groups . With all five members sporting Beatlesque moptop haircuts , Crosby dressed in a striking green suede cape , and McGuinn wearing a pair of distinctive rectangular " granny glasses " , the band exuded California cool , while also looking suitably non @-@ conformist . In particular , McGuinn 's distinctive rectangular spectacles would go on to become popular among members of the burgeoning hippie counterculture in the United States . 
 Although McGuinn was widely regarded as the Byrds ' bandleader by this point , the band actually had multiple <unk> , with McGuinn , Clark , Crosby and later Hillman all taking turns to sing lead vocals in roughly equal measures across the group 's repertoire . Despite the dizzying array of personnel changes that the group underwent in later years , this lack of a dedicated lead singer would remain a stylistic trait of the Byrds ' music throughout the majority of the band 's existence . A further distinctive aspect of the Byrds ' image was their unsmiling air of detachment , both on stage and in front of the camera . This natural aloofness was compounded by the large amounts of marijuana that the band consumed and often resulted in moody and erratic live performances . Indeed , the contemporary music press was extremely critical of the Byrds ' abilities as a live act during the mid @-@ 1960s , with the reaction from the British media during the band 's August 1965 tour of England being particularly scathing . 
 This 1965 English tour was largely orchestrated by the group 's publicist Derek Taylor , in an attempt to capitalize on the number 1 chart success of the " Mr. Tambourine Man " single . Unfortunately , the tour was overhyped from the start , with the band being touted as " America 's answer to the Beatles " , a label that proved impossible for the Byrds to live up to . During concert performances , a combination of poor sound , group illness , ragged musicianship , and the band 's notoriously lackluster stage presence , all combined to alienate audiences and served to provoke a merciless castigating of the band in the British press . 
 However , the tour did enable the band to meet and socialize with a number of top English groups , including the Rolling Stones and the Beatles . In particular , the band 's relationship with the Beatles would prove important for both acts , with the two groups again meeting in Los Angeles some weeks later , upon the Byrds ' return to America . During this period of fraternization , the Beatles were vocal in their support of the Byrds , publicly acknowledging them as creative competitors and naming them as their favorite American group . A number of authors , including Ian MacDonald , Richie Unterberger , and Bud Scoppa , have noted the Byrds influence on the Beatles ' late 1965 album Rubber Soul , most notably on the songs " Nowhere Man " and " If I Needed Someone " , the latter of which utilizes a guitar riff similar to that in the Byrds ' cover of " The Bells of Rhymney " . 
 For their third Columbia single , the Byrds initially intended to release a cover of Dylan 's " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " ( it was even premiered on the California radio station KRLA ) , but instead they decided to record " Turn ! Turn ! Turn ! ( to Everything There Is a Season ) " , a Pete Seeger composition with lyrics adapted almost entirely from the biblical Book of Ecclesiastes . The song was brought to the group by McGuinn , who had previously arranged it in a chamber @-@ folk style while working on folksinger Judy Collins ' 1963 album , Judy Collins 3 . The Byrds ' cover of " Turn ! Turn ! Turn ! ( to Everything There Is a Season ) " was issued on October 1 , 1965 and became the band 's second U.S. number 1 single , as well as the title track for their second album . The single represented the high @-@ water mark of folk rock as a chart trend and has been described by music historian Richie Unterberger as " folk rock 's highest possible grace note . " In addition , music critic William Ruhlmann has noted that the song 's lyrical message of peace and tolerance struck a nerve with the American record buying public as the Vietnam War continued to escalate . 
 The Byrds ' second album , Turn ! Turn ! Turn ! , was released in December 1965 and while it received a mostly positive reception , critical consensus deemed it to be inferior to the band 's debut . Nonetheless , it was a commercial success , peaking at number 17 on the U.S. charts and number 11 in the UK . Author Scott Schinder has noted that , along with Mr. Tambourine Man , the Turn ! Turn ! Turn ! album served to establish the Byrds as one of rock music 's most important creative forces , on a par with the Beatles , the Beach Boys and the Rolling Stones . Like their debut , the album comprised a mixture of group originals , folk songs , and Bob Dylan covers , all characterized by the group 's clear harmonies and McGuinn 's distinctive guitar sound . However , the album featured more of the band 's own compositions than its predecessor , with Gene Clark in particular coming to the fore as a songwriter . His songs from this period , including " She Don 't Care About Time " , " The World Turns All Around Her " , and " Set You Free This Time " , are widely regarded by critics as among the best of the folk rock genre . The latter song was even chosen for release as a single in January 1966 , but its densely worded lyrics , melancholy melody , and ballad @-@ like tempo contributed to it stalling at number 63 on the Billboard chart and failing to reach the UK chart altogether . 
 While the Byrds outwardly seemed to be riding the crest of a wave during the latter @-@ half of 1965 , the recording sessions for their second album had not been without tension . One source of conflict was the power struggle that had begun to develop between producer Terry Melcher and the band 's manager Jim Dickson , with the latter harboring aspirations to produce the band himself , causing him to be overly critical of Melcher 's work . Within a month of Turn ! Turn ! Turn ! being released , Dickson and the Byrds approached Columbia Records and requested that Melcher be replaced , despite the fact that he had successfully steered the band through the recording of two number 1 singles and two hit albums . Any hopes that Dickson had of being allowed to produce the band himself , however , were dashed when Columbia assigned their West Coast head of A & R , Allen Stanton , to the band . 
 = = = <unk> ( 1965 – 67 ) = = = 
 On December 22 , 1965 , the Byrds recorded a new , self @-@ penned composition titled " Eight Miles High " at RCA Studios in Hollywood . The song represented a creative leap forward for the band and is often considered the first full @-@ blown psychedelic rock recording by critics , although other contemporaneous acts , such as Donovan and the Yardbirds , were also exploring similar musical territory . The song was also pivotal in transmuting folk rock into the new musical forms of psychedelia and raga rock . However , Columbia Records refused to release the band 's first version of the song because it had been recorded at another record company 's studios . As a result , the band were forced to re @-@ record " Eight Miles High " at Columbia Studios in Los Angeles on January 24 and 25 , 1966 , and it was this re @-@ recorded version that would be released as a single and included on the group 's third album . 
 The song is marked by McGuinn 's groundbreaking lead guitar playing , which saw the guitarist attempting to emulate the free form jazz saxophone playing of John Coltrane , and in particular , Coltrane 's playing on the song " India " from his Impressions album . " Eight Miles High " also exhibits the influence of the Indian classical music of Ravi Shankar in the droning quality of the song 's vocal melody and in McGuinn 's guitar playing . The song 's subtle use of Indian influences resulted in it being labeled as " raga rock " by the music press , but in fact , it was the single 's B @-@ side " Why " that drew more directly on Indian ragas . 
 Upon release , " Eight Miles High " was banned by many U.S. radio stations , following allegations made by the broadcasting trade journal the Gavin Report , that its lyrics advocated recreational drug use . The band and their management strenuously denied these allegations , stating that the song 's lyrics actually described an airplane flight to London and the band 's subsequent concert tour of England . The relatively modest chart success of " Eight Miles High " ( number 14 in the U.S. and number 24 in the UK ) has been largely attributed to the broadcasting ban , although the challenging and slightly uncommercial nature of the track is another possible reason for its failure to reach the Top 10 . 
 In February 1966 , just prior to the release of " Eight Miles High " , Gene Clark left the band . His departure was partly due to his fear of flying , which made it impossible for him to keep up with the Byrds ' itinerary , and partly due to his increasing isolation within the band . Clark , who had witnessed a fatal airplane crash as a youth , had a panic attack on a plane bound for New York and as a result , he disembarked and refused to take the flight . In effect , Clark 's exit from the plane represented his exit from the Byrds , with McGuinn telling him , " If you can 't fly , you can 't be a Byrd . " However , it has become known in the years since the incident that there were other stress @-@ related factors at work , as well as resentment within the band that Gene 's songwriting income had made him the wealthiest member of the group . Clark was subsequently signed by Columbia Records as a solo artist and went on to produce a critically acclaimed but commercially unsuccessful body of work . He died on May 24 , 1991 , at the age of 46 , from heart failure brought on by a bleeding stomach ulcer , although years of alcohol abuse and a heavy cigarette habit were also contributing factors . 
 The Byrds ' third album , Fifth Dimension , was released in July 1966 . Much of the album 's material continued to build on the band 's new psychedelic sound , with McGuinn extending his exploration of jazz and raga styles on tracks such as " I See You " and the Crosby @-@ penned " What 's Happening ? ! ? ! " . The album also saw Hillman coming forward as the band 's third vocalist , in order to fill the hole in the group 's harmonies that Clark 's departure had left . The title track , " 5D ( Fifth Dimension ) " , was released as a single ahead of the album and was , like " Eight Miles High " before it , banned by a number of U.S. radio stations for supposedly featuring lyrics that advocated drug use . In addition , the album 's front cover artwork featured the first appearance of the Byrds ' colorful , psychedelic mosaic logo , variations of which would subsequently appear on a number of the band 's compilation albums , as well as on their 1967 release , Younger Than Yesterday . 
 The Fifth Dimension album received a mixed critical reception upon release and was less commercially successful than its predecessors , peaking at number 24 in the U.S. and number 27 in the UK . Band biographer Bud Scoppa has noted that with the album 's lackluster chart performance , its lukewarm critical reception , and the high @-@ profile loss of Gene Clark from the group , the Byrds ' popularity began to wane at this point and by late 1966 , the group had been all but forgotten by the mainstream pop audience . Nonetheless , the band were considered forefathers of the emerging rock underground , with many of the new L.A. and San Francisco groups of the day , including Love , Jefferson Airplane , and the Buffalo Springfield , publicly naming the Byrds as a primary influence . 
 The band returned to the studio between November 28 and December 8 , 1966 to record their fourth album , Younger Than Yesterday . With Allen Stanton having recently departed Columbia Records to work for A & M , the band chose to bring in producer Gary Usher to help guide them through the album sessions . Usher , who had a wealth of production experience and a love of innovative studio experimentation , would prove invaluable to the Byrds as they entered their most creatively adventurous phase . The first song to be recorded for the album was the McGuinn and Hillman @-@ penned " So You Want to Be a Rock ' n ' Roll Star " , a satirical and heavily sarcastic jibe at the manufactured nature of groups like The Monkees . The song features the trumpet playing of South African musician Hugh Masekela and as such , marks the first appearance of brass on a Byrds ' recording . " So You Want to Be a Rock ' n ' Roll Star " was issued as a single in January 1967 and peaked at number 29 in America but failed to chart in the UK . Despite this relatively poor chart showing , " So You Want to Be a Rock ' n ' Roll Star " has become one of the Byrds ' best @-@ known songs in the years since its initial release , inspiring cover versions by the likes of Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers and the Patti Smith Group amongst others . 
 Released in February 1967 , the Byrds ' fourth album , Younger Than Yesterday , was more varied than its predecessor and saw the band successfully mixing psychedelia with folk rock and country and western influences . Although it received generally positive reviews upon its release , the album was , to a degree , overlooked by the record @-@ buying public and consequently peaked at number 24 on the Billboard chart and number 37 on the UK Albums Chart . However , music expert Peter Buckley has pointed out that although the album may 've passed the Byrds ' rapidly shrinking teen audience by , it found favor with " a new underground following who disdained hit singles , but were coming to regard albums as major artistic statements . " 
 In addition to " So You Want to Be a Rock ' n ' Roll Star " , Younger Than Yesterday also includes the evocative Crosby and McGuinn penned song " Renaissance Fair " , a cover of Dylan 's " My Back Pages " ( which was later released as a single ) , and a quartet of Chris Hillman songs , which found the bassist emerging fully formed as an accomplished songwriter . Two of Hillman 's country @-@ oriented compositions on the album , " Time Between " and " The Girl with No Name " , can be seen as early indicators of the country rock direction that the band would pursue on later albums . Younger Than Yesterday also features the jazz @-@ tinged Crosby ballad " Everybody 's Been Burned " , which critic Thomas Ward has described as " one of the most haunting songs in the Byrds ' catalogue , and one of David Crosby 's finest compositions . " 
 By mid @-@ 1967 , Jim McGuinn had changed his first name to Roger , as a result of his interest in the Indonesian religion Subud , into which he had been initiated in January 1965 . The adoption of a new name was common among followers of the religion and served to signify a spiritual rebirth for the participant . Shortly after McGuinn 's name change , the band entered the studio to record the Crosby @-@ penned , non @-@ album single " Lady Friend " , which was released on July 13 , 1967 . The Byrds ' biographer Johnny Rogan has described " Lady Friend " as " a work of great maturity " and " the loudest , fastest and <unk> Byrds ' single to date . " Regardless of its artistic merits , however , the single stalled at a disappointing number 82 on the Billboard chart , despite the band making a number of high @-@ profile television appearances to promote the record . Crosby , who had closely overseen the recording of the song , was bitterly disappointed by the single 's lack of success and blamed Gary Usher 's mixing of the song as a factor in its commercial failure . 
 The poor sales suffered by " Lady Friend " were in stark contrast to the chart success of the band 's first compilation album , The Byrds ' Greatest Hits , which was released on August 7 , 1967 . Sanctioned by Columbia Records in the wake of the Top 10 success of Bob Dylan 's Greatest Hits , the album was a critical and commercial triumph , peaking at number 6 on the Billboard Top LPs chart and giving the band their highest @-@ charting album in America since their 1965 debut , Mr. Tambourine Man . Within a year , the compilation would be certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America , eventually going platinum on November 21 , 1986 , and is today the biggest @-@ selling album in the Byrds ' discography . 
 Prior to the release of The Byrds ' Greatest Hits , the band decided to dispense with the services of their co @-@ managers Jim Dickson and Eddie Tickner . The relationship between Dickson and the band had soured over recent months , and he and Tickner 's business arrangement with the Byrds was officially dissolved on June 30 , 1967 . At Crosby 's recommendation , Larry Spector was brought in to handle the Byrds ' business affairs , with the group electing to manage themselves to a large extent . 
 Between June and December 1967 , the Byrds worked on completing their fifth album , The Notorious Byrd Brothers . The lead single from the album was a cover of the Gerry Goffin and Carole King song " Goin ' Back " , which was released in October 1967 and peaked at number 89 on the Billboard chart . Despite this lack of commercial success , the Byrds ' rendition of " Goin ' Back " featured a band performance that author Ric Menck has described as " a beautiful recording " , while music critic Richie Unterberger has called it " a magnificent and melodic cover ... that should have been a big hit . " The song found the Byrds successfully blending their signature harmonies and chiming 12 @-@ string guitar playing with the sound of the pedal steel guitar for the first time , foreshadowing their extensive use of the instrument on their next album , Sweetheart of the Rodeo . 
 Released in January 1968 , The Notorious Byrd Brothers album saw the band taking their psychedelic experimentation to its furthest extremes by mixing folk rock , country music , jazz , and psychedelia ( often within a single song ) , while utilizing innovative studio production techniques such as phasing and flanging . The album featured contributions from a number of noted session musicians , including bluegrass guitarist and future Byrd , Clarence White . White , who had also played on Younger Than Yesterday , contributed country @-@ influenced guitar to the tracks " Natural Harmony " , " Wasn 't Born to Follow " and " Change Is Now " . Upon release , the album was almost universally praised by music critics but it was only moderately successful commercially , particularly in the United States where it peaked at number 47 . However , the album 's reputation has grown over the years and today it is widely regarded by critics and fans as one of the Byrds ' best album releases . 
 = = = Line @-@ up changes ( 1967 – 68 ) = = = 
 While the band worked on The Notorious Byrd Brothers album throughout late 1967 , there was increasing tension and acrimony between the members of the group , which eventually resulted in the departures of both Crosby and Clarke . McGuinn and Hillman became increasingly irritated by what they saw as Crosby 's overbearing egotism and his attempts to dictate the band 's musical direction . In addition , during the Byrds ' performance at the Monterey Pop Festival on June 17 , 1967 , Crosby gave lengthy in @-@ between @-@ song speeches on controversial subjects , including the JFK assassination and the benefits of giving LSD to " all the statesmen and politicians in the world " , to the intense annoyance of the other band members . He further irritated his bandmates by performing with rival group Buffalo Springfield at Monterey , filling in for ex @-@ member Neil Young . His reputation within the band deteriorated even more following the commercial failure of " Lady Friend " , the first Byrds ' single to feature a song penned solely by Crosby on its A @-@ side . 
 Tensions within the band finally erupted in August 1967 , during recording sessions for The Notorious Byrd Brothers album , when Michael Clarke quit the group over disputes with his bandmates and his dissatisfaction with the material that the songwriting members of the band were providing . Session drummers Jim Gordon and Hal Blaine were brought in to temporarily replace Clarke in the studio , although he continued to honor his live concert commitments with the group . Then , in September , Crosby refused to participate in the recording of the Goffin – King song " Goin ' Back " , considering it to be inferior to his own " Triad " , a controversial song about a ménage à trois that was in direct competition with " Goin ' Back " for a place on the album . Crosby felt that the band should rely on self @-@ penned material for their albums , rather than cover songs by other artists and writers . He would eventually give " Triad " to the San Francisco band Jefferson Airplane , who included a recording of it on their 1968 album , Crown of Creation . 
 Tensions reached a breaking point during October 1967 , when McGuinn and Hillman drove to Crosby 's home and fired him , stating that they would be better off without him . Crosby subsequently received a cash settlement , with which he bought a sailboat and soon after , he began working with Stephen Stills and Graham Nash in the successful supergroup Crosby , Stills & Nash . In the years since his exit from the Byrds , Crosby has enjoyed an influential and commercially successful career as a part of Crosby , Stills & Nash ( sometimes augmented by Neil Young ) , Crosby & Nash , CPR , and as a solo artist . During the 1980s , he fought against crippling drug addiction and eventually served a year in prison on drug @-@ related charges . He emerged from jail free of his drug habit and remains musically active up to the present day . 
 Following Crosby 's departure , Gene Clark briefly rejoined the band , but left just three weeks later , after again refusing to board an aircraft while on tour . There is some disagreement among biographers and band historians as to whether Clark actually participated in the recording sessions for The Notorious Byrd Brothers , but there is evidence to suggest that he sang backing vocals on the songs " Goin ' Back " and " Space Odyssey " . Michael Clarke also returned to the band briefly , towards the end of the album sessions , before being informed by McGuinn and Hillman that he was once again an ex @-@ member . 
 Now reduced to a duo , McGuinn and Hillman elected to hire new band members . Hillman 's cousin Kevin Kelley was quickly recruited as the band 's new drummer and the trio embarked on an early 1968 college tour in support of The Notorious Byrd Brothers . It soon became apparent , however , that recreating the band 's studio recordings with a three @-@ piece line @-@ up wasn 't going to be possible and so , McGuinn and Hillman , in a fateful decision for their future career direction , hired Gram Parsons as a keyboard player , although he quickly moved to guitar . Although Parsons and Kelley were both considered full members of the Byrds , they actually received a salary from McGuinn and Hillman , and did not sign with Columbia Records when the Byrds ' recording contract was renewed on February 29 , 1968 . 
 = = = Country rock ( 1968 – 73 ) = = = 
 = = = = The Gram Parsons era = = = = 
 Following his induction into the band , Gram Parsons began to assert his own musical agenda in which he intended to marry his love of country and western music with youth culture 's passion for rock and in doing so , make country music fashionable for a young audience . He found a kindred spirit in Hillman , who had played mandolin in a number of notable bluegrass bands before joining the Byrds . In addition , Hillman had also persuaded the Byrds to incorporate subtle country influences into their music in the past , beginning with the song " Satisfied Mind " on the Turn ! Turn ! Turn ! album . Although McGuinn had some reservations about the band 's proposed new direction , Parsons convinced him that a move towards country music could theoretically expand the group 's declining audience . Thus , McGuinn was persuaded to change direction and abandon his original concept for the group 's next album , which had been to record a history of 20th century American popular music , and instead explore country rock . 
 On March 9 , 1968 , the band decamped to Columbia 's recording studios in Nashville , Tennessee , with Clarence White in tow , to begin the recording sessions for the Sweetheart of the Rodeo album . While in Nashville , the Byrds also appeared at the Grand Ole Opry on March 15 , 1968 , where they performed the Merle Haggard song " Sing Me Back Home " and Parsons ' own " Hickory Wind " ( although they were actually scheduled to play a second Haggard song , " Life in Prison " ) . Being the first group of hippie " longhairs " ever to play at the venerable country music institution , the band was met with heckling , booing , and mocking calls of " tweet , tweet " from the conservative Opry audience . 
 The band also incurred the wrath of renowned country music DJ Ralph Emery , when they appeared on his Nashville @-@ based WSM radio program . Emery mocked the band throughout their interview and made no secret of his dislike for their newly recorded country rock single , " You Ain 't Goin ' Nowhere " . Parsons and McGuinn would later write the pointedly sarcastic song " Drug Store Truck Drivin ' Man " about Emery and their appearance on his show . Journalist David Fricke has noted that the reactions of Emery and the Grand Ole Opry audience were indicative of the resistance and hostility that the Byrds ' venture into country music provoked from the Nashville old guard . 
 Following their stay in Nashville , the band returned to Los Angeles and throughout April and May 1968 , they worked on completing their new country @-@ oriented album . During this period , Parsons attempted to exert a controlling influence over the group by pressuring McGuinn to recruit either JayDee Maness or Sneaky Pete Kleinow as the band 's permanent pedal steel guitar player . When McGuinn refused , Parsons next began to push for a higher salary , while also demanding that the group be billed as " Gram Parsons and the Byrds " on their forthcoming album . Even Hillman , who had previously been Parsons ' biggest supporter in the band , began to grow weary of his forceful demands . Ultimately , Parsons ' behavior led to a power struggle for control of the group , with McGuinn finding his position as band leader challenged . However , the April 1968 release of " You Ain 't Goin ' Nowhere " served to strengthen McGuinn 's position as head Byrd , with the guitarist 's familiar drawl occupying the lead vocal spot and negligible input from Parsons , despite the single 's obvious country leanings . 
 Parsons ' dominance over the band waned still further during post @-@ production for Sweetheart of the Rodeo , when his appearance on the album was contested by music business impresario Lee Hazlewood , who alleged that the singer was still under contract to his LHI record label , creating legal complications for Columbia Records . As a result of this , McGuinn and Hillman replaced Parsons ' lead vocals on the songs " You Don 't Miss Your Water " , " The Christian Life " , and " One Hundred Years from Now " before the legal problems could be resolved . However , album producer Gary Usher would later put a different slant on the events surrounding the removal of Parsons ' vocals by telling his biographer Stephen J. McParland that the alterations to the album arose out of creative concerns , not legal ones ; Usher and the band were both worried that Parsons ' contributions were dominating the record and so , his vocals were excised in an attempt to increase McGuinn and Hillman 's presence on the album . In the album 's final running order , Parsons is still featured as lead vocalist on the songs " You 're Still on My Mind " , " Life in Prison " , and " Hickory Wind " . 
 With their new album now completed , the Byrds flew to England for an appearance at a charity concert at the Royal Albert Hall on July 7 , 1968 . Following the concert , just prior to a tour of South Africa , Parsons quit the Byrds on the grounds that he did not want to perform in a racially segregated country ( apartheid did not end in South Africa until 1994 ) . Hillman doubted the sincerity of Parsons ' gesture , believing that the singer had in fact left the band in order to remain in England with Mick Jagger and Keith Richards of the Rolling Stones , whom he had recently befriended . Parsons stayed at Richards ' house in West Sussex immediately after leaving the Byrds , and the pair developed a close friendship over the next few years . After leaving the Byrds , Parsons would go on to produce an influential but commercially unsuccessful body of work , both as a solo artist and with the band the Flying Burrito Brothers ( which also featured Chris Hillman ) . He died on September 19 , 1973 , at the age of 26 , following an accidental overdose of morphine and alcohol in his room at the Joshua Tree Inn . 
 With Parsons gone from the band and their tour of South Africa due to begin in two days time , the Byrds were forced to draft in their roadie Carlos Bernal as a substitute rhythm guitar player . The ensuing South African tour was a disaster , with the band finding themselves having to play to segregated audiences — something that they had been assured by promoters they would not have to do . The under @-@ rehearsed band gave ramshackle performances to audiences that were largely unimpressed with their lack of professionalism and their antagonistic , anti @-@ apartheid stance . The Byrds left South Africa amid a storm of bad publicity and death threats , while the liberal press in the U.S. and the UK attacked the band for undertaking the tour and questioned their political integrity . McGuinn attempted to counter this criticism by asserting that the tour of South Africa had , in some small way , been an attempt to challenge the country 's political status quo and protest against apartheid . 
 After returning to California , the Byrds ' released the Sweetheart of the Rodeo album on August 30 , 1968 , almost eight weeks after Parsons had left the band . It comprised a mixture of country music standards and contemporary country material , along with a country reworking of William Bell 's soul hit " You Don 't Miss Your Water " . The album also included the Parsons originals " Hickory Wind " and " One Hundred Years from Now " , along with the Bob Dylan @-@ penned songs " Nothing Was Delivered " and " You Ain 't Goin ' Nowhere " , the latter of which had been a moderately successful single . Although it was not the first country rock album , Sweetheart of the Rodeo was the first album widely labeled as country rock to be released by an internationally successful rock act , pre @-@ dating Dylan 's Nashville Skyline by over six months . The first bona fide country rock album overall is often cited as being Parsons ' earlier Safe at Home , which he recorded with his group the International Submarine Band . 
 Unfortunately , the stylistic shift away from psychedelia towards country rock that Sweetheart of the Rodeo represented served to alienate much of the Byrds ' counterculture following , while at the same time , eliciting hostility from the ultra @-@ conservative Nashville country music establishment . As a result , the album peaked at number 77 on the U.S. charts and was the least commercially successful Byrds ' album to date upon its initial release . Today , however , it is considered a seminal and highly influential album , serving as a blueprint for the entire 1970s country rock movement , the outlaw country scene , and the alternative country genre of the 1990s and early 21st century . 
 = = = = The Clarence White era = = = = 
 After Gram Parsons ' departure , McGuinn and Hillman decided to recruit noted session guitarist Clarence White as a full @-@ time member of the band in late July 1968 . White , who had contributed countrified guitar playing to every Byrds ' album since 1967 's Younger Than Yesterday , was brought in at Hillman 's suggestion as someone who could handle the band 's older rock repertoire and their newer country @-@ oriented material . Shortly after his induction into the band , White began to express dissatisfaction with drummer Kevin Kelley and soon persuaded McGuinn and Hillman to replace him with Gene Parsons ( no relation to Gram ) , who White had previously played with in the country rock band Nashville West . 
 The McGuinn – Hillman – White – Parsons line @-@ up was together for less than a month before Hillman quit to join Gram Parsons in forming the Flying Burrito Brothers . Hillman had become increasingly disenchanted with the Byrds since the South African débâcle and he was also frustrated by business manager Larry Spector 's mishandling of the group 's finances . Things came to a head on September 15 , 1968 , following a band performance at the Rose Bowl stadium in Pasadena , when Hillman and Spector came to blows backstage . In a fit of rage , Hillman threw down his bass in disgust and walked out of the group . Following his exit , Hillman would have a successful career both as a solo artist and with bands such as the Flying Burrito Brothers , Manassas , the Souther – Hillman – Furay Band , and the Desert Rose Band . He remains active , releasing albums and touring , often with ex @-@ Desert Rose Band member Herb Pedersen . 
 As the only original band member left , McGuinn elected to hire bassist John York as Hillman 's replacement . York had previously been a member of the Sir Douglas Quintet and had also worked as a session musician with Johnny Rivers and the Mamas & the Papas . In October 1968 , the new line @-@ up entered Columbia Studios in Hollywood to begin recording the Dr. Byrds & Mr. Hyde album with producer Bob Johnston . The sessions saw the band juxtaposing their new country rock sound with more psychedelic @-@ oriented material , giving the resulting album a stylistic split personality that was alluded to in its title . In the wake of the recent changes in band personnel , McGuinn decided that it would be too confusing for fans of the group to hear the unfamiliar voices of White , Parsons and York coming forward at this stage , and so they were relegated to backing vocals on the album . As a result , Dr. Byrds & Mr. Hyde is unique in the Byrds ' back catalogue as McGuinn sings lead on every track . 
 The album was released on March 5 , 1969 to generally positive reviews but in America became the lowest @-@ charting album of the Byrds ' career , peaking at number 153 on the Billboard album charts . However the album fared much better in the UK , where it attracted glowing reviews and reached number 15 . A number of tracks on Dr Byrds & Mr. Hyde , including the instrumental " Nashville West " and the traditional song " Old Blue " , featured the sound of the Parsons and White designed <unk> ( also known as the B @-@ Bender ) , an invention that allowed White to duplicate the sound of a pedal steel guitar on his Fender Telecaster . The distinctive sound of the <unk> was characteristic of the Byrds ' music during White 's tenure . 
 Following the release of Dr. Byrds & Mr. Hyde the band issued a version of Dylan 's " Lay Lady Lay " as a single in May 1969 , which failed to reverse the group 's commercial fortunes in the U.S. , reaching number 132 . The Byrds ' producer Bob Johnston took it upon himself to overdub a female choir onto the record and the group became aware of this only after the single was issued leaving them incensed by what they saw as an embarrassing and incongruous addition . As a result , the band dispensed with Johnston and re @-@ enlisted Terry Melcher , who had produced the band 's first two albums , to produce their next LP . Although he was happy to accept the band 's invitation , Melcher insisted that he also manage the group to avoid a repeat of the conflict he had experienced in 1965 with Jim Dickson . 
 Prior to the release of the Byrds ' next studio album , however , the band 's former producer Gary Usher managed to acquire a number of demo recordings from Dickson , dating from the group 's 1964 rehearsal sessions at World Pacific Studios . These recordings were subsequently issued as the Preflyte album on Usher 's own Together Records imprint in July 1969 . Although the material on Preflyte was five years old at the time of its release , the album actually managed to outperform Dr. Byrds & Mr. Hyde in America , garnering moderately enthusiastic reviews and peaking at number 84 on the Billboard album chart . 
 Between June and August 1969 , the Byrds worked with Melcher to complete the Ballad of Easy Rider album . Musically the album consolidated and streamlined the band 's country rock sound , consisting mostly of cover versions and traditional material , with three self @-@ penned original songs . The first single to be released from the album was the title track , issued in October 1969 in America and reaching number 65 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart . Composed primarily by McGuinn , with some input from Bob Dylan ( although not credited ) , " Ballad of Easy Rider " was written as the theme tune for the 1969 countercultural film Easy Rider . However the Byrds ' recording of the song does not appear in the film , instead an acoustic version credited to McGuinn alone was used . However the Byrds ' song " Wasn 't Born to Follow " from The Notorious Byrd Brothers album was featured in Easy Rider and also included on the Easy Rider soundtrack album in August 1969 . The Byrds ' association with the film heightened their public profile and when the Ballad of Easy Rider album was released in November 1969 , it peaked at number 36 in the U.S. and number 41 in the UK , becoming the band 's highest charting album for two years in America . A second single taken from the album , " Jesus Is Just Alright " , was released in December 1969 but it only managed to reach number 97 . Despite this lack of commercial success , the Doobie Brothers ' later hit version of " Jesus Is Just Alright " features an arrangement that was heavily influenced by the Byrds ' recording . 
 Just prior to the release of Ballad of Easy Rider , the Byrds underwent yet another change in personnel when bassist John York was asked to leave the band in September 1969 . York had become disenchanted with his role in the Byrds and had voiced his reluctance to perform material that had been written and recorded by the group before he had joined . The rest of the band had begun to doubt his commitment and so , a consensus was reached among the other three members that York should be fired . He was replaced , at the suggestion of Parsons and White , by Skip Battin , a freelance session musician and one @-@ time member of the duo Skip & Flip . Battin 's recruitment marked the last personnel change to the group for almost three years and as a result , the McGuinn – White – Parsons – Battin line @-@ up became the most stable and longest @-@ lived of any configuration of the Byrds . 
 The latter @-@ day , post @-@ Sweetheart of the Rodeo version of the band , featuring McGuinn and White 's dual lead guitar work , toured relentlessly between 1969 and 1972 and was regarded by critics and audiences as much more accomplished in concert than any previous configuration of the Byrds had been . As a result of this , it was decided in early 1970 that the time was right for the group to issue a live album . However , it was also felt that the band had a sufficient backlog of new compositions to warrant the recording of a new studio album . It was therefore suggested by producer Terry Melcher that the band should release a double album , featuring one LP of concert recordings and another LP of new studio material . To help with the editing of the live recordings , the band 's ex @-@ manager Jim Dickson , who had been fired by the group in June 1967 , was invited back into the Byrds ' camp . At around this same time , former business manager Eddie Tickner also returned to the group 's employ as a replacement for Larry Spector , who had quit the management business and relocated to Big Sur . 
 The two @-@ record ( Untitled ) album was released by the Byrds on September 14 , 1970 to positive reviews and strong sales , with many critics and fans regarding the album as a return to form for the band . Peaking at number 40 on the Billboard Top LPs chart and number 11 in the UK , the album 's success continued the upward trend in the band 's commercial fortunes and popularity that had begun with the release of the Ballad of Easy Rider album . The live half of ( Untitled ) included both new material and new renditions of previous hit singles , including " Mr. Tambourine Man " , " So You Want to Be a Rock ' n ' Roll Star " and a 16 @-@ minute version of " Eight Miles High " , which comprised the whole of one side of the original LP release . Band biographer Johnny Rogan has noted that the inclusion of these newly recorded live versions of older songs served to forge a spiritual and musical link between the Byrds ' current line @-@ up and the original mid @-@ 1960s incarnation of the band . 
 The studio recordings featured on ( Untitled ) mostly consisted of newly written , self @-@ penned material , including a number of songs that had been composed by McGuinn and Broadway theatre impresario Jacques Levy for a planned country rock musical titled Gene <unk> that the pair were developing . Plans for the musical had fallen through and as a result , McGuinn decided to record some of the material originally intended for the production with the Byrds . Among the Gene <unk> songs included on ( Untitled ) was " Chestnut Mare " , which had originally been written for a scene in which the musical 's eponymous hero attempts to catch and tame a wild horse . The song was excerpted from the album and issued as a single in the U.S. on October 23 , 1970 , but it only managed to climb to number 121 on the Billboard chart . Nonetheless , the song went on to become a staple of FM radio programming in America during the 1970s . " Chestnut Mare " did much better in the UK , however , when it was released as a single on January 1 , 1971 , reaching number 19 on the UK Singles Chart and giving the Byrds their first UK Top 20 hit since their cover of Bob Dylan 's " All I Really Want to Do " had peaked at number 4 in September 1965 . 
 The Byrds returned to the recording studio with Melcher sporadically between October 1970 and early March 1971 , in order to complete the follow @-@ up to ( Untitled ) , which would be released in June 1971 as Byrdmaniax . Unfortunately , the grueling pace of the band 's touring schedule at the time meant that they were not fully prepared for the sessions and as a result , much of the material they recorded was under @-@ developed . Following completion of the album recording sessions , the Byrds once again headed out on tour , leaving Melcher and engineer Chris Hinshaw to finish mixing the album in their absence . Controversially , Melcher and Hinshaw elected to bring in arranger Paul <unk> to assist in the overdubbing of strings , horns , and a gospel choir onto many of the songs , allegedly without the band 's consent . Drummer Gene Parsons recalled in a 1997 interview that when the band heard Melcher 's additions they campaigned to have the album remixed and the orchestration removed but Columbia Records refused , citing budget restrictions , and the record was duly pressed up and released . 
 In May 1971 , just prior to the release of the Byrdmaniax album , the Byrds undertook a sell @-@ out tour of England and Europe , which included a performance at the Royal Albert Hall in London that was released for the first time in 2008 as Live at Royal Albert Hall 1971 . The British and European press were unanimous in their praise of the Byrds ' live performances during the tour , reinforcing their reputation as a formidable live act during this period . Over the course of the tour , the band chose to expand their ranks , with roadie Jimmi Seiter joining the group on stage to provide additional percussion as an unofficial member . Seiter would continue to sit in with the Byrds during their live performances until August 1971 , when he decided to leave the group 's employ . 
 When the Byrdmaniax album was released on June 23 , 1971 it was received poorly by most critics and did much to undermine the new @-@ found popularity that the Byrds had enjoyed since the release of Ballad of Easy Rider . The response to the album from the American music press was particularly scathing , with a review in the August 1971 edition of Rolling Stone magazine describing the Byrds as " a boring dead group " and memorably dismissing the entire album as " increments of pus " . The consensus among most reviewers was that Byrdmaniax was hampered by Melcher 's inappropriate orchestration and by being an album almost totally bereft of the Byrds ' signature sound . The band themselves were publicly critical of the album upon its release , with Gene Parsons referring to it as " Melcher 's folly " . For his part , Melcher later stated that he felt that the band 's performances in the studio during the making of Byrdmaniax were lackluster and he therefore employed the orchestration in order to cover up the album 's musical shortcomings . Regardless , by the time of the album 's release , Melcher had resigned as the Byrds ' manager and producer . Despite the band 's dissatisfaction with the finished product and its poor critical reception , Byrdmaniax made a respectable showing on the U.S. charts , peaking at number 46 . However , the album failed to sell in sufficient quantities to reach the UK charts . Author Christopher Hjort has noted that in the years since its release , Byrdmaniax has become arguably " the least @-@ liked album in the Byrds catalogue " among the group 's fanbase . 
 The Byrds moved quickly to record a self @-@ produced follow @-@ up to Byrdmaniax , in an attempt to stem the criticism that the album was receiving in the music press and as a reaction to their own dislike of Melcher 's overproduction . Johnny Rogan has speculated that the Byrds ' decision to produce their next album themselves was an attempt on the band 's part to prove that they could do a better job than Melcher had done on their previous record . While in England for an appearance at the Lincoln Folk Festival , the Byrds decamped to CBS Studios in London with engineer Mike Ross and between July 22 and 28 , 1971 , they recorded an album 's worth of new material . 
 In October 1971 , CBS Records in the UK issued The Byrds ' Greatest Hits Volume II to capitalize on the group 's recent appearance at the Lincoln Folk Festival and perhaps as a reaction to the chart failure suffered by Byrdmaniax . Unfortunately , the compilation album also failed to reach the UK charts , while contemporary reviews made note of its misleading and inaccurate title , since among its twelve tracks , only " Chestnut Mare " had been a genuine hit in the United Kingdom . An equivalent compilation wasn 't released in the U.S. until November 1972 , when The Best of The Byrds : Greatest Hits , Volume II was issued . 
 On November 17 , 1971 , less than five months after the release of Byrdmaniax , the Byrds issued their eleventh studio album , Farther Along . The album was met with slightly more enthusiastic reviews than its predecessor but nevertheless , only managed to climb to number 152 on the Billboard Top LPs chart , while failing to reach the charts in the United Kingdom altogether . Musically , the album found the Byrds beginning to move away from their country rock sound — although at least half the album still bore a strong country influence — and instead , embrace a style indebted to 1950s rock ' n ' roll music . The Skip Battin and Kim Fowley penned song " America 's Great National Pastime " was taken from the album and released as a single in late November , but it failed to chart on either side of the Atlantic . Johnny Rogan has concluded that , ultimately , the rapidity with which the Byrds planned and recorded Farther Along resulted in an album that was just as flawed as Byrdmaniax and as a result , it failed to rehabilitate the band 's ailing commercial fortunes or increase their declining audience . The album 's title track , sung by White with the rest of the group harmonizing , would later become a poignant and prophetic epitaph for the guitarist when it was sung by ex @-@ Byrd Gram Parsons and the Eagles ' Bernie Leadon at White 's funeral in July 1973 . 
 Following the release of Farther Along , the Byrds continued to tour throughout 1972 , but no new album or single release was forthcoming . In July of that year , Gene Parsons was fired from the group for a number of reasons , including McGuinn 's growing dissatisfaction with his drumming , disagreements that he and McGuinn were having over band members ' pay , and his own discontent over the band 's lack of morale during this period . Parsons was quickly replaced with L.A. session drummer John Guerin , who remained with the Byrds until January 1973 , when he decided to return to studio work . Although Guerin participated in recording sessions with the band and appeared on stage with them from September 1972 , he was never an official member of the Byrds and instead received a standard session musician 's wage , while continuing to undertake work for other artists as an in @-@ demand studio player . Three officially released Byrds recordings exist of the McGuinn – White – Battin – Guerin line @-@ up : live versions of " Mr. Tambourine Man " and " Roll Over Beethoven " that were recorded for the soundtrack of the Earl Scruggs ' film <unk> , and a studio recording of " Bag Full of Money " that was included as a bonus track on the remastered reissue of Farther Along in 2000 . 
 Following Guerin 's departure , he was temporarily replaced for live performances by session drummer Dennis Dragon . The band underwent a further personnel change following a February 10 , 1973 show in Ithaca , New York , when Skip Battin was dismissed by McGuinn , who had capriciously decided that the bassist 's playing abilities were no longer of a sufficient standard . McGuinn turned to ex @-@ Byrd Chris Hillman , who at that time was a member of the band Manassas , and asked him to step in as Battin 's replacement for two upcoming shows on February 23 and 24 . Hillman agreed to play both concerts for the sum of $ 2 @,@ 000 and also brought in Manassas ' drummer Joe Lala to fill the vacant spot behind the drum kit . Following a shambolic , under @-@ rehearsed performance at The Capitol Theatre , Passaic , New Jersey on February 24 , 1973 , McGuinn cancelled the band 's remaining concert commitments and disbanded the touring version of the Byrds , in order to make way for a reunion of the original five @-@ piece line @-@ up of the band . Five months later , guitarist Clarence White was killed by a drunk driver on July 14 , 1973 , while he loaded guitar equipment into the back of a van after a concert appearance in Palmdale , California . 
 = = = Reunions = = = 
 = = = = 1972 – 73 reunion = = = = 
 The five original members of the Byrds reunited briefly during late 1972 , while McGuinn was still undertaking selected concerts with the Columbia Records version of the group . Discussions regarding a reunion between Roger McGuinn , Gene Clark , David Crosby , Chris Hillman , and Michael Clarke had taken place as early as July 1971 , around the same time as the then current line @-@ up of the band were recording the Farther Along album . Plans for a reunion accelerated in mid @-@ 1972 , however , when the founder of Asylum Records , David Geffen , offered each of the original band members a sizable amount of money to reform and record an album for his label . The reunion actually took place in early October 1972 , beginning with a rehearsal at McGuinn 's house , where the group began selecting suitable material for a new album . The five original Byrds booked into Wally Heider Studios in Los Angeles from October 16 until November 15 , 1972 , recording their first album together in seven years . 
 Following completion of the album recording sessions , Crosby persuaded McGuinn to dissolve the Columbia version of the Byrds , who were still touring at that time . Crosby had long been vocal regarding his displeasure over McGuinn 's decision to recruit new band members following his dismissal from the group in 1967 , and had stated in a number of interviews that in his opinion " there were only ever five Byrds . " In keeping with the new spirit of reconciliation that the reunion fostered , McGuinn permanently disbanded the Columbia line @-@ up of the group in February 1973 . 
 The reunion album , titled simply Byrds , was released on March 7 , 1973 to mixed reviews . As a result , a planned tour in support of the album failed to materialize . Among the album 's shortcomings , critics made note of a lack of sonic unity and the absence of the Byrds ' signature jangly guitar sound . Nonetheless , the album managed to climb to number 20 on the Billboard Top LPs & Tapes chart and number 31 in the UK . In the United States , the album became the band 's highest charting LP of new material since 1965 's Turn ! Turn ! Turn ! , which had also been the last Byrds ' album to feature Gene Clark as a full member . Among the tracks included on the album were McGuinn 's folk @-@ flavored " Sweet Mary " , the Joni Mitchell cover " For Free " , a re @-@ recording of Crosby 's song " Laughing " ( which had originally appeared on his 1971 solo album , If I Could Only Remember My Name ) , and a pair of Neil Young songs . The album also featured the Gene Clark compositions " Changing Heart " and " Full Circle " , the latter of which had provided the reunion album with its working title and was subsequently released as a single , although it failed to chart . 
 The negative critical reception that Byrds received in the music press resulted in the band losing faith in the idea of an ongoing series of reunions . In the years following its release , all five band members were openly critical of the album , with the general consensus being that the material included on it was weak and that the recording sessions had been rushed and ill @-@ thought out . In addition , McGuinn and Hillman have both suggested that with the exception of Gene Clark , the songwriting members of the band were reluctant to bring their strongest compositions to the recording sessions , preferring instead to hold those songs back for their own solo projects . In the wake of the reunion , the five original Byrds quietly returned to their own careers , with the June 1973 release of McGuinn 's eponymously titled solo album serving to effectively mark the end of the Byrds . 
 Following the reunion of 1972 / 1973 , the Byrds remained disbanded throughout the rest of the decade . Roger McGuinn turned his attention to establishing his own career , releasing a series of solo albums between 1973 and 1977 , and making a high @-@ profile appearance with Bob Dylan 's Rolling Thunder Revue . Chris Hillman worked as part of the Souther – Hillman – Furay Band following the Byrds reunion and released a pair of solo albums entitled Slippin ' Away and Clear Sailin ' in 1976 and 1977 respectively . David Crosby returned to the supergroup Crosby , Stills , Nash & Young for their 1974 tour and subsequently continued to produce albums with Graham Nash . He also took part in a 1977 reunion of Crosby , Stills & Nash , which saw the group release their multi @-@ platinum selling CSN album . Michael Clarke also found success following the Byrds reunion as the drummer for soft rock group Firefall , while Gene Clark returned to his solo career , producing the critically acclaimed but commercially unsuccessful albums No Other ( 1974 ) and Two Sides to Every Story ( 1977 ) . In addition , between 1977 and 1980 , McGuinn , Clark and Hillman worked on and off together as a trio , modeled after Crosby , Stills , Nash & Young and , to a lesser extent , the Eagles . This supergroup made up of former Byrds was reasonably successful commercially and even managed to score a Top 40 hit with the single " Don 't You Write Her Off " in March 1979 . The trio toured internationally and recorded the albums McGuinn , Clark & Hillman and City . Clark departed the group in late 1979 , resulting in a third and final album being billed as McGuinn @-@ Hillman . 
 = = = = Ersatz Byrds and further reunions ( 1989 – 91 ; 2000 ) = = = = 
 In 1984 , Gene Clark approached McGuinn , Crosby , and Hillman in an attempt to reform the Byrds in time for the 20th anniversary of the release of the " Mr. Tambourine Man " single in 1985 . None of these three original members were interested in the venture and so Clark instead assembled a group of musicians and friends , including Rick Roberts , Blondie Chaplin , Rick Danko , Richard Manuel , and the ex @-@ Byrds Michael Clarke and John York , under the banner of " The 20th Anniversary Tribute to The Byrds " and began performing on the lucrative nostalgia circuit in early 1985 . A number of concert promoters began to shorten the band 's name to The Byrds in advertisements and promotional material . As the band continued to tour throughout 1985 , they eventually decided to shorten their name to the Byrds themselves , prompting McGuinn , Crosby and Hillman to berate the tribute group in interviews , with McGuinn deriding the act as " a cheap show . " 
 After the tour wound down in late 1985 , Clark returned to his solo career , leaving Michael Clarke to soldier on with a band that was now billed as " A Tribute to The Byrds " ( although again , it was often shortened to the Byrds by promoters ) . Gene Clark returned to the group following the release of his and Carla Olsen 's So Rebellious a Lover album , and the tribute band continued to work on and off from 1987 to 1988 . Author Johnny Rogan has noted that most die @-@ hard fans of the Byrds were mortified by the existence of this ersatz version of the group , while Byrds expert Tim Connors has commented that " no chapter in the history of the Byrds caused as much consternation and controversy among fans . " 
 In June 1988 , McGuinn , Crosby and Hillman appeared at a concert celebrating the reopening of the Ash Grove folk club in Los Angeles . Although they were billed as solo artists , the three musicians did come together for an on @-@ stage reunion during the show , performing a string of Byrds hits including " Mr. Tambourine Man " and " Eight Miles High " . Although Clark and Clarke 's Byrds tribute group was inactive at the time of this high @-@ profile get @-@ together of McGuinn , Crosby and Hillman , Michael Clarke did mount another tribute tour shortly afterwards , this time featuring former Byrd Skip Battin and newcomers Terry Jones Rogers and Jerry <unk> , under the banner of " The Byrds featuring Michael Clarke " . In addition , the drummer also sought to trademark the name " The Byrds " for his own use . 
 In retaliation against Clarke 's trademark application , McGuinn , Crosby and Hillman submitted their own counter @-@ claim to gain ownership of the band 's name . McGuinn had actually attempted to trademark the Byrds name himself during the 1970s , in order to prevent its misuse , but his application had been turned down . To strengthen their case , the three musicians announced in December 1988 that they would be performing a series of concerts in January 1989 as the Byrds . Although he was no longer connected with Clarke 's tribute act , Gene Clark was not invited to participate in these official Byrds reunion concerts due to residual ill @-@ feeling stemming from his earlier " 20th Anniversary Tribute to The Byrds " . 
 The reunion concerts were a resounding success but with Michael Clarke continuing to tour with his Byrds tribute , McGuinn , Crosby and Hillman filed a lawsuit against the drummer in the spring of 1989 , suing him for allegedly false advertising , unfair competition and deceptive trade practices , as well as seeking a preliminary injunction against Clarke 's use of the name . At the court hearing in May 1989 , the judge denied the injunction , ruling that McGuinn , Crosby and Hillman had failed to show that they would be irreparably damaged by Clarke 's actions . As a result , Clarke gained full legal ownership of the name the Byrds . In the wake of this ruling , McGuinn , Crosby and Hillman dropped their lawsuit , but to demonstrate that they had not wholly surrendered the Byrds name to Clarke , the three musicians appeared under the banner of " The Original Byrds " at a Roy Orbison tribute concert on February 24 , 1990 , where they were joined on @-@ stage by Bob Dylan for a rendition of " Mr. Tambourine Man " . Later that year , McGuinn , Crosby and Hillman entered Treasure Isle Recorders in Nashville to record four new Byrds tracks for inclusion on the forthcoming The Byrds box set . 
 On January 16 , 1991 , the five original members of the Byrds put aside their differences to appear together at the Waldorf @-@ Astoria Hotel in New York City for their induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame . The ceremony honored the original line @-@ up of Roger McGuinn , Gene Clark , David Crosby , Chris Hillman , and Michael Clarke , while later configurations of the group featuring such key personnel as Gram Parsons and Clarence White were quietly passed over . The occasion , which saw the band come together on stage to perform the songs " Turn ! Turn ! Turn ! ( to Everything There Is a Season ) " , " Mr. Tambourine Man " , and " I 'll Feel a Whole Lot Better " , represented the first time that all five original Byrds had stood together since 1973 . Unfortunately , it would also represent the last time that the five original members were gathered together . Clark died later that year of heart failure , and on December 19 , 1993 , Clarke succumbed to liver disease brought on by alcoholism . 
 Following Clarke 's death , Terry Jones Rogers resurrected the Byrds tribute act , with guitarist Scott <unk> and former Byrds Skip Battin and Gene Parsons on bass and drums respectively . Performing under the banner of The Byrds Celebration , the tribute group toured extensively throughout the remainder of the 1990s , although Parsons was replaced by session drummer Vince Barranco in 1995 and Battin was forced to retire due to ill @-@ health in 1997 . Since 2002 , Rogers and <unk> have continued to tour as part of the band Younger Than Yesterday : A Tribute to the Byrds , along with bassist Michael Curtis and drummer Tim <unk> . 
 McGuinn , Crosby and Hillman all returned to their individual solo careers following the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame ceremony . However , the Byrds did reunite for a third time on August 8 , 2000 , to give an impromptu , one @-@ off performance at a tribute concert for Fred <unk> , the owner of a Los Angeles music equipment store who was suffering from throat cancer . Crosby and Hillman were booked to appear at the event separately , but McGuinn , who was not listed on the bill , made a surprise appearance and joined his two former partners on stage . McGuinn introduced the hastily reformed trio with the words , " And now , ladies and gentlemen , the Byrds " , as the group launched into renditions of " Mr. Tambourine Man " and " Turn ! Turn ! Turn ! ( to Everything There Is a Season ) " . According to contemporary press reports , the reunion was an unmitigated success , with the audience giving the band multiple standing ovations and shouting for more as they left the stage . 
 During the 2000s , two more ex @-@ members of the Byrds died when drummer Kevin Kelley succumbed of natural causes in 2002 and bassist Skip Battin , who was suffering from Alzheimer 's disease , died at his home in 2003 . Former members Gene Parsons and John York both remain active and continue to perform and record various musical projects . Perhaps the most surprising development in the Byrds ' story during the 2000s , however , was the acquisition by David Crosby of the rights to the band 's name in 2002 . Ownership of the Byrds ' name had reverted to Clarke 's estate upon his death in 1993 and Crosby 's purchase served to effectively bring the convoluted battle for control of the group 's name to an end . 
 To date , the Fred <unk> tribute concert appearance in 2000 represents the last time that the Byrds have performed together . However , Hillman and Crosby have both expressed an interest in working with McGuinn again on future Byrds projects , but the lead guitarist and head Byrd remains adamant that he is not interested in another reunion . During an interview with music journalist John Nork , McGuinn replied " absolutely not , " when asked if he had any plans to revive the Byrds , explaining , " No , I don 't want to do that . I just want to be a solo artist . The Byrds are well documented . I don 't think we need anymore from the Byrds . " 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Since the band 's 1960s heyday , the influence of the Byrds on successive generations of rock and pop musicians has grown steadily , with acts such as the Eagles , Big Star , Tom Petty & the Heartbreakers , R.E.M. , the Bangles , the Smiths , and innumerable alternative rock bands of the post @-@ punk era all exhibiting signs of their influence . Musician and author Peter Lavezzoli described the Byrds in 2007 as " one of the few bands to exert a decisive influence on the Beatles " , while also noting that they helped to persuade Bob Dylan to begin recording with electric instrumentation . Lavezzoli concluded that " like it or not , terms like " folk rock , " " raga rock " and " country rock " were coined for a reason : the Byrds did it first , and then kept moving , never staying in the " raga " or " country " mode for very long . This is precisely what made the Byrds such a rewarding band to follow from one record to the next . " 
 In his book The Great Rock Discography , music researcher Martin C. Strong describes the Byrds ' cover of " Mr. Tambourine Man " as " a timeless slice of hypnotic , bittersweet pop " and a record that " did nothing less than change the course of pop / rock history . " Author and musician Bob Stanley , writing in his 2013 book Yeah Yeah Yeah : The Story of Modern Pop , has called the Byrds ' music " a phenomenon , a drone , genuinely hair @-@ raising and totally American . " 
 In his book Riot on Sunset Strip : Rock ' n ' Roll 's Last Stand in 60s Hollywood , music historian Domenic Priore attempts to sum up the band 's influence by noting , " Few of The Byrds ' contemporaries can claim to have made such a subversive impact on popular culture . The band had a much larger , more positive impact on the world at large than any Billboard chart position or album sales or concert attendance figure could possibly measure . " 
 In 2004 , Rolling Stone magazine ranked the Byrds at number 45 on their list of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time . 
 = = Members = = 
 Original members 
 Roger McGuinn – lead guitar , banjo , Moog synthesizer , vocals ( 1964 – 73 , 1989 – 91 , 2000 ) 
 Gene Clark – tambourine , rhythm guitar , harmonica , vocals ( 1964 – 66 , 1967 , 1972 – 73 , 1991 ) 
 David Crosby – rhythm guitar , vocals ( 1964 – 67 , 1972 – 73 , 1989 – 91 , 2000 ) 
 Michael Clarke – drums ( 1964 – 67 , 1972 – 73 , 1991 ) 
 Chris Hillman – bass guitar , rhythm guitar , mandolin , vocals ( 1964 – 68 , 1972 – 73 , 1989 – 91 , 2000 ) 
 Subsequent members 
 Kevin Kelley – drums ( 1968 ) 
 Gram Parsons – rhythm guitar , piano , organ , vocals ( 1968 ) 
 Clarence White – lead guitar , mandolin , vocals ( 1968 – 73 ) 
 Gene Parsons – drums , banjo , harmonica , pedal steel guitar , rhythm guitar , vocals ( 1968 – 72 ) 
 John York – bass guitar , vocals ( 1968 – 69 ) 
 Skip Battin – bass guitar , piano , vocals ( 1969 – 73 ) 
 Membership timeline ( 1964 – 73 ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 Mr. Tambourine Man ( 1965 ) 
 Turn ! Turn ! Turn ! ( 1965 ) 
 Fifth Dimension ( 1966 ) 
 Younger Than Yesterday ( 1967 ) 
 The Notorious Byrd Brothers ( 1968 ) 
 Sweetheart of the Rodeo ( 1968 ) 
 Dr. Byrds & Mr. Hyde ( 1969 ) 
 Ballad of Easy Rider ( 1969 ) 
 ( Untitled ) ( 1970 ) 
 Byrdmaniax ( 1971 ) 
 Farther Along ( 1971 ) 
 Byrds ( 1973 ) 
 = Otto Becher = 
 Rear Admiral Otto Humphrey Becher , CBE , DSO , DSC & Bar ( 13 September 1908 – 15 June 1977 ) was a senior officer in the Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) . Born in Harvey , Western Australia , Becher entered the Royal Australian Naval College in 1922 . After graduating in 1926 , he was posted to a series of staff and training positions prior to specialising in gunnery . 
 A lieutenant commander at the outbreak of the Second World War , Becher assisted in the extraction of Allied troops from the Namsos region of Norway while aboard the heavy cruiser HMS Devonshire , and was decorated with the Distinguished Service Cross . Following service in the Mediterranean theatre , he returned to Australia in 1942 as officer @-@ in @-@ charge of the gunnery school at HMAS Cerberus . He spent two years at Cerberus before being given command of the Q class destroyer HMAS Quickmatch in March 1944 . While commanding Quickmatch in operations against Japanese forces in the Pacific , Becher earned a Bar to his Distinguished Service Cross . 
 At the war 's end Becher was posted to the Navy Office and later to the aircraft carrier HMAS Sydney ; in 1951 he was given command of the destroyer HMAS Warramunga . Warramunga formed part of Australia 's contribution to the United Nations forces engaged in the Korean War ; Becher was promoted to captain and awarded the Distinguished Service Order while carrying out operations in Korean waters . On returning to Australia , he filled several staff positions and commanded the aircraft carriers HMAS Melbourne and HMS Vengeance . Promoted to rear admiral in 1959 , he served as Flag Officer Commanding Australian Fleet from 1964 to 1965 , before taking up the post of Flag Officer @-@ in @-@ Charge East Australia Area . Becher retired from the RAN in 1966 , and died in 1977 at the age of 68 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Otto Becher was born in Harvey , Western Australia , on 13 September 1908 , to Francis Joseph Becher , an orchardist , and Antonia Amalie ( née Vetter ) . On 1 January 1922 , at the age of thirteen , he enrolled in the Royal Australian Naval College at Jervis Bay , where he performed well both academically and at sport , receiving colours for hockey and tennis . Graduating in 1926 , he served as a midshipman aboard HMAS Adelaide and later HMAS Brisbane , before being posted to the United Kingdom in September of that year for further sea @-@ training and professional development with the Royal Navy . 
 Becher was promoted to acting sub @-@ lieutenant in September 1928 ; the rank was made substantive the following March . He returned to Australia in January 1930 and was raised to lieutenant , gaining further seafaring experience over the next two years on HMAS Australia and HMAS Canberra . Deciding to specialise in gunnery , he attended an advanced course at the Royal Navy 's gunnery school at HMS Excellent in England from 1932 until 1934 . Returning to Australia after completing the course , on 7 January 1935 , Becher married Valerie Chisholm Baird at St Michael 's Anglican Church in Vaucluse , New South Wales ; the couple would have three sons . 
 From May 1934 to June 1935 , Becher was posted to the gunnery school at the shore establishment HMAS Cerberus in Victoria . He later completed two years aboard HMAS Canberra as intelligence officer , and in 1937 was transferred to HMAS Stuart for flotilla duties . Promoted to lieutenant commander on 16 June 1938 , Becher briefly returned to Cerberus before embarking for the United Kingdom on exchange with the Royal Navy in January 1939 . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 Becher was serving as squadron gunnery officer aboard the Royal Navy heavy cruiser HMS Devonshire ] when the Second World War broke out . In May 1940 , Devonshire was dispatched to the Namsos region of Norway to assist in the extraction of Allied troops . Commended for his " daring , resource and devotion " during the operation , Becher was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross . The notification for the decoration was published in a supplement to the London Gazette on 19 July 1940 , and the investiture ceremony was held by King George VI at Buckingham Palace on 11 March 1941 . 
 In late November 1940 , Becher transferred to the recently launched destroyer HMAS Napier as part of the ship 's commissioning crew . While completing working @-@ up exercises , Napier was tasked with transferring British Prime Minister Winston Churchill and his wife from Thurso in Scotland to the battleship HMS King George V , and later returning them to the mainland . With her working @-@ up complete , Napier was initially posted to convoy duties in the North Atlantic , before setting sail in April 1941 with HMAS Nizam for the Mediterranean Sea . Arriving in May , she formed up as part of the Mediterranean Fleet . 
 Napier assisted in the evacuation of British and Commonwealth troops from the island of Crete in late May , following the successful Axis invasion . On one such occasion the vessel embarked 296 soldiers , three women , one Greek and one Chinese civilian , ten sailors , two children and a dog . Returning to Alexandria , the destroyer came under attack but arrived unscathed . Two days later Napier was less fortunate ; having taken 705 soldiers on board , she was targeted on her return journey by a formation of twelve German dive @-@ bombers . The ship was struck twice by bombs and suffered damage to the stern , the engine room and boiler room . One of the aircraft was shot down and a further three damaged . Although no allied casualties were sustained and the destroyer arrived safely in Alexandria , she spent the next two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half months in Port Said under repair . 
 Becher returned to Australia in early 1942 , and from 17 May was appointed officer @-@ in @-@ charge of the gunnery school at HMAS Cerberus . He remained at this post for almost two years until , on 12 March 1944 , he was given command of the destroyer HMAS Quickmatch — formed up as part of the Eastern Fleet . On 22 July , Quickmatch was among a 23 @-@ vessel strong task force that set out from Trincomalee to assault the Japanese naval base off northern Sumatra at Sabang Island . The formation approached Sabang on the night of 24 / 25 July , launching fighter strikes on airfields in the area at first light . At 06 : 55 , the fleet bombarded the harbour installations , coastal defence batteries and the military barracks . As the formation 's two battleships maintained their fire , Quickmatch joined three other ships that entered the harbour to carry out close @-@ range bombardment . After completing their task , Quickmatch and her fellows withdrew under the cover of fire from two cruisers . Praised for his " outstanding courage and skill " in pressing home the assault , Becher was awarded a Bar to his Distinguished Service Cross , announced in a supplement to the London Gazette on 31 October 1944 . 
 In October 1944 , Quickmatch was transferred to Australian waters and underwent her annual refit at Sydney from November to December . Once the refit was completed she operated mainly off the Australian coast . During the early hours of 25 December 1944 , the Navy Office in Melbourne received an SOS from the SS Robert J. Walker , reporting that she had been torpedoed by a submarine while travelling from Fremantle , Western Australia , to Sydney . Aircraft were dispatched to provide aerial cover , and HMA Ships Quickmatch , Kiama and Yandra were directed to Robert J. Walker 's position . Quickmatch and Yandra were to operate against the submarine , while Kiama was to take the Robert J. Walker under tow . Arriving at the reported location at approximately 23 : 30 that evening , Quickmatch , under the command of Becher , and Kiama patrolled the vicinity in search of the submarine and Robert J. Walker 's crew . Sixty @-@ seven men were discovered in lifeboats at 05 : 45 the following morning and were taken aboard Quickmatch ; Robert J. Walker had sunk two hours earlier with the loss of two crew . 
 Becher was promoted to commander on 31 December 1944 , and the following month Quickmatch was transferred to the recently established British Pacific Fleet . On 28 February , the British Pacific Fleet , including Quickmatch , sailed from Sydney Harbour for Manus Island to prepare for its role in support of the planned United States invasion of Okinawa . The fleet engaged in eleven days of exercises at Manus before departing for Ulithi , and on 23 March was attached to the United States Fifth Fleet with the designation " Task Force 57 " . Setting sail for Okinawa two days later , the fleet launched air strikes against airfield targets in the Sakishima Islands on 26 and 27 March . During these operations Quickmatch formed part of the escort for the fleet 's aircraft carriers . Becher later stated : " These two days ' operations were successful , the enemy airstrips being neutralised and a number of aircraft being destroyed on the ground . " Task Force 57 continued operations around the Sakishima Islands for the following two months to cover the United States ' left flank , with Quickmatch forming part of the carrier force 's escort throughout this period . 
 On 25 June 1945 , Becher relinquished command of the Quickmatch and returned to Australia , where he was attached to the shore base HMAS Penguin . For his " distinguished service ... in the Pacific " he received a Mention in Despatches . In August , he transferred to HMAS Cerberus for duties with the Navy Office . 
 = = Interbellum and Korean War = = 
 Becher remained with the Navy Office until November 1947 , when he was posted to the United Kingdom to join the aircraft carrier HMAS Sydney 's commissioning crew . Embarking from Melbourne during February 1948 , he was temporarily attached to HMS Drake and later HMS Glory until Sydney 's commissioning on 16 December . His service aboard the aircraft carrier lasted for two years , and was followed on 23 January 1950 by an appointment as Commanding Officer to the shore establishment HMAS Watson . However , Becher 's time at Watson was cut short when , on 28 July , he relieved Captain Alan McNicoll as commander of the destroyer HMAS Warramunga , which had been selected for service in the Korean War . Warramunga was to be attached to a force of five Royal Navy destroyers led by a captain , making it expedient to have the Australian ship commanded by an officer of lower rank . 
 Warramunga arrived in Korean waters in late August 1950 . After some initial escort work , the destroyer joined HMAS Bataan as part of the carrier HMS Triumph 's protective screen while the latter contributed air cover to the Allied landing at Inchon on 15 September . For the next three months , Warramunga engaged in patrol and screening duties , in addition to transporting food for famine relief . 
 On 4 December , Warramunga and Bataan supported the emergency withdrawal of Allied troops from <unk> . Becher decided to sail up a channel of the Taedong River known as Short Cut , which according to his charts should have allowed him five to ten feet of clearance . The chart proved inaccurate , and Warramunga ran aground at 23 : 15 ; Becher 's only option was to wait for the rising tide to float the destroyer off . Warramunga came free at 23 : 50 without having sustained damage , and was able to resume her mission , escorting troop transports south . Later , Becher brought Warramunga alongside Bataan and entreated the latter 's commander , via megaphone , to keep quiet about the incident . With Becher 's promotion to captain due , he was concerned that if the Naval Board became aware of the grounding his promotion would be delayed until an investigation had taken place . His " well @-@ earned " rise in rank came through as scheduled on 31 December . On the journey south , Warramunga 's crew developed a new way of signalling between ships that was considerably quicker than using international code flags . Known to the crew as the " Murphy Method " , it involved wrapping messages around potatoes and throwing them from one ship to the other . 
 Warramunga participated in the Siege of Wonsan during late February 1951 , where she engaged and partially destroyed North Korean shore batteries , as well as shelling buildings and transport infrastructure . Despite coming under fire the destroyer sustained no damage . For the remainder of her tour in Korea , Warramunga took part in patrols and shore bombardments , earning special praise from Vice Admiral C. Turner Joy , Commander US Naval Forces Far East , for the accuracy of her gunnery . 
 On 17 July 1951 , it was announced that Becher had been appointed as an honorary aide @-@ de @-@ camp to the Governor @-@ General of Australia for a period of three years . Following Warramunga 's departure from Korean waters on 1 August , Rear Admiral Alan Scott @-@ Moncrieff , Commander West Coast Blockade Force , commented : " She has been a tower of strength and done an incredible amount of steaming with no troubles at all . I cannot speak too highly of Captain O. H. Becher and his men ... " Together with Bataan , Warramunga had borne the brunt of Australia 's naval contribution to the Korean War . Noting his " courage , skill and determination " , a recommendation for Becher to be awarded the Distinguished Service Order was approved by the Australian Government on 17 August 1951 , and announced in the London Gazette the following month . For his " meritorious service ... as C.O. of HMAS Warramunga " , Becher was also decorated by the United States with the Legion of Merit . 
 = = Senior command = = 
 Becher retained command of Warramunga until October 1951 , when he was posted to the shore base HMAS Lonsdale for service with the Navy Office as Deputy Chief of Naval Personnel and Director of Personal Services . In September that year he was additionally appointed trustee of the Services Canteens Trust Fund ; a position he held until October 1952 and for which he received a letter of appreciation from the Minister for Defence . The same month he assumed the position of Deputy Chief of Naval Staff . On 25 August 1954 , Becher was given command of the aircraft carrier HMAS Vengeance , and in October he returned with his new command to the Korean theatre to transport the aircraft , equipment and personnel of No. 77 Squadron RAAF back to Australia . 
 In 1956 , Becher embarked for the United Kingdom to attend the Imperial Defence College . A month after his December graduation , he travelled back to Australia and assumed command of HMAS Melbourne . Becher remained with Melbourne until December 1958 , at which time he returned to the Navy Office at HMAS Lonsdale to resume his role as Deputy Chief of Naval Staff . He was promoted to acting rear admiral on 3 January 1959 , the rank being made substantive twelve months later . In the Queen 's Birthday Honours of 1961 , Becher was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire . 
 Relinquishing his position with the Navy Office in 1962 , Becher was sent to the United Kingdom as Head of the Australian Joint Services Staff in London . In January 1964 he returned to Australia , and was made Flag Officer Commanding HM Australian Fleet . During his time in this role Becher became embroiled in the controversy that followed the collision of HMA Ships Voyager and Melbourne , which took place in February that year . Prior to giving evidence before the Royal Commission that had been established to investigate the incident , Becher had discussed events with Melbourne 's Commanding Officer , Commander Ronald Robertson . The discussion became public knowledge , and led to suggestions of conspiracy . Becher stated to the commission that Melbourne should have questioned Voyager 's final movements ; his evidence is alleged to have influenced the Royal Commissioner , Sir John Spicer , to place a degree of blame on Robertson . In 1965 , Becher assumed his final command as Flag Officer @-@ in @-@ Charge East Australia Area , before retiring from the Royal Australian Navy on 6 March 1966 . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Following his retirement , Becher accepted the position of Director @-@ General of Recruiting for the Australian armed forces from 1966 until 1969 , a period during which conscription was in effect . Minister of Defence Allen Fairhall asked Becher to find enough volunteers to fill the armed forces , and Becher believed that conscription eroded professional standards , but he found this task difficult given that the military was " competing with industry , and the country was short of labour . " He also held the post of chairman of the Council of the Institute of Marine Sciences at the University of New South Wales . On 15 June 1977 , aged 68 , Becher died from a myocardial infarction at Sydney Hospital . Survived by his wife and their three sons , he was cremated . 
 = 2006 Bank of America 500 = 
 The 2006 Bank of America 500 was the 31st stock car race of the 2006 NASCAR Nextel Cup Series and the fifth in the ten @-@ race season @-@ ending Chase for the Nextel Cup . It was held on October 14 , 2006 , before a crowd of 175 @,@ 000 in Concord , North Carolina , at Lowe 's Motor Speedway , one of ten intermediate tracks to hold NASCAR races . The 334 @-@ lap race was won by Kasey Kahne of the Evernham Motorsports team , who started from second position . Jimmie Johnson finished second and Jeff Burton came in third . 
 Although Scott Riggs won the pole position , he was immediately passed by teammate Kahne at the start of the race . Riggs regained the lap twelve laps later , only to lose it to Tony Raines on the 19th lap . Riggs retook the lead on lap 31 and maintained it for the following sixteen laps , until he was passed by Dale Earnhardt , Jr. who led the next 31 laps . Kahne moved back into the first position on lap 96 , with Raines moving back into the lead on the 123rd lap . Kahne passed Raines to move back into the lead 15 laps later . Johnson moved into the lead on lap 168 and held the position for a total of 72 laps . At the race 's final restart on lap 307 Johnson led until he was passed two laps later by Kahne who maintained it to win the race . There was a total of ten cautions and 34 lead changes by thirteen different drivers . 
 The victory was Kahne 's sixth of the season , and the seventh of his career . After the race Burton maintained his lead in the Drivers ' Championship , which increased to 45 points over nearest rival Matt Kenseth . Kahne 's victory moved him from ninth to eighth , while Jeff Gordon dropped to tenth because his engine failed in the race 's closing laps . Chevrolet maintained its lead in the Manufacturers ' Championship , 48 points ahead of Dodge and 54 ahead of Ford with five races left in the season . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Bank of America 500 was the 31st of 36 scheduled stock car races of the 2006 NASCAR Nextel Cup Series , and the fifth in the ten @-@ race season @-@ ending Chase for the Nextel Cup . It was held on October 14 , 2006 , at Lowe 's Motor Speedway ( now called Charlotte Motor Speedway ) in Concord , North Carolina , one of ten intermediate tracks to hold NASCAR races ; the others are Atlanta Motor Speedway , Kansas Speedway , Chicagoland Speedway , Darlington Raceway , Homestead @-@ Miami Speedway , New Hampshire Motor Speedway , Kentucky Speedway , Las Vegas Motor Speedway , and Texas Motor Speedway . The standard track at Lowe 's Motor Speedway is a four @-@ turn , 1 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) -long , quad @-@ oval track . The track 's turns are banked at twenty @-@ four degrees ; both the front stretch ( the location of the finish line ) and the back stretch ( opposite the front ) have a five @-@ degree banking . 
 Before the race Jeff Burton led the Drivers ' Championship with 5 @,@ 598 points , with Matt Kenseth second , and Mark Martin third . Kevin Harvick and Denny Hamlin were fourth and fifth . Dale Earnhardt , Jr . , Jeff Gordon , Jimmie Johnson , Kasey Kahne , and Kyle Busch rounded out the top ten drivers competing in the 2006 Chase for the Nextel Cup . Chevrolet was leading the Manufacturers ' Championship with 231 points ; Dodge was second with 180 , and Ford was a close third on 179 . Johnson was the race 's defending champion . NASCAR mandated that teams use a 13 @.@ 8 @-@ US @-@ gallon ( 52 l ; 11 @.@ 5 imp gal ) fuel cell which would allow fewer laps between pit stops and increase the occurrence of tire changes . Tire supplier Goodyear brought a new right @-@ hand tire compound in hopes that racing would be improved . Testing of the tires took place at the track on August 29 with drivers Joe Nemechek and Kurt Busch who believed Goodyear had rectified problems with harder @-@ compound tires that were raised at the previous round at Charlotte ( the Coca @-@ Cola 600 ) . 
 After he was rammed by his teammate Brian Vickers in the UAW @-@ Ford 500 , Johnson said the expectations for him to succeed at Lowe 's Motor Speedway were high and hoped the track 's surface would be more predictable . Martin said he was in the best position that he had been in for several years to win the championship , and stated he was less interested at looking at race results . Having secured one top @-@ ten finish in the season 's first four Chase for the Nextel Cup races , Earnhardt stated he need to secure a top @-@ five finishing position , and was determined to get his team more involved in the championship battle . Gordon had driven well at the circuit , but without finishing . His team brought the car he drove to victory in the season 's 18th race at Chicagoland Speedway . Gordon felt it would help him at intermediate tracks and get him back into championship contention . Following a poor start in the chase , which improved after he finished second at Talladega Superspeedway , Kahne believed the momentum would be carried into Charlotte and stated he would race hard to win races . 
 One team made its début at the race . Red Bull Racing Team elected to start operations early as part of a warm @-@ up exercise to running a full @-@ time schedule in 2007 with 1988 NASCAR Winston Cup Series champion Bill Elliott driving the No. 83 car . Elliott would attempt to qualify the car at three races towards the end of the year . He said that his decision to join Red Bull was because of the organization , and its <unk> to become competitive , which had attracted him to the team . Elliott stated that he was required to qualify the car for the race and move up the field , and provide input that would allow the team to be prepared for the 2007 Daytona 500 . 
 = = = Practice and qualification = = = 
 Three practice sessions were held before the Sunday race - one each on Thursday , Friday and , Saturday . The first practice session lasted 90 minutes , the second 60 minutes , and the third 50 minutes . Kahne set the fastest time in the first practice session with a lap of 28 @.@ 834 seconds ; Scott Riggs was second , and Kurt Busch third . Elliott Sadler took fourth position , and Martin placed fifth . Johnson , Nemechek , Martin Truex , Jr . , Jeff Green , and Hamlin rounded out the session 's top @-@ ten fastest drivers . 
 Although 52 cars were entered in the qualifier , according to NASCAR 's qualifying procedure , only 43 could race . Each driver ran two laps , with the starting order determined by the competitor 's fastest times . Riggs clinched the third pole position of his career , and his third consecutive at Lowe 's Motor Speedway , with a time of 28 @.@ 203 seconds . He was joined on the grid 's front row by Kahne , his Evernham Motorsports teammate , and held the pole position until Riggs ' lap . Kurt Busch originally qualified in third , but his car 's right @-@ rear shock absorber was found to have violated NASCAR regulations during the post @-@ qualifying inspection because it did not work as required . Busch was required to start from 42nd position after using a provisional . As a result , Casey Mears inherited third , Sadler fourth , and Harvick fifth . Burton , Martin , Clint Bowyer , Reed Sorenson and Johnson rounded out the top ten qualifiers . Kenseth , a Chase for the Nextel Cup driver , qualified eleventh , while Earnhardt took 16th and Kyle Busch 18th . The nine drivers who failed to qualify were : Elliott , Kevin Lepage , Derrike Cope , Chad Chaffin , Hermie Sadler , Kirk <unk> , Kenny Wallace ( who crashed on his first timed lap ) , Morgan Shepherd ( who elected not to set a lap time ) , and Carl Long ( who crashed while attempting to record a timed lap ) . After the qualifier Riggs said that his team knew his car was good , and achieved a good draw by recording his lap time in the latter period of the session . He stated when returning to the track , his team wanted to get back into a rhythm of starting and finishing in a top position . 
 On Friday afternoon Kyle Busch was fastest in the second practice session with a time of 29 @.@ 378 seconds , ahead of Kahne and Robby Gordon . Bowyer was fourth @-@ fastest ; Johnson was fifth and Truex sixth . Greg Biffle , Kurt Busch , Burton , and Martin followed in the top ten . Of the other drivers in the Chase , Edwards was eleventh @-@ fastest , Hamlin set the twelfth @-@ fastest time , and Harvick was 15th . Ryan Newman crashed and switched to a back @-@ up car . Later , on Saturday afternoon , Earnhardt paced the final practice session with a time of 29 @.@ 357 ; Kyle Busch was second and Hamlin third . Kahne was fourth @-@ fastest , ahead of Johnson and Bowyer . Biffle was seventh @-@ fastest , Truex eighth , Riggs ninth , and Robby Gordon tenth . Other Chase drivers included Jeff Gordon in 13th and Burton in 15th ; all were within three @-@ tenths of a second of Earnhardt 's time . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Live television coverage of the race on NBC began at 7 : 04 p.m. Eastern Daylight Time in the United States . Around the start of the race , weather conditions were sunny with an air temperature of 64 ° F ( 18 ° C ) which was forecast to drop as the race progressed . Dr. William K. Thierfelder , president of Belmont Abbey College in Belmont , North Carolina , began pre @-@ race ceremonies with an invocation . American Idol contestant and country music singer Kellie Pickler performed the national anthem , and Mickey Jackson , the winner of a sponsored Grand Marshal contest , along with his five @-@ year @-@ old son <unk> , commanded the drivers to start their engines . During the pace laps , Newman moved to the rear of the field because he switched to his back @-@ up car . 
 The race started at 7 : 21 p.m. Kahne accelerated faster than teammate Riggs off the line , and was ahead of him by the second turn . The first caution of the race was given one lap later when Todd Bodine contacted Robby Gordon in the tri @-@ oval . Gordon slid but regained control of his car with Bodine slowing . This triggered a multi @-@ car accident that involved Mike Bliss hitting the rear of Hamlin 's car sending him spinning down the front stretch which then involved Mike Skinner , Truex , Jeff Gordon , Jamie McMurray , Kyle Petty , J. J. Yeley , Travis Kvapil , David Gilliland , Tony Stewart , Kurt Busch , Newman , and Nemechek who blocked the track temporarily . Hamlin drove back to his garage where his team repaired his car . Kahne led the field at the lap @-@ nine restart , followed by Riggs and Mears . A caution was issued immediately at the start of lap nine , as the cars drove through the first turn , because three safety vehicles were on the track after crew members did not hear there would one further lap added before racing resumed , and the laps were counted towards the first caution . Several cars elected to make pit stops under caution . Stewart made repairs to his car 's body which was damaged in the lap two crash . Kahne maintained the top position at the lap twelve restart , with Riggs in second . Riggs reclaimed the first position from Kahne on the 13th lap ; after starting from 41st , Jeff Gordon moved up to 22nd position by lap 15 . Two laps later , Dave Blaney spun after leaving turn four and hit the outside barrier with his car 's left @-@ rear quarter , triggering the race 's second caution . Most of the field , including Riggs , chose to make pit stops for fuel and tires . 
 Tony Raines decided not to make a pit stop and led the field back up to speed at the lap @-@ 22 restart , ahead of Newman , McMurray , Terry Labonte , and Riggs . On the 23rd lap , Riggs and Kahne got ahead of Labonte for fourth and fifth positions . Riggs passed McMurray for third one lap later , and Kahne got ahead of McMurray for fourth on lap 25 . Newman fell to fourth place when he was passed by Riggs and Kahne two laps later . Riggs passed Raines for the lead on the 30th lap , while Kahne moved into second place . Truex hit the wall on the same lap but no caution was shown . Sorenson ran into the rear @-@ end of Dale Jarrett 's car , who spun backwards into the turn four wall , prompting the third caution . Jarrett retired from the race when he drove into his garage . All drivers elected to make pit stops for fuel under caution . Riggs maintained his lead at the lap @-@ 39 restart , followed by Kahne and Bowyer . Johnson got ahead of Sadler to move into eighth on lap 44 . On lap 46 , a fourth caution was given ; Todd <unk> was hit by Greg Biffle after leaving turn two and spun on the backstretch , causing Ken Schrader and Petty to hit <unk> . Michael Waltrip contacted the wall in avoidance . Most drivers ( including Riggs ) chose to make pit stops for fuel . Earnhardt led at the lap @-@ 53 restart ahead of Edwards , Newman , Biffle and , Sorenson who all chose not to pit . Riggs moved back into third place on lap 59 after passing Biffle and Newman . By lap 66 , Earnhardt held a 1 @.@ 78 @-@ second advantage over Edwards . Two laps later , Riggs passed Edwards to take over second place . 
 Riggs closed the gap to Earnhardt , and was 1 @.@ 5 seconds behind by lap 75 . Green @-@ flag pit stops began on lap 78 , with Earnhardt stopping on lap 79 , giving the lead back to Riggs . Kahne and Riggs made pit stops on the 85th lap for scuffed right @-@ hand tires . After the pit stops , which concluded on lap 91 , Riggs reclaimed the first position . Kahne closed the gap to teammate Riggs , who was holding a 0 @.@ 4 second lead , by lap 95 . One lap later , Kahne passed Riggs ( who complained his car was experiencing excessive understeer ) for first place . Earnhardt moved into second when he passed Riggs on the 100th lap . Lap 105 saw the fifth caution ; Waltrip lost control of his car and hit the turn four outside wall , which caused him to spin while attempting to make a pit stop for fuel . During the caution , all drivers again made pit stops . Kahne maintained the lead at the lap @-@ 110 restart , followed by Earnhardt and Bowyer . Gordon passed Bowyer to claim third position one lap later . Bowyer lost two further positions when he was passed on the 115th lap . A sixth caution was prompted on the following lap when Kurt Busch spun leaving turn two and hit the inside wall on the backstretch ; Sorenson lost control in turn two , while attempting to avoid Busch , and went towards the inside backstretch wall . Most of the leaders , including Kahne , made pit stops for fuel . Harvick and Kahne avoided a collision on pit road . Sadler led the field at the lap @-@ 121 restart , followed by Raines and Robby Gordon . Raines passed Sadler to reclaim the lead two laps later , while Sadler drove back to pit road with engine problems on lap 125 . 
 Kahne moved up into second place by lap 132 after passing Jeff Gordon , Earnhardt , and Robby Gordon . Johnson got ahead of Robby Gordon for fourth place one lap later . Kahne moved back into the lead after passing Raines on the backstretch on lap 138 , while Johnson moved into second one lap later . The second round of green @-@ flag pit stops commenced on lap 143 , when Robby Gordon made a pit stop for right @-@ side tires and car adjustments . Kahne stopped on lap 154 with Riggs . Jeff Gordon and Johnson made similar stops over the next three laps . After the pit stops , Kahne reclaimed the lead after battling with Raines . A seventh caution was given three laps later when Gilliland spun in turn two and contacted the inside wall heavily , and then drove to his garage to retire . Most of the leaders , including Kahne , made pit stops . Sterling Marlin stayed out and led at the lap @-@ 168 restart , ahead of Johnson . That same lap , Marlin lost the lead when Johnson passed him on the backstretch , and Marlin was passed by Kahne for second on lap 169 . Martin got ahead of Earnhardt for fifth position ten laps later . By lap 180 , Johnson held a 1 @.@ 4 @-@ second lead over Kahne . Gordon passed Martin for third on lap 182 , while Edwards got ahead of Kyle Busch for seventh two laps later . Upfront , Kahne closed the gap with Johnson to 0 @.@ 6 seconds by the 188th lap . The third round of green @-@ flag pit stops began on lap 199 ; Johnson stopped on lap 203 , while Earnhardt made a pit stop on the following lap . After the pit stops , Kahne retook the lead . 
 Johnson drove to the track 's inside at turn three and passed Kahne for the lead on lap 211 and started to pull away from the rest of the field . Bowyer drove to his garage on lap 216 for a transmission change because he lost the use of third gear . Jeff Gordon had closed the gap to Kahne by lap 229 . Green @-@ flag pit stops started six laps later when Kahne made a pit stop from second place . Johnson took on four tires at his stop on lap 239 , handing the lead to Jeff Gordon , who ceded it to Earnhardt two laps later . Martin 's pit crew dropped a lug nut which resulted him remaining stationary for 21 @.@ 7 seconds , while Burton stalled his car which required his crew to push him to the end of pit road . An eighth caution was triggered on lap 242 when Yeley attempted to drive down pit road , and made contact with Martin . He attempted to avoid Yeley by driving left below the driver to escape onto the turn four apron and went airborne . Martin spun and went into the tri @-@ oval wall , and Robby Gordon hit Yeley , causing Gordon to spin into the front stretch grass . Earnhardt made a pit stop on lap 244 , followed by Kahne on the following lap . Edwards gained the lead and maintained it at the lap @-@ 252 restart , followed by Earnhardt and Kahne . Five laps later , Kahne passed Edwards to reclaim the lead as they came across slower cars and began to pull away . Debris was located on the track on lap 276 , necessitating the race 's ninth caution . During the caution , the leaders elected to make pit stops . 
 Kahne maintained his lead at the lap @-@ 281 restart and pulled away from Earnhardt . Jeff Gordon passed Nemechek to move into fourth place on the following lap . Jeff Gordon 's engine failed after he crossed the start @-@ finish line on lap 302 , triggering the race 's final caution . The leaders , including Kahne , made pit stops for fuel under caution . Johnson led the field at the lap @-@ 307 restart , ahead of Kahne , Earnhardt and Burton . Kahne turned right to the track 's outside and passed Johnson around the inside in turn one for the lead on the 309th lap . Burton ( who felt a vibration from his car ) passed Earnhardt to take over third position seven laps later . Kahne increased his advantage over Johnson during the remaining seventeen laps to win the race and to become the eighth driver to win both points races at Lowe 's Motor Speedway in a calendar year . Johnson finished second , ahead of Burton in third , Earnhardt in fourth and Bobby Labonte in fifth . Kyle Busch , Raines , Edwards , Nemechek , and Vickers rounded out the top ten finishers . The race had a total of ten cautions and thirty @-@ four lead changes by thirteen different drivers . Kahne led eight times for a total of 134 laps , more than any other competitor . The win was the seventh of Kahne 's Cup Series career , as well as his final of a series @-@ high six victories he posted in the 2006 season . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 Kahne appeared in victory lane in front of the crowd of 170 @,@ 000 to celebrate his sixth win of the season earning him $ 305 @,@ 889 . Kahne was delighted with his victory and thanked the people who worked on his car 's transmission and rear @-@ end : " We had a great car . It was unbelievable all night . I slammed it into second gear at the end of pit road one time and I thought I had to break something . This isn 't the special car . This car 's been good two other times this year , but it went to waste . It 's just an awesome team . " Second @-@ place finisher Johnson said he finished the event where he ran in its duration : “ I only made up ten points . But ten points is ten points . ” Third @-@ place finisher Burton was happy he was able to recover from a tire issue from the previous race at Talladega Superspeedway . However , he was upset that he stalled his engine as he felt it cost him the chance of victory . He also said the late @-@ race vibration was enough to scare him and he was glad the race ended because of the amount of shudder coming from his car : " I screamed , ‘ We ’ ve got a wheel loose , we got a wheel loose ’ and they said , we do not have a wheel loose , we know we got them tight . " 
 Shortly after leaving his car , Martin felt the championship was an achievement that he was unable to secure : " They tell me a lot of people are having trouble anyway , but we didn 't need to throw that away , " He said he was unaware that Yeley intended to make a pit stop and , from his viewpoint , it allowed Kenseth to pass him while Yeley was coming from the centre of the track . Yeley said the pit stop was planned and signalled his intentions to Martin for over one mile . He felt Martin placed him in the position to hit the backstretch wall . Hamlin said the first @-@ lap crash that he was involved was part of auto racing , and stated it was problematic being involved in difficulties in the Chase for the Nextel Cup : " We checked up and somebody else ( Waltrip ) didn 't . I put myself back there in qualifying . We 'll take our lumps and go on . " Seventh @-@ place finisher Raines was happy to hold the first position for 28 laps saying it was " extra special " to lead a race at Charlotte . Tom Bowles of <unk> opined that had the caution flag not been displayed for the three safety vehicles on lap nine , it could have resulted in causing " one of the most disastrous accidents in NASCAR history . " 
 Johnson and Burton stated it was difficult to achieve a rhythm because of the small fuel cells mandated for the race and the hard @-@ compound tires . Temperatures had been warmer than the previous day 's Busch Series race and thus gave the drivers more grip though sliding was observed during both events . McMurray noted it was difficult to drive alongside other cars and that other competitors drove cautiously . Kenny Francis , Kahne 's crew chief , stated that he preferred to see longer runs but noted safety had to be taken into consideration . Four days after the race , Penske Racing South were given penalties for Kurt Busch 's car . The penalties , for " actions detrimental to stock car racing " ; " car , car parts , components and / or equipment that do not conform to NASCAR rules " ; and a right rear shock absorber that did not compress , included a $ 25 @,@ 000 fine and a two race suspension for crew chief Roy McCauley who was placed on probation until December 31 , 2006 . Team owner Roger Penske and Kurt Busch were penalized 50 points in the Owners ' and Drivers ' Championships . The following day , Penske Racing South announced it would not appeal the penalties . 
 The result kept Burton in the lead of the Drivers ' Championship with 5 @,@ 763 points , ahead of Kenseth on 5 @,@ 718 . Harvick moved into third with 5 @,@ 674 , thirteen points ahead of Martin who fell to fourth . Earnhardt moved in front of Hamlin for fifth , and Johnson , Kahne and Kyle Busch filled positions seven to nine . After the race , Jeff Gordon ( who fell to tenth ) said he would try and win races to return to contention for the championship . In the Manufacturers ' Championship , Chevrolet maintained the lead with 237 points . Dodge remained in second with 189 , six points ahead of Ford . The race took three hours , forty @-@ seven minutes and twenty @-@ nine seconds to complete , and the margin of victory was 1 @.@ 624 seconds . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race results = = = 
 = = Standings after the race = = 
 = Olive Trees ( Van Gogh series ) = 
 Vincent van Gogh painted at least 18 paintings of olive trees , mostly in Saint @-@ Rémy @-@ de @-@ Provence in 1889 . At his own request , he lived at an asylum there from May 1889 through May 1890 painting the gardens of the asylum and , when he had permission to venture outside its walls , nearby olive trees , cypresses and wheat fields . 
 One painting , Olive Trees in a Mountainous Landscape , was a complement to The Starry Night . 
 The olive tree paintings had special significance for Van Gogh . A group in May 1889 represented life , the divine and the cycle of life while those from November 1889 arose out of Van Gogh 's attempt to symbolize his feelings about Christ in Gethsemane . His paintings of olive pickers demonstrate the relationship between man and nature by depicting one of the cycles of life , harvesting or death . It is also an example of how individuals , through interaction with nature , can connect with the divine . 
 Van Gogh found respite and relief in interaction with nature . When the series of olive tree paintings was made in 1889 Van Gogh was subject to illness and emotional turmoil , yet the paintings are among his finest works . 
 = = Saint @-@ Rémy = = 
 In May 1889 , Van Gogh voluntarily entered the asylum of St. Paul near Saint @-@ Rémy in Provence . There he had access to an adjacent cell he used as his studio . He was initially confined to the immediate asylum grounds and painted ( without the window bars ) the world he saw from his room , such as ivy covered trees , lilacs , and irises in the garden . As he ventured outside of the asylum walls , he painted the wheat fields , olive groves , and cypress trees in the surrounding countryside , which he saw as " characteristic of Provence . " Over the course of the year , he painted about 150 canvases . 
 The imposed regimen of asylum life gave Van Gogh a hard @-@ won stability : " I feel happier here with my work than I could be outside . By staying here a good long time , I shall have learned regular habits and in the long run the result will be more order in my life . " While his time at Saint @-@ Rémy forced him to manage his vices , such as coffee , alcohol , poor eating habits and periodic attempts to consume turpentine and paint , his stay was not ideal . He needed to obtain permission to leave the asylum grounds . The food was poor ; he generally ate only bread and soup . His only apparent form of treatment were two @-@ hour baths twice a week . During his year there , Van Gogh had periodic attacks , possibly due to a form of epilepsy . By early 1890 , when the attacks worsened , he concluded that his stay at the asylum was not helping him to recover , which led him to move to Auvers @-@ sur @-@ Oise just north of Paris in May 1890 . 
 = = Olive trees as a subject = = 
 Painting the countryside , the surrounding fields , cypress trees and olive trees restored Van Gogh 's connection to nature through art . He completed at least 18 paintings in 1889 of " venerable , gnarled olive trees , " pervasive throughout southern France , of which he wrote : 
 " The effect of daylight and the sky means there are endless subjects to be found in olive trees . For myself I look for the contrasting effects in the foliage , which changes with the tones of the sky . At times , when the tree bares its pale blossoms and big blue flies , emerald fruit beetles and cicadas in great numbers fly about , everything is immersed in pure blue . Then , as the <unk> foliage takes on more mature tones , the sky is radiant and streaked with green and orange , and then again , further into autumn , the leaves take on violet tones something of the color of a ripe fig , and this violet effect manifests itself most fully with the contrast of the large , whitening sun within its pale halo of light lemon . Sometimes , too , after a shower I 've seen the whole sky pink and orange , which gave an exquisite value and coloring to the silvery gray @-@ greens . And among all this were women , also pink , who were gathering the fruit . " 
 He found olive trees , representative of Provence , both " demanding and compelling . " He wrote to his brother Theo that he was " struggling to catch ( the olive trees ) . They are old silver , sometimes with more blue in them , sometimes greenish , bronzed , fading white above a soil which is yellow , pink , violet tinted orange ... very difficult . " He found that the " rustle of the olive grove has something very secret in it , and immensely old . It is too beautiful for us to dare to paint it or to be able to imagine it . " 
 = = Spiritual significance = = 
 As a young man , Van Gogh was interested in pursuing ministry to serve working people . He studied for a time in the Netherlands but his zeal and self @-@ imposed asceticism cost him a short @-@ term position in lay ministry . He became somewhat embittered and rejected the church establishment , yet found a personal spirituality that was comforting and important to him . By 1879 , he made a shift in the direction of his life and found he could express his " love of God and man " through painting . 
 Van Gogh painted nature , the major subject for his works in the last 29 months of his life , to bring relief from his illnesses and emotional distress . Prior to this period he had rejected what he perceived as the narrow religion of his parents , and took an almost nihilistic stance , not unlike Nietzsche 's , toward religion and God . It was among the blossoming trees , the olive orchards and fields that Van Gogh most often found " profound meaning " , because he saw in their cycles an analogy to human life . He wrote to Theo that death , happiness and unhappiness are " necessary and useful " and relative , declaring " Even faced with an illness that breaks me up and frightens me , that belief is unshaken . " 
 The autumn work was somewhat in reaction to the recent compositions of Christ in the Garden of Olives by his friends Paul Gauguin and Émile Bernard . Frustrated by their work which he qualified with the words " nothing was observed " , Van Gogh painted " in the groves , morning and evening during these clear , cold days , but in beautiful , bright sunshine " resulting in five canvases above the three he completed earlier in the year . He wrote to his brother , Theo , " What I have done is a rather hard and coarse reality beside their abstractions , but it will have a rustic quality and will smell of the earth . " Rather than attempting to recreate what the scene might have been like , he explained " one can express anguish without making reference to the actual Gethsemane , and ... there is no need to portray figures from the Sermon on the Mount in order to express a gentle and comforting feeling . " He also commented : " I shall not paint a Christ in the Garden of Olives , but shall paint the olive harvest as one might see it today , and by giving the human figure its proper place in it , one might perhaps be reminded of it . " 
 = = Analysis = = 
 = = = Artistic style = = = 
 Van Gogh 's early works were made with dull , gray colors . In Paris , he met leading French artists Edgar Degas , Georges Seurat and others who provided illuminating influences on the use of color and technique . His work , previously somber and dark , now " blazed with color . " Indeed , Van Gogh 's use of color became so dramatic that he was sometimes called an Expressionist . But it was southern France that provided an opportunity for him to express his " surging emotions . " Enlightened by the effects of its sun @-@ drenched countryside , Van Gogh reported that above all , his work " promises color " . This is where he began development of his masterpieces . 
 Van Gogh captured the colors and moods of the trees which varied dramatically by daylight and season . He began to use the color blue to represent the divine . In both The Starry Night and his olive tree paintings , Van Gogh used the intense blue of the sky to symbolize the " divine and infinite presence " of Jesus . Seeking a " modern artistic language " to represent the divine , he sought a numinous quality in many of his olive tree paintings , such as by bathing olive trees , an emblem for Jesus , in " radiant gold light " . 
 Van Gogh used the Impressionist concept of broken color to give light to a work , innovatively drawing in color , giving the painting light and form , as he also did in his paintings of plowed fields , mountains , rocks , and heads and figures . The series is unified by a more refined approach , without the thick application of paint to which he was more accustomed . 
 = = = Meaning = = = 
 The National Gallery of Art summarizes this series : 
 " In the olive trees — in the expressive power of their ancient and gnarled forms — Van Gogh found a manifestation of the spiritual force he believed resided in all of nature . His brushstrokes make the soil and even the sky seem alive with the same rustling motion as the leaves , stirred to a shimmer by the Mediterranean wind . These strong individual dashes do not seem painted so much as drawn onto the canvas with a heavily loaded brush . The energy in their continuous rhythm communicates to us , in an almost physical way , the living force that Van Gogh found within the trees themselves , the very spiritual force that he believed had shaped them . " 
 Skye <unk> , author of The Divine Commodity : Discovering a Faith Beyond Consumer Christianity , asserts that in many of his paintings , the olive tree series in particular , Van Gogh conveys the redemptive quality of sorrow and that even in sorrow , there can be rejoicing . To quote Van Gogh 's sermon of 1876 : 
 " Sorrow is better than joy ... for by the sadness of the countenance , the heart is made better . Our nature is sorrowful , but for those who have learnt and are learning to look at Jesus Christ , there will always be reason to rejoice . It is a good word , that of St. Paul : as being sorrowful yet also rejoicing . " 
 = = The paintings = = 
 In his letters , Van Gogh specified two groupings : three paintings made in June 1889 and five completed by late November 1889 . There was also a painting in September , three olive picker paintings in December and a few others . Van Gogh made several drawings of olive trees when , as a precautionary safety measure , he did not have access to his paints . 
 = = = Complement to The Starry Night = = = 
 Of Olive Trees in a Mountainous Landscape in the collection of the Museum of Modern Art ( MoMA ) , Van Gogh wrote his brother Theo : " I did a landscape with olive trees and also a new study of a starry sky , " calling this painting the daylight complement to the nocturnal , The Starry Night . His intention was to go beyond " the photographic and silly perfection of some painters " to an intensity born of color and linear rhythms . 
 Within the painting , twisted green olive trees stand before the foothills of the Alps and underneath the sky with an " ectoplasmic " cloud . Later , when the pictures had dried , he sent both of them to Theo in Paris , noting : " The olive trees with the white cloud and the mountains behind , as well as the rise of the moon and the night effect , are exaggerations from the point of view of the general arrangement ; the outlines are accentuated as in some old woodcuts . " 
 = = = Olive pickers = = = 
 Van Gogh painted three versions of women picking olives . The first ( <unk> ) he described as an on @-@ the @-@ spot study " in deeper tones from nature " . The second painting ( <unk> ) is " the most resolved and stylized of the three , " intended for his sister and mother , is located at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City . 
 The third , in the Chester Dale collection at the National Gallery of Art , Washington , DC . ( <unk> ) he painted in his studio in December in a " very discreet color scheme " . Although the subject of the painting is immediately clear , the first tree , like a stepping stone , leads the spectator into the scene . Here Van Gogh was more concerned about emotional and spiritual reality than literal interpretation . The women harvest olives for sustenance . The way in which the trees seem to wrap around the women and the trees and the landscape are almost one , indicates an emotional bond and interdependence between nature and people . 
 Another painting was made of olive pickers , this time a couple . <unk> @-@ Müller Museum 's Olive Grove with Two Olive Pickers ( <unk> ) was painted December , 1889 . 
 = = = Painted in May and June 1889 = = = 
 Van Gogh made four paintings in May and June 1889 . The first , Couple Walking among Olive Trees in a Mountainous Landscape with Crescent Moon ( <unk> ) is located at the Museu de Arte de São Paulo , São Paulo , Brazil 
 Van Gogh identified three olive tree paintings made in June , the second month of his stay at the asylum . 
 The Nelson @-@ Atkins Museum of Art 's Olive Orchard ( <unk> ) was expressed by Van Gogh in a letter of July 1889 as an orchard of olive trees with gray leaves , " their violet shadows lying on the sunny sand . " By contrast , the shadows accentuate the heat of the Provençal sun . The " repetitive , rectangular brush strokes " convey an energy that heightens the emotional impact of this work . 
 Van Gogh Museum 's Olive Trees : Bright Blue Sky ( <unk> ) of cool , blue daylight tones is similar to Göteborgs Museum of Art 's Olive Grove , a study in warm autumn colors . The autumn toned painting met Van Gogh 's goal of achieving a " harsh and coarse " realism to his work . He presented the painting to his friend and doctor , Dr. Gachet , with whom he would be under care and supervision in Auvers @-@ sur @-@ Oise the following year . 
 The <unk> @-@ Müller Museum Olive Orchard ( <unk> ) was painted in June , 1889 . 
 = = = Painted in September , November and December 1889 = = = 
 The paintings made during this period were much the artistic result of Van Gogh 's reaction to the Gauguin and Bernard Gethsemane painting , as mentioned in the " Spiritual significance " section . 
 The intense nature of National Gallery of Scotland 's Olive Trees ( <unk> ) likely expresses Van Gogh 's agitated state of mind when he completed this work , dramatic impact evidenced both through his brushstrokes and color use . 
 The vibrant oranges and yellows in Olive Trees with Yellow Sky and Sun ( <unk> ) suggest the fall season . Novelist Warren Keith Wright visited this painting at the Minneapolis Institute of Art over a 15 @-@ year period , transfixed by the painting , but unsure why . He came to realize that the fascination was that the painting represented two periods of time . The late @-@ afternoon sun lies due west above the mountains . The shadows , though , slant from the left , or the southwest , where they would fall in autumn . Not only is the painting out of sync with time , it is also out of sync with the season . It " predicts its own future , reverts to its own past . " Olive Trees with Yellow Sky and Sun symbolizes the suffering of Jesus is symbolized by a " harsh sun , barren ground , shadows , and the menacing appearance of leaf clusters . " 
 In November or December 1889 Van Gogh worked on the Metropolitan Museum of Art 's Olive Orchard ( <unk> ) . Another painting from this time is Olive Grove : Orange Sky ( <unk> ) which resides at the Göteborgs Museum of Art , Gothenburg , Sweden 
 = Stone Temple Pilots ( album ) = 
 Stone Temple Pilots ( also known as The Red Album ) is the sixth studio album by American rock band Stone Temple Pilots . The album was released worldwide from May 21 through May 27 , 2010 , and is the band 's first album since 2001 's Shangri @-@ La Dee Da . The album is the result of the band 's reunion , which occurred in April 2008 with their North American tour . After Stone Temple Pilots had begun playing together , the band decided to record again , but a lawsuit filed by Atlantic Records on June 12 , 2008 , made the sixth album an uncertainty . Atlantic eventually withdrew the lawsuit , and the band 's attorney called the legal situation a " misunderstanding " . This is the last album to feature vocalist Scott Weiland before he was fired from the band in 2013 and died in 2015 . 
 Robert DeLeo , against Atlantic Records ' wishes , insisted that he and his brother Dean DeLeo produce the record themselves , which began production in early 2009 . Because recording took place during breaks in the band 's touring schedule , production took nearly ten months to complete . Three studios were used simultaneously , including Robert 's home studio and Eric Kretz 's Bomb Shelter Studios . Scott Weiland recorded vocals at his own Lavish Studios . Don Was was brought in as an additional producer to help keep the band 's separate recording sessions in sync , as well as to work closely with Weiland during the recording of his vocals . The album was completed in December 2009 , and mixing and mastering were finished by February 2010 . 
 The album received generally favorable reviews . Most critics agreed that Stone Temple Pilots was heavily inspired by country and rock music from the 1960s and 1970s . The band confirmed these assertions and that lyricists like Bob Dylan , and guitarists like Speedy West and Brad Whitford were influences . The album was promoted during the band 's performances at music festivals and headlining concerts , as well as in interviews with music websites and magazines , including Billboard and Spin , and radio and television talk shows . " Between the Lines " was the first single , released on March 22 . The second and third singles , " Take a Load Off " and " Cinnamon " , were released later in the year . Stone Temple Pilots sold 62 @,@ 000 copies in its first week and peaked at number two on the Billboard 200 . 
 = = Background = = 
 After separating in 2003 , Stone Temple Pilots reunited in April 2008 for a 75 @-@ date North American tour . Scott Weiland would hear new material from Robert and Dean DeLeo while the band performed sound checks during the tour , but he would not collaborate in the songwriting process until he was through promoting his solo album , " Happy " in Galoshes . 
 Despite the band 's intent , a future album from the group was uncertain . On June 12 , 2008 , Atlantic Records filed a lawsuit against Weiland and Eric Kretz , claiming the two had threatened to terminate their contract unless changes were made . Stone Temple Pilots had delivered six albums ( five studio records and the compilation , Thank You ) and Atlantic wanted a seventh album with an option for two more . In a statement made by email , the band said they were surprised and disappointed by the lawsuit . 
 Stone Temple Pilots stressed that a new album would be recorded as long as both parties in the lawsuit acted in good faith , but in November 2008 , Weiland would comment , " I was told , and I was told for years , that we were free from Atlantic .... I have no interest in making a record for a major label . " Weiland expressed interest in exploring distribution options after the band 's reformation . Commenting on his idea , he said , " [ O ] ther bands , they make more money doing things in an unconventional fashion as opposed to doing it ... with the major labels . " Dean was curious about Weiland 's idea but was aware that the band was contractually obligated to release two more albums . Increasing the uncertainty in the future of a new album , Weiland added , " I 'm proud of everything we 've written . But to make another record would mean another couple of years of my life dedicated to that , and I just don 't know if that 's where I see myself going . " 
 The band 's attorney , Gary <unk> , clarified that the complaint was a result of a " misunderstanding " during contract negotiations , and a representative for Atlantic stated the lawsuit had been voluntarily dismissed . The final negotiation details between Atlantic and the band remain unknown . Weiland later clarified , " I didn 't want to record for Atlantic because I didn 't know anybody there anymore , except for Craig Kallman . Since then I 've gotten to know Craig much better , and I 've gotten to know the Atlantic staff pretty extensively . " 
 Recording a new album was , according to Robert , a " natural progression " after the band began playing together again . " The thing that kind of introduces us back together is all those memories of the songs , and once you start playing those songs ... it always takes us back to ... 18 years now . It can take us back to our past and think about where we were when we were writing these songs , and that 's a bond , I think , [ that ] will always keep us together as four people .... It just progressed into , ' Maybe it 's time to make a new record . ' " 
 = = Production = = 
 Stone Temple Pilots marks the first time Robert and Dean have written together since Army of Anyone 's only release in 2006 ; some of Dean 's contributions date from this period , but " Dare If You Dare " was written while Talk Show was touring . Robert and Dean began writing new material by November 2008 , but , except for clips played during the tour sound checks , Weiland would not hear anything new until after February 2009 . The recording process took place over a period of ten months , due largely to the band 's touring schedule , but the majority of actual studio time was spent experimenting with different instruments and miking techniques . Pre @-@ production for the album took place at Kretz 's Bomb Shelter Studios and consisted mainly of Dean , Robert , and Kretz sifting through musical ideas . 
 Robert insisted , against Atlantic Records ' initial wishes , that he and Dean produce the album together . This freed the band from the constraints of any outside producer 's schedule . The recording process could then be intertwined with tour dates , which , Dean said , resulted in improved performances on the record . Dean admitted they had been spoiled by working with producer Brendan O 'Brien on previous releases . " I 'm not so good at walking around the control room with a pen and clipboard in my hands , marking down what takes are the best . It 's a lot of work . But I like being the very best I can be , and when you 're producing , you are taking on everyone 's performances and wanting it to be the best it can be . " 
 The <unk> often worked off each other when writing the songs . Robert 's primary instrument for composing was the bass , and Dean complimented his achievements : " It 's probably easier to tell a story through a piano or a guitar , but when [ someone ] can tell a story with a bass , that 's pretty remarkable . " Robert recognized the important roles each of the band members played in bringing his songs to life : 
 When I personally write a song , it 's such an honor and a pleasure to give that song to these guys , because I know that song is going to be interpreted the best way possible . Everyone 's going to put their imprint on that song and make that song the best STP song it can be , whether it be the playing or the arranging or the writing of everyone doing their part .... What has really been the body of our records has been that contribution of all of us as four people . 
 CDs were submitted to Weiland containing music in completed demo form , including scratch melodies , which Weiland had the option to use or discard . Dean did not mind when his melodies were not accepted by Weiland . " [ W ] hen I write a song , I know what I want it to be melodically . But Scott always ... knocks my melodies out of the water . " Weiland worked on the lyrics using these demo arrangements , often making suggestions for musical phrases to be doubled or moved . Weiland was credited for the lyrical melodies , but Robert pointed out , " This record was made in a way that Scott wasn 't really there for the creation of these songs , musically . " However , both Dean and Robert would be surprised at the direction Weiland would take the songs , which could have been composed with an entirely different vision . Robert found this to be a strength within the band . " People always have this misconception that a band all need to think alike ... [ There are ] so many different ways of looking at songs and [ how they 're ] put together , and that 's really the beauty of a great band " . 
 Working as an additional producer , Don Was helped keep Weiland 's and the rest of the band 's separate recording sessions in sync by bringing them together to perform live . When the band performed together , they would do so acoustically , so each member could hear the nuances of the songs . Weiland credited Was for helping Stone Temple Pilots re @-@ learn how to play together again . Was also worked closely with Weiland during the recording of the vocals . 
 By June 2009 , the band had written eighteen songs , twelve of which were planned to be released on the album , with B @-@ sides for Japan , the United Kingdom , and Europe selected from the remaining songs . Recording began in early 2009 , at times taking place in three studios simultaneously . Bass lines and overdubs were recorded at <unk> Studio , located in the basement of Robert 's house . The majority of " Cinnamon " and " First Kiss on Mars " , including drums , were recorded in Robert 's home studio . Dean 's guitars were recorded at Kretz 's Bomb Shelter Studios , and Weiland 's vocals were recorded at his Lavish Studios . By early December , nine songs had been finished , and the entire record was completed later that month . Mixing began in January 2010 with Chris Lord @-@ Alge , and mastering for the album was completed in February by Ted Jensen at Sterling Sound . Robert described the overall feel of the album as having a " ' 60s vibe . " Though previous albums explored new sounds , Weiland acknowledged that the new album would be a " back @-@ to @-@ basics rock record . " 
 = = = Album title and artwork = = = 
 Several titles were considered before the band settled on the eponymous name . Kretz explained , " We 've always tried to come up with very witty and interesting names for our records and we just felt that it was time , 18 years into the Stone Temple Pilots career , to put out a self @-@ titled album . " Robert agreed that the new title was a testament to the " new chapter " in the band 's career . Weiland also felt the band was starting over and thought the music expressed this on its own . " We don 't need to come up with some major conceptual title . The image on the cover and the music speak for themselves . " 
 The album cover incorporates the artwork Peace Fingers Red , designed by Shepard Fairey . According to Kretz , " It was just something to kind of symbolize more of our attitude right now .... We definitely are in a really good place right now as a band and really want to spread some peace and love across the world as much we can . We 're going to do it through music and the celebration of rock and roll . " The artwork on the deluxe edition released in Target stores added gold foil to the patterns . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The music on Stone Temple Pilots was influenced by various styles , most notably country music and 1960s and 1970s rock . Various amps and vintage guitars from Dean 's and Robert 's personal collections were used to produce the desired sounds . Dean 's guitars included two 1970s Gibson Les Pauls , a 1956 Stratocaster , three <unk> dating between 1965 and 1966 , and a 1960s double @-@ cut Danelectro . An assortment of amps were used , including 10- , 15- , and 20 @-@ watt <unk> speakers and late 1960s 18- and 20 @-@ watt Marshall combos . Robert recorded the bass lines to " First Kiss on Mars " with a 1950s six @-@ string Danelectro Longhorn bass , and Weiland used Robert 's collection of vintage microphones for some of his vocals . Dean exclaimed , " Most bands do a retro thing and apologize for it . We 're unapologetically retro here . That was the whole idea ! " 
 Leading up to the recording process , Dean had been listening to country , drawing inspiration from 1960s guitarists like Jimmy Bryant , Speedy West , Hank Garland , Pete Drake , Hank Snow and Aerosmith 's Brad Whitford . Songs like " Hickory Dichotomy " gave Weiland and Kretz a " Down South " and " swampy kind of feeling " . Although it was recorded in standard tuning , " Hickory Dichotomy " features a slide guitar solo performed in open G. Both " Cinnamon " and " <unk> " were recorded with a Telecaster set up for Nashville tuning , and Dean described " First Kiss on Mars " as having a " down @-@ home country kind of feel " , but noted Weiland 's influence on the song : " That title takes it to this whole other plateau . " 
 Several of the songs were inspired by 1960s and 1970s rock bands . " Between the Lines " was written with The Animals , The Zombies and Paul Revere & the Raiders in mind , and Weiland considered " Cinnamon " to be a combination of 1960s British pop and Ian Curtis ( of Joy Division ) . " Huckleberry Crumble " was inspired by Aerosmith , specifically " Same Old Song and Dance " . Dean admitted to the similarities : " The arrangement is almost the same : riff , solo , verse , chorus , solo , back to a second verse — it 's pretty much the same setup . " He also noted how the song sounded different depending on the type of instruments used to play it . " It 's amazing how , if you were to present that opening riff on a Tele really clean , it 's almost a country riff . But if you present it with a Les Paul through a Marshall , it takes on this whole different thing . " 
 Weiland 's lyrics were unique to previous albums , which had been solely focused on himself and his drug addictions . He studied lyricists to learn how to write differently . " [ In ] the ' 90s , I was so overwhelmed with my heroin addiction , and so a lot of the stuff was just from my point of view . Now , I tend to look at some of the greats like Leonard Cohen and Bob Dylan . I look at their storytelling [ and ] I try to tell stories . Every song doesn 't have to be <unk> written about how I feel on that day . " Stone Temple Pilots became the third album Weiland had ever recorded sober , after Velvet Revolver 's Libertad and Stone Temple Pilot 's first album , Core . Weiland was also influenced by his ex @-@ wife , Mary Forsberg , about whom he specifically wrote on " Cinnamon " . Weiland 's inspiration for " First Kiss on Mars " came from the music itself . He explained his lyrics succinctly : " When I first heard [ the song ] , it sounded intergalactic . " Critics and interviewers of the band noticed that Weiland 's vocalizations were drawn from David Bowie . 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 Stone Temple Pilots was promoted through various media outlets , including the Internet , radio , and on television , with live performances and interviews by the band . The earliest reported premiere of the album was on February 23 , 2010 , when the new album was played in its entirety at a private listening party held at Gramercy Park Hotel 's Rose Bar in New York City . Among those in attendance were Stone Temple Pilots , journalists from several venues , and Craig Kallman , Chairman and CEO of Atlantic Records . Stone Temple Pilots opened an early @-@ 2010 tour on March 18 at the South by Southwest music festival , where four new songs were premiered : " Between the Lines " , " Huckleberry Crumble " , " <unk> " , and " Hickory Dichotomy " . On March 27 , the band was filmed performing live at the Riviera Theatre in Chicago , Illinois . The footage appeared on VH1 's Friday Night Alright series two months later on May 21 , which included a performance of " Between the Lines " . 
 Beginning in late April , Amazon.com advertised that they would be streaming a new song in its entirety each week leading up to the release of the album . Four songs total were streamed , including " Between the Lines " , " Hickory Dichotomy " , " <unk> " , and " Huckleberry Crumble " . On May 21 , all twelve tracks of the album became available for streaming in their entirety on Billboard 's website . That same month , the band appeared on a radio talk show and two late night television talk shows . On May 18 , Stone Temple Pilots was the guest on the Howard Stern Show . The following night , May 19 , Stone Temple Pilots performed " Between the Lines " on the Late Show with David Letterman . The band performed two mini @-@ concerts for two episodes of Jimmy Kimmel Live ! . The first concert was recorded at the Gramercy Theater in Manhattan , New York , and aired on the evening of May 26 . The second concert was performed the following night and aired on May 27 . Stone Temple Pilots became Artist of the Month for American cable television network ESPN during June , though the network began featuring the band 's music during the month of May . Songs from previous releases , as well as " Fast As I Can " , " Cinnamon " , " Dare If You Dare " , and " Take a Load Off " , were played during the network 's television programming and were listed on the network 's website , which included links to purchase the songs . 
 Stone Temple Pilots was released worldwide over a period of a week . Several foreign markets released the album on May 21 , including Australia , Germany , and the Netherlands . The U.S. released the album on May 25 , and countries like Sweden , Finland , and Japan released the album on May 26 . Different versions of the album were released , including retailer @-@ specific versions . The standard 12 @-@ track album was released on CD and vinyl . Deluxe and Japanese versions of the album included a second disc with four bonus tracks . Target stores sold a deluxe edition version that included gold foil on the artwork and an 18 @-@ panel poster , and iTunes included a music video , an interview video , and a pre @-@ order bonus track . 
 On June 1 , " Between the Lines " was released , along with two other songs , as part of a Stone Temple Pilots pack for the rhythm video game Guitar Hero . On June 5 , the band performed at the KROQ Weenie Roast , hosted by the U.S. radio station . For the duration of June , the band played at various festivals in Europe , beginning with the Nova Rock Festival in <unk> , Austria , on June 11 and completing on June 28 in <unk> San Giovanni , Italy . The band returned to North America to perform at the rock festival Rock on the Range in Winnipeg , Canada , on August 7 . They launched their headline tour on August 10 at the Red Rocks Amphitheatre in Morrison , Colorado . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Between the Lines " became the album 's first single ; it was released digitally on the band 's Twitter page on March 22 , later peaking at number one on the Billboard Rock Songs <unk> music video for " Between the Lines " , directed by Christopher Sims , was shot on April 11 in Los Angeles , California , and premiered on Fuse TV 's Top 20 Countdown on May <unk> song was written by Robert , with a guitar solo written by Dean . Robert was inspired by the 1960s rock groups , The Zombies and The Animals , and who had been picturing " a ' 60s go @-@ go beat and a girl in a miniskirt " before Weiland changed the song 's meaning with his lyrics . Dean commented on how Weiland had turned " Between the Lines " into a love song : " Sometimes we don 't feel musically what Scott does lyrically . He took it to an exciting place . It 's pretty twisted . " Weiland 's lyrics reflected on his relationship with his ex @-@ wife , Mary Forsberg , and his history with drug abuse . Speaking of the at @-@ times strange lyrics , Weiland cited The Beatles ' " I Am the Walrus " as an inspiration . " Sometimes you throw together random words that phonetically sound good with the melody and then you get to the meat of the song in the chorus . " " Between the Lines " was originally the working title of the song , which Weiland incorporated into his lyrics . 
 " Take a Load Off " was the band 's second single , which was released on June 15 , and the accompanying music video was released in September . The video is a culmination of clips edited together , including moments with the band — both on and off stage — , samples of cartoons , and " all @-@ American imagery " . " Take a Load Off " topped the Alternative Chart at number 24 . 
 " Cinnamon " was released as the band 's third single , which debuted at number 49 on the Alternative Chart . The first music video for the song was filmed in mid @-@ 2010 , directed by Aggressive ( the combined efforts of directors Alex <unk> and Dan Shapiro ) , and produced by Anke <unk> , but the video was reshot . Kretz said simply that the first video had " the wrong director " . The second music video was filmed in December 2010 , directed by Dennis Roberts and photographed by Adam Bricker , however this video was also shelved in May 2011 without ever being released . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 Stone Temple Pilots peaked at number two on the Billboard 200 chart , selling 61 @,@ 933 copies its first week . The album was prevented from reaching number one by the television soundtrack Glee : The Music , Volume 3 Showstoppers . The album dropped to number 16 in its second week and to number 45 in its third week . The album also peaked at number one on Billboard 's Hard Rock and Rock Albums charts , as well as number one on the Alternative Songs chart . The album reached the top 10 in two countries , Canada ( number two ) and New Zealand ( number 6 ) ; the top 40 in three countries , Australia ( number 21 ) , Finland ( number 35 ) and Switzerland ( number 36 ) ; and the top 100 for two countries , Austria ( number 54 ) and Germany ( number 52 ) . Sales for the album dropped 70 % in its second week , selling 18 @,@ 601 copies , and continued to drop another 44 % in its third week , selling 10 @,@ 473 copies . The fourth week saw sales drop 18 % , with 8 @,@ 538 copies sold . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Previews and pre @-@ release = = = 
 On February 23 , 2010 , the album was previewed in its entirety during a private listening party at Gramercy Park Hotel 's Rose Bar in New York City . Craig Kallman , Chairman and CEO of Atlantic Records , delivered a speech praising the members of the band and their influence on the music industry , comparing them to Led Zeppelin . Several members of the audience described the songs as " Beatles @-@ esque " and the album " a natural , melodic progression for Stone Temple Pilots . " Robert DeLeo cautioned against the overuse of the " Beatles " label . " I think there 's always going to be a sense of Beatles on whatever anybody does . I mean , the Beatles have been such a huge influence and inspiration on music in general . The Beatles , they 're ingrained in everybody 's mind .... The Beatles are like our nursery rhymes for all of us ; it 's the planet 's nursery rhymes . " 
 William Goodman of Spin described the album as a " signature blend of tuneful melodies and rock guitar crunch , psychedelic solos and impressive crooning courtesy of Scott Weiland , " adding that two songs in the second half of the album were slower and performed with acoustic guitar . Rick Florino of <unk> extolled the album as " the rock record of the decade , " calling it " a masterpiece that will officially solidify STP alongside the Beatles , Led Zeppelin and the Rolling Stones as one of the greatest rock ' n ' roll bands of all time . " 
 = = = Post @-@ release = = = 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic suggested that Stone Temple Pilots proved the band members , after nearly a decade of side @-@ projects , needed each other . The album 's sound picked up where Shangri @-@ La Dee Da left off , but the lack of Brendan O 'Brien 's production , which Erlewine believed was a " key ingredient " to the previous albums , was evident . " [ W ] ith another set of ears in the studio ... perhaps the entire set would be sharpened . " Jon Dolan 's brief review in Entertainment Weekly called the music " cheap and easy pop @-@ rock mimicry " . He noted that Weiland sounded " effervescent " now that the singer was drug @-@ free , but Dolan still found his lyrics to " weigh him down " . 
 Brad Wheeler , writing for The Globe and Mail , wondered if the eponymous title was an allusion to the Atlantic Records contractual dispute . He went on to remark on the music 's combination of 90s era " guitar flash and crunch " and The Beatles . Wheeler did not think the album moved the band or its sound forward , calling it " a quasi @-@ comeback album that neither defiles nor builds upon the band 's legend . " <unk> Eisenbach of IGN wrote that the music was not " anything especially unique " . Eisenbach analyzed several tracks , observing that some songs " start off promising " only to result in " uninspired , generic hooks , " while other songs struggle with their musical direction . Despite this , Eisenbach felt the album had " enough going on inside the album 's 41 minutes that it 's worth a listen . " 
 Newsday 's Glenn Gamboa praised the band for " not reliving the past " , but he found enough similarities to the band 's previous releases to appeal to listeners . He considered the album successful because the band had been " reflecting their time apart and their work with Velvet Revolver and Army of Anyone . " Mike Schiller , writing for PopMatters , called the album 's title an appropriate fit with the band 's apparent ease of writing with " obvious " influences . He described the title as , " more homage than it is subconscious plagiarism , " before listing Nirvana , Aerosmith , Joy Division , John Lennon , David Bowie , and even the band 's Purple as having intentionally shaped the album . Schiller decided the album was a " bonus " because , in the near @-@ decade gap since the band 's last release , " people have moved on " . He concluded that Stone Temple Pilots is " a far more fitting epilogue " than the last album , before considering it , " perhaps , [ the ] next chapter " . 
 Ronnie <unk> of Rock Sound said that the album " does not disappoint " , describing it as having " heady guitar trips and crunching grooves " . She found Weiland 's voice to be improved in part due to his sober lifestyle and wrote that the band was " back in action " . USA Today 's Jerry Schriver praised the band for releasing a " cohesive , self @-@ produced reunion album " , but admitted the tracks were not " timeless " . The songs were found to be " pleasant " but " disposable " and inoffensive . Schriver commended Dean DeLeo for keeping the " well @-@ constructed tunes " moving forward , despite Weiland 's lyrics . Allison Stewart , writing for The Washington Post , decided the album was a " small victory " and " respectable " but ultimately " a weirdly mild , tension @-@ free outing . " Like other critics , Stewart noticed the influences on the album , including country and " psych @-@ rock " , and thought the band was " better at mixing their influences in novel ways than at actually being novel themselves . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Scott Weiland . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Band 
 Scott Weiland – lead vocals 
 Dean DeLeo – guitar , production 
 Robert DeLeo – bass , harmonizer , production 
 Eric Kretz – drums 
 Production 
 Chris Lord @-@ Alge – mixing 
 Don Was – additional producer 
 Ted Jensen – mastering 
 Russ Fowler – engineer 
 Bill <unk> – engineer and all keyboards 
 Doug Grean – engineer 
 Mike Gerlach – assistant engineer 
 Jared <unk> – assistant engineer 
 Arik Garcia – assistant engineer 
 Keith Armstrong – assistant mixer 
 Nik <unk> – assistant mixer 
 Brad Townsend – additional engineering 
 Andrew Schubert – additional engineering 
 Shepard Fairey – cover image 
 Mark <unk> – art direction & design 
 David J. Harrigan III – additional design 
 Chapman Baehler – photography 
 Dana <unk> – management 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Peasants ' Revolt = 
 The Peasants ' Revolt , also called Wat Tyler 's Rebellion or the Great Rising , was a major uprising across large parts of England in 1381 . The revolt had various causes , including the socio @-@ economic and political tensions generated by the Black Death in the 1340s , the high taxes resulting from the conflict with France during the Hundred Years ' War , and instability within the local leadership of London . The final trigger for the revolt was the intervention of a royal official , John Bampton , in Essex on 30 May 1381 . His attempts to collect unpaid poll taxes in Brentwood ended in a violent confrontation , which rapidly spread across the south @-@ east of the country . A wide spectrum of rural society , including many local artisans and village officials , rose up in protest , burning court records and opening the local gaols . The rebels sought a reduction in taxation , an end to the system of unfree labour known as serfdom and the removal of the King 's senior officials and law courts . 
 Inspired by the sermons of the radical cleric John Ball , and led by Wat Tyler , a contingent of Kentish rebels advanced on London . They were met at Blackheath by representatives of the royal government , who unsuccessfully attempted to persuade them to return home . King Richard II , then aged 14 , retreated to the safety of the Tower of London , but most of the royal forces were abroad or in northern England . On 13 June , the rebels entered London and , joined by many local townsfolk , attacked the gaols , destroyed the Savoy Palace , set fire to law books and buildings in the Temple , and killed anyone associated with the royal government . The following day , Richard met the rebels at Mile End and acceded to most of their demands , including the abolition of serfdom . Meanwhile , rebels entered the Tower of London , killing the Lord Chancellor and the Lord High Treasurer , whom they found inside . 
 On 15 June , Richard left the city to meet with Tyler and the rebels at Smithfield . Violence broke out , and Richard 's party killed Tyler . Richard defused the tense situation long enough for London 's mayor , William Walworth , to gather a militia from the city and disperse the rebel forces . Richard immediately began to re @-@ establish order in London and rescinded his previous grants to the rebels . The revolt had also spread into East Anglia , where the University of Cambridge was attacked and many royal officials were killed . Unrest continued until the intervention of Henry le Despenser , who defeated a rebel army at the Battle of North Walsham on 25 or 26 June . Troubles extended north to York , Beverley and Scarborough , and as far west as Bridgwater in Somerset . Richard mobilised 4 @,@ 000 soldiers to restore order . Most of the rebel leaders were tracked down and executed ; by November , at least 1 @,@ 500 rebels had been killed . 
 The Peasants ' Revolt has been widely studied by academics . Late 19th @-@ century historians used a range of sources from contemporary chroniclers to assemble an account of the uprising , and these were supplemented in the 20th century by research using court records and local archives . Interpretations of the revolt have shifted over the years . It was once seen as a defining moment in English history , but modern academics are less certain of its impact on subsequent social and economic history . The revolt heavily influenced the course of the Hundred Years ' War , by deterring later Parliaments from raising additional taxes to pay for military campaigns in France . The revolt has been widely used in socialist literature , including by the author William Morris , and remains a potent political symbol for the political left , informing the arguments surrounding the introduction of the Community Charge in the United Kingdom during the 1980s . 
 = = Background and causes = = 
 = = = Economics = = = 
 The Peasants ' Revolt was fed by the economic and social upheaval of the 14th century . At the start of the century , the majority of English people worked in the countryside , as part of a sophisticated economy that fed the country 's towns and cities and supported an extensive international trade . Across much of England , production was organised around manors , controlled by local lords – including the gentry and the Church – and governed through a system of manorial courts . Some of the population were unfree serfs , who had to work on their lords ' lands for a period each year , although the balance of free and unfree varied across England , and in the south @-@ east there were relatively few serfs . Some serfs were born unfree and could not leave their manors to work elsewhere without the consent of the local lord ; others accepted limitations on their freedom as part of the tenure agreement for their farmland . Population growth led to pressure on the available agricultural land , increasing the power of local landowners . 
 In 1348 a plague known as the Black Death crossed from mainland Europe into England , rapidly killing an estimated 50 per cent of the population . After an initial period of economic shock , England began to adapt to the changed economic situation . The death rate among the peasantry meant that suddenly land was relatively plentiful and manpower in much shorter supply . Labourers could charge more for their work and , in the consequent competition for labour , wages were driven sharply upwards . In turn , the profits of landowners were eroded . The trading , commercial and financial networks in the towns disintegrated . 
 The authorities responded to the chaos with emergency legislation ; the Ordinance of Labourers was passed in 1349 , and the Statute of Labourers in 1351 . These attempted to fix wages at pre @-@ plague levels , making it a crime to refuse work or to break an existing contract , imposing fines on those who transgressed . The system was initially enforced through special Justices of Labourers and then , from the 1360s onwards , through the normal Justices of the Peace , typically members of the local gentry . Although in theory these laws applied to both labourers seeking higher wages and to employers tempted to outbid their competitors for workers , they were in practice applied only to labourers , and then in a rather arbitrary fashion . The legislation was strengthened in 1361 , with the penalties increased to include branding and imprisonment . The royal government had not intervened in this way before , nor allied itself with the local landowners in quite such an obvious or unpopular way . 
 Over the next few decades , economic opportunities increased for the English peasantry . Some labourers took up specialist jobs that would have previously been barred to them , and others moved from employer to employer , or became servants in richer households . These changes were keenly felt across the south @-@ east of England , where the London market created a wide range of opportunities for farmers and artisans . Local lords had the right to prevent serfs from leaving their manors , but when serfs found themselves blocked in the manorial courts , many simply left to work illegally on manors elsewhere . Wages continued to rise , and between the 1340s and the 1380s the purchasing power of rural labourers increased by around 40 percent . As the wealth of the lower classes increased , Parliament brought in fresh laws in 1363 to prevent them from consuming expensive goods formerly only affordable by the elite . These sumptuary laws proved unenforceable , but the wider labour laws continued to be firmly applied . 
 = = = War and finance = = = 
 Another factor in the revolt of 1381 was the conduct of the war with France . In 1337 Edward III of England had pressed his claims to the French throne , beginning a long @-@ running conflict that became known as the Hundred Years ' War . Edward had initial successes , but his campaigns were not decisive . Charles V of France became more active in the conflict after 1369 , taking advantage of his country 's greater economic strength to commence cross @-@ Channel raids on England . By the 1370s , England 's armies on the continent were under huge military and financial pressure ; the garrisons in Calais and Brest alone , for example , were costing £ 36 @,@ 000 a year to maintain , while military expeditions could consume £ 50 @,@ 000 in only six months . Edward died in 1377 , leaving the throne to his grandson , Richard II , then only ten years old . 
 Richard 's government was formed around his uncles , most prominently the rich and powerful John of Gaunt , and many of his grandfather 's former senior officials . They faced the challenge of financially sustaining the war in France . Taxes in the 14th century were raised on an ad hoc basis through Parliament , then comprising the Lords , the titled aristocracy and clergy ; and the Commons , the representatives of the knights , merchants and senior gentry from across England . These taxes were typically imposed on a household 's movable possessions , such as their goods or stock . The raising of these taxes affected the members of the Commons much more than the Lords . To complicate matters , the official statistics used to administer the taxes pre @-@ dated the Black Death and , since the size and wealth of local communities had changed greatly since the plague , effective collection had become increasingly difficult . 
 Just before Edward 's death , Parliament introduced a new form of taxation called the poll tax , which was levied at the rate of four pence on every person over the age of 14 , with a deduction for married couples . Designed to spread the cost of the war over a broader economic base than previous tax levies , this round of taxation proved extremely unpopular but raised £ 22 @,@ 000 . The war continued to go badly and , despite raising some money through forced loans , the Crown returned to Parliament in 1379 to request further funds . The Commons were supportive of the young King , but had concerns about the amounts of money being sought and the way this was being spent by the King 's counsellors , whom they suspected of corruption . A second poll tax was approved , this time with a sliding scale of taxes against seven different classes of English society , with the upper classes paying more in absolute terms . Widespread evasion proved to be a problem , and the tax only raised £ 18 @,@ 600 — far short of the £ 50 @,@ 000 that had been hoped for . 
 In November 1380 , Parliament was called together again in Northampton . Archbishop Simon Sudbury , the new Lord Chancellor , updated the Commons on the worsening situation in France , a collapse in international trade , and the risk of the Crown having to default on its debts . The Commons were told that the colossal sum of £ 160 @,@ 000 was now required in new taxes , and arguments ensued between the royal council and Parliament about what to do next . Parliament passed a third poll tax ( this time on a flat @-@ rate basis of 12 pence on each person over 15 , with no allowance made for married couples ) which they estimated would raise £ 66 @,@ 666 . The third poll tax was highly unpopular and many in the south @-@ east evaded it by refusing to register . The royal council appointed new commissioners in March 1381 to interrogate local village and town officials in an attempt to find those who were refusing to comply . The extraordinary powers and interference of these teams of investigators in local communities , primarily in the south @-@ east and east of England , raised still further the tensions surrounding the taxes . 
 = = = Protest and authority = = = 
 The decades running up to 1381 were a rebellious , troubled period . London was a particular locus of unrest , and the activities of the city 's politically active guilds and fraternities often alarmed the authorities . Londoners resented the expansion of the royal legal system in the capital , in particular the increased role of the Marshalsea Court in Southwark , which had begun to compete with the city authorities for judicial power in London . The city 's population also resented the presence of foreigners , Flemish weavers in particular . Londoners detested John of Gaunt because he was a supporter of the religious reformer John Wycliffe , whom the London public regarded as a heretic . John of Gaunt was also engaged in a feud with the London elite and was rumoured to be planning to replace the elected mayor with a captain , appointed by the Crown . The London elite were themselves fighting out a vicious , internal battle for political power . As a result , in 1381 the ruling classes in London were unstable and divided . 
 Rural communities , particularly in the south @-@ east , were unhappy with the operation of serfdom and the use of the local manorial courts to exact traditional fines and levies , not least because the same landowners who ran these courts also often acted as enforcers of the unpopular labour laws or as royal judges . Many of the village elites refused to take up positions in local government and began to frustrate the operation of the courts . Animals seized by the courts began to be retaken by their owners , and legal officials were assaulted . Some started to advocate the creation of independent village communities , respecting traditional laws but separate from the hated legal system centred in London . As the historian Miri Rubin describes , for many , " the problem was not the country 's laws , but those charged with applying and safeguarding them " . 
 Concerns were raised about these changes in society . William Langland wrote the poem Piers Plowman in the years before 1380 , praising peasants who respected the law and worked hard for their lords , but complaining about greedy , travelling labourers demanding higher wages . The poet John Gower feared England might see an uprising similar to the French Jacquerie revolt of 1358 , in which the peasants had risen up against their masters . There was a moral panic about the threat posed by newly arrived workers in the towns and the possibility that servants might turn against their masters . New legislation was introduced in 1359 to deal with migrants , existing conspiracy laws were more widely applied and the treason laws were extended to include servants or wives who betrayed their masters and husbands . By the 1370s , there were fears that if the French invaded England , the rural classes might side with the invaders . 
 The discontent began to give way to open protest . In 1377 , the " Great Rumour " occurred in south @-@ east and south @-@ west England . Rural workers organised themselves and refused to work for their lords , arguing that , according to the Domesday Book , they were exempted from such requests . The workers made unsuccessful appeals to the law courts and the King . There were also widespread urban tensions , particularly in London , where John of Gaunt narrowly escaped being lynched . The troubles increased again in 1380 , with protests and disturbances across northern England and in the western towns of Shrewsbury and Bridgwater . An uprising occurred in York , during which John de Gisborne , the city 's mayor , was removed from office , and fresh tax riots followed in early 1381 . There was a great storm in England during May 1381 , which many felt to prophesy future change and upheaval , adding further to the disturbed mood . 
 = = Events = = 
 = = = Outbreak of revolt = = = 
 = = = = Essex and Kent = = = = 
 The revolt of 1381 broke out in Essex , following the arrival of John Bampton to investigate non @-@ payment of the poll tax on 30 May . Bampton was a member of Parliament , a Justice of the Peace and well @-@ connected with royal circles . He based himself in Brentwood and summoned representatives from the neighbouring villages of <unk> , <unk> and Stanford @-@ le @-@ Hope to explain and make good the shortfalls on 1 June . The villagers appear to have arrived well @-@ organised , and armed with old bows and sticks . Bampton first interrogated the people of <unk> , whose representative , Thomas Baker , declared that his village had already paid their taxes , and that no more money would be forthcoming . When Bampton and two sergeants attempted to arrest Baker , violence broke out . Bampton escaped and retreated to London , but three of his clerks and several of the Brentwood townsfolk who had agreed to act as jurors were killed . Robert <unk> , the Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas , who was probably already holding court in the area , was empowered to arrest and deal with the perpetrators . 
 By the next day , the revolt was rapidly growing . The villagers spread the news across the region , and John Geoffrey , a local bailiff , rode between Brentwood and Chelmsford , rallying support . On 4 June , the rebels gathered at <unk> , where their future plans seem to have been discussed . The Essex rebels , possibly a few thousand strong , advanced towards London , some probably travelling directly and others via Kent . One group , under the leadership of John Wrawe , a former chaplain , marched north towards the neighbouring county of Suffolk , with the intention of raising a revolt there . 
 Revolt also flared in neighbouring Kent . Sir Simon de Burley , a close associate of both Edward III and the young Richard , had claimed that a man in Kent , called Robert Belling , was an escaped serf from one of his estates . Burley sent two sergeants to Gravesend , where Belling was living , to reclaim him . Gravesend 's local bailiffs and Belling tried to negotiate a solution under which Burley would accept a sum of money in return for dropping his case , but this failed and Belling was taken away to be imprisoned at Rochester Castle . A furious group of local people gathered at Dartford , possibly on 5 June , to discuss the matter . From there the rebels travelled to Maidstone , where they stormed the gaol , and then onto Rochester on 6 June . Faced by the angry crowds , the constable in charge of Rochester Castle surrendered it without a fight and Belling was freed . 
 Some of the Kentish crowds now dispersed , but others continued . From this point , they appear to have been led by Wat Tyler , whom the Anonimalle Chronicle suggests was elected their leader at a large gathering at Maidstone on 7 June . Relatively little is known about Tyler 's former life ; chroniclers suggest that he was from Essex , had served in France as an archer and was a charismatic and capable leader . Several chroniclers believe that he was responsible for shaping the political aims of the revolt . Some also mention a Jack Straw as a leader among the Kentish rebels during this phase in the revolt , but it is uncertain if this was a real person , or a pseudonym for Wat Tyler or John Wrawe . 
 Tyler and the Kentish men advanced to Canterbury , entering the walled city and castle without resistance on 10 June . The rebels deposed the absent Archbishop of Canterbury , Sudbury , and made the cathedral monks swear loyalty to their cause . They attacked properties in the city with links to the hated royal council , and searched the city for suspected enemies , dragging the suspects out of their houses and executing them . The city gaol was opened and the prisoners freed . Tyler then persuaded a few thousand of the rebels to leave Canterbury and advance with him on London the next morning . 
 = = = = March on the capital = = = = 
 The Kentish advance on London appears to have been coordinated with the movement of the rebels in Essex , Suffolk and Norfolk . Their forces were armed with weapons including sticks , battle axes , old swords and bows . Along their way , they encountered Lady Joan , the King 's mother , who was travelling back to the capital to avoid being caught up in the revolt ; she was mocked but otherwise left unharmed . The Kentish rebels reached Blackheath , just south @-@ east of the capital , on 12 June . 
 Word of the revolt reached the King at Windsor Castle on the night of 10 June . He travelled by boat down the River Thames to London the next day , taking up residence in the powerful fortress of the Tower of London for safety , where he was joined by his mother , Archbishop Sudbury , the Lord High Treasurer Sir Robert Hales , the Earls of Arundel , Salisbury and Warwick and several other senior nobles . A delegation , headed by Thomas Brinton , the Bishop of Rochester , was sent out from London to negotiate with the rebels and persuade them to return home . 
 At Blackheath , John Ball gave a famous sermon to the assembled Kentishmen . Ball was a well @-@ known priest and radical preacher from Kent , who was by now closely associated with Tyler . Chroniclers ' accounts vary as to how he came to be involved in the revolt ; he may have been released from Maidstone gaol by the crowds , or might have been already at liberty when the revolt broke out . Ball rhetorically asked the crowds " When Adam delved and Eve span , who was then a gentleman ? " and promoted the rebel slogan " With King Richard and the true commons of England " . The phrases emphasised the rebel opposition to the continuation of serfdom and to the hierarchies of the Church and State that separated the subject from the King , while stressing that they were loyal to the monarchy and , unlike the King 's advisers , were " true " to Richard . The rebels rejected proposals from the Bishop of Rochester that they should return home , and instead prepared to march on . 
 Discussions took place in the Tower of London about how to deal with the revolt . The King had only a few troops at hand , in the form of the castle 's garrison , his immediate bodyguard and , at most , several hundred soldiers . Many of the more experienced military commanders were in France , Ireland and Germany , and the nearest major military force was in the north of England , guarding against a potential Scottish invasion . Resistance in the provinces was also complicated by English law , which stated that only the King could summon local militias or lawfully execute rebels and criminals , leaving many local lords unwilling to attempt to suppress the uprisings on their own authority . 
 Since the Blackheath negotiations had failed , the decision was taken that the King himself should meet the rebels , at Greenwich , on the south side of the Thames . Guarded by four barges of soldiers , Richard sailed from the Tower on the morning of 13 June , where he was met on the other side by the rebel crowds . The negotiations failed , as Richard was unwilling to come ashore and the rebels refused to enter discussions until he did . Richard returned across the river to the Tower . 
 = = = Events in London = = = 
 = = = = Entry to the city = = = = 
 The rebels began to cross from Southwark onto London Bridge on the afternoon of 13 June . The defences on London Bridge were opened from the inside , either in sympathy for the rebel cause or out of fear , and the rebels advanced into the city . At the same time , the rebel force from Essex made its way towards Aldgate on the north side of the city . The rebels swept west through the centre of the city , and Aldgate was opened to let the rest of the rebels in . 
 The Kentish rebels had assembled a wide @-@ ranging list of people whom they wanted the King to hand over for execution . It included national figures , such as John of Gaunt , Archbishop Sudbury and Hales ; other key members of the royal council ; officials , such as Belknap and Bampton who had intervened in Kent ; and other hated members of the wider royal circle . When they reached the Marshalsea Prison in Southwark , they tore it apart . By now the Kent and Essex rebels had been joined by many rebellious Londoners . The Fleet and Newgate Prisons were attacked by the crowds , and the rebels also targeted houses belonging to Flemish immigrants . 
 On the north side of London , the rebels approached Smithfield and Clerkenwell Priory , the headquarters of the Knights Hospitaller which was headed by Hales . The priory was destroyed , along with the nearby manor . Heading west along Fleet Street , the rebels attacked the Temple , a complex of legal buildings and offices owned by the Hospitallers . The contents , books and paperwork were brought out and burned in the street , and the buildings systematically demolished . Meanwhile , John Fordham , the Keeper of the Privy Seal and one of the men on the rebels ' execution list , narrowly escaped when the crowds ransacked his accommodation but failed to notice he was still in the building . 
 Next to be attacked along Fleet Street was the Savoy Palace , a huge , luxurious building belonging to John of Gaunt . According to the chronicler Henry Knighton it contained " such quantities of vessels and silver plate , without counting the parcel @-@ gilt and solid gold , that five carts would hardly suffice to carry them " ; official estimates placed the value of the contents at around £ 10 @,@ 000 . The interior was systematically destroyed by the rebels , who burnt the soft furnishings , smashed the precious metal work , crushed the gems , set fire to the Duke 's records and threw the remains into the Thames and the city drains . Almost nothing was stolen by the rebels , who declared themselves to be " zealots for truth and justice , not thieves and robbers " . The remains of the building were then set alight . In the evening , rebel forces gathered outside the Tower of London , from where the King watched the fires burning across the city . 
 = = = = Taking the Tower of London = = = = 
 On the morning of 14 June , the crowd continued west along the Thames , burning the houses of officials around Westminster and opening the Westminster gaol . They then moved back into central London , setting fire to more buildings and storming Newgate Prison . The hunt for Flemings continued , and those with Flemish @-@ sounding accents were killed , including the royal adviser , Richard Lyons . In one city ward , the bodies of 40 executed Flemings were piled up in the street , and at the Church of St Martin Vintry , popular with the Flemish , 35 of the community were killed . Historian Rodney Hilton argues that these attacks may have been coordinated by the weavers ' guilds of London , who were commercial competitors of the Flemish weavers . 
 Isolated inside the Tower , the royal government was in a state of shock at the turn of events . The King left the castle that morning and made his way to negotiate with the rebels at Mile End in east London , taking only a very small bodyguard with him . The King left Sudbury and Hales behind in the Tower , either for their own safety or because Richard had decided it would be safer to distance himself from his unpopular ministers . Along the way , several Londoners accosted the King to complain about alleged injustices . 
 It is uncertain who spoke for the rebels at Mile End , and Wat Tyler may not have been present on this occasion , but they appear to have put forward their various demands to the King , including the surrender of the hated officials on their lists for execution ; the abolition of serfdom and unfree tenure ; " that there should be no law within the realm save the law of Winchester " , and a general amnesty for the rebels . It is unclear precisely what was meant by the law of Winchester , but it probably referred to the rebel ideal of self @-@ regulating village communities . Richard issued charters announcing the abolition of serfdom , which immediately began to be disseminated around the country . He declined to hand over any of his officials , apparently instead promising that he would personally implement any justice that was required . 
 While Richard was at Mile End , the Tower was taken by the rebels . A force of rebels , separate from those operating under Tyler at Mile End , approached the castle , possibly in the late morning . The gates were open to receive Richard on his return and a crowd of around 400 rebels entered the fortress , encountering no resistance , possibly because the guards were terrified by them . 
 Once inside , the rebels began to hunt down their key targets , and found Archbishop Sudbury and Robert Hales in the chapel of the White Tower . Along with William Appleton , John of Gaunt 's physician , and John Legge , a royal sergeant , they were taken out to Tower Hill and beheaded . Their heads were paraded around the city , before being affixed to London Bridge . The rebels found John of Gaunt 's son , the future Henry IV , and were about to execute him as well , when John <unk> , one of the royal guards , successfully interceded on his behalf . The rebels also discovered Lady Joan and Joan Holland , Richard 's sister , in the castle but let them go unharmed after making fun of them . The castle was thoroughly looted of armour and royal paraphernalia . 
 In the aftermath of the attack , Richard did not return to the Tower but instead travelled from Mile End to the Great Wardrobe , one of his royal houses in Blackfriars , part of south @-@ west London . There he appointed the military commander Richard FitzAlan , the Earl of Arundel , to replace Sudbury as Chancellor , and began to make plans to regain an advantage over the rebels the following day . Many of the Essex rebels now began to disperse , content with the King 's promises , leaving Tyler and the Kentish forces the most significant faction in London . Tyler 's men moved around the city that evening , seeking out and killing John of Gaunt 's employees , foreigners and anyone associated with the legal system . 
 = = = = Smithfield = = = = 
 On 15 June the royal government and the remaining rebels , who were unsatisfied with the charters granted the previous day , agreed to meet at Smithfield , just outside the city walls . London remained in confusion , with various bands of rebels roaming the city independently . Richard prayed at Westminster Abbey , before setting out for the meeting in the late afternoon . The chronicler accounts of the encounter all vary on matters of detail , but agree on the broad sequence of events . The King and his party , at least 200 strong and including men @-@ at @-@ arms , positioned themselves outside St Bartholomew 's Priory to the east of Smithfield , and the thousands of rebels massed along the western end . 
 Richard probably called Tyler forwards from the crowd to meet him , and Tyler greeted the King with what the royal party considered excessive familiarity , terming Richard his " brother " and promising him his friendship . Richard queried why Tyler and the rebels had not yet left London following the signing of the charters the previous day , but this brought an angry rebuke from Tyler , who requested that a further charter be drawn up . The rebel leader rudely demanded refreshment and , once this had been provided , attempted to leave . 
 An argument then broke out between Tyler and some of the royal servants . The Mayor of London , William Walworth , stepped forward to intervene , Tyler made some motion towards the King , and the royal soldiers leapt in . Either Walworth or Richard ordered Tyler to be arrested , Tyler attempted to attack the Mayor , and Walworth responded by stabbing Tyler . Ralph Standish , a royal squire , then repeatedly stabbed Tyler with his sword , mortally injuring him . 
 The situation was now precarious and violence appeared likely as the rebels prepared to unleash a volley of arrows . Richard rode forwards towards the crowd and persuaded them to follow him away from <unk> , to Clerkenwell Fields , defusing the situation . Walworth meanwhile began to regain control of the situation , backed by reinforcements from the city . Tyler 's head was cut off and displayed on a pole and , with their leader dead and the royal government now backed by the London militia , the rebel movement began to collapse . Richard promptly knighted Walworth and his leading supporters for their services . 
 = = = Wider revolt = = = 
 = = = = Eastern England = = = = 
 While the revolt was unfolding in London , John Wrawe led his force into Suffolk . Wrawe had considerable influence over the development of the revolt across eastern England , where there may have been almost as many rebels as in the London revolt . The authorities put up very little resistance to the revolt : the major nobles failed to organise defences , key fortifications fell easily to the rebels and the local militias were not mobilised . As in London and the south @-@ east , this was in part due to the absence of key military leaders and the nature of English law , but any locally recruited men might also have proved unreliable in the face of a popular uprising . 
 On 12 June , Wrawe attacked Sir Richard Lyons ' property at <unk> , advancing on to Cavendish and Bury St Edmunds in west Suffolk the next day , gathering further support as they went . John Cambridge , the Prior of the wealthy Bury St Edmunds Abbey , was disliked in the town , and Wrawe allied himself with the townspeople and stormed the abbey . The Prior escaped , but was found two days later and beheaded . A small band of rebels marched north to Thetford to extort protection money from the town , and another group tracked down Sir John Cavendish , the Chief Justice of the King 's Bench and Chancellor of the University of Cambridge . Cavendish was caught in Lakenheath and killed . John <unk> and Thomas Sampson independently led a revolt near Ipswich on 14 June . They took the town without opposition and looted the properties of the archdeacon and local tax officials . The violence spread out further , with attacks on many properties and the burning of the local court records . One official , Edmund Lakenheath , was forced to flee from the Suffolk coast by boat . 
 Revolt began to stir in St Albans in Hertfordshire late on 13 June , when news broke of the events in London . There had been long @-@ running disagreements in St Albans between the town and the local abbey , which had extensive privileges in the region . On 14 June , protesters met with the Abbot , Thomas de la Mare , and demanded their freedom from the abbey . A group of townsmen under the leadership of William Grindecobbe traveled to London , where they appealed to the King for the rights of the abbey to be abolished . Wat Tyler , then still in control of the city , granted them authority in the meantime to take direct action against the abbey . Grindecobbe and the rebels returned to St Albans , where they found the Prior had already fled . The rebels broke open the abbey gaol , destroyed the fences marking out the abbey lands and burnt the abbey records in the town square . They then forced Thomas de la Mare to surrender the abbey 's rights in a charter on 16 June . The revolt against the abbey spread out over the next few days , with abbey property and financial records being destroyed across the county . 
 On 15 June , revolt broke out in Cambridgeshire , led by elements of Wrawe 's Suffolk rebellion and some local men , such as John <unk> , who had been involved in the events in London and had returned to his home county to spread the revolt , and Geoffrey Cobbe and John <unk> , members of the local gentry . The University of Cambridge , staffed by priests and enjoying special royal privileges , was widely hated by the other inhabitants of the town . A revolt backed by the Mayor of Cambridge broke out with the university as its main target . The rebels ransacked Corpus Christi College , which had connections to John of Gaunt , and the University 's church , and attempted to execute the University <unk> , who escaped . The university 's library and archives were burnt in the centre of the town . The next day , the university was forced to negotiate a new charter , giving up its royal privileges . Revolt then spread north from Cambridge toward Ely , where the gaol was opened and the local Justice of the Peace executed . 
 In Norfolk , the revolt was led by Geoffrey Litster , a weaver , and Sir Roger Bacon , a local lord with ties to the Suffolk rebels . Litster began sending out messengers across the county in a call to arms on 14 June , and isolated outbreaks of violence occurred . The rebels assembled on 17 June outside Norwich and killed Sir Robert Salle , who was in charge of the city defences and had attempted to negotiate a settlement . The people of the town then opened the gates to let the rebels in . They began looting buildings and killed Reginald Eccles , a local official . William de Ufford , the Earl of Suffolk fled his estates and travelled in disguise to London . The other leading members of the local gentry were captured and forced to play out the roles of a royal household , working for Litster . Violence spread out across the county , as gaols were opened , Flemish immigrants killed , court records burned , and property looted and destroyed . 
 = = = = Northern and western England = = = = 
 Revolts also occurred across the rest of England , particularly in the cities of the north , traditionally centres of political unrest . In the town of Beverley , violence broke out between the richer mercantile elite and the poorer townspeople during May . By the end of the month the rebels had taken power and replaced the former town administration with their own . The rebels attempted to enlist the support of Alexander Neville , the Archbishop of York , and in June forced the former town government to agree to arbitration through Neville . Peace was restored in June 1382 but tensions continued to simmer for many years . 
 Word of the troubles in the south @-@ east spread north , slowed by the poor communication links of medieval England . In Leicester , where John of Gaunt had a substantial castle , warnings arrived of a force of rebels advancing on the city from Lincolnshire , who were intent on destroying the castle and its contents . The mayor and the town mobilised their defences , including a local militia , but the rebels never arrived . John of Gaunt was in Berwick when word reached him on 17 June of the revolt . Not knowing that Wat Tyler had by now been killed , John of Gaunt placed his castles in Yorkshire and Wales on alert . Fresh rumours , many of them incorrect , continued to arrive in Berwick , suggesting widespread rebellions across the west and east of England and the looting of the ducal household in Leicester ; rebel units were even said to be hunting for the Duke himself . Gaunt began to march to Bamburgh Castle , but then changed course and diverted north into Scotland , only returning south once the fighting was over . 
 News of the initial events in London also reached York around 17 June , and attacks at once broke out on the properties of the Dominican friars , the Franciscan friaries and other religious institutions . Violence continued over the coming weeks , and on 1 July a group of armed men , under the command of John de Gisbourne , forced their way into the city and attempted to seize control . The mayor , Simon de <unk> , gradually began to reclaim authority , but order was not properly restored until 1382 . The news of the southern revolt reached Scarborough where riots broke out against the ruling elite on 23 June , with the rebels dressed in white hoods with a red tail at the back . Members of the local government were deposed from office , and one tax collector was nearly lynched . By 1382 the elite had re @-@ established power . 
 In the Somerset town of Bridgwater , revolt broke out on 19 June , led by Thomas Ingleby and Adam Brugge . The crowds attacked the local Augustine house and forced their master to give up his local privileges and pay a ransom . The rebels then turned on the properties of John Sydenham , a local merchant and official , looting his manor and burning paperwork , before executing Walter Baron , a local man . The Ilchester gaol was stormed , and one unpopular prisoner executed . 
 = = = Suppression = = = 
 The royal suppression of the revolt began shortly after the death of Wat Tyler on 15 June . Sir Robert Knolles , Sir Nicholas Brembre and Sir Robert <unk> were appointed to restore control in the capital . A summons was put out for soldiers , probably around 4 @,@ 000 men were mustered in London , and expeditions to the other troubled parts of the country soon followed . 
 The revolt in East Anglia was independently suppressed by Henry le Despenser , the Bishop of Norwich . Henry was in Stamford in Lincolnshire when the revolt broke out , and when he found out about it he marched south with eight men @-@ at @-@ arms and a small force of archers , gathering more forces as he went . He marched first to Peterborough , where he routed the local rebels and executed any he could capture , including some who had taken shelter in the local abbey . He then headed south @-@ east via Huntingdon and Ely , reached Cambridge on 19 June , and then headed further into the rebel @-@ controlled areas of Norfolk . Henry reclaimed Norwich on 24 June , before heading out with a company of men to track down the rebel leader , Geoffrey Litster . The two forces met at the Battle of North Walsham on 25 or 26 June ; the Bishop 's forces triumphed and Litster was captured and executed . Henry 's quick action was essential to the suppression of the revolt in East Anglia , but he was very unusual in taking matters into his own hands in this way , and his execution of the rebels without royal sanction was illegal . 
 On 17 June , the King dispatched his half @-@ brother Thomas Holland and Sir Thomas Trivet to Kent with a small force to restore order . They held courts at Maidstone and Rochester . William de Ufford , the Earl of Suffolk , returned to his county on 23 June , accompanied by a force of 500 men . He quickly subdued the area and was soon holding court in Mildenhall , where many of the accused were sentenced to death . He moved on into Norfolk on 6 July , holding court in Norwich , Great Yarmouth and Hacking . Hugh , Lord la Zouche , led the legal proceedings against the rebels in Cambridgeshire . In St Albans , the Abbot arrested William Grindecobbe and his main supporters . 
 On 20 June , the King 's uncle , Thomas of Woodstock , and Robert Tresilian , the replacement Chief Justice , were given special commissions across the whole of England . Thomas oversaw court cases in Essex , backed up by a substantial military force as resistance was continuing and the county was still in a state of unrest . Richard himself visited Essex , where he met with a rebel delegation seeking confirmation of the grants the King had given at Mile End . Richard rejected them , allegedly telling them that " rustics you were and rustics you are still . You will remain in bondage , not as before , but incomparably harsher " . Tresilian soon joined Thomas , and carried out 31 executions in Chelmsford , then travelled to St Albans in July for further court trials , which appear to have utilised dubious techniques to ensure convictions . Thomas went on to Gloucester with 200 soldiers to suppress the unrest there . Henry Percy , the Earl of Northumberland , was tasked to restore order to Yorkshire . 
 A wide range of laws were invoked in the process of the suppression , from general treason to charges of book burning or demolishing houses , a process complicated by the relatively narrow definition of treason at the time . The use of informants and denunciations became common , causing fear to spread across the country ; by November at least 1 @,@ 500 people had been executed or killed in battle . Many of those who had lost property in the revolt attempted to seek legal compensation , and John of Gaunt made particular efforts to track down those responsible for destroying his Savoy Palace . Most had only limited success , as the defendants were rarely willing to attend court . The last of these cases was resolved in 1387 . 
 The rebel leaders were quickly rounded up . A rebel leader by the name of Jack Straw was captured in London and executed . John Ball was caught in Coventry , tried in St Albans , and executed on 15 July . Grindecobbe was also tried and executed in St Albans . John Wrawe was tried in London ; he probably gave evidence against 24 of his colleagues in the hope of a pardon , but was sentenced to be executed by being hanged , drawn and quartered on 6 May 1382 . Sir Roger Bacon was probably arrested before the final battle in Norfolk , and was tried and imprisoned in the Tower of London before finally being pardoned by the Crown . As of September 1381 , Thomas Ingleby of Bridgwater had successfully evaded the authorities . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 The royal government and Parliament began to re @-@ establish the normal processes of government after the revolt ; as the historian Michael Postan describes , the uprising was in many ways a " passing episode " . On 30 June , the King ordered England 's serfs to return to their previous conditions of service , and on 2 July the royal charters signed under duress during the rising were formally revoked . Parliament met in November to discuss the events of the year and how best to respond to their challenges . The revolt was blamed on the misconduct of royal officials , who , it was argued , had been excessively greedy and overbearing . The Commons stood behind the existing labour laws , but requested changes in the royal council , which Richard granted . Richard also granted general pardons to those who had executed rebels without due process , to all men who had remained loyal , and to all those who had rebelled – with the exception of the men of Bury St Edmunds , any men who had been involved in the killing of the King 's advisers , and those who were still on the run from prison . 
 Despite the violence of the suppression , the government and local lords were relatively circumspect in restoring order after the revolt , and continued to be worried about fresh revolts for several decades . Few lords took revenge on their peasants except through the legal processes of the courts . Low @-@ level unrest continued for several more years . In September 1382 there was trouble in Norfolk , involving an apparent plot against the Bishop of Norwich , and in March the following year there was an investigation into a plot to kill the sheriff of Devon . When negotiating rents with their landlords , peasants alluded to the memory of the revolt and the threat of violence . 
 There were no further attempts by Parliament to impose a poll tax or to reform England 's fiscal system . The Commons instead concluded at the end of 1381 that the military effort on the Continent should be " carefully but substantially reduced " . Unable to raise fresh taxes , the government had to curtail its foreign policy and military expeditions and began to examine the options for peace . The institution of serfdom declined after 1381 , but primarily for economic rather than political reasons . Rural wages continued to increase , and lords increasingly sold their serfs ' freedom in exchange for cash , or converted traditional forms of tenure to new leasehold arrangements . During the 15th century the institution vanished in England . 
 = = Rebels = = 
 Chroniclers primarily described the rebels as rural serfs , using broad , derogatory Latin terms such as serviles <unk> , servile genus and <unk> . Some chroniclers , including Knighton , also noted the presence of runaway apprentices , artisans and others , sometimes terming them the " lesser commons " . The evidence from the court records following the revolt , albeit biased in various ways , similarly shows the involvement of a much broader community , and the earlier perception that the rebels were only constituted of unfree serfs is now rejected . 
 The rural rebels came from a wide range of backgrounds , but typically they were , as the historian Christopher Dyer describes , " people well below the ranks of the gentry , but who mainly held some land and goods " , and not the very poorest in society , who formed a minority of the rebel movement . Many had held positions of authority in local village governance , and these seem to have provided leadership to the revolt . Some were artisans , including , as the historian Rodney Hilton lists , " carpenters , sawyers , masons , cobblers , tailors , weavers , fullers , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , bakers , butchers , innkeepers , cooks and a lime @-@ burner " . They were predominantly male , but with some women in their ranks . The rebels were typically illiterate ; only between 5 and 15 per cent of England could read during this period . They also came from a broad range of local communities , including at least 330 south @-@ eastern villages . 
 Many of the rebels had urban backgrounds , and the majority of those involved in the events of London were probably local townsfolk rather than peasants . In some cases , the townsfolk who joined the revolt were the urban poor , attempting to gain at the expense of the local elites . In London , for example , the urban rebels appear to have largely been the poor and unskilled . Other urban rebels were part of the elite , such as at York where the protesters were typically prosperous members of the local community , while in some instances , townsfolk allied themselves with the rural population , as at Bury St Edmunds . In other cases , such as Canterbury , the influx of population from the villages following the Black Death made any distinction between urban and rural less meaningful . 
 The vast majority of those involved in the revolt of 1381 were not represented in Parliament and were excluded from its decision @-@ making . In a few cases the rebels were led or joined by relatively prosperous members of the gentry , such as Sir Roger Bacon in Norfolk . Some of them later claimed to have been forced to join the revolt by the rebels . Clergy also formed part of the revolt ; as well as the more prominent leaders , such as John Ball or John Wrawe , nearly 20 are mentioned in the records of the revolt in the south @-@ east . Some were pursuing local grievances , some were disadvantaged and suffering relative poverty , and others appear to have been motivated by strong radical beliefs . 
 Many of those involved in the revolt used pseudonyms , particularly in the letters sent around the country to encourage support and fresh uprisings . They were used both to avoid incriminating particular individuals and to allude to popular values and stories . One popular assumed name was Piers Plowman , taken from the main character in William Langland 's poem . Jack was also a widely used rebel pseudonym , and historians Steven Justice and Carter <unk> suggest that this may have been because it resonated with the Jacques of the French Jacquerie revolt several decades earlier . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Historiography = = = 
 Contemporary chroniclers of the events in the revolt have formed an important source for historians . The chroniclers were biased against the rebel cause and typically portrayed the rebels , in the words of the historian Susan Crane , as " beasts , monstrosities or misguided fools " . London chroniclers were also unwilling to admit the role of ordinary Londoners in the revolt , preferring to place the blame entirely on rural peasants from the south @-@ east . Among the key accounts was the anonymous Anonimalle Chronicle , whose author appears to have been part of the royal court and an eye @-@ witness to many of the events in London . The chronicler Thomas Walsingham was present for much of the revolt , but focused his account on the terror of the social unrest and was extremely biased against the rebels . The events were recorded in France by Jean Froissart , the author of the Chronicles . He had well @-@ placed sources close to the revolt , but was inclined to elaborate the known facts with colourful stories . No sympathetic accounts of the rebels survive . 
 At the end of the 19th century there was a surge in historical interest in the Peasants ' Revolt , spurred by the contemporary growth of the labour and socialist movements . Work by Charles Oman , Edgar Powell , André <unk> and G. M. Trevelyan established the course of the revolt . By 1907 the accounts of the chroniclers were all widely available in print and the main public records concerning the events had been identified . <unk> began to use the legal indictments that had been used against suspected rebels after the revolt as a fresh source of historical information , and over the next century extensive research was carried out into the local economic and social history of the revolt , using scattered local sources across south @-@ east England . 
 Interpretations of the revolt have changed over the years . 17th @-@ century historians , such John Smyth , established the idea that the revolt had marked the end of unfree labour and serfdom in England . 19th @-@ century historians such as William Stubbs and Thorold Rogers reinforced this conclusion , Stubbs describing it as " one of the most portentous events in the whole of our history " . In the 20th century , this interpretation was increasingly challenged by historians such as May McKisack , Michael Postan and Richard Dobson , who revised the impact of the revolt on further political and economic events in England . Mid @-@ 20th century Marxist historians were both interested in , and generally sympathetic to , the rebel cause , a trend culminating in Hilton 's 1973 account of the uprising , set against the context of wider peasant revolts across Europe during the period . The Peasants ' Revolt has received more academic attention than any other medieval revolt , and this research has been interdisciplinary , involving historians , literary scholars and international collaboration . 
 The name " the Peasants ' Revolt " emerged in the 18th and early 19th centuries , and its first recorded use by historians was in John Richard Green 's Short History of the English People in 1874 . Contemporary chronicles did not give the revolt a specific title , and the term " peasant " did not appear in the English language until the 15th century . The title has been critiqued by modern historians such as Miri Rubin and Paul Strohm , both on the grounds that many in the movements were not peasants , and that the events more closely resemble a prolonged protest or rising , rather than a revolt or rebellion . 
 = = = Popular culture = = = 
 The Peasants ' Revolt became a popular literary subject . The poet John Gower , who had close ties to officials involved in the suppression of the revolt , amended his famous poem Vox <unk> after the revolt , inserting a section condemning the rebels and likening them to wild animals . Geoffrey Chaucer , who lived in Aldgate and may have been in London during the revolt , used the rebel killing of Flemings as a metaphor for wider disorder in The Nun 's Priest 's Tale part of The Canterbury Tales , parodying Gower 's poem . Chaucer otherwise made no reference to the revolt in his work , possibly because as he was a client of the King it would have been politically unwise to discuss it . William Langland , the author of the poem Piers Plowman , which had been widely used by the rebels , made various changes to its text after the revolt in order to distance himself from their cause . 
 The revolt formed the basis for the late 16th @-@ century play , The Life and Death of Jack Straw , possibly written by George Peele and probably originally designed for production in the city 's guild pageants . It portrays Jack Straw as a tragic figure , being led into wrongful rebellion by John Ball , making clear political links between the instability of late @-@ Elizabethan England and the 14th century . The story of the revolt was used in pamphlets during the English Civil War of the 17th century , and formed part of John Cleveland 's early history of the war . It was deployed as a cautionary account in political speeches during the 18th century , and a chapbook entitled The History of Wat Tyler and Jack <unk> proved popular during the Jacobite risings and American War of Independence . Thomas Paine and Edmund Burke argued over the lessons to be drawn from the revolt , Paine expressing sympathy for the rebels and Burke condemning the violence . The Romantic poet Robert Southey based his 1794 play Wat Tyler on the events , taking a radical and pro @-@ rebel perspective . 
 As the historian Michael Postan describes , the revolt became famous " as a landmark in social development and [ as ] a typical instance of working @-@ class revolt against oppression " , and was widely used in 19th and 20th century socialist literature . William Morris built on Chaucer in his novel A Dream of John Ball , published in 1888 , creating a narrator who was openly sympathetic to the peasant cause , albeit a 19th @-@ century persona taken back to the 14th century by a dream . The story ends with a prophecy that socialist ideals will one day be successful . In turn , this representation of the revolt influenced Morris 's utopian socialist News from Nowhere . Florence Converse used the revolt in her novel Long Will in 1903 . Later 20th century socialists continued to draw parallels between the revolt and contemporary political struggles , including during the arguments over the introduction of the Community Charge in the United Kingdom during the 1980s . 
 Conspiracy theorists , including writer John Robinson , have attempted to explain alleged flaws in mainstream historical accounts of the events of 1381 , such as the speed with which the rebellion was coordinated . Theories include that the revolt was led by a secret , occult organisation called " the Great Society " , said to be an offshoot of the order of the Knights Templar destroyed in 1312 , or that the fraternity of the Freemasons was covertly involved in organising the revolt . 
 = M @-@ 188 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 188 is a 4 @.@ 559 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 7 @.@ 337 km ) state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan . It runs from Eaton Rapids to the VFW National Home for Children , southeast of town through a rural area . Approximately 1 @,@ 000 vehicles each day use a highway that was first designated in the 1930s and paved in the 1940s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Starting in Eaton Rapids , M @-@ 188 heads eastward from the intersection with M @-@ 99 / M @-@ 50 ( Michigan highway ) toward the Grand River . The highway follows Water Street southeasterly along the river through residential neighborhoods and exits town . M @-@ 188 turns back due east on VFW Road to run through farm fields . Near the intersection with Tucker Road , the highway turns south and then southeasterly to avoid a bend in the river . After this bend , VFW Road once again runs due east to the intersection with Waverly Road . M @-@ 188 turns south on Waverly Road , which runs along the Eaton – Ingham county line . The M @-@ 188 designation ends at the VFW National Home for Children about one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) south of VFW Road . 
 M @-@ 188 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) like other state highways in Michigan . As a part of these maintenance responsibilities , the department tracks the volume of traffic that uses the roadways under its jurisdiction . These volumes are expressed using a metric called annual average daily traffic , which is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles on a segment of roadway . MDOT 's surveys in 2010 showed that 986 vehicles in the city of Eaton Rapids , and 1 @,@ 103 used the trunkline outside of town , traveled along the highway on average . M @-@ 188 has not been listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 188 was designated in late 1932 , providing highway access to the VFW National Home from Eaton Rapids in southeast Eaton County . In early 1941 , the trunkline was completely paved ; and the highway has been unchanged since . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = No. 5 Operational Training Unit RAAF = 
 No. 5 Operational Training Unit was an operational training units ( OTU ) of the Royal Australian Air Force . It was formed at Wagga Wagga , New South Wales , in October 1942 to train bomber pilots and navigators for service in World War II . The unit was initially equipped with Bristol Beauforts and Beaufighters , and later received Douglas Bostons and de Havilland Mosquitos , among other types . It was transferred to Tocumwal in October 1943 , and then to Williamtown in mid @-@ 1944 . Disbanded in July 1947 , No. 5 OTU was re @-@ raised at Williamtown in April 1970 as a jet fighter conversion unit , operating CAC Sabres , de Havilland Vampires , and Macchi MB @-@ 326s . It ceased operations in July the following year . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 During World War II , the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) established several operational training units ( OTUs ) to convert recently graduated pilots from advanced trainers to combat aircraft , and to add fighting ability to the flying skills they had already learned . No. 5 Operational Training Unit was formed at Forest Hill in Wagga Wagga , New South Wales , on 26 October 1942 . Initially equipped with five Bristol Beaufighters and two Bristol Beauforts , its inaugural commanding officer was Squadron Leader B.F. Rose . The first training course ran from 2 November to 12 December 1942 . At the end of the month the unit 's strength was 170 personnel and sixteen aircraft . By mid @-@ 1943 this had increased to almost 400 personnel and twenty @-@ five aircraft , including four de Havilland DH @-@ 84s and one de Havilland Moth Minor , the remainder being Beauforts and Beaufighters . The unit 's aircraft complement was augmented by its first Airspeed Oxford in August 1943 . 
 By the time No. 5 OTU relocated to Tocumwal , New South Wales , on 20 October 1943 , it had begun running courses on Douglas Bostons . Its first de Havilland Mosquito arrived the following month . As of April 1944 , the unit had a complement of sixty @-@ three aircraft , including five Mosquitos . It ran conversion courses for experienced pilots and navigators , as well as training courses for newer aircrew . No. 4 Operational Training Unit disbanded at Williamtown , New South Wales , on 30 April 1944 ; a small detachment remained to hand the base over to an advance party from No. 5 OTU the following day . The rest of No. 5 OTU transferred to Williamtown during July . The unit commenced photo reconnaissance courses in August , and by October its strength was over 1 @,@ 000 personnel . Mosquito fighter ace Charles Scherf briefly served as chief flying instructor in late 1944 . November was marred by four fatal accidents in the space of three days . 
 No. 5 OTU had thirty crews under training in January 1945 , compared to a dozen in November 1942 . By this time its complement of aircraft had increased to seventy @-@ five , including twenty @-@ eight Mosquitos . Staffing reached its highest level of 1 @,@ 700 personnel in May . Ace Charles Crombie was the unit 's chief flying instructor when he was killed in a Beaufighter crash at Williamtown on 26 August 1945 . One of his fellow instructors at the time was Flight Lieutenant Charles " Bud " Tingwell . Leading Aircraftman Jack Brabham , then an engine mechanic at No. 5 OTU , witnessed the accident . The end of hostilities in the Pacific saw the dissolution of all the RAAF 's OTUs . On 1 February 1946 , No. 5 OTU was reorganised as a crew conversion unit , CCU ( Fighter ) , operating North American P @-@ 51 Mustangs and CAC Wirraways . By February 1947 the CCU had a complement of twenty @-@ eight aircraft and just under a hundred personnel . Activity began winding down in May , and the unit was disbanded on 7 July 1947 . 
 = = = Re @-@ establishment = = = 
 No. 5 OTU was re @-@ formed at Williamtown on 1 April 1970 to provide pilots with operational training prior to their conversion to the Dassault Mirage III fighter . The unit 's reactivation was celebrated with a dinner attended by its original commanding officer , B.F. Rose , and a flypast of forty @-@ nine aircraft from No. 2 Operational Conversion Unit ( OCU ) . No. 5 OTU was divided into instructional and operational flights , and conducted training in concert with Mirages from No. 2 OCU and No. 76 Squadron . Its aircraft also participated in joint exercises and display flights , including air shows celebrating the RAAF 's 1971 golden jubilee . The unit was equipped with forty CAC Sabre jet fighters , some de Havilland Vampire jet trainers , and eight Macchi MB @-@ 326s previously operated by No. 2 OCU for lead @-@ in fighter training . Vampire operations began winding down in September 1970 , and the type was withdrawn in April 1971 . 
 The last Sabre conversion course was completed in December 1970 . Early the following year , the Australian government announced that the Sabres were to be phased out and retired by July 1971 . At this time RAAF fighter pilots were trained progressively on the Winjeel , Macchi , Sabre and Mirage , but after considering the feasibility of direct Macchi @-@ to @-@ Mirage conversion , and the impracticability of maintaining the ageing Sabres , the government determined that it was possible to remove the Sabre from the process and retire the type , on the proviso that more Mirage trainers were made available ; it subsequently approved the purchase of six new Mirage IIID dual trainers to augment the ten already in service . No. 5 OTU was disbanded on 31 July 1971 , the date the Sabre was retired from RAAF service . The unit 's Macchis were transferred back to No. 2 OCU . 
 Following No. 5 OTU 's disbandment , one of its Sabres , <unk> @-@ 983 , was among several donated by the Australian government to the Royal Malaysian Air Force . The aircraft was returned to the RAAF in 1978 , and subsequently put on display at RAAF Bases Richmond , New South Wales , and Point Cook , Victoria . In 2005 the RAAF loaned it to the Temora Aviation Museum , New South Wales , where it was restored to flying condition . 
 = Darren Bent = 
 Darren Ashley Bent ( born 6 February 1984 ) is an English professional footballer who plays as a striker for Championship club Derby County . 
 Bent started his career with Ipswich Town . After progressing through their youth system he made his first team debut in 2001 . He made 122 appearances and scored 48 goals in the league for Ipswich , before joining Charlton Athletic for a fee of £ 2 @.@ 5 million in 2005 . He was Charlton Athletic 's top goalscorer for two consecutive seasons and joined Tottenham Hotspur for a club record fee of £ 16 @.@ 5 million in 2007 . After two seasons at Tottenham he joined Sunderland . After a successful 18 months at Sunderland , he joined Aston Villa in 2011 . Bent had loans with Fulham , Brighton & Hove Albion and Derby County and after being released by Villa in 2015 joined Derby permanently . 
 He has represented England at under @-@ 15 , under @-@ 16 , under @-@ 17 , under @-@ 19 , under @-@ 21 and senior levels . He made 14 appearances and scored nine goals for the under @-@ 21 side , after making his debut against Italy in 2003 . He made his debut for the senior England side in 2006 against Uruguay , and has since made 13 appearances for England , scoring four goals . He scored his first goal on 7 September 2010 in a 3 – 1 UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying match victory against Switzerland . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bent was born in Tooting , London to a family of Jamaican descent . His father , Mervyn Bent , was a player in the youth systems of Wimbledon and Brentford . He moved to Huntingdon , Cambridgeshire at the age of 10 and attended <unk> school and played for the Godmanchester Rovers youth system . As a youngster , Bent was a supporter of Arsenal , and used to have a season ticket at Highbury . He was handed a formal caution by police in June 2004 after he was alleged to have shot a 12 @-@ year @-@ old with a pellet gun . Bent refrains from drinking alcohol . Bent is a Christian . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Ipswich Town = = = 
 Bent progressed through Ipswich Town 's youth system , having joined the club at the age of 14 in 1998 , after considering a possible career in athletics . He signed a professional contract with Ipswich on 2 July 2001 . He made his first team debut on 1 November 2001 in a 3 – 1 victory against Helsingborgs IF in the UEFA Cup , and scored his first senior goal in a 4 – 1 League Cup defeat to Newcastle United on 27 November 2001 . 
 He scored his first FA Premier League goal on 24 April 2002 in a 1 – 0 win over Middlesbrough . He finished the 2001 – 02 season with seven appearances and two goals in all competitions , and also saw his team Ipswich face relegation into the First Division . He scored the winning goal against Slovan Liberec in the UEFA Cup on 31 October 2002 and finished the 2002 – 03 season with 18 goals . The 2003 – 04 season finished with Bent scoring 16 goals , which was followed by 20 goals in the 2004 – 05 season , being the team 's joint highest goalscorer with <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Charlton Athletic = = = 
 He completed a transfer to Charlton Athletic on 1 June 2005 , which was worth an initial fee of £ 2 @.@ 5 million , but would have risen to £ 3 million if he made an agreed number of appearances for Charlton and for England . After the move , he said : " I am confident that Charlton will play an important role to play in the Premiership next season . This is a very strong team and I am glad that I will be a part of it . " On the opening day of the 2005 – 06 FA Premier League season , Bent scored two goals on his Charlton debut against Sunderland , and was named the Premier League player of the month for August . He scored in his first four games for the club , one of only six players to perform this feat in the Premier League . Bent was the highest scoring Englishman in the Premier League in the 2005 – 06 season , with 18 goals ( 22 overall ) , which made him third highest scorer and was given Charlton 's Player of the Year award . He signed an extension to his contract at Charlton in July , which contracted him until June 2010 . Bent finished the 2006 – 07 season with 13 goals in the Premier League , again finishing as Charlton 's top goalscorer , but was unable to prevent them from being relegated into the Championship after seven successive seasons of Premier League football . Charlton accepted a bid from West Ham United for him in June 2007 , but Bent was not interested in a move to Upton Park . 
 = = = Tottenham Hotspur = = = 
 He completed a move to Tottenham Hotspur for a club record fee of £ 16 @.@ 5 million on 29 June 2007 , which was to be payable over three years and is inclusive of add @-@ on payments . Ipswich were entitled to 20 % of Charlton 's profit on Bent under a sell @-@ on clause , which gave the club an initial £ 2 @.@ 58 million . He scored his first goal for Tottenham in a friendly match against Stevenage Borough in their first pre @-@ season fixture of the 2007 – 08 season . Bent scored his first competitive goal for Tottenham in a 4 – 0 home victory over Derby County in August 2007 . This was followed up by scoring in the 6 – 1 win over Anorthosis Famagusta in the first round of the UEFA Cup on 20 September 2007 . Bent scored his 100th career goal on 9 March 2008 in the added time of a 4 – 0 league win over West Ham United . He also scored the 100th goal to be scored at White Hart Lane during the 2007 – 08 season on 22 March in a 2 – 0 win over Portsmouth . Bent went on to score one more goal that season , against Newcastle United , which he finished with 36 appearances and 8 goals . 
 He scored 12 goals for Tottenham during the 2008 – 09 pre @-@ season . His first league goal of the season came against Chelsea , which gave his side a 1 – 1 draw . He scored a header in the second half of Tottenham 's UEFA Cup first round game against Wisła Kraków , giving the team a 2 – 1 victory . On 6 November , in a game against Dinamo Zagreb , Bent scored his first competitive hat @-@ trick for Tottenham . He followed this up with two goals in a 2 – 1 victory against Manchester City at the City of Manchester Stadium . 
 A miss in front of an open goal in the final minutes during a home game against Portsmouth in January 2009 , which cost Tottenham two points , prompted manager Harry Redknapp to claim " You will never get a better chance to win a match than that . My <unk> could have scored that one " . On 31 January he scored two goals in the period of two minutes against Bolton Wanderers at the Reebok Stadium after coming on as a second @-@ half substitute , in a match that eventually finished as a 3 – 2 defeat . Following the return of Robbie Keane at Tottenham , Redknapp assured Bent of his future at the club . He finished the season as Tottenham 's top goalscorer with 17 goals in 43 games . 
 = = = Sunderland = = = 
 Sunderland opened negotiations to sign Bent in July 2009 . The deal seemed delayed and through social networking website Twitter he accused chairman Daniel Levy of disrupting his move to Sunderland , although Bent later apologised , saying he acted out of frustration . He travelled to Sunderland to sign for the club after they agreed a fee with Tottenham , and after passing a medical , Bent signed for Sunderland on 5 August for an initial fee of £ 10 million plus potential additional payments , which later rose to £ 16 @.@ 5 million . He scored on his Sunderland debut , which was the only goal in a 1 – 0 victory against Bolton , and was followed with Sunderland 's opening goal against Chelsea in a 3 – 1 defeat . He scored a brace in the 4 – 1 win over Hull City to give himself his third and fourth goals in five games . 
 Bent scored Sunderland 's only goal against Burnley at Turf Moor , making the score 1 – 1 , before losing 3 – 1 . He scored again in a 5 – 2 win against Wolverhampton Wanderers , although after the game Sunderland manager Steve Bruce was left angry at Bent 's decision to give Sunderland 's second penalty kick to teammate Kenwyne Jones , after the latter " pleaded " with Bent to take the penalty so that he could get on the score sheet . Bent then scored the opening goal in a 2 – 2 draw with Manchester United at Old Trafford . He also scored in a 1 – 0 victory against Liverpool on 17 October 2009 when his shot hit a beach ball thrown onto the field by a Liverpool fan and past confused goalkeeper Pepe Reina into the net . Bent also scored in Sunderland 's victory 1 – 0 over Arsenal on 21 November 2009 when his initial header rebounded back to him off Fraizer Campbell . Bent scored his first hat @-@ trick for Sunderland in a 4 – 0 victory over Bolton on 9 March 2010 . He scored two goals , one a penalty , but missed two other penalties as they were saved by Heurelho Gomes in a 3 – 1 victory against former club Tottenham on 3 April . He finished the season with 25 goals in 40 appearances in all competitions , 24 of which came in the Premier League , amounting to 50 % of Sunderland 's 48 goals in the league that season . 
 Bent made his first appearance of the 2010 – 11 season in the opening game , a 2 – 2 draw with Birmingham City on 14 August and opened the scoring with a penalty in the 24th minute . He scored the winning goal with stoppage time penalty as Sunderland beat Manchester City 1 – 0 on 29 August . Bent scored the equaliser during stoppage time to earn Sunderland a 1 – 1 draw against Arsenal on 18 September . He then scored twice in Sunderland 's 2 – 2 draw at Liverpool . 
 = = = Aston Villa = = = 
 On 17 January 2011 , Bent submitted a transfer request , amid reports that Aston Villa had made a club record £ 18 million bid for him , which was rejected . Villa then submitted an improved offer of £ 18 million , potentially rising to £ 24 million , which was then accepted . The following day , Bent completed his move to Villa and signed a four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year deal . He scored the winning goal on his debut against Manchester City in a 1 – 0 victory at Villa Park . Bent scored his second Villa goal in his third appearance for his side when he completed the full 90 minutes against Manchester United at Old Trafford in a 3 – 1 away defeat . Bent scored both of Villa 's goals in their 2 – 1 away victory over Arsenal in the penultimate game of the season on 15 May . The first was a nicely crafted volley after he chested down a Kyle Walker chipped pass , with the second coming a few minutes later after a slip from Arsenal 's Thomas Vermaelen allowed Ashley Young the time to thread a pass through the Gunners ' defence and Bent to <unk> home for 2 – 0 . He finished the season with 9 goals in 16 Premier League appearances for Villa , becoming the club 's joint top @-@ scorer with Young , despite only joining in January . He was also the top English goalscorer in the Premier League and the fourth highest scorer overall that season with 17 goals in total , eight of which were scored for Sunderland . 
 = = = = 2011 – 12 season = = = = 
 In his first full season with Villa , Bent scored his first goal of the season against Blackburn Rovers in a 3 – 1 victory on 20 August 2011 . In his first match against former club Sunderland , a 2 – 2 draw at the Stadium of Light on 29 October 2011 , every time he received a touch on the ball he was booed by the home support . Bent then suffered an injury during the match against Bolton Wanderers and was out for the next few matches as a result . Bent caused controversy when a fan posted a picture and claimed the striker was out shopping while his teammates were losing 2 – 0 to Liverpool . It was later revealed Bent had been sent home to recover from his injury and afterwards he apologised to the Villa fans for his actions . After apologising , manager Alex McLeish reacted angrily to the " conspiracy theory " over Bent 's absence for Villa . This led to Bent having to deny a fall @-@ out with McLeish . Bent made his return as a 78th @-@ minute substitute in the match against Chelsea on 31 December 2011 , scoring the third goal to seal a 3 – 1 win at Stamford Bridge . After not scoring in the next two matches , Bent went on a run by scoring in the next four matches for Villa , including his first FA Cup goal in a Villa shirt on 29 January 2012 , against Arsenal in an eventual 3 – 2 defeat . Three days later , Bent scored his 100th Premier League goal as Villa came from behind to earn a 2 – 2 home draw against Queens Park Rangers . He was the 21st player to reach the milestone . 
 On 25 February 2012 , in a match against Wigan Athletic , Bent landed awkwardly on his ankle after tangling with <unk> Alcaraz . He was stretchered off the pitch with what was thought to be a serious injury . This was later confirmed two days later , after Bent had a scan on his ankle that revealed he had ruptured ligaments . He was out for three months which effectively ended his season with Villa and most likely his chance to play at UEFA Euro 2012 . Bent had recovered from his injury by mid @-@ May and was in contention for Villa 's final game of the 2011 – 12 season against Norwich City but was ultimately left out . This also gave him the possibility of making new England manager Roy Hodgson 's Euro 2012 squad . Bent vowed to prove his fitness to Hodgson , in the hope that he would be selected to play in the tournament . Bent once again finished as Villa 's top scorer with 10 goals in 25 appearances and vowed to stay on at the club . 
 = = = = 2012 – 13 season = = = = 
 In July 2012 , Bent was named interim captain of Aston Villa while Stiliyan Petrov continued to recover from leukaemia . On 28 August , he scored his first goal of the 2012 – 13 season in a 3 – 0 victory over League One Tranmere Rovers in the second round of the League Cup , his first goal for Villa since February 2012 . Bent lost the Villa captaincy to Ron <unk> , after the Dutchman was appointed captain for the 2 – 0 victory against Swansea City on 15 September 2012 and thereafter . He scored his first league goal of the season on 22 September , in a 4 – 1 defeat away to Southampton . Bent then lost his starting place for the next league game against West Bromwich Albion , after the performances of Gabriel Agbonlahor and Christian Benteke during the midweek League Cup victory over Manchester City saw the pair start up front . However , after coming on for Benteke as a 68th @-@ minute substitute , Bent followed up his goal against Southampton by grabbing the equaliser in a 1 – 1 draw . 
 = = = = Season @-@ long loan at Fulham = = = = 
 Bent joined Villa 's Premier League rivals Fulham on a season @-@ long loan on 16 August 2013 . Bent scored his first goal for Fulham on 24 August 2013 on his debut , 18 minutes after replacing Damien Duff in a 3 – 1 defeat at home to London rivals Arsenal . On 24 September , only three minutes after coming on for Adel <unk> , he scored the winner in a 2 – 1 home win over Everton in the third round of the League Cup . Again as a late substitute , this time for Dimitar Berbatov , he scored the only goal in Fulham 's home league win over Stoke City on 5 October , taking control of <unk> <unk> 's shot and cutting past Robert Huth . 
 Despite scoring in the first game and replay against Norwich City in the third round of the FA Cup , Bent went 13 league games without scoring before an added @-@ time equaliser at Old Trafford to gain a 2 – 2 draw against Manchester United on 9 February after replacing <unk> <unk> at half time . He finished his loan with six goals from 30 games , and Fulham were relegated into the Championship . 
 = = = = 2014 – 15 season = = = = 
 After returning from Fulham , Bent was reintegrated into the Villa first team for the 2014 – 15 season . In the first match since his return Bent scored two goals in a 3 – 1 pre @-@ season victory over Mansfield Town . 
 On 26 November 2014 , Bent joined Brighton & Hove Albion on a one @-@ month loan . Three days later he scored on his debut for the Championship club , opening a 1 – 2 defeat to his former employers Fulham at Falmer Stadium . 
 = = = Derby County = = = 
 After two goals in five games for Brighton , Bent was loaned to another Championship side , Derby County , on 2 January 2015 . He was signed by his former international manager Steve McClaren on a deal lasting until the end of the season . With his fourth goal in five games , he equalised in a 2 – 2 draw away to then league leaders Bournemouth on 10 February . Bent scored 12 goals from 17 appearances as Derby finished in eighth place in the Championship table , missing out on a play @-@ off place by one point . He was released by Villa on 8 June 2015 , ahead of a permanent transfer to Derby on a two @-@ year contract , with a one @-@ year option . 
 = = International career = = 
 Bent has represented England at under @-@ 15 , under @-@ 16 , under @-@ 17 , under @-@ 19 , under @-@ 21 and senior levels . He made his under @-@ 16 debut against Finland on 31 July 2000 , making 10 appearances and scoring three goals for the team , with his last appearance coming against Finland on 27 February 2001 . His debut for the under @-@ 19 team came against Germany on 14 February 2002 , scoring two goals in a 3 – 1 victory , and his third and final appearance was against Lithuania on 21 April . His first appearance for the under @-@ 21 team came against Italy on 11 February 2003 , which England lost 1 – 0 . He made 14 appearances and scored nine goals for the under @-@ 21 team , with his final appearance coming against France on 15 November 2005 . He received his first call up to the senior England team for the friendly against Denmark on 17 August , but did not play in the game . His England debut eventually came on 1 March 2006 , when he started against Uruguay at Anfield in a pre @-@ 2006 FIFA World Cup friendly match . He was not included in England 's World Cup squad when it was announced in May 2006 . 
 Despite having played for the senior side , Bent was recalled to the under @-@ 21 squad for their October 2006 qualification play @-@ offs against Germany . Later that month , he was recalled to the senior squad due to an injury to Andrew Johnson shortly after the squad 's announcement . He was called to the England squad for a UEFA Euro 2008 qualifier against Croatia in November 2007 . He came on as an 80th @-@ minute substitute as England lost 3 – 2 and failed to qualify for the tournament . He was called up to the team for a 2010 FIFA World Cup qualifier against Ukraine in March 2009 following an injury to striker Carlton Cole . He made his second start for England in a 1 – 0 friendly defeat to Brazil on 14 November 2009 . Bent was named in England 's preliminary 30 @-@ man squad for the 2010 World Cup on 11 May 2010 , although he was eventually omitted from the final 23 @-@ man squad on 1 June . 
 Bent scored his first international goal in England 's 3 – 1 away win over Switzerland after appearing as a substitute for Jermain Defoe in a Euro 2012 qualifier on 7 September 2010 . Capello stated he had been impressed with the improvement in Bent 's all @-@ round game since his World Cup omission and selected him in the starting XI for England 's friendly with Denmark , where he scored a tap @-@ in from a Theo Walcott cross . Bent retained his place for England 's Euro 2012 qualifier with Wales to make his first competitive international start on 26 March 2011 . In scoring England 's second goal he took his tally to three goals in his last three matches . Bent recovered from injury in time but was left out of the final 23 @-@ man squad for Euro 2012 as Hodgson felt Bent would not be fit enough to appear at the tournament . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 As of match played 17 May 2016 . 
 = = = International = = = 
 As of match played 15 November 2011 . 
 = = = International goals = = = 
 As of match played 15 November 2011 . England score listed first , score column indicates score after each Bent goal . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Individual 
 Charlton Athletic Player of the Year : 2005 – 06 
 Sunderland Player of the Year : 2009 – 10 
 = Johor Bahru = 
 Johor Bahru ( Malaysian pronunciation : [ <unk> ] , formerly known as Tanjung Puteri or Iskandar Puteri in the Malay language , is the capital of the state of Johor , Malaysia . As of the 2010 Malaysian census , Johor Bahru has a population of 497 @,@ 067 and it is the country 's second largest city and the southernmost city in the Malay Peninsula . Johor Bahru is connected to Singapore through Johor – Singapore Causeway . 
 Johor Bahru was founded in 1855 as Iskandar Puteri when the Sultanate of Johor came under the influence of Temenggong Daeng Ibrahim . It was administered from Telok Blangah in Singapore . The area gradually developed into an agricultural centre when the Chinese and the Javanese migrated into the area . The area was renamed " Johor Bahru " in 1862 and became the capital of the Sultanate when the Sultanate administration centre was moved there from Telok Blangah in Singapore . During the reign of Sultan Abu Bakar , there was development and modernisation within the city ; with the construction of administrative buildings , schools , religious buildings , and railways connecting to Singapore . During World War II , the Japanese used the Istana Bukit Serene as their main base to launch a final attack on the last British stronghold in Singapore . Johor Bahru was occupied by the Japanese forces from 1942 to 1945 . After the war , Johor was administered as part of the Unfederated Malay States and Johor Bahru remained as its capital . Johor Bahru became the cradle of Malay nationalism after the war and gave birth to a political party named United Malays National Organisation ( UMNO ) in 1946 . After the formation of Malaysia in 1963 , Johor Bahru retained its status as state capital and was granted city status in 1994 . Central business district was developed in the city centre during the 1990s . More development funds were channelled to the city after the introduction of Iskandar Malaysia in 2006 . 
 Johor Bahru is the economic centre for the state of Johor . The economy of Johor Bahru is also influenced by Singapore because of large number of Singaporean people visiting here . There is also a large number of city 's residents working in Singapore . The Johor Port , which is located in the Johor Bahru metropolitan area , is one of the country 's major seaports . Sultanah Aminah Hospital is the largest hospital in the state . Among the tourist attractions around Johor Bahru are : Grand Palace , Chinese Heritage Museum , Johor Art Gallery , Sultan Ibrahim Building , Johor Bahru railway station , Danga Bay , Dataran Bandaraya Johor Bahru , Sultan Abu Bakar State Mosque and Johor Bahru Old Chinese Temple . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The present area of Johor Bahru was originally known as Tanjung Puteri , and was a fishing village of the Malays located near Singapore . Temenggong Daeng Ibrahim then renamed Tanjung Puteri to Iskandar Puteri once he arrived in the area in 1858 after acquiring the territory from Sultan Ali ; before it was renamed Johor Bahru by Sultan Abu Bakar following the Temenggong 's death . ( The suffix " Bahru " means " new " in Malay , normally written " baru " in standard spelling today but appearing with several variants in place names , such as Kota Bharu and Indonesian Pekanbaru . ) The British preferred to spell its name as Johore Bahru or Johore Bharu , but the current accepted western spelling is Johor Bahru , as Johore is only spelt Johor ( without the letter " e " at the end of the word ) in Malay language . The city is currently spelled as Johor Baru or Johor <unk> . 
 The city was also once known as " Little Swatow ( Shantou ) " by the Chinese community in Johor Bahru , as most of Johor Bahru 's Chinese residents are Teochew people whose ancestry can be traced back to Shantou , China . They arrived in the mid @-@ 1800s , during the reign of Temenggong Daeng Ibrahim . 
 = = History = = 
 Due to a dispute between the Malays and the Bugis , the Johor @-@ Riau Empire was split on 1819 with the mainland Johor Sultanate came under the controls of Temenggong Daeng Ibrahim while the Riau @-@ Lingga Sultanate came under the control of the Bugis . The Temenggong intends to create a new administration centre for the Johor Sultanate to create a dynasty under the entity of Temenggong . As the Temenggong already has a close relationship with the British and the British intends to have control over trade activities in Singapore , a treaty was signed between Sultan Ali and Temenggong Ibrahim in Singapore on 10 March 1855 . According to the treaty , Ali will be crowned as the Sultan of Johor and receive $ 5 @,@ 000 ( in Spanish dollars ) with an allowance of $ 500 per month . In return , Ali was required to cede the sovereignty of the territory of Johor ( except Kesang of Muar which would be the only territory under his control ) to Temenggong Ibrahim . When both sides agreed on Temenggong acquiring the territory , he renamed it Iskandar Puteri and began to administer it from Telok Blangah in Singapore . As the area was still an undeveloped jungle , Temenggong encouraged the migration of Chinese and Javanese to clear the land and to develop an agricultural economy in Johor . The Chinese planted the area with black pepper and gambier , while the Javanese dug <unk> ( canals ) to drain water from the land , build roads and plant coconuts . During this time , a Chinese businessman , pepper and gambier cultivator , Wong Ah Fook arrived ; at the same time , Kangchu and Javanese labour contract systems was introduced by the Chinese and Javanese communities . After Temenggong 's death on 31 January 1862 , the town was renamed " Johor Bahru " and his position was succeeded by his son , Abu Bakar with the administration centre in Telok Blangah being moved to the area in 1889 . 
 = = = British administration = = = 
 In the first phase of Abu Bakar 's administration , the British only recognised him as a maharaja rather than a sultan . In 1855 , the British Colonial Office start to recognise his status as a Sultan after he met Queen Victoria . He managed to regain Kesang territory for Johor after a civil war with the aid of British forces and he boosted the town 's infrastructure and agricultural economy . Infrastructure such as the State Mosque and Royal Palace was built with the aid of Wong Ah Fook , who had become a close patron for the Sultan since his migration during the Temenggong reign . As the Johor @-@ British relationship improved , Abu Bakar also set up his administration under a British style and implemented a constitution known as Undang @-@ undang <unk> Negeri Johor ( Johor State Constitution ) . Although the British have long became the adviser for the Sultanate of Johor , the Sultanate never came under direct colonial rule of the British . The direct colonial rule only came into effect when the status of the adviser was elevated to a status similar to that of a Resident in the Federated Malay States ( FMS ) during the reign of Sultan Ibrahim in 1904 . In Johor Bahru , the Malay Peninsula railway extension was completed in 1909 , and the completion of the Johor – Singapore Causeway , a causeway in 1923 that linked the railway and road systems between Singapore and the Malay Peninsula . Johor Bahru developed at a modest rate between the First and Second World Wars . The secretariat building — Sultan Ibrahim Building — was completed in 1940 as the British colonial government attempted to streamline the state 's administration . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 The continuous development of Johor Bahru was , however , halted when the Japanese under General Tomoyuki Yamashita invaded the town on 31 January 1942 . As the Japanese had reached northwest Johor by 15 January , they easily captured major towns of Johor such of Batu Pahat , Yong Peng , Kluang and Ayer Hitam . The British and other Allied forces were forced to retreat towards Johor Bahru ; however , following a further series of bombings by the Japanese on 29 January , the British retreated to Singapore and blew up the causeway the following day as a final attempt to stop the Japanese advancement in British Malaya . The Japanese then used the Sultan 's residence of Istana Bukit Serene located in the town as their main temporary base for their future initial plans to conquest Singapore while waiting to reconnect the causeway . The Japanese chose the palace as their main base because they already knew the British would not dare to attack it as this would harm their close relationship with Johor . 
 In less than a month , the Japanese repaired the causeway and invaded the Singapore island easily . Soon after the war ended in 1946 , the town became the main hotspot for Malay nationalism in Malaya . Onn Jaafar , a local Malay politician who later became the Menteri Besar of Johor , formed the United Malay National Organisation party on 11 May 1946 when the Malays expressed their widespread disenchantment over the British government 's action for granting citizenship laws to non @-@ Malays in the proposed states of the Malayan Union . An agreement over the policy was then reached in the town with Malays agreeing with the dominance of economy by the non @-@ Malays and the Malays ' dominance in political matters being agreed upon by non @-@ Malays . Racial conflict between the Malay and non @-@ Malays , especially the Chinese , is being provoked continuously since the Malayan Emergency . 
 = = = Post @-@ independence = = = 
 When the Federation of Malaya , together with North Borneo , Sarawak and Singapore formed the Federation of Malaysia in 1963 , Johor Bahru continued as the state capital and more development was carried out , with the town 's expansion and the construction of more new townships and industrial estates . The Indonesian confrontation did not directly affect Johor Bahru as the main Indonesian landing point in Johor was in Labis . There is only one active Indonesian spy organisation in the town , known as Gerakan <unk> Melayu Indonesia ( <unk> ) . They frequently engaged with the Indonesian communities living there to contribute information for Indonesian commandos until the bombing of the MacDonald House in Singapore in 1965 . By the early 1990s , the town had considerably expanded in size , and was officially granted a city status on 1 January 1994 . Johor Bahru City Council was formed and the city 's current main square , Dataran Bandaraya Johor Bahru , was constructed to commemorate the event . A central business district was developed in the centre of the city from the mid @-@ 1990s in the area around Wong Ah Fook Street and the Johor – Singapore Causeway . The state and federal government channelled considerable funds for the development of the city — particularly more so after 2006 , when the Iskandar Malaysia was formed . 
 = = Capital city = = 
 As the capital city of Johor , the city plays an important role in the economic welfare of the population of the entire state . There is one member of parliament ( MP ) representing the single parliamentary constituency ( <unk> ) in the city . The city also elects two representatives to the state legislature from the state assembly districts of Tanjong Puteri and <unk> . 
 = = = Local authority and city definition = = = 
 The city is administered by the Johor Bahru City Council . The current mayor as of March 2016 is Haji A. Rahim Haji Nin , who took over from Dato ' Haji Abdul Rahman Mohamed <unk> on 16 August 2015 . Johor Bahru obtained city status on 1 January 1994 . The area under the jurisdiction of the Johor Bahru City Council includes Central District , <unk> Tebrau , <unk> , Larkin , <unk> , <unk> Jaya , Mount Austin , Pandan , Pasir Pelangi , Pelangi , Permas Jaya , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> Utara and Tebrau . This covers an area of 220 square kilometres ( 85 sq mi ) . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Johor Bahru is located along the Straits of Johor at the southern end of Peninsular Malaysia . It is the southernmost city in the Malay Peninsula . Originally , the city area was only 12 @.@ 12 km2 ( 4 @.@ 68 sq mi ) in 1933 before been expanded to over 220 km2 ( 85 sq mi ) in 2000 . Mount Pulai , which stand at 654 metres ( 2 @,@ 146 ft ) above sea level , is located 19 km ( 12 mi ) from the city centre . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The city has an equatorial climate with consistent temperatures , a considerable amount of rain , and high humidity throughout the course of the year . Temperatures range from 25 @.@ 5 ° C ( 77 @.@ 9 ° F ) to 27 @.@ 8 ° C ( 82 @.@ 0 ° F ) with an annual rainfall of around 2 @,@ 000 mm ( 79 in ) , mostly from November until February . Although the climate is relatively uniform , it can change through the monsoon seasons with variation of wind speeds and direction , cloudiness , and wet and dry seasons throughout the year . There are two monsoon periods every year , the first one happens between December and February , and is known as north @-@ east Monsoon . It is characterised by heavy rains and winds from the north @-@ east . The second one is the south @-@ west Monsoon , characterised by relative dryness with winds driven from the south and south @-@ west . It occurs between June and August . There are two inter @-@ Monsoon periods from March to May and from September to November , which are relatively calm with less rain and weaker winds . 
 = = Demography = = 
 Johor Bahru has an official demonym where people are commonly referred to as " Johor <unk> " . The terms " J.B @-@ ites " and " J.B @-@ <unk> " have also been used to a limited extent . People from Johor are called Johoreans . 
 = = = Ethnicity and religion = = = 
 The Malaysian Census in 2010 reported the population of Johor Bahru as 497 @,@ 067 . This makes it the country 's second largest city . The city 's population today is a mixture of three main <unk> Malays , Chinese and <unk> along with other <unk> . Malays comprise the majority of the population at 240 @,@ 323 , followed by Chinese totalling 172 @,@ 609 , Indians totalling 33 @,@ 319 and others totalling 2 @,@ 957 . Non @-@ Malaysian citizens form a population of 42 @,@ 585 . Most of the Malays are chiefly descended from Riau Malay and Javanese people including significant minorities of ethnic Buginese and ethnic <unk> among the majority ethnic Malay population . The Chinese mainly are from the majority Teochew , Hoklo , Hainanese and Hakka dialect groups , while the Indian community mainly consist of Tamils together with significant populations of Malayalees , Telugus and Sikh Punjabis . 
 = = = Languages = = = 
 The local ethnic Malays speak the Malay language , while the language primarily spoken by the local Chinese is Mandarin Chinese . The Chinese community is represented by several dialect groups : Teochew , Hainanese , Hakka and Hokkien . The Indian community mainly speaks Tamil , Malayalam , Telugu and Punjabi . The English language ( or <unk> ) is also used considerably , albeit more so among the older generation , who have attended school during the British rule . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Johor Bahru is one of the fastest @-@ growing cities in Malaysia after Kuala Lumpur . It is the main commercial centre for Johor and is located in the Indonesia – Malaysia – Singapore Growth Triangle . Tertiary @-@ based industry dominates the economy with thousands of Singaporeans and Indonesians and other international tourists visiting the city . It is the centre of financial services , commerce and retail , arts and culture , hospitality , urban tourism , plastic manufacturing , electrical and electronics and food processing . The city has a very close economic relationship with Singapore as many Singaporeans frequently visit for shopping , entertainment , and dining which increase the city income with the stronger Singapore dollar ; some Singaporeans have also chosen to live in the city . Due to this , Johor Bahru 's retail scene was continuously developed to meet the needs of its consumers . The main shopping districts are located within the city , with a number of large shopping malls located in the suburbs . A large numbers of the city 's residents work in Singapore , where the salaries are higher than in Malaysia . The presence of Singaporean and Chinese @-@ owned companies were also significant , with China being the fifth largest investor in Iskandar Malaysia after Singapore , the United States , Spain and Japan as of September 2014 . In 2014 , the sudden change of weekend rest days to Friday and Saturday from Saturday and Sunday by the Sultan of Johor had a relatively small impact to the city economy , with business especially affected . However , it boosted the tourism industry as the holidays would be able to start earlier on Sunday , attracting more tourists from Singapore . Johor Bahru is the location of numerous conferences , congress and trade fairs , such as the Eastern Regional Organisation for Planning and Housing and the World Islamic Economic Forum . The city is the first in Malaysia to practise a low @-@ carbon economy . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 = = = Land = = = 
 The internal roads linking different parts of the city are mostly federal roads constructed and maintained by Malaysian Public Works Department . There are five major highways linking the Johor Bahru Central Business District to outlying suburbs : Tebrau Highway and Johor Bahru Eastern Dispersal Link Expressway in the northeast , Skudai Highway in the northwest , Iskandar Coastal Highway in the west and Johor Bahru East Coast Highway in the east . Pasir Gudang Highway and the connecting Johor Bahru Parkway cross Tebrau Highway and Skudai Highway , which serve as the middle ring road of the metropolitan area . The Johor Bahru Inner Ring Road , which connects with the Sultan Iskandar customs complex , aids in controlling the traffic in and around the central business district . Access to the national expressway is provided through the North @-@ South Expressway and Senai @-@ <unk> Expressway . The Johor @-@ Singapore Causeway links the city to Woodlands , Singapore with a six @-@ lane road and a railway line terminating at the Southern Integrated Gateway . The Malaysia @-@ Singapore Second Link , located west of the metropolitan area , was constructed in 1997 to alleviate congestion on the Causeway . It is linked directly to the Second Link Expressway . Further expansion of other major highways in the city were currently in the process to improve the city road connection . 
 = = = = Public transportation = = = = 
 Larkin Sentral , located 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) northwest of the city centre , has direct bus services to and from many destinations in West Malaysia , southern Thailand and Singapore . Two types of taxis operate in the city ; the main taxi is either in red and yellow , blue , green or red while the larger , less common type is known as a limousine taxi , which is more comfortable but expensive . Most taxis in the city do not use their meter . The Johor Bahru Sentral railway station serves train services to Kuala Lumpur and Singapore . In 2015 , a new shuttle train service operated by <unk> Tanah Melayu ( KTM ) was launched providing transport to Woodlands in Singapore . 
 = = = Air = = = 
 The city is served by Senai International Airport located at the neighbouring Senai town . Five airlines , AirAsia , Firefly , Malaysia Airlines , Malindo Air and Xpress Air , provide flights internationally and domestically . The city is also supposedly to become the main hub for a newly formed airline called <unk> in October 2015 but were postponed due to certain issues surrounding the airline . 
 = = = Sea = = = 
 Johor Port is located on the eastern side of the metropolitan area in the industrial area of Pasir Gudang . It is one of the country 's most important seaports for commodities and mineral resources shipping , as Johor is home to a large number of major commercial plantations . The port is also the location of the majority of Malaysia 's resources refineries . The Port of Tanjung Pelepas , which ranks as Malaysia 's largest container port since 2004 lies in the western side of the metropolitan area . It is the 19th busiest container port in the world as of 2013 . Singapore 's seaports serve Johor Bahru 's transportation and logistics needs as they are less than an hour 's drive from the city . Boat services are also available to ports in Sumatra . 
 = = Other utilities = = 
 = = = Courts of law and legal enforcement = = = 
 The city high court complex is located along Dato ' Onn Road . The Sessions and Magistrate Courts is located on Ayer <unk> Road , while another court for Sharia law is located on Abu Bakar Road . The Johor Police Contingent Headquarters is located on Tebrau Road . There are two district headquarters in the city , the Johor Bahru North District police headquarters in Skudai , and the Johor Bahru South District headquarters on Meldrum Road . Both also operate as police stations . There are around eleven police stations and seven police substations ( Pondok Polis ) in the south district while five police stations is located in the north district with six police substations . The city 's north district traffic police headquarters is located along Tebrau Road while the south district is in Skudai . There is one main prison called Johor Bahru Prison located in the city along the Ayer <unk> road , but this has been closed down since 9 December 2005 . Other temporary lock @-@ ups or prison cells are available in most police stations in the city like other parts of Malaysia . 
 = = = Healthcare = = = 
 There are three public hospitals , four health clinics and thirteen 1Malaysia clinics in Johor Bahru . Sultanah Aminah Hospital , which is located along <unk> Road , is the largest public hospital in the state with 989 beds . Another government funded hospital is the Sultan Ismail Specialist Hospital with 700 beds . Regency Specialist Hospital in Masai is the largest private hospital with 218 beds . Another large private health facility is the KPJ Puteri Specialist Hospital with 158 beds . Further healthcare facilities are currently being expanded to improve healthcare services in the city . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Many government or state schools are available in the city . The secondary schools include English College Johore Bahru , Sekolah Menengah Kebangsaan Engku Aminah , Sekolah Menengah Kebangsaan Sultan Ismail , Sekolah Menengah Infant Jesus Convent , Sekolah Menengah Kebangsaan ( Perempuan ) Sultan Ibrahim and Sekolah Menengah Saint Joseph . In the district of Johor Bahru itself , there are a total of 41 secondary schools , one religious school , three vocational schools , one technical secondary school and one fully residential school . There are also a number of independent private schools in the city . These include Austin Heights , Excelsior International School , Foon Yew High School and the Sri Ara Schools . The Sri Ara Schools provide two curricula , the British @-@ based curriculum of International General Certificate of Secondary Education ( IGCSE ) under Cambridge International Examinations and the National Curriculum with emphasis on the English language that leads to the Malaysian Schools Certificate . Universiti Teknologi Malaysia has its main campus in the city and is the only public university there . The other private universities are University of Southampton Malaysian Campus , Raffles University Iskandar , Newcastle University Medicine Malaysia and Wawasan Open University . There are also a number of private college campuses and one polytechnic operating in the city ; these are Crescendo International College , KPJ College , Olympia College , Southern University College , Sunway College , Taylor 's College , College of Islamic Studies Johor and Politeknik Ibrahim Sultan . 
 = = = = Libraries = = = = 
 The Johor Public Library headquarters is the main library in the state , located off Yahya Awal Road . Another public library branch is the University Park in <unk> Road , while there are other libraries or private libraries in schools , colleges , and universities . Two village libraries are available in the district of Johor Bahru . 
 = = Culture and leisure = = 
 = = = Attractions and recreation spots = = = 
 = = = = Cultural attractions = = = = 
 There are a number of cultural attractions in Johor Bahru . The Royal Abu Bakar Museum located within the Grand Palace building is the main museum in the city . The Johor Bahru Kwong Siew Heritage located in Wong Ah Fook Street housed the former Cantonese clan house that was donated by Wong Ah Fook . The Foon Yew High School houses many historical documents of the city history with a Chinese cultural heritage . A Chinese Heritage Museum on Ibrahim Road includes the history of Chinese migration to Johor along with a collection of documents , photos , and other artefacts . The Arts Plaza ( Plaza Seni ) on the Wong Ah Fook Street features the state heritage and cultures with exhibitions of art , cultural performances , clothes , fashion accessories , travel agencies , and batik fabrics . 
 The Johor Art Gallery in Petrie Road is a house gallery built in 1910 , known as the house for the former third Chief Minister of Johor , Abdullah Jaafar . The house features old architecture and became the centre for the collection of artefacts related to Johor 's cultural history since its renovation in 2000 . 
 = = = = Historical attractions = = = = 
 The Grand Palace is one of the historical attractions in the city , and is an example of Victorian @-@ style architecture with a garden . <unk> Museum is another historical colonial building since 1886 which ever become the house for the Johor first Menteri Besar Jaafar Mohamed ; it is located on the top of Smile Hill ( Bukit Senyum ) overlooking the Johor Straits . The English College ( now Maktab Sultan Abu Bakar ) established in 1914 was located close to the Sungai Chat Palace before being moved to its present location at Sungai Chat Road ; some of the ruins are visible at the old site . The Sultan Ibrahim Building is another historical building in the city ; built in 1936 by British architect Palmer and Turner , it was the centre of the administration of Johor as since the relocation from Telok Blangah in Singapore , the Johor government never had its own building . Before the current railway station was built , there was Johor Bahru railway station ( formerly Wooden Railway ) which has now been turned into a museum after serving for 100 years since the British colonial era . 
 Sultan Abu Bakar State Mosque , located along Skudai Road , is the main and the oldest mosque in the state . It was built with a combination of Victorian , Moorish and Malay architectures . The Johor Bahru Old Chinese temple , located on the <unk> Road , hosts the Gods of five Chinese dialects spoken in the city . It was built in 1875 and renovated by the <unk> Tiong Hua Johor Bahru ( Johor Bahru Tiong Hua Association ) in 1994 – 95 with the addition of a small L @-@ shaped museum in one corner of the square premises . The Wong Ah Fook Mansion , the home of the late Wong Ah Fook , was a former historical attraction . It stood for more than 150 years but was demolished illegally by its owner in 2014 to make way for a commercial housing development without informing the state government . Other historical religious buildings include the <unk> Sri <unk> Hindu Temple , Sri Raja Mariamman Hindu Temple , Gurdwara Sahib and Church of the Immaculate Conception . 
 = = = = Leisure and conservation areas = = = = 
 The Danga Bay is a 25 kilometres ( 16 mi ) area of recreational waterfront . There are around 15 established golf courses , of which two offer 36 @-@ hole facilities ; most of these are located within resorts . The city also features a number of paintball parks which are also used for off @-@ road motorsports activities . 
 The Johor Bahru Zoo is one of the oldest zoos in Malaysia ; built in 1928 covering 4 hectares ( 9 @.@ 9 acres ) of land , it was originally called " animal garden " before being handed to the state government for renovation in 1962 . The zoo has around 100 species of animals , including wild cats , camels , gorillas , orangutans , and tropical birds . Visitors can participate in activities such as horse riding or using <unk> . 
 = = = = Other attractions = = = = 
 Dataran Bandaraya was built after Johor Bahru was proclaimed as a city . The site features a clock tower , fountain and a large field . The <unk> Tun Sri Lanang ( Tun Sri Lanang Park ) , named after Tun Sri Lanang ( Bendahara of the royal Court of the Johor Sultanate in the 16th and 17th centuries ) is located in the centre of the city . The Wong Ah Fook Street is named after Wong Ah Fook . The Tam Hiok Nee Street is named after Tan Hiok Nee , who was the leader of the former Ngee Heng Kongsi , a secret society in Johor Bahru . Together with the <unk> Street , both are part of a trail known as Old Buildings Road ; they feature a mixture of Chinese and Indian heritages , reflected by their forms of ethnic business and architecture . 
 = = = = Shopping = = = = 
 Shopping malls in Johor Bahru include Johor Bahru City Square , Holiday Plaza , <unk> <unk> , KSL City , Plaza Pelangi , Sutera Mall , Plaza <unk> and Danga City Mall . New malls continue to be constructed in the city . The Mawar Handicrafts Centre , a government @-@ funded exhibition and sales centre , is located along the Sungai Chat road and sells various batik and songket clothes . Opposite this is the Johor Area Rehabilitation Organisation ( <unk> ) Handicrafts Centre which sells items such as hand @-@ made cane furniture , soft toys and rattan baskets made by the physically disabled . 
 = = = = Entertainment = = = = 
 The oldest cinema in the city is the Broadway Theatre which mostly screens Tamil and Hindi movies . There are around five new cinemas available in the city with most of them located inside shopping malls . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 The city 's main football stadium , Tan Sri Dato Haji Hassan <unk> Stadium has a capacity of around 30 @,@ 000 . The stadium is the home ground of Johor Darul Ta <unk> F.C. , also known as <unk> . In Japan , this stadium is well known as the place of " the Joy of Johor Bahru " ; Japan National Football Team got the ticket to the FIFA World Cup at first in its history , by Masayuki Okano 's goal in 1997 . 
 There is also a futsal centre , known as Sports Prima , which has eight minimum @-@ sized FIFA approved futsal courts ; it is the largest indoor sports centre in the city . 
 = = = Radio stations = = = 
 Two radio stations have their offices in the city : Best FM ( 104 @.@ 1 ) and Johor FM ( 101 @.@ 9 ) . 
 = = International relations = = 
 Several countries have set up their consulates in Johor Bahru , including Indonesia and Singapore . 
 = = = Twin towns – Sister cities = = = 
 Johor Bahru currently has six sister cities : 
 = = Literature = = 
 Guinness , Patrick ( 1992 ) . On the Margin of Capitalism : People and development in <unk> <unk> , Johor , Malaysia . South @-@ East Asian social monographs . Singapore : Oxford University Press. p . 177 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Lim , Patricia Pui <unk> ( 2002 ) . Wong Ah Fook : Immigrant , Builder and Entrepreneur . Singapore : Times Editions . ISBN 978 @-@ 981 @-@ 232 @-@ 369 @-@ 9 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Oakley , Mat ; Brown , Joshua Samuel ( 2009 ) . Singapore : city guide . Footscray , Victoria , Australia : Lonely Planet . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 664 @-@ 9 . OCLC <unk> . 
 <unk> , Richard Olof ; Kim , Khoo Kay ( 1992 ) . A History of Johore , 1365 – 1941 . M. B. R. A. S. Reprints ( 6 ) ( Reprint ed . ) . Kuala Lumpur : Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society . ISBN 978 @-@ 983 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 @-@ 1 . OCLC <unk> . 
 John Drysdale ( 15 December 2008 ) . Singapore Struggle for Success . Marshall Cavendish International Asia Pte Ltd. pp. 287 – . ISBN 978 @-@ 981 @-@ <unk> @-@ 67 @-@ 7 . 
 A Halim Hassan ( September 2013 ) . <unk> <unk> ( in Malay ) . Trafford Publishing. pp. 84 – . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Jamie Han ( 2014 ) . " Communal riots of 1964 " . National Library Board . Archived from the original on 5 July 2015 . Retrieved 5 July 2015 . 
 = Virginia = 
 Virginia ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> , UK / <unk> / <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ ee @-@ ə ) , officially the Commonwealth of Virginia , is a state located in the Mid @-@ Atlantic and / or Southern regions of the United States . Virginia is nicknamed the " Old Dominion " due to its status as the first colonial possession established in mainland British America , and " Mother of Presidents " because eight U.S. presidents were born there , more than any other state . The geography and climate of the Commonwealth are shaped by the Blue Ridge Mountains and the Chesapeake Bay , which provide habitat for much of its flora and fauna . The capital of the Commonwealth is Richmond ; Virginia Beach is the most populous city , and Fairfax County is the most populous political subdivision . The Commonwealth 's estimated population as of 2014 is over 8 @.@ 3 million . 
 The area 's history begins with several indigenous groups , including the Powhatan . In 1607 the London Company established the Colony of Virginia as the first permanent New World English colony . Slave labor and the land acquired from displaced Native American tribes each played a significant role in the colony 's early politics and plantation economy . Virginia was one of the 13 Colonies in the American Revolution and joined the Confederacy in the American Civil War , during which Richmond was made the Confederate capital and Virginia 's northwestern counties seceded to form the state of West Virginia . Although the Commonwealth was under one @-@ party rule for nearly a century following Reconstruction , both major national parties are competitive in modern Virginia . 
 The Virginia General Assembly is the oldest continuous law @-@ making body in the New World . The state government was ranked most effective by the Pew Center on the States in both 2005 and 2008 . It is unique in how it treats cities and counties equally , manages local roads , and prohibits its governors from serving consecutive terms . Virginia 's economy has many sectors : agriculture in the Shenandoah Valley ; federal agencies in Northern Virginia , including the headquarters of the Department of Defense and CIA ; and military facilities in Hampton Roads , the site of the region 's main seaport . Virginia 's economy changed from primarily agricultural to industrial during the 1960s and 1970s , and in 2002 computer chips became the state 's leading export . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Virginia has a total area of 42 @,@ 774 @.@ 2 square miles ( 110 @,@ 784 @.@ 7 km2 ) , including 3 @,@ 180 @.@ 13 square miles ( 8 @,@ 236 @.@ 5 km2 ) of water , making it the 35th @-@ largest state by area . Virginia is bordered by Maryland and Washington , D.C. to the north and east ; by the Atlantic Ocean to the east ; by North Carolina and Tennessee to the south ; by Kentucky to the west ; and by West Virginia to the north and west . Virginia 's boundary with Maryland and Washington , D.C. extends to the low @-@ water mark of the south shore of the Potomac River . The southern border is defined as the 36 ° 30 ′ parallel north , though surveyor error led to deviations of as much as three arcminutes . The border with Tennessee was not settled until 1893 , when their dispute was brought to the U.S. Supreme Court . 
 = = = Geology and terrain = = = 
 The Chesapeake Bay separates the contiguous portion of the Commonwealth from the two @-@ county peninsula of Virginia 's Eastern Shore . The bay was formed from the drowned river valleys of the Susquehanna River and the James River . Many of Virginia 's rivers flow into the Chesapeake Bay , including the Potomac , Rappahannock , York , and James , which create three peninsulas in the bay . 
 The Tidewater is a coastal plain between the Atlantic coast and the fall line . It includes the Eastern Shore and major estuaries of Chesapeake Bay . The Piedmont is a series of sedimentary and igneous rock @-@ based foothills east of the mountains which were formed in the Mesozoic era . The region , known for its heavy clay soil , includes the Southwest Mountains around Charlottesville . The Blue Ridge Mountains are a physiographic province of the Appalachian Mountains with the highest points in the state , the tallest being Mount Rogers at 5 @,@ 729 feet ( 1 @,@ 746 m ) . The Ridge and Valley region is west of the mountains and includes the Great Appalachian Valley . The region is carbonate rock based and includes Massanutten Mountain . The Cumberland Plateau and the Cumberland Mountains are in the southwest corner of Virginia , south of the Allegheny Plateau . In this region , rivers flow northwest , with a dendritic drainage system , into the Ohio River basin . 
 The Virginia Seismic Zone has not had a history of regular earthquake activity . Earthquakes are rarely above 4 @.@ 5 in magnitude , because Virginia is located away from the edges of the North American Plate . The largest earthquake , at an estimated 5 @.@ 9 magnitude , was in 1897 near Blacksburg . A 5 @.@ 8 magnitude earthquake struck central Virginia on August 23 , 2011 , near Mineral . The earthquake was reportedly felt as far away as Toronto , Atlanta and Florida . 
 Coal mining takes place in the three mountainous regions at 45 distinct coal beds near Mesozoic basins . Over 62 million tons of other non @-@ fuel resources , such as slate , <unk> , sand , or gravel , were also mined in Virginia in 2012 . The state 's carbonate rock is filled with more than 4 @,@ 000 caves , ten of which are open for tourism . 35 million years ago , a bolide impacted what is now eastern Virginia . The resulting crater may explain sinking and earthquakes in the region . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The climate of Virginia becomes increasingly warmer and more humid farther south and east . Seasonal extremes vary from average lows of 26 ° F ( − 3 ° C ) in January to average highs of 86 ° F ( 30 ° C ) in July . The Atlantic ocean has a strong effect on eastern and southeastern coastal areas of the state . Influenced by the Gulf Stream , coastal weather is subject to hurricanes , most pronouncedly near the mouth of Chesapeake Bay . In spite of its position adjacent to the Atlantic Ocean , even the coastal areas have a significant continental influence with quite large temperature differences between summer and winter , particularly given the state climate 's subtropical classification . 
 Virginia has an annual average of 35 – 45 days of thunderstorm activity , particularly in the western part of the state , and an average annual precipitation of 42 @.@ 7 inches ( 108 cm ) . Cold air masses arriving over the mountains in winter can lead to significant snowfalls , such as the Blizzard of 1996 and winter storms of 2009 – 2010 . The interaction of these elements with the state 's topography creates distinct microclimates in the Shenandoah Valley , the mountainous southwest , and the coastal plains . Virginia averages seven tornadoes annually , most F2 or lower on the Fujita scale . 
 In recent years , the expansion of the southern suburbs of Washington , D.C. into Northern Virginia has introduced an urban heat island primarily caused by increased absorption of solar radiation in more densely populated areas . In the American Lung Association 's 2011 report , 11 counties received failing grades for air quality , with Fairfax County having the worst in the state , due to automobile pollution . Haze in the mountains is caused in part by coal power plants . 
 = = = Flora and fauna = = = 
 Forests cover 65 % of the state , primarily with deciduous , broad leaf trees in the western part of the state and <unk> and conifers dominant the central and eastern part of Virginia . Lower altitudes are more likely to have small but dense stands of moisture @-@ loving hemlocks and mosses in abundance , with hickory and oak in the Blue Ridge . However , since the early 1990s , Gypsy moth infestations have eroded the dominance of oak forests . In the lowland tidewater and piedmont , yellow pines tend to dominate , with bald cypress wetland forests in the Great Dismal and Nottoway swamps . Other common trees and plants include red bay , wax myrtle , dwarf palmetto , tulip poplar , mountain laurel , milkweed , daisies , and many species of ferns . The largest areas of wilderness are along the Atlantic coast and in the western mountains , where the largest populations of trillium wildflowers in North America are found . The Atlantic coast regions are host to flora commonly associated with the South Atlantic pine forests and lower Southeast Coastal Plain maritime flora , the latter found primarily in eastern and central Virginia . 
 Mammals include white @-@ tailed deer , black bear , beaver , bobcat , coyote , raccoon , skunk , groundhog , Virginia opossum , gray fox , red fox , and eastern cottontail rabbit . Other mammals include : nutria , fox squirrel , gray squirrel , flying squirrel , chipmunk , brown bat , and weasel . Birds include cardinals ( the state bird ) , barred owls , Carolina chickadees , red @-@ tailed hawks , ospreys , brown pelicans , quail , seagulls , bald eagles , and wild turkeys . Virginia is also home to the pileated woodpecker as well as the red @-@ bellied woodpecker . The peregrine falcon was reintroduced into Shenandoah National Park in the mid @-@ 1990s . Walleye , brook trout , Roanoke bass , and blue catfish are among the 210 known species of freshwater fish . Running brooks with rocky bottoms are often inhabited by plentiful amounts of crayfish and salamanders . The Chesapeake Bay is host to many species , including blue crabs , clams , oysters , and rockfish ( also known as striped bass ) . 
 Virginia has 30 National Park Service units , such as Great Falls Park and the Appalachian Trail , and one national park , the Shenandoah National Park . Shenandoah was established in 1935 and encompasses the scenic Skyline Drive . Almost 40 % of the park 's area ( 79 @,@ 579 acres / 322 km2 ) has been designated as wilderness under the National Wilderness Preservation System . Additionally , there are 34 Virginia state parks and 17 state forests , run by the Department of Conservation and Recreation and the Department of Forestry . The Chesapeake Bay , while not a national park , is protected by both state and federal legislation , and the jointly run Chesapeake Bay Program which conducts restoration on the bay and its watershed . The Great Dismal Swamp National Wildlife Refuge extends into North Carolina , as does the Back Bay National Wildlife Refuge , which marks the beginning of the Outer Banks . 
 = = History = = 
 " Jamestown 2007 " marked Virginia 's <unk> year , celebrating 400 years since the establishment of the Jamestown Colony . The celebrations highlighted contributions from Native Americans , Africans , and Europeans , each of which had a significant part in shaping Virginia 's history . Warfare , including among these groups , has also had an important role . Virginia was a focal point in conflicts from the French and Indian War , the American Revolution and the Civil War , to the Cold War and the War on Terrorism . Stories about historic figures , such as those surrounding Pocahontas and John Smith , George Washington 's childhood , or the plantation elite in the slave society of the antebellum period , have also created potent myths of state history , and have served as rationales for Virginia 's ideology . 
 = = = Colony = = = 
 The first people are estimated to have arrived in Virginia over 12 @,@ 000 years ago . By 5 @,@ 000 years ago more permanent settlements emerged , and farming began by 900 AD . By 1500 , the Algonquian peoples had founded towns such as <unk> in the Tidewater region , which they referred to as <unk> . The other major language groups in the area were the Siouan to the west , and the Iroquoians , who included the Nottoway and Meherrin , to the north and south . After 1570 , the Algonquians consolidated under Chief Powhatan in response to threats from these other groups on their trade network . Powhatan controlled more than 30 smaller tribes and over 150 settlements , who shared a common Virginia Algonquian language . In 1607 , the native Tidewater population was between 13 @,@ 000 and 14 @,@ 000 . 
 Several European expeditions , including a group of Spanish Jesuits , explored the Chesapeake Bay during the 16th century . In 1583 , Queen Elizabeth I of England granted Walter Raleigh a charter to plant a colony north of Spanish Florida . In 1584 , Raleigh sent an expedition to the Atlantic coast of North America . The name " Virginia " may have been suggested then by Raleigh or Elizabeth , perhaps noting her status as the " Virgin Queen , " and may also be related to a native phrase , " <unk> , " or name , " <unk> . " Initially the name applied to the entire coastal region from South Carolina to Maine , plus the island of Bermuda . Later , subsequent royal charters modified the Colony 's boundaries . The London Company was incorporated as a joint stock company by the proprietary Charter of 1606 , which granted land rights to this area . The Company financed the first permanent English settlement in the " New World " , Jamestown . Named for King James I , it was founded in May 1607 by Christopher Newport . In 1619 , colonists took greater control with an elected legislature called the House of Burgesses . With the bankruptcy of the London Company in 1624 , the settlement was taken into royal authority as an English crown colony . 
 Life in the colony was perilous , and many died during the Starving Time in 1609 and the Anglo @-@ Powhatan Wars , including the Indian massacre of 1622 , which fostered the colonists ' negative view of all tribes . By 1624 , only 3 @,@ 400 of the 6 @,@ 000 early settlers had survived . However , European demand for tobacco fueled the arrival of more settlers and servants . The headright system tried to solve the labor shortage by providing colonists with land for each indentured servant they transported to Virginia . African workers were first imported to Jamestown in 1619 initially under the rules of indentured servitude . The shift to a system of African slavery in Virginia was propelled by the legal cases of John Punch , who was sentenced to lifetime slavery in 1640 for attempting to run away , and of John <unk> , who was claimed by Anthony Johnson as his servant for life in 1655 . Slavery first appears in Virginia statutes in 1661 and 1662 , when a law made it hereditary based on the mother 's status . 
 Tensions and the geographic differences between the working and ruling classes led to Bacon 's Rebellion in 1676 , by which time current and former indentured servants made up as much as 80 % of the population . Rebels , largely from the colony 's frontier , were also opposed to the conciliatory policy towards native tribes , and one result of the rebellion was the signing at Middle Plantation of the Treaty of 1677 , which made the signatory tribes tributary states and was part of a pattern of appropriating tribal land by force and treaty . Middle Plantation saw the founding of The College of William & Mary in 1693 and was renamed Williamsburg as it became the colonial capital in 1699 . In 1747 , a group of Virginian speculators formed the Ohio Company , with the backing of the British crown , to start English settlement and trade in the Ohio Country west of the Appalachian Mountains . France , which claimed this area as part of their colony of New France , viewed this as a threat , and the ensuing French and Indian War became part of the Seven Years ' War ( 1756 – 1763 ) . A militia from several British colonies , called the Virginia Regiment , was led by then @-@ Lieutenant Colonel George Washington . 
 = = = Statehood = = = 
 The British Parliament 's efforts to levy new taxes following the French and Indian War were deeply unpopular in the colonies . In the House of Burgesses , opposition to taxation without representation was led by Patrick Henry and Richard Henry Lee , among others . Virginians began to coordinate their actions with other colonies in 1773 , and sent delegates to the Continental Congress the following year . After the House of Burgesses was dissolved by the royal governor in 1774 , Virginia 's revolutionary leaders continued to govern via the Virginia Conventions . On May 15 , 1776 , the Convention declared Virginia 's independence from the British Empire and adopted George Mason 's Virginia Declaration of Rights , which was then included in a new constitution . Another Virginian , Thomas Jefferson , drew upon Mason 's work in drafting the national Declaration of Independence . 
 When the American Revolutionary War began , George Washington was selected to head the colonial army . During the war , the capital was moved to Richmond at the urging of Governor Thomas Jefferson , who feared that Williamsburg 's coastal location would make it vulnerable to British attack . In 1781 , the combined action of Continental and French land and naval forces trapped the British army on the Virginia Peninsula , where troops under George Washington and Comte de Rochambeau defeated British General Cornwallis in the Siege of Yorktown . His surrender on October 19 , 1781 led to peace negotiations in Paris and secured the independence of the colonies . 
 Virginians were instrumental in writing the United States Constitution . James Madison drafted the Virginia Plan in 1787 and the Bill of Rights in 1789 . Virginia ratified the Constitution on June 25 , 1788 . The three @-@ fifths compromise ensured that Virginia , with its large number of slaves , initially had the largest bloc in the House of Representatives . Together with the Virginia dynasty of presidents , this gave the Commonwealth national importance . In 1790 , both Virginia and Maryland ceded territory to form the new District of Columbia , though the Virginian area was retroceded in 1846 . Virginia is called " Mother of States " because of its role in being carved into states like Kentucky , which became the 15th state in 1792 , and for the numbers of American pioneers born in Virginia . 
 = = = Civil War and aftermath = = = 
 In addition to agriculture , slave labor was increasingly used in mining , shipbuilding and other industries . The execution of Gabriel Prosser in 1800 , Nat Turner 's slave rebellion in 1831 and John Brown 's Raid on Harpers Ferry in 1859 marked the growing social discontent over slavery and its role in the plantation economy . By 1860 , almost half a million people , roughly 31 % of the total population of Virginia , were enslaved . This division contributed to the start of the American Civil War . 
 Virginia voted to secede from the United States on April 17 , 1861 , after the Battle of Fort Sumter and Abraham Lincoln 's call for volunteers . On April 24 , Virginia joined the Confederate States of America , which chose Richmond as its capital . After the 1861 Wheeling Convention , 48 counties in the northwest separated to form a new state of West Virginia , which chose to remain loyal to the Union . Virginian general Robert E. Lee took command of the Army of Northern Virginia in 1862 , and led invasions into Union territory , ultimately becoming commander of all Confederate forces . During the war , more battles were fought in Virginia than anywhere else , including Bull Run , the Seven Days Battles , Chancellorsville , and the concluding Battle of Appomattox Court House . After the capture of Richmond in April 1865 , the state capital was briefly moved to Lynchburg , while the Confederate leadership fled to Danville . Virginia was formally restored to the United States in 1870 , due to the work of the Committee of Nine . 
 During the post @-@ war Reconstruction era , Virginia adopted a constitution which provided for free public schools , and guaranteed political , civil , and voting rights . The populist Readjuster Party ran an inclusive coalition until the conservative white Democratic Party gained power after 1883 . It passed segregationist Jim Crow laws and in 1902 rewrote the Constitution of Virginia to include a poll tax and other voter registration measures that effectively disfranchised most African Americans and many poor whites . Though their schools and public services were segregated and underfunded due to a lack of political representation , African Americans were able to unite in communities and take a greater role in Virginia society . 
 = = = Modern era = = = 
 New economic forces also changed the Commonwealth . Virginian James Albert <unk> invented the tobacco cigarette rolling machine in 1880 leading to new industrial scale production centered on Richmond . In 1886 , railroad magnate Collis Potter Huntington founded Newport News Shipbuilding , which was responsible for building six major World War I @-@ era battleships for the U.S. Navy from 1907 – 1923 . During the war , German submarines like U @-@ 151 attacked ships outside the port . In 1926 , Dr. <unk> Goodwin , rector of Williamsburg 's Bruton Parish Church , began restoration of colonial @-@ era buildings in the historic district with financial backing of John D. Rockefeller , Jr . Though their project , like others in the state , had to contend with the Great Depression and World War II , work continued as Colonial Williamsburg became a major tourist attraction . 
 Protests started by Barbara Rose Johns in 1951 in Farmville against segregated schools led to the lawsuit Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County . This case , filed by Richmond natives <unk> Robinson and Oliver Hill , was decided in 1954 with Brown v. Board of Education , which rejected the segregationist doctrine of " separate but equal " . But , in 1958 , under the policy of " massive resistance " led by the influential segregationist Senator Harry F. Byrd and his Byrd Organization , the Commonwealth prohibited desegregated local schools from receiving state funding . 
 The Civil Rights Movement gained many participants in the 1960s . It achieved the moral force and support to gain passage of national legislation with the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 . In 1964 the United States Supreme Court ordered Prince Edward County and others to integrate schools . In 1967 , the Court also struck down the state 's ban on interracial marriage with Loving v. Virginia . From 1969 to 1971 , state legislators under Governor Mills Godwin rewrote the constitution , after goals such as the repeal of Jim Crow laws had been achieved . In 1989 , Douglas Wilder became the first African American elected as governor in the United States . 
 The Cold War led to the expansion of national defense government programs housed in offices in Northern Virginia near Washington , D.C. , and correlative population growth . The Central Intelligence Agency in Langley was involved in various Cold War events , including as the target of Soviet espionage activities . Also among the federal developments was the Pentagon , built during World War II as the headquarters for the Department of Defense . It was one of the targets of the September 11 attacks ; 189 people died at the site when a jet passenger plane was crashed into the building . 
 = = Cities and towns = = 
 Virginia is divided into 95 counties and 38 independent cities , the latter acting in many ways as county @-@ equivalents . This general method of treating cities and counties on par with each other is unique to Virginia , with only three other independent cities in the United States outside Virginia , in three different states . Virginia limits the authority of cities and counties to countermand laws expressly allowed by the Virginia General Assembly under what is known as Dillon 's Rule . In addition to independent cities , there are also incorporated towns which operate under their own governments , but are part of a county . Finally there are hundreds of unincorporated communities within the counties . Virginia does not have any further political subdivisions , such as villages or townships . 
 Virginia has 11 Metropolitan Statistical Areas ; Northern Virginia , Hampton Roads , and Richmond @-@ Petersburg are the three most populous . Richmond is the capital of Virginia , and its metropolitan area has a population of over 1 @.@ 2 million . As of 2010 , Virginia Beach is the most populous city in the Commonwealth , with Norfolk and Chesapeake second and third , respectively . Norfolk forms the urban core of the Hampton Roads metropolitan area , which has a population over 1 @.@ 6 million people and is the site of the world 's largest naval base , Naval Station Norfolk . Suffolk , which includes a portion of the Great Dismal Swamp , is the largest city by area at 429 @.@ 1 square miles ( 1 @,@ 111 km2 ) . 
 Fairfax County is the most populous locality in Virginia , with over one million residents , although that does not include its county seat Fairfax , which is one of the independent cities . Fairfax County has a major urban business and shopping center in Tysons Corner , Virginia 's largest office market . Neighboring Loudoun County , with the county seat at Leesburg , is both the fastest @-@ growing county in Virginia and has the highest median household income ( $ 114 @,@ 204 ) in the country as of 2010 . Arlington County , the smallest self @-@ governing county in the United States by land area , is an urban community organized as a county . The Roanoke area , with an estimated population of 300 @,@ 399 , is the largest Metropolitan Statistical Area in western Virginia . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The United States Census Bureau estimates that the state population was 8 @,@ 382 @,@ 993 on July 1 , 2015 , a 4 @.@ 77 % increase since the 2010 United States Census . This includes an increase from net migration of 381 @,@ 969 people into the Commonwealth since the 2010 census . Immigration from outside the United States resulted in a net increase of 159 @,@ 627 people , and migration within the country produced a net increase of 155 @,@ 205 people . Outside of Virginia , the top birth state for Virginians was New York , with the Northeast accounting for the largest number of migrants into the state by region . The center of population is located in Louisa County outside of Richmond . 
 = = = Ethnicity = = = 
 The state 's most populous ethnic group , Non @-@ Hispanic White , has declined from 76 % in 1990 to 62 @.@ 7 % in 2015 . In 2011 , non @-@ Hispanic Whites were involved in 50 @.@ 9 % of all the births . People of English heritage settled throughout the Commonwealth during the colonial period , and others of British and Irish heritage have since immigrated . Those who self @-@ identify as having " American ethnicity " are predominantly of English descent , but have ancestry that has been in North America for so long that they choose to identify simply as American . Of the English immigrants to Virginia in the 17th century , 75 % came as indentured servants . The western mountains have many settlements that were founded by Scots @-@ Irish immigrants before the American Revolution . There are also sizable numbers of people of German descent in the northwestern mountains and Shenandoah Valley , and German ancestry was the most popular response on the 2010 American Community Survey , with 11 @.@ 7 % . 2 @.@ 9 % of Virginians also describe themselves as biracial . 
 The largest minority group in Virginia is African American , at 19 @.@ 7 % as of 2015 . Most African American Virginians have been descendants of enslaved Africans who worked on tobacco , cotton , and hemp plantations . These men , women and children were brought from West and West @-@ Central Africa , primarily from Angola and the Bight of Biafra . The Igbo ethnic group of what is now southern Nigeria were the single largest African group among slaves in Virginia . Though the black population was reduced by the Great Migration , since 1965 there has been a reverse migration of blacks returning south . According to the Pew Research Center , the state has the highest concentration of black and white interracial marriages . 
 More recent immigration in the late 20th century and early 21st century has fueled new communities of Hispanics and Asians . As of 2015 , 9 @.@ 0 % of Virginians are Hispanic or Latino ( of any race ) , and 6 @.@ 5 % are Asian . The state 's Hispanic population rose by 92 % from 2000 to 2010 , with two @-@ thirds of Hispanics living in Northern Virginia . Hispanic citizens in Virginia have higher median household incomes and educational attainment than the general Virginia population . As far as Hispanic groups , there is a large Salvadoran population in the DC suburbs of Northern Virginia , and a large Puerto Rican population in the Hampton Roads region of Southeast Virginia . Northern Virginia also has a significant population of Vietnamese Americans , whose major wave of immigration followed the Vietnam War , and Korean Americans , whose migration has been more recent and was induced in part by the quality school system . The Filipino American community has about 45 @,@ 000 in the Hampton Roads area , many of whom have ties to the U.S. Navy and armed forces . 
 Additionally , 0 @.@ 5 % of Virginians are American Indian or Alaska Native , and 0 @.@ 1 % are Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander . Virginia has extended state recognition to eight Native American tribes resident in the state , though some lack federal recognition status . Most Native American groups are located in the Tidewater region . 
 As of 2011 , 49 @.@ 1 % of Virginia 's population younger than age 1 were minorities ( meaning that they had at least one parent who was not non @-@ Hispanic white ) . 
 = = = Languages = = = 
 The Piedmont region is known for its dialect 's strong influence on Southern American English . While a more homogenized American English is found in urban areas , various accents are also used , including the Tidewater accent , the Old Virginia accent , and the anachronistic Elizabethan of Tangier Island . 
 As of 2010 , 85 @.@ 87 % ( 6 @,@ 299 @,@ 127 ) of Virginia residents age 5 and older spoke English at home as a primary language , while 6 @.@ 41 % ( 470 @,@ 058 ) spoke Spanish , 0 @.@ 77 % ( 56 @,@ 518 ) Korean , 0 @.@ 63 % ( 45 @,@ 881 ) Vietnamese , 0 @.@ 57 % ( 42 @,@ 418 ) Chinese ( which includes Mandarin ) , and Tagalog was spoken as a main language by 0 @.@ 56 % ( 40 @,@ 724 ) of the population over the age of five . In total , 14 @.@ 13 % ( 1 @,@ 036 @,@ 442 ) of Virginia 's population age 5 and older spoke a mother language other than English . English was passed as the Commonwealth 's official language by statutes in 1981 and again in 1996 , though the status is not mandated by the Constitution of Virginia . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Virginia is predominantly Christian and Protestant ; Baptists are the largest single group with 27 % of the population as of 2008 . Baptist congregations in Virginia have 763 @,@ 655 members . Baptist denominational groups in Virginia include the Baptist General Association of Virginia , with about 1 @,@ 400 member churches , which supports both the Southern Baptist Convention and the moderate Cooperative Baptist Fellowship ; and the Southern Baptist Conservatives of Virginia with more than 500 affiliated churches , which supports the Southern Baptist Convention . Roman Catholics are the second @-@ largest religious group with 673 @,@ 853 members . The Roman Catholic Diocese of Arlington includes most of Northern Virginia 's Catholic churches , while the Diocese of Richmond covers the rest . 
 The Virginia Conference is the regional body of the United Methodist Church in most of the Commonwealth , while the Holston Conference represents much of extreme Southwest Virginia . The Virginia Synod is responsible for the congregations of the Lutheran Church . Presbyterian , Pentecostal , Congregationalist , and Episcopalian adherents each composed less than 2 % of the population as of 2010 . The Episcopal Diocese of Virginia , Southern Virginia , and Southwestern Virginia support the various Episcopal churches . 
 In November 2006 , 15 conservative Episcopal churches voted to split from the Diocese of Virginia over the ordination of openly gay bishops and clergy in other dioceses of the Episcopal Church ; these churches continue to claim affiliation with the larger Anglican Communion through other bodies outside the United States . Though Virginia law allows parishioners to determine their church 's affiliation , the diocese claimed the secessionist churches ' buildings and properties . The resulting property law case , ultimately decided in favor of the mainline diocese , was a test for Episcopal churches nationwide . 
 Among other religions , adherents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints constitute 1 % of the population , with 197 congregations in Virginia as of March 2014 . Fairfax Station is the site of the Ekoji Buddhist Temple , of the <unk> <unk> school , and the Hindu Durga Temple . While the state 's Jewish population is small , organized Jewish sites date to 1789 with Congregation Beth <unk> . Muslims are a growing religious group throughout the Commonwealth through immigration . <unk> in the Commonwealth include Thomas Road Baptist Church , Immanuel Bible Church , and McLean Bible Church . Several Christian universities are also based in the state , including Regent University , Liberty University , and Lynchburg College . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Virginia is an employment @-@ at @-@ will state ; its economy has diverse sources of income , including local and federal government , military , farming and business . Virginia has 4 @.@ 1 million civilian workers , and one @-@ third of the jobs are in the service sector . The unemployment rate in Virginia is among the lowest in the nation , at 4 @.@ 8 % , as of December 2014 . The second fastest job growth town in the nation is Leesburg , as of 2011 . The Gross Domestic Product of Virginia was $ 452 billion in 2013 . According to the Bureau of Economic Analysis , Virginia had the most counties in the top 100 wealthiest in the United States based upon median income in 2007 . Northern Virginia is the highest @-@ income region in Virginia , having six of the twenty highest @-@ income counties in the United States , including the three highest as of 2011 . According to CNN Money Magazine the highest @-@ income town in the nation is Great Falls , as of 2011 . According to a 2013 study by Phoenix Marketing International , Virginia had the seventh @-@ largest number of millionaires per capita in the United States , with a ratio of 6 @.@ 64 % . 
 = = = Government = = = 
 Virginia has the highest defense spending of any state per capita , providing the Commonwealth with around 900 @,@ 000 jobs . 12 % of all U.S. federal procurement money is spent in Virginia , the second @-@ highest amount after California . Many Virginians work for federal agencies in Northern Virginia , which include the Central Intelligence Agency and the Department of Defense , as well as the National Science Foundation , the United States Geological Survey and the United States Patent and Trademark Office . Many others work for government contractors , including defense and security firms , which hold more than 15 @,@ 000 federal contracts . 
 Virginia has one of the highest concentrations of veterans of any state , and is second to California in total Department of Defense employees . The Hampton Roads area has the largest concentration of military personnel and assets of any metropolitan area in the world , including the largest naval base in the world , Naval Station Norfolk . In its state government , Virginia employs 106 @,@ 143 public employees , who combined have a median income of $ 44 @,@ 656 as of 2013 . 
 = = = Business = = = 
 Virginia has the highest concentration of technology workers of any state , and the fourth @-@ highest number of technology workers after California , Texas , and New York . Computer chips became the state 's highest @-@ grossing export in 2006 , surpassing its traditional top exports of coal and tobacco combined , reaching a total export value of $ 717 million in 2015 . Northern Virginia , once considered the state 's dairy capital , now hosts software , communication technology , defense contracting companies , particularly in the Dulles Technology Corridor . 
 The state has the highest average and peak Internet speeds in the United States , with the third @-@ highest worldwide . Northern Virginia 's data centers can carry up to 70 % of the nation 's internet traffic , with Loudoun County alone home to as much data center space as northern California . 
 Virginia companies received the fourth @-@ highest amount of venture capital funding in the first half of 2011 after California , Massachusetts , and New York . In 2009 , Forbes magazine named Virginia the best state in the nation for business for the fourth year in a row , while CNBC named it the top state for business in 2007 , 2009 , and 2011 . Additionally , in 2014 a survey of 12 @,@ 000 small business owners found Virginia to be one of the most friendly states for small businesses . Virginia has 20 Fortune 500 companies , ranking the state eighth nationwide . Tysons Corner is one of the largest business districts in the nation . 
 Tourism in Virginia supported an estimated 210 @,@ 000 jobs and generated $ 21 @.@ 2 billion in 2012 . Arlington County is the top tourist destination in the state by domestic spending , followed by Fairfax County , Loudoun County , and Virginia Beach . 
 = = = Agriculture = = = 
 Agriculture occupies 32 % of the land in Virginia . As of 2012 , about 357 @,@ 000 Virginian jobs were in agriculture , with over 47 @,@ 000 farms , averaging 171 acres ( 0 @.@ 27 sq mi ; 0 @.@ 69 km2 ) , in a total farmland area of 8 @.@ 1 million acres ( 12 @,@ 656 sq mi ; 32 @,@ 780 km2 ) . Though agriculture has declined significantly since 1960 when there were twice as many farms , it remains the largest single industry in Virginia . Tomatoes surpassed soy as the most profitable crop in Virginia in 2006 , with peanuts and hay as other agricultural products . Although it is no longer the primary crop , Virginia is still the fifth @-@ largest producer of tobacco nationwide . Virginia is the largest producer of seafood on the East Coast , with scallops , oysters , blue crabs , and clams as the largest seafood harvests by value , and France , Canada , and Hong Kong as the top export destinations . Eastern oyster harvests have increased from 23 @,@ 000 bushels in 2001 to over 500 @,@ 000 in 2013 . Wineries and vineyards in the Northern Neck and along the Blue Ridge Mountains also have begun to generate income and attract tourists . Virginia has the fifth @-@ highest number of wineries in the nation . 
 = = = Taxes = = = 
 Virginia collects personal income tax in five income brackets , ranging from 3 @.@ 0 % to 5 @.@ 75 % . The state sales and use tax rate is 4 @.@ 3 % , while the tax rate on food is 1 @.@ 5 % . There is an additional 1 % local tax , for a total of a 5 @.@ 3 % combined sales tax on most Virginia purchases and 2 @.@ 5 % on most food . Virginia 's property tax is set and collected at the local government level and varies throughout the Commonwealth . Real estate is also taxed at the local level based on 100 % of fair market value . <unk> personal property also is taxed at the local level and is based on a percentage or percentages of original cost . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Virginia 's culture was popularized and spread across America and the South by figures such as George Washington , Thomas Jefferson , and Robert E. Lee . Their homes in Virginia represent the birthplace of America and the South . Modern Virginia culture has many sources , and is part of the culture of the Southern United States . The Smithsonian Institution divides Virginia into nine cultural regions . 
 Besides the general cuisine of the Southern United States , Virginia maintains its own particular traditions . Virginia wine is made in many parts of the state . Smithfield ham , sometimes called " Virginia ham " , is a type of country ham which is protected by state law , and can only be produced in the town of Smithfield . Virginia furniture and architecture are typical of American colonial architecture . Thomas Jefferson and many of the state 's early leaders favored the Neoclassical architecture style , leading to its use for important state buildings . The Pennsylvania Dutch and their style can also be found in parts of the state . 
 Literature in Virginia often deals with the state 's extensive and sometimes troubled past . The works of Pulitzer Prize winner Ellen Glasgow often dealt with social inequalities and the role of women in her culture . Glasgow 's peer and close friend James Branch Cabell wrote extensively about the changing position of gentry in the Reconstruction era , and challenged its moral code with Jurgen , A Comedy of Justice . William Styron approached history in works such as The Confessions of Nat Turner and Sophie 's Choice . Tom Wolfe has occasionally dealt with his southern heritage in bestsellers like I Am Charlotte Simmons . Mount Vernon native Matt <unk> received critical acclaim for his historic novel The Wettest County in the World about <unk> in Franklin County during prohibition . Virginia also names a state Poet Laureate , currently Ron Smith of Richmond , who will serve until mid @-@ 2016 . 
 = = = Fine and performing arts = = = 
