 Rich in cultural heritage , Virginia however ranks near the bottom of U.S. states in terms of public spending on the arts , at nearly half of the national average . The state government does fund some institutions , including the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts and the Science Museum of Virginia . Other museums include the popular Steven F. Udvar @-@ Hazy Center of the National Air and Space Museum and the Chrysler Museum of Art . Besides these sites , many open @-@ air museums are located in the Commonwealth , such as Colonial Williamsburg , the Frontier Culture Museum , and various historic battlefields . The Virginia Foundation for the Humanities works to improve the Commonwealth 's civic , cultural , and intellectual life . 
 Theaters and venues in the Commonwealth are found both in the cities and suburbs . The Harrison Opera House , in Norfolk , is home of the Virginia Opera . The Virginia Symphony Orchestra operates in and around Hampton Roads . Resident and touring theater troupes operate from the American Shakespeare Center in Staunton . The Barter Theatre , designated the State Theatre of Virginia , in Abingdon won the first ever Regional Theatre Tony Award in 1948 , while the Signature Theatre in Arlington won it in 2009 . There 's also a Children 's Theater of Virginia , Theatre IV , which is the second largest touring troupe nationwide . 
 Virginia has launched many award @-@ winning traditional musical artists and internationally successful popular music acts , as well as Hollywood actors . Virginia is known for its tradition in the music genres of old @-@ time string and bluegrass , with groups such as the Carter Family and Stanley Brothers , as well as gospel , blues , and shout bands . Contemporary Virginia is also known for folk rock artists like Dave Matthews and Jason Mraz , hip hop stars like Pharrell Williams and Missy Elliott , as well as thrash metal groups like GWAR and Lamb of God . Notable performance venues include The <unk> , the Landmark Theater , and <unk> Lube Live . Wolf Trap National Park for the Performing Arts is located in Vienna and is the only national park intended for use as a performing arts center . 
 = = = Festivals = = = 
 Many counties and localities host county fairs and festivals . The Virginia State Fair is held at the Meadow Event Park every September . Also in September is the Neptune Festival in Virginia Beach , which celebrates the city , the waterfront , and regional artists . Norfolk 's Harborfest , in June , features boat racing and air shows . Fairfax County also sponsors Celebrate Fairfax ! with popular and traditional music performances . The Virginia Lake Festival is held during the third weekend in July in Clarksville . Wolf Trap hosts the Wolf Trap Opera Company , which produces an opera festival every summer . Each September , Bay Days celebrates the Chesapeake Bay as well as Hampton 's 400 @-@ year history since 1610 , and Isle of Wight County holds a County Fair on the second week of September as well . Both feature live music performances , and other unique events . 
 On the Eastern Shore island of Chincoteague the annual Pony Swim & Auction of feral Chincoteague ponies at the end of July is a unique local tradition expanded into a week @-@ long carnival . The Shenandoah Apple Blossom Festival is a six @-@ day festival held annually in Winchester that includes parades and bluegrass concerts . The Old Time Fiddlers ' Convention in <unk> , begun in 1935 , is one of the oldest and largest such events worldwide . Two important film festivals , the Virginia Film Festival and the VCU French Film Festival , are held annually in Charlottesville and Richmond , respectively . 
 = = Media = = 
 The Hampton Roads area is the 45th @-@ largest media market in the United States as ranked by Nielsen Media Research , while the Richmond @-@ Petersburg area is 57th and Roanoke @-@ Lynchburg is 66th as of 2013 . Northern Virginia is part of the much larger Washington , D.C. media market . 
 There are 36 television stations in Virginia , representing each major U.S. network , part of 42 stations which serve Virginia viewers . More than 720 FCC @-@ licensed FM radio stations broadcast in Virginia , with about 300 such AM stations . The nationally available Public Broadcasting Service ( PBS ) is headquartered in Arlington . Independent PBS affiliates exist throughout Virginia , and the Arlington PBS member station WETA @-@ TV produces programs such as the PBS NewsHour and Washington Week . 
 The most circulated native newspapers in the Commonwealth are Norfolk 's The Virginian @-@ Pilot ( 142 @,@ 476 daily subscribers ) , the Richmond Times @-@ Dispatch ( 108 @,@ 559 ) , and The Roanoke Times ( 78 @,@ 663 ) , as of 2014 . Several Washington , D.C. papers are based in Northern Virginia , such as The Washington Examiner and Politico . The paper with the nation 's widest circulation , USA Today , with 1 @.@ 83 million daily subscriptions , is headquartered in McLean . Besides traditional forms of media , Virginia is the home base for telecommunication companies such as <unk> and XO Communications . In Northern Virginia , The Washington Post is the dominant newspaper , since Northern VA is located in the Washington , DC metropolitan area . 
 = = Education = = 
 Virginia 's educational system consistently ranks in the top ten states on the U.S. Department of Education 's National Assessment of Educational Progress , with Virginia students outperforming the average in all subject areas and grade levels tested . The 2011 Quality Counts report ranked Virginia 's K – 12 education fourth best in the country . All school divisions must adhere to educational standards set forth by the Virginia Department of Education , which maintains an assessment and accreditation regime known as the Standards of Learning to ensure accountability . In 2010 , 85 % of high school students graduated on @-@ time after four years . Between 2000 and 2008 , school enrollment increased 5 % , the number of teachers 21 % . 
 Public K – 12 schools in Virginia are generally operated by the counties and cities , and not by the state . As of 2011 , a total of 1 @,@ 267 @,@ 063 students were enrolled in 1 @,@ 873 local and regional schools in the Commonwealth , including three charter schools , and an additional 109 alternative and special education centers across 132 school divisions . Besides the general public schools in Virginia , there are Governor 's Schools and selective magnet schools . The Governor 's Schools are a collection of more than 40 regional high schools and summer programs intended for gifted students . The Virginia Council for Private Education oversees the regulation of 320 state accredited and 130 non @-@ accredited private schools . An additional 24 @,@ 682 students receive homeschooling . 
 As of 2011 , there are 176 colleges and universities in Virginia . In the U.S. News & World Report ranking of public colleges , the University of Virginia is second , The College of William & Mary is sixth , and Virginia Tech is 25th . Virginia Commonwealth University is ranked the top public graduate school in fine arts , while James Madison University has been recognized as the top regional public master 's program in The South since 1993 . The Virginia Military Institute is the oldest state military college and a top ranked public liberal arts college . George Mason University is the largest university in Virginia with over 32 @,@ 000 students . Virginia Tech and Virginia State University are the state 's land @-@ grant universities . Virginia also operates 23 community colleges on 40 campuses serving over 260 @,@ 000 students . There are 129 private institutions , including Hampton University , Washington and Lee University , Randolph College , Hampden – Sydney College , Emory & Henry College , Roanoke College , the University of Richmond , and Randolph @-@ Macon College . 
 = = Health = = 
 Virginia has a mixed health record , and is ranked as the 26th overall healthiest state according to the 2013 United Health Foundation 's Health Rankings . Virginia also ranks 21st among the states in the rate of premature deaths , 6 @,@ 816 per 100 @,@ 000 . In 2008 , Virginia reached its lowest ever rate of infant mortality , at 6 @.@ 7 deaths per 1 @,@ 000 . There are however racial and social health disparities , in 2010 African Americans experienced 28 % more premature deaths than whites , while 13 % of Virginians lack any health insurance . According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 's 2009 survey , 26 % of Virginians are obese and another 35 % are overweight . 78 % of residents claim to have exercised at least once in the past three months . About 30 % of Virginia 's 10- to 17 @-@ year @-@ olds are overweight or obese . Virginia banned smoking in bars and restaurants in January 2010 . 19 % of Virginians smoke tobacco . Residents of Virginia 's 8th congressional district share the longest average life expectancy rate in the nation , over 83 years . 
 There are 89 hospitals in Virginia listed with the United States Department of Health and Human Services . Notable examples include Inova Fairfax Hospital , the largest hospital in the Washington Metropolitan Area , and the VCU Medical Center , located on the medical campus of Virginia Commonwealth University . The University of Virginia Medical Center , part of the University of Virginia Health System , is highly ranked in endocrinology according to <unk> & World Report . Sentara Norfolk General Hospital , part of the Hampton Roads based Sentara Health System and a teaching institution of Eastern Virginia Medical School , was the site of the first successful in @-@ vitro fertilization birth . Virginia has a ratio of 127 primary care physicians per 10 @,@ 000 residents , which is the 16th highest nationally . Virginia was one of five states to receive a perfect score in disaster preparedness according to a 2008 report by the Trust for America 's Health , based on criteria such as detecting pathogens and distributing vaccines and medical supplies . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 Because of the 1932 Byrd Road Act , the state government controls most of Virginia 's roads , instead of a local county authority as is usual in other states . As of 2011 , the Virginia Department of Transportation owns and operates 57 @,@ 867 miles ( 93 @,@ 128 km ) of the total 70 @,@ 105 miles ( 112 @,@ 823 km ) of roads in the state , making it the third largest state highway system in the United States . Although the Washington Metropolitan Area , which includes Northern Virginia , has the second worst traffic in the nation , Virginia as a whole has the 21st @-@ lowest congestion and the average commute time is 26 @.@ 9 minutes . Virginia hit peak car usage before the year 2000 , making it one of the first such states . 
 Virginia has Amtrak passenger rail service along several corridors , and Virginia Railway Express ( VRE ) maintains two commuter lines into Washington , D.C. from Fredericksburg and Manassas . VRE is one of the nation 's fastest growing commuter rail services , handling nearly 20 @,@ 000 passengers a day . The Washington Metro rapid transit system serves Northern Virginia as far west as communities along I @-@ 66 in Fairfax County , with expansion plans to reach Loudoun County by 2017 . Major freight railroads in Virginia include Norfolk Southern and CSX Transportation . Commuter buses include the Fairfax Connector and the Shenandoah Valley Commuter Bus . The Virginia Department of Transportation operates several free ferries throughout Virginia , the most notable being the Jamestown @-@ Scotland ferry which crosses the James River in Surry County . 
 Virginia has five major airports : Washington Dulles International and Reagan Washington National in Northern Virginia , both of which handle over 20 million passengers a year ; Richmond International ; and Newport News / Williamsburg International Airport and Norfolk International serving the Hampton Roads area . Several other airports offer limited commercial passenger service , and sixty @-@ six public airports serve the state 's aviation needs . The Virginia Port Authority 's main seaports are those in Hampton Roads , which carried 17 @,@ 726 @,@ 251 short tons ( 16 @,@ 080 @,@ 984 t ) of bulk cargo in 2007 , the sixth most of United States ports . The Eastern Shore of Virginia is the site of Wallops Flight Facility , a rocket testing center owned by NASA , and the Mid @-@ Atlantic Regional Spaceport , a commercial spaceport . Space tourism is also offered through Vienna @-@ based Space Adventures . 
 = = Law and government = = 
 In colonial Virginia , free men elected the lower house of the legislature , called the House of Burgesses , which together with the Governor 's Council , made the " General Assembly " . Founded in 1619 , the Virginia General Assembly is still in existence as the oldest legislature in the Western Hemisphere . In 2008 , the government was ranked by the Pew Center on the States with an A − in terms of its efficiency , effectiveness , and infrastructure , tied with Utah and Washington . This was the second consecutive time that Virginia received the highest grade in the nation . 
 Since 1971 , the government has functioned under the seventh Constitution of Virginia , which provides for a strong legislature and a unified judicial system . Similar to the federal structure , the government is divided in three branches : legislative , executive , and judicial . The legislature is the General Assembly , a bicameral body whose 100 @-@ member House of Delegates and 40 @-@ member Senate write the laws for the Commonwealth . The Assembly is stronger than the executive , as it selects judges and justices . The Governor and Lieutenant Governor are elected every four years in separate elections . Incumbent governors cannot run for re @-@ election , however the Lieutenant Governor and Attorney General can , and governors may serve non @-@ consecutive terms . The judicial system , the oldest in America , consists of a hierarchy from the Supreme Court of Virginia and the Court of Appeals of Virginia to the Circuit Courts , the trial courts of general jurisdiction , and the lower General District Courts and Juvenile and Domestic Relations District Courts . 
 The Code of Virginia is the statutory law , and consists of the codified legislation of the General Assembly . The Virginia State Police is the largest law enforcement agency in Virginia . The Virginia Capitol Police is the oldest police department in the United States . The Virginia National Guard consists of 7 @,@ 500 soldiers in the Virginia Army National Guard and 1 @,@ 200 airmen in the Virginia Air National Guard . Since the resumption of capital punishment in Virginia in 1982 , 107 people have been executed , the second highest number in the nation . The " total crime risk " is 28 % lower than the national average . Since Virginia ended prisoner parole in 1995 , the rate of recidivism has fallen to 28 @.@ 3 % , among the lowest nationwide . Virginia is an open @-@ carry state . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Over the 20th century , Virginia shifted from a largely rural , politically Southern and conservative state to a more urbanized , pluralistic , and politically moderate environment . Up until the 1970s , Virginia was a racially divided one @-@ party state dominated by the Byrd Organization . The legacy of slavery in the state effectively disfranchised African Americans until after passage of civil rights legislation in the mid @-@ 1960s . Enfranchisement and immigration of other groups , especially Hispanics , have placed growing importance on minority voting , while voters that identify as " white working @-@ class " declined by three percent between 2008 and 2012 . Regional differences play a large part in Virginia politics . Rural southern and western areas moved to support the Republican Party in response to its " southern strategy " , while urban and growing suburban areas , including much of Northern Virginia , form the Democratic Party base . Democratic support also persists in union @-@ influenced Roanoke in Southwest Virginia , college towns such as Charlottesville and Blacksburg , and the southeastern Black Belt Region . 
 Political party strength in Virginia has likewise been in flux . In the 2007 state elections , Democrats regained control of the State Senate , and narrowed the Republican majority in the House of Delegates to eight seats . Yet elections in 2009 resulted in the election of Republican Bob McDonnell as Governor by a seventeen @-@ point margin , the election of a Republican Lieutenant Governor and Attorney General , as well as Republican gains of six seats in the House of Delegates . In 2011 , the Republican caucus took over two @-@ thirds ( 68 – 32 ) of the seats in the House of Delegates , and a majority of the Senate based on the Lieutenant Governor Bill Bolling as the tie @-@ breaker . Following the 2013 elections , Democrat Terry McAuliffe was elected Governor by two percentage points , and Democrat Ralph Northam was elected Lieutenant Governor by double digits . Republicans , however , maintained their super @-@ majority ( 68 – 32 ) in the House of Delegates . State election seasons traditionally start with the annual Shad <unk> event in Wakefield . 
 In federal elections since 2006 , both parties have seen successes . Republican Senator George Allen lost close races in 2006 , to Democratic newcomer Jim Webb , and again in 2012 , to Webb 's replacement , former Governor Tim Kaine . In 2008 , Democrats won both United States Senate seats ; former Governor Mark Warner was elected to replace retiring Republican John Warner . The state went Republican in 11 out of 12 presidential elections from 1948 to 2004 , including 10 in a row from 1968 to 2004 . However , Democrat Barack Obama carried Virginia 's 13 electoral votes in both the 2008 and 2012 presidential elections . In the 2010 elections , Republicans won three United States House of Representatives seats from the Democrats . Of the state 's eleven seats in the House of Representatives , Republicans hold eight and Democrats hold three . Virginia is considered a " swing state " in future presidential elections . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Virginia is the most populous U.S. state without a major professional sports league franchise . The reasons for this include the lack of any dominant city or market within the state , the proximity of teams in Washington , D.C. and North Carolina , and a reluctance to publicly finance stadiums . However , in recent years , the city of Virginia Beach has proposed a new arena designed to lure a major league franchise . Norfolk is host to two minor league teams : The AAA Norfolk Tides and the ECHL 's Norfolk Admirals . The San Francisco Giants ' AA team , the Richmond Flying Squirrels , began play at The Diamond in 2010 , replacing the AAA Richmond Braves , who relocated after 2008 . Additionally , the Washington Nationals , Boston Red Sox , Seattle Mariners , Chicago White Sox , and Atlanta Braves also have Single @-@ A and Rookie @-@ level farm teams in Virginia . 
 The Washington Redskins have Redskins Park , their headquarters , in Ashburn and their training facility is in Richmond , and the Washington Capitals train at Kettler Capitals Iceplex in Ballston . Virginia has many professional caliber golf courses including the Greg Norman course at Lansdowne Resort and Kingsmill Resort , home of the Kingsmill Championship , an LPGA Tour tournament . NASCAR currently schedules Sprint Cup races on two tracks in Virginia : Martinsville Speedway and Richmond International Raceway . Virginia natives currently competing in the series include Denny Hamlin and Elliott Sadler . 
 Virginia does not allow state appropriated funds to be used for either operational or capital expenses for intercollegiate athletics . Despite this , both the Virginia Cavaliers and Virginia Tech Hokies have been able to field competitive teams in the Atlantic Coast Conference and maintain modern facilities . Their rivalry is followed statewide . Twelve other universities compete in NCAA Division I , particularly in the Atlantic 10 Conference , Big South Conference , and Colonial Athletic Association . Three historically black schools compete in the Division II Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association , and two others compete in the Division I Mid @-@ Eastern Athletic Conference . Several smaller schools compete in the Old Dominion Athletic Conference and the USA South Athletic Conference of NCAA Division III . The NCAA currently holds its Division III championships in football , men 's basketball , volleyball and softball in Salem . 
 = = State symbols = = 
 The state nickname is its oldest symbol , though it has never been made official by law . Virginia was given the title " Dominion " by King Charles II of England at the time of The Restoration , because it had remained loyal to the crown during the English Civil War , and the present moniker , " Old Dominion " is a reference to that title . Charles ' supporters were called Cavaliers , and " The Cavalier State " nickname was popularized after the American Civil War to romanticize the antebellum period . Sports teams from the University of Virginia are called the Cavaliers . The other nickname , " Mother of Presidents " , is also historic , as eight Virginians have served as President of the United States , including four of the first five . 
 The state 's motto , Sic Semper <unk> , translates from Latin as " Thus Always to Tyrants " , and is used on the state seal , which is then used on the flag . While the seal was designed in 1776 , and the flag was first used in the 1830s , both were made official in 1930 . The majority of the other symbols were made official in the late 20th century . The Virginia reel is among the square dances classified as the state dance . In March 2015 , after 20 years without a state song , Virginia received two : " Our Great Virginia " ( official traditional state song ) and " Sweet Virginia Breeze " ( official popular state song ) . In 1940 , Virginia made " Carry Me Back to Old <unk> " the state song , but it was retired in 1997 and reclassified as the state song emeritus . 
 = Bound for Glory IV = 
 Bound for Glory IV was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event produced by the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) promotion that took place on October 12 , 2008 at the Sears Centre in Hoffman Estates , Illinois . It was the fourth event under the Bound for Glory name and the tenth event in the 2008 TNA PPV schedule . The show was promoted as TNA 's premier PPV event and their equivalent to the rival World Wrestling Entertainment 's ( WWE ) WrestleMania . Eight professional wrestling matches and one untelevised match were featured on the event 's card , four of which were for championships . 
 The main event of Bound for Glory IV was a standard wrestling match for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship , pitting the champion Samoa Joe against the challenger Sting . Sting won the match to become the new champion . Another highly promoted contest on the card was between Kurt Angle and Jeff Jarrett , with Mick Foley serving as the Special Ringside Enforcer . Jarrett was the victor of the encounter . TNA held a Three Way War between A.J. Styles , Booker T , and Christian Cage at the event , which Booker T won . The TNA World Tag Team Championship was defended in a Four Way Tag Team Monster 's Ball match with Steve McMichael as the Special Guest Referee , in which the champions Beer Money , Inc . ( James Storm and Robert Roode ) fought the team of Abyss and Matt Morgan , The Latin American Xchange ( Hernandez and Homicide ) , and Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) . Beer Money , Inc. pinned Hernandez to retain the championship in the contest . 
 Bound for Glory IV is remembered for Sting winning the TNA World Heavyweight Championship and Team 3D forcing Abyss through a flaming table . There were 35 @,@ 000 who purchased the event , as reported by The Wrestling Observer Newsletter . Bound for Glory IV had an attendance of between 5 @,@ 000 and 5 @,@ 500 people . Chris and Bryan Sokol of the professional wrestling section of the Canadian Online Explorer rated the show a 7 out of 10 , the same as the 2009 edition but lower than the 2007 edition 's rating of 7 @.@ 5 . It also received a lower rating by the Canadian Online Explorer than WWE 's WrestleMania XXIV PPV event held on March 30 , 2008 , which had been given a 9 out of 10 by Dale Plummer . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The fourth installment under the Bound for Glory name was announced in January 2008 with an October 12 date attached . TNA issued a mobile alert in March 2008 that the top three candidate cities to host the event were New York City , Toronto , and Chicago . TNA President Dixie Carter was quoted as saying that Chicago had been chosen as the location . The main event was planned to be Samoa Joe versus Kevin Nash before TNA management chose to go in a different direction . TNA issued a press release on June 9 regarding Bound for Glory , announcing it would be held at the Sears Centre in Hoffman Estates , Illinois , a suburb of Chicago . It was also revealed that the event was officially stylized as " Bound for Glory IV , " tickets went on sale August 1 , and TNA had scheduled a " Total Nonstop InterAction " event on October 11 . Early returns for ticket sales revealed that the first two tiers had been sold out . In previous installments , the purchasing price of the event was $ 29 @.@ 99 , but with Bound for Glory IV TNA increased the price to $ 34 @.@ 99 . TNA advertised recently signed wrestler Mick Foley for their Total Nonstop InterAction event held at the Hyatt Regency in Rosemont , Illinois , with it selling out shortly afterwards . The Wrestling Observer Newsletter reported that TNA had received the largest crowd for a Total Nonstop InterAction event up to that point . TNA originally planned to use former professional football player and professional wrestler Steve McMichael as a Special Ringside Enforcer before management changed their minds and decided to use Mick Foley in the role instead . TNA later issued a press release announcing that McMichael would take part in the Bound for Glory IV festivities as a Special Guest Referee due to his fame and connection to the Chicago Bears and Chicago in general . 
 Bound for Glory is considered by TNA to be their equivalent to the National Football League 's Super Bowl or rival World Wrestling Entertainment 's WrestleMania event . As such , TNA used an extensive marketing campaign that involved several wrestlers dressing up as gangsters from the 1920s and 1930s era of Chicago to promote the show since it is the biggest event the company holds annually . Samoa Joe and The Latin American Xchange ( Hernandez and Homicide ) participated in some of these promotional video shoots . This was the first Bound for Glory event to use roman numerals in the title . TNA created a section on their company website to promote Bound for Glory IV . TNA released a poster to promote the show featuring Karen Angle , Joe , Booker T , Kurt Angle , Christian Cage , and Gail Kim . The official theme for the show was Tarantula by The Smashing Pumpkins . A contest was held to win upgraded ringside seats , free merchandise , and meet several TNA performers at Bound for Glory IV by wearing a Halloween costume to the event , with a drawing being held prior to the start of the telecast . 
 = = = Storylines = = = 
 Bound for Glory IV featured eight professional wrestling matches and one untelevised match that involved different wrestlers from pre @-@ existing scripted feuds and storylines . Wrestlers portrayed villains , heroes , or less distinguishable characters in the scripted events that built tension and culminated in a wrestling match or series of matches . 
 Heading into Bound for Glory IV , TNA created a company @-@ wide narrative that led to an on @-@ screen rivalry between professional wrestling veterans , who played the villains , and the younger talent of the company , who played the heroic characters . Several matches and storylines that led to the event were connected to this narrative , such as the storyline surrounding the TNA World Heavyweight Championship and the bout pitting Kurt Angle against Jeff Jarrett . This narrative started at TNA 's Victory Road PPV event on July 13 , where Samoa Joe defended the TNA World Heavyweight Championship against Booker T. During the match , Joe relentlessly assaulted Booker T to the point that referees nor security could stop him . This led to Sting interfering in the contest trying to calm Joe down . Joe refused to listen and continued his assault , causing Sting to hit Joe in the stomach with a baseball in order for Joe to stop , resulting in a no contest . Sting did not state a reason as to why he hit Joe in the weeks after the event . At TNA 's Hard Justice PPV event on August 10 , A.J. Styles fought Angle in a Last Man Standing match , which he won after injuring Angle 's neck in the contest . After the bout , Styles attacked Angle 's injured neck , making the injury more severe in the storyline until Sting attacked Styles to prevent the assault from continuing . On the August 14 episode of TNA 's television program TNA Impact ! , Sting explained that both Joe and Styles had been disrespectful and violent in their current rivalries and matches . He stated that his actions were to end that type of behavior between the younger wrestlers and the veteran wrestlers . 
 At TNA 's previous No Surrender PPV event on September 14 , Sting announced that TNA management had decided that he would challenge the TNA World Heavyweight Champion for the title at Bound for Glory . Later in the show , Joe defeated Christian Cage and Angle in a Three Ways to Glory match to retain the TNA World Heavyweight Championship after Jarrett interfered in the bout by bashing a guitar over Angle 's head . Following No Surrender on the September 18 episode of Impact ! , Sting discussed his actions further , stating that when he was younger he learned from the veterans in the industry and that Joe and Styles had been disrespectful in their rivalries with Booker T and Angle . Jarrett responded to Sting 's comments later in the show , stating that the issue was not about disrespect , it was about the veterans in the company not wanting to retire and let the younger wrestlers be stars . Angle argued that he made TNA a success , not the efforts of Jarrett , Sting , Joe , or Styles . Angle then challenged Jarrett to a match at Bound for Glory IV , which Jarrett declined . On the September 25 episode of Impact ! , Angle challenged Jarrett to a match again , this time threatening and mocking him along with his daughters . Jarrett accepted Angle 's challenge afterwards . Sting also expressed his reasons for having a desire to face Joe for the title on the same telecast , stating that he was taught respect by veterans in his youth so he was going to defeat Joe for the championship at Bound for Glory to teach Joe respect . Mick Foley was announced as the Special Ringside Enforcer for the Jarrett versus Angle bout on the October 2 Impact ! episode . Sting and Joe signed the contract for their encounter on the October 9 episode of Impact ! , with the stipulation added that there would be no rematch between the two after the event regardless of the outcome . 
 TNA held a Three Way War between A.J. Styles , Booker T , and Christian Cage at the show . Leading into the event , Styles represented the younger wrestlers in the company , while Booker T represented the veterans . Cage was neutral in the storyline , due to not having revealed which side he had aligned with . This upset Styles in the storyline , who wanted Cage to join the younger wrestlers . On the September 25 episode of Impact ! , Styles fought Booker T in a standard match . Booker T won the bout after bashing Styles in the head with a steel briefcase . Styles blamed the loss on Cage , who had interfered in the bout and accidentally cost Styles the win due to a miscommunication . On the October 2 episode of Impact ! , the team of Cage , Styles , and Jay Lethal teamed to face the team of Booker T and Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) in a Six Man Tag Team match . Another miscommunication between Styles and Cage occurred in the contest , allowing Booker T to pin Cage to win the bout . This led to the October 9 episode of Impact ! , when Management Director Jim Cornette announced that Booker T versus Styles with Cage as Special Guest Referee would be the main event of that telecast to settle the issue . Styles defeated Booker T during the show , with Cage assaulting both wrestlers after the contest . Cornette then promoted a Three Way War at Bound for Glory in order to end the overall conflict . 
 The TNA World Tag Team Championship was defended in a Four Way Tag Team Monster 's Ball match by Beer Money , Inc . ( James Storm and Robert Roode ) against the team of Abyss and Matt Morgan , The Latin American Xchange ( Hernandez and Homicide ; LAX ) , and Team 3D . On the September 18 episode of Impact ! , Matt Morgan announced that TNA were holding a Tag Team Invitational Tournament at Bound for Glory and that he had signed up himself and his partner Abyss for the contest . Team 3D interrupted Morgan and revealed that they were also involved in the tournament . Meanwhile , on the same telecast , Beer Money , Inc. and their manager Jacqueline assaulted LAX 's manager Héctor Guerrero . On the September 25 episode of Impact ! , Team 3D announced that the match between them and the team of Morgan and Abyss was made a Monster 's Ball match . On the same telecast , Beer Money , Inc. defeated LAX in a bout with the stipulation that the losing team lost their manager . This meant that Guerrero could no longer manage LAX in the storyline . On the October 2 episode of Impact ! , Management Director Jim Cornette announced that the originally scheduled tournament was cancelled . Instead , TNA was holding a Four Way Tag Team Monster 's Ball match for the TNA World Tag Team Championship between the above teams at Bound for Glory IV . TNA issued a press release announcing that Steve McMichael would be the Special Guest Referee for this match after it was promoted for the event . 
 The TNA X Division Championship was defended by Sheik Abdul Bashir against Consequences Creed at the spectacle . At Hard Justice , Bashir attacked Creed with a steal chair during his bout with Petey Williams for the title , which allowed Williams to force Creed 's head into the mat with his signature Canadian Destroyer maneuver to retain the X Division Championship . Creed was given a rematch on the August 21 episode of Impact ! , with Bashir once again interfering by attacking Creed , resulting in Creed winning by disqualification and Williams retaining the X Division Championship again . A Three Way match for the title with Williams defending against Bashir and Creed was scheduled for No Surrender . At the event , Bashir defeated Williams and Creed to become the new TNA X Division Champion . On the October 9 episode of Impact ! , Creed won a Four Way match to challenge Bashir for the title at Bound for Glory , defeating Sonjay Dutt , Williams , and Jay Lethal in the process . 
 = = Event = = 
 Prior to the event broadcasting live , TNA held an untelevised match for the audience in attendance . It was an Intergender Tag Team match pitting the team of Eric Young and Sojournor Bolt against Lance Rock and Christy Hemme . The team of Young and Bolt won the contest . 
 = = = Miscellaneous = = = 
 Bound for Glory IV featured employees other than the wrestlers involved in the matches . Mike Tenay and Don West were the commentators for the telecast . Jeremy Borash and David Penzer were ring announcers for the event . Andrew Thomas , Earl Hebner , Rudy Charles , Mark " Slick " Johnson , Traci Brooks , and Steve McMichael participated as referees for the encounters . Lauren Thompson and Borash were used as interviewers during the event . Besides employees who appeared in a wrestling role , SoCal Val , Christy Hemme , Jim Cornette , Raisha Saeed , Jacqueline , Sharmell , and Kevin Nash all appeared on camera , either in backstage or in ringside segments . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The opening televised contest of Bound for Glory was the Steel Asylum to determine the number one contender to the TNA X Division Championship . There were ten participants in this contest ; those involved were Alex Shelley , Chris Sabin , Curry Man , Jay Lethal , Jimmy Rave , Johnny Devine , Petey Williams , Shark Boy , Sonjay Dutt , and Super Eric . Christy Hemme accompanied Rave to the ring , while SoCal Val accompanied Dutt . In this encounter , the ring was surrounded by a large red steel cage that domed with a hole in the center of the ceiling . The objective was for a competitor to fight up the walls of the cage and escape via the hole in the center . The first person to complete the task won the match and became number one contender to the TNA X Division Championship . The duration of the bout was 12 minutes and 7 seconds . After several minutes of fighting among one another , several wrestlers attempted to climb the cage but were stopped . At one point , Devine performed his signature Devine Intervention maneuver on Rave , with Rave landing awkwardly on his neck . The winner of the contest was Lethal , who climbed the cage and escaped through the hole while everyone was preoccupied . 
 A Six Person Intergender Tag Team Bimbo Brawl match with Traci Brooks as the Special Guest Referee was next , pitting the team of ODB , Rhaka Khan , and Rhino against The Beautiful People ( Angelina Love , Cute Kip , and Velvet Sky ) . In this bout , both male and female wrestlers could fight each other and all weapons were legal to use . The only way to win was by pinfall or submission . Rhino won the match for his team after tackling Kip with his signature Gore maneuver at 6 minutes and 15 seconds . 
 The TNA X Division Championship match followed , with Sheik Abdul Bashir defending against Consequences Creed . The match lasted 9 minutes and 18 seconds . Prior to the contest , ring announcer David Penzer introduced Sgt. Daniel <unk> , who in turn introduced Creed . During the bout , Bashir held Creed in a submission hold with the referee attempting to raise Creed 's arm three times . If it fell all three times , Bashir would be named the winner . Creed held his arm up on the third try , continuing the match . Bashir won the contest later by pinning Creed with a roll @-@ up pinning maneuver while holding onto the middle rope for leverage . As such , Bashir retained the TNA X Division Championship . 
 The TNA Women 's Knockout Championship was defended by Taylor Wilde against Awesome Kong and Roxxi in a Three Way match next . Raisha Saeed accompanied Kong to the ring . She also interfered in the contest by pulling Roxxi out of the ring and kicking her at ringside . Roxxi later returned to the ring and attacked Kong before being pinned by Wilde with a bridging suplex pin at 5 minutes and 11 seconds . Wilde thus retained the TNA Women 's Knockout Championship . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The TNA World Tag Team Championship was defended in a Four Way Tag Team Monster 's Ball match with Steve McMichael as Special Guest Referee in the fifth contest . Beer Money , Inc . ( James Storm and Robert Roode ) defended the title against the team of Abyss and Matt Morgan , The Latin American Xchange ( Hernandez and Homicide ) , and Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) . Jacqueline accompanied Beer Money , Inc. to the ring . The duration of the bout was 20 minutes and 20 seconds . This bout was contested under no count @-@ outs and no disqualification rules with weapons legal and the only way to win was for a competitor to either pin or make another wrestler submit . The match started off with Hernandez jumping over the top rope onto Roode and Storm . Several competitors bled during the contest , such as Devon and Abyss , who was cut open by a cheese grater by Ray . McMichael was directly involved in the match several times . The first being an altercation with Beer Money , Inc . , resulting in McMichael attacking Roode . Another time was near the end of the contest when Jacqueline interrupted a pin attempt by Homicide on Storm , with McMichael spanking her in retaliation . The last time was when he aided Hernandez in opening a tied bag of thumbtacks . Johnny Devine interfered in the encounter when Team 3D were assaulting Abyss with various weapons , such as a staple gun . Devine hit Abyss with a kendo stick from behind and helped Devon set up a table on the floor next to the stage . Ray and Devon then sprayed the table with lighter fluid . Devine lit the table on fire before Ray and Devon slammed Abyss through the flaming table off of the stage . The match ended when Team 3D forced Hernandez through a table covered in thumbtacks with their signature 3D tag team maneuver , before Storm spat beer in Devon 's eyes and Roode covered Hernandez for the pinfall to retain the TNA World Tag Team Championship . 
 The sixth match was a Three Way War between A.J. Styles , Booker T , and Christian Cage that lasted 13 minutes and 5 seconds . Sharmell accompanied Booker T to the ring . She interfered in the encounter by giving Booker T a steal briefcase which he used to knockout Styles at ringside . Later , Cage attempted his signature Unprettier maneuver on Styles , who countered the move into an Inverted DDT to force Cage 's head into the mat . Styles followed by placing Booker T in an armbar submission hold , before Cage broke it up . Booker T gained a near @-@ fall after slamming Styles back @-@ first against the mat with his trademark Book End maneuver . Afterwards , Booker T performed his popular " <unk> " hallmark for the audience before he was attacked by Cage , who went on to mock the move . Cage and Styles fought on top of a turnbuckle before Styles threw Cage off the top and into the ring . Styles followed by performing his signature Spiral Tap maneuver , but Cage moved out of the way . Booker T hit both Styles and Cage with a double Axe Kick , gaining a near @-@ fall on both . A short bit later , Cage performed the Unprettier on Styles from the top of a turnbuckle . As he went for the pin attempt , Booker T hit Cage with an Axe Kick off of a turnbuckle and followed with the pinfall to win the encounter . 
 The seventh match of the show pitted Jeff Jarrett against Kurt Angle , with Mick Foley serving as the Special Ringside Enforcer . Jarrett gained a near @-@ fall in the contest when he suplexed Angle off the top of a turnbuckle . Jarrett then placed Angle in a Figure @-@ Four Leglock submission hold , which was broken by the referee when Angle grabbed the bottom rope . Angle fought back with a series of consecutive German suplexes , forcing Jarrett against the mat back @-@ first . He then placed Jarrett in his signature Ankle lock submission hold , which Jarrett fought Angle to get released . Angle gained a near @-@ fall by slamming Jarrett back @-@ first against the mat with his signature Olympic Slam maneuver . Afterwards , Angle missed an <unk> splash from the top of a turnbuckle , when Jarrett moved out of the way . Angle then accidentally hit the referee , knocking him out in the storyline . Jarrett followed by performing his signature Stroke maneuver on Angle , with Foley counting the pinfall attempt before Angle kicked out . Afterwards , Angle hit Jarrett in the groin and then attacked Foley with a steel chair at ringside , before returning to the ring to hit Jarrett with the chair as well . Angle then revived the referee who counted Angle 's pinfall attempt before Foley stopped the count by pulling the referee from the ring . Foley then attacked Angle and applied his signature Mandible Claw submission hold . Jarrett followed up by bashing a guitar over Angle 's head and covering for a pinfall that Foley counted to win the match at 20 minutes and 7 seconds . 
 The main event was for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship in which the champion Samoa Joe defended against the challenger Sting . The duration of the encounter was 16 minutes and 54 seconds . The beginning of the match had Joe on the offensive , with Joe performing a dive between the ropes to hit Sting in the face with his forearm . The competitors then fought throughout the crowd for an extended period . At one point while the two were fighting on the arena steps , Joe jumped from a luxury box and kicked Sting down the stairs . Afterwards , Sting and Joe fought back towards the ring with each trading the offensive advantage . Back in the ring , Sting earned a near @-@ fall after an aerial splash from the top of a turnbuckle . Joe placed Sting in an STF submission hold after a powerbomb next . Sting reached the ropes , causing the hold to be broken by the referee . Sting threw Joe into a ring corner and performed his signature Stinger Splash before lifting Joe up and slamming Joe neck @-@ first onto the mat with Joe 's signature Muscle Buster maneuver . Joe got up off the mat immediately and attacked Sting . He then slammed Sting head and back @-@ first into the mat with Sting 's trademark Scorpion Death Drop maneuver . Sting also got up immediately after the move . Later , Kevin Nash entered the arena and walked to the ringside area . Nash had reportedly left the company but his attendance backstage was leaked to various media outlets . As Joe was arguing with the referee , Sting retrieved a baseball bat that he had left at ringside . Nash pulled the bat from Sting 's hands , not allowing him to use it in the match . Afterwards , Joe and Sting fought in the ring when Sting dodged a running Joe , causing him to almost collide with referee Earl Hebner who dodged as well . At this time , Nash hit Joe across the back with the baseball bat when Joe came in contact with the ring ropes . Sting followed by performing the Scorpion Death Drop on Joe and pinned him to win the TNA World Heavyweight Championship . The event came to a close as Sting celebrated in @-@ front of the crowd . 
 = = Reception = = 
 There were several reported attendance figures for Bound for Glory IV , with the initial attendance figure being 5 @,@ 000 people before being retracted and updated to a total of 5 @,@ 500 people by The Wrestling Observer Newsletter . This was lower than the maximum seating capacity available at the Sears Centre of between 11 @,@ 000 and 11 @,@ 800 people for festival style events . However , the Bound for Glory IV setup caused the event to only hold a maximum capacity of 8 @,@ 000 people . Of the 5 @,@ 500 that attended the show , only 4 @,@ 500 of them were paid tickets . Despite this , it was seen as one of the largest paid crowds in the company 's history and one of the most responsive crowds the company has had as well . The Wrestling Observer Newsletter reported that 35 @,@ 000 people bought the event . 
 Chris and Bryan Sokol of the Canadian Online Explorer reviewed and rated the show on a scale out of 10 , giving it a 7 . This was the same rating given to the 2009 edition by Nick Tylwalk , but lower than the 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 given to the 2007 edition by Chris Sokol . Compared to TNA 's previous PPV event No Surrender , Bound for Glory was received better as No Surrender was given a 3 out of 10 by Jason Clevett . Meanwhile , Chris and Bryan Sokol gave TNA 's next PPV event Turning Point a 7 out of 10 . Rival World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) produced two PPV events in October that competed against Bound for Glory IV . The first was the No Mercy PPV event on October 5 , while the second was the Cyber Sunday PPV event on October 26 . No Mercy was reviewed by Chris and Bryan Sokol and given a 6 out of 10 , lower than the Bound for Glory IV rating . Cyber Sunday was rated an 8 out of 10 by Andy McNamara , higher than the Bound for Glory rating . Compared to WWE 's WrestleMania XXIV PPV event on March 30 , Bound for Glory IV was outperformed as WrestleMania XXIV was given a 9 out of 10 by Dale Plummer . 
 Chris and Bryan Sokol rated the matches on a scale out of 10 , with the main event receiving a 7 . The Jeff Jarrett versus Kurt Angle bout and the Four Way Tag Team Monster 's Ball match were both given an 8 out of 10 . The Three Way War between A.J. Styles , Booker T , and Christian Cage was given a 7 , while the X Division Championship match got a 6 out of 10 . In their review , they commented that the ending of the event was a " sloppy finish to a decent PPV " . They felt the Jarrett versus Angle contest was a " great match with lots of close calls and near falls " , while the Three Way War they considered was " pretty good " . As for the Monster 's Ball match , they said that it was " crazy " , with " tons of brawling " . The X Division Championship encounter was called a " good match " in their review . 
 Wade Keller of the Pro Wrestling Torch Newsletter reviewed the show . Keller rated the matches on a scale out of 5 stars , with the main event given a 3 1 / 4 stars and called a " fine match that fit its slot on the PPV well " but had a finish that he described as " horrible " . He gave Jarrett versus Angle 3 1 / 2 stars with Keller commenting that it was a " good old @-@ school match ... but a bit slow " . The Three Way War received a 3 star rating , stating that there was " enough good " but overall it was " above @-@ average . " The Monster 's Ball match was given 3 1 / 4 stars in the review and called " an exciting match " with Keller explaining that there were " four stars worth of action , but it crossed into gratuitousness " and also criticized some awkward moments and the fire 's danger . The X Division Championship contest got 2 1 / 4 stars with Keller commenting that it " started okay " with the middle being a " little too slow " and that the " build to the finish was solid " but the " actual pin was sloppy " . 
 James Caldwell , also of the Pro Wrestling Torch Newsletter , posted a review of the show rating the matches on the same scale as Keller . The main event was given 3 1 / 2 stars with Caldwell commenting that it was a " really good main event match " but that the finishing sequence " killed the momentum " . The Jarrett and Angle bout got a 4 star rating and called a " really nice match with a good story " . Caldwell clarified that the " finish didn 't hurt the drama " . He also complimented Jarrett 's " great physical condition in his first match back " . The Three Way War received 3 stars with Caldwell saying it had " some really good moments " . Caldwell called the Monster 's Ball match a " heck of a stunt brawl " that " came off pretty well with tons of energy " before giving it 3 1 / 2 stars . He referred to the X Division Championship encounter as a " good singles match " and gave it 2 stars . 
 Daniel Wilkenfeld , also of the Pro Wrestling Torch Newsletter , posted a review of the telecast . Wilkenfeld gave some overall comments on the show , saying the " first half of the card dragged " but the " latter half picked up the pace a lot " . Wilkenfeld compared the event against " normal TNA PPV standards " with Bound for Glory IV being a " pretty good outing " , giving it either a " B + , or maybe even an A − " as an average show but since it was Bound for Glory the bar was raised higher so he only gave it a C. He called Samoa Joe the " Star of the Night " for getting a " largely pro @-@ Sting crowd behind his destructive ways " . Wilkenfeld called the Jarrett and Angle bout as the possible " match of the night " in his review . He referred to the flaming table portion of the Monster 's Ball match as being " an insane flaming table spot " in which he could not understand how those are done " without bad things happening " . He was disappointed by the X Division Championship match , and said that it never got past its " competent " beginning , with its conclusion " both arbitrary and blown " . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = On @-@ screen = = = 
 Following Bound for Glory IV , TNA continued the rivalry between the veteran wrestlers and the younger wrestlers . At Turning Point on November 9 , TNA held several matches connected to this overall narrative . Since Samoa Joe and Sting agreed on the stipulation that there would be no rematch between the two , Sting went on to feud with A.J. Styles while Joe fought Kevin Nash . On the October 23 episode of Impact ! , the veterans in TNA formed the group The Main Event Mafia , consisting of Sting , Kurt Angle , Nash , Booker T , and Scott Steiner . Meanwhile , the younger wrestlers formed The TNA Front Line led by Joe and Styles . 
 Heading into Turning Point , Styles and Sting argued over Sting assaulting Styles at Hard Justice . On the October 30 episode of Impact ! , newly made co @-@ owner of TNA Mick Foley advertised Sting defending the TNA World Heavyweight Championship against Styles at Turning Point . Sting retained the title at the event . Sting and Styles fought again at TNA 's Final Resolution PPV event on December 7 , this time in an Eight Man Tag Team Match pitting The Main Event Mafia ( Sting , Nash , Steiner , and Booker T ) against The TNA Front Line ( Styles , Joe , Brother Devon , and Brother Ray ) for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship . The Main Event Mafia won the match , thus Sting retained the championship for a second time against Styles . Sting and Styles fought one last time for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship , but not for several months . They clashed one final time at the 2009 Bound for Glory event on October 18 . At that event , Styles headed into the bout as the TNA World Heavyweight Champion . Styles defeated Sting to retain the championship at the show . 
 The storyline behind Nash 's betrayal began in December 2007 . At the 2007 Turning Point event , Joe was scheduled to take part in a Six Man Tag Team match , partnering with Nash and Nash 's longtime real @-@ life friend Scott Hall to face The Angle Alliance ( Angle , Styles , and Tomko ) . Hall missed the event citing " food poisoning " , leaving Joe legitimately angered by the excuse , causing him to make an on @-@ camera statement insulting Hall . Following the incident , TNA began a storyline in which Joe was unhappy with his position in the company for various reasons and had continuous conflicts with Nash . After time , Nash became Joe 's on @-@ screen mentor , which led to Joe defeating Angle on April 13 at TNA 's Lockdown PPV event to become the new TNA World Heavyweight Champion . On the October 30 episode of Impact ! , Foley announced that Joe would face Nash at Turning Point . Nash defeated Joe at the event . Joe and Nash fought again at Final Resolution when they competed on opposing teams in the Eight Man Tag Team match for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship , which Nash 's team won . Nash and Joe did not have another match until April 19 , 2009 at TNA 's Lockdown PPV event , when Joe was apart of Team Jarrett ( Jarrett , Styles , Daniels , and Joe ) and Nash was apart of Team Angle ( Angle , Steiner , Booker T , and Nash ) in a Lethal Lockdown match . Team Jarrett won the encounter ; Joe went on to defeat Nash on May 24 at TNA 's Sacrifice PPV event afterwards . 
 Another encounter connected to the narrative that was advertised for Turning Point was Kurt Angle versus Abyss in a Falls Count Anywhere match . After Angle lost to Jeff Jarrett at Bound for Glory IV , Angle challenged Jarrett to a rematch , which was refused on the October 16 episode of Impact ! . To get Jarrett to accept his challenge , Angle assaulted several wrestlers in TNA . On the October 23 episode of Impact ! , Angle challenged Jarrett to a rematch for the second time . Jarrett refused the offer for a second time , but recommended a casualty of Angle 's attacks , Abyss , as Angle 's opponent . On the October 30 episode of Impact ! , a contest between Angle and Abyss ended in a disqualification after Angle struck Abyss with a steel chair . Following their encounter , a match was promoted pitting Angle against Abyss in a Falls Count Anywhere match at Turning Point . Angle won the bout at the show . 
 On the October 23 episode of Impact ! , Booker T introduced a new championship named the TNA Legends Championship and declared himself the inaugural champion . Afterwards , Christian Cage challenged Booker T to defend the championship against him at Turning Point . Booker T accepted after he added the stipulation that if Cage lost the encounter Cage would have to join The Main Event Mafia . Later on the October 30 episode of Impact ! , the match was made official when it was promoted for the event . Booker T retained the championship at Turning Point , defeating Cage and causing him to join the veterans and The Main Event Mafia in the storyline . 
 = = = Off @-@ screen = = = 
 A few wrestlers were injured at Bound for Glory IV . The Wrestling Observer Newsletter reported that Abyss suffered burns to his arms after going through a flaming table at the event . Jimmy Rave received a neck injury from being dropped on his head badly by Johnny Devine during the Steel Asylum . 
 The Wrestling Observer Newsletter reported that almost all of the participants involved in the Four Way Tag Team Monster 's Ball match at the show were furious over how Steve McMichael performed as the Special Guest Referee . Some of the reported issues were slow counting and being out of position , which several felt " screwed up the match . " McMichael was originally supposed to have served as a Special Ringside Enforcer , but TNA personnel did not want the role done twice in one night . The decision to change him to the Special Guest Referee was made the day of the show by Jeff Jarrett . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = Gallery = = 
 Several images captured at the Bound for Glory IV PPV event on October 12 , 2008 . 
 = Choral symphony = 
 A choral symphony is a musical composition for orchestra , choir , and sometimes solo vocalists that , in its internal workings and overall musical architecture , adheres broadly to symphonic musical form . The term " choral symphony " in this context was coined by Hector Berlioz when he described his Roméo et Juliette as such in his five @-@ paragraph introduction to that work . The direct antecedent for the choral symphony is Ludwig van Beethoven 's Ninth Symphony . Beethoven 's Ninth incorporates part of the Ode an die Freude ( " Ode to Joy " ) , a poem by Friedrich Schiller , with text sung by soloists and chorus in the last movement . It is the first example of a major composer 's use of the human voice on the same level as instruments in a symphony . 
 A few 19th @-@ century composers , notably Felix Mendelssohn and Franz Liszt , followed Beethoven in producing choral symphonic works . Notable works in the genre were produced in the 20th century by Gustav Mahler , Sergei Rachmaninoff , Igor Stravinsky , Ralph Vaughan Williams , Benjamin Britten and Dmitri Shostakovich , among others . The final years of the 20th century and the opening of the 21st century have seen several new works in this genre , among them compositions by Peter Maxwell Davies , Tan Dun , Philip Glass , Hans Werner Henze , Krzysztof Penderecki , and William <unk> . 
 The term " choral symphony " indicates the composer 's intention that the work be symphonic , even with its fusion of narrative or dramatic elements that stems from the inclusion of words . To this end , the words are often treated symphonically to pursue non @-@ narrative ends , by use of frequent repetition of important words and phrases , and the transposing , reordering or omission of passages of the set text . The text often determines the basic symphonic outline , while the orchestra 's role in conveying the musical ideas is similar in importance to that of the chorus and soloists . Even with a symphonic emphasis , a choral symphony is often influenced in musical form and content by an external narrative , even in parts where there is no singing . 
 = = History = = 
 The symphony had established itself by the end of the 18th century as the most prestigious of instrumental genres . While the genre had been developed with considerable intensity throughout that century and appeared in a wide range of occasions , it was generally used as an opening or closing work ; in between would be works that included vocal and instrumental soloists . Because of its lack of written text for focus , it was seen as a vehicle for entertainment rather than for social , moral or intellectual ideas . As the symphony grew in size and artistic significance , thanks in part to efforts in the form by Haydn , Mozart and Beethoven , it also amassed greater prestige . A concurrent change in attitude toward instrumental music in general also took place , and the lack of text , once seen as a handicap , became considered a virtue . 
 In 1824 , Beethoven redefined the symphony genre in his Ninth by introducing text and voice into a previously instrumental genre . His doing so sparked a debate on the future of the symphony itself . Beethoven 's use of words , according to Richard Wagner , had shown " the limits of purely instrumental music " and marked " the end of the symphony as a vital genre " . Others were not sure how to proceed — whether to emulate the Ninth by writing symphonies with choral finales , or to develop the symphony genre in a purely instrumental fashion . Eventually , musicologist Mark Evan Bonds writes , the symphony was seen " as an all @-@ embracing , cosmic drama that transcended the realm of sound alone " . 
 Some composers both emulated and expanded upon Beethoven 's model . Berlioz showed in his choral symphony Roméo et Juliette a fresh approach to the epic nature of the symphony as he used voices to blend music and narrative but saved crucial moments of that narrative for the orchestra alone . In doing so , Bonds writes , Berlioz illustrates for subsequent composers " new approaches for addressing the metaphysical in the realm of the symphony " . Mendelssohn wrote his Lobgesang as a work for chorus , soloists and orchestra . Labeling the work a " symphony @-@ cantata " , he expanded the choral finale to nine movements by including sections for vocal soloists , recitatives and sections for chorus ; this made the vocal part longer than the three purely orchestral sections that preceded it . Liszt wrote two choral symphonies , following in these multi @-@ movement forms the same compositional practices and programmatic goals he had established in his symphonic poems . 
 After Liszt , Mahler took on the legacy of Beethoven in his early symphonies , in what Bonds terms " their striving for a utopian finale " . Towards this end Mahler used a chorus and soloists in the finale of his Second Symphony , the " Resurrection " . In his Third , he wrote a purely instrumental finale following two vocal movements , and in his Fourth a vocal finale is sung by a solo soprano . After writing his Fifth , Sixth and Seventh Symphonies as purely instrumental works , Mahler returned to the vein of " festival @-@ symphonic ceremonial " in his Eighth Symphony , which integrates text throughout the body of the work . After Mahler , the choral symphony became a more common genre , taking a number of compositional turns in the process . Some composers , such as Britten , Rachmaninoff , Shostakovich and Vaughan Williams , followed symphonic form strictly . Others , such as Havergal Brian , Alfred Schnittke and Karol Szymanowski , chose either to expand symphonic form or to use different symphonic structures altogether . 
 Throughout the history of the choral symphony , works have been composed for special occasions . One of the earliest was Mendelssohn 's Lobgesang , commissioned by the city of Leipzig in 1840 to celebrate the 400th anniversary of Johannes Gutenberg 's invention of movable type . More than a century later , Henryk Górecki 's Second Symphony , subtitled " Copernican " , was commissioned in 1973 by the Kosciuszko Foundation in New York to celebrate the 500th anniversary of the astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus . In between these two works , in 1930 , conductor Serge Koussevitzky asked Stravinsky to write the Symphony of Psalms for the 50th anniversary of the Boston Symphony Orchestra and , in 1946 , composer Henry Barraud , then head of Radiodiffusion Française , commissioned Darius Milhaud to write his Third Symphony , subtitled " Te Deum " , to commemorate the end of World War II . 
 In the final years of the 20th century and the early years of the 21st , more such choral symphonies were written . Krzysztof Penderecki 's Seventh Symphony was for the third millennium of the city of Jerusalem . Tan Dun 's Symphony 1997 : Heaven Earth Mankind commemorated the transfer of sovereignty over Hong Kong that year to the People 's Republic of China . Philip Glass 's Fifth Symphony as one of several pieces commissioned to celebrate the beginning of the 21st century . Paul Spicer 's choral symphony Unfinished Remembering ( 2014 , libretto by Euan Tait ) was commissioned to commemorate the centenary of the outbreak of the First World War . 
 = = General features = = 
 Like an oratorio or an opera , a choral symphony is a musical work for orchestra , choir and ( often ) solo voices , although a few have been written for unaccompanied voices . Berlioz , who in 1858 first coined the term when describing his work Roméo et Juliette , explained the distinctive relationship he envisaged between voice and orchestra : 
 Even though voices are often used , it is neither a concert opera nor a cantata , but a choral symphony . If there is singing , almost from the beginning , it is to prepare the listener 's mind for the dramatic scenes whose feelings and passions are to be expressed by the orchestra . It is also to introduce the choral masses gradually into the musical development , when their too sudden appearance would have damaged the compositions 's unity .... 
 Unlike oratorios or operas , which are generally structured <unk> into arias , recitatives and choruses , a choral symphony is structured like a symphony , in movements . It may employ the traditional four @-@ movement scheme of a fast opening movement , slow movement , scherzo and finale , or as with many instrumental symphonies , it may use a different structure of movements . The written text in a choral symphony shares equal standing with the music , as in an oratorio , and the chorus and soloists share equality with the instruments . Over time the use of text allowed the choral symphony to evolve from an instrumental symphony with a choral finale , as in the Beethoven 's Ninth , to a composition that can use voices and instruments throughout the entire composition , as in Stravinsky 's Symphony of Psalms or Mahler 's Eighth Symphony . 
 Sometimes the text can give a basic outline that correlates to the four @-@ movement scheme of a symphony . For instance , the four @-@ part structure of Edgar Allan Poe 's The Bells , a progression from youth to marriage , maturity , and death , naturally suggested the four movements of a symphony to Sergei Rachmaninoff , which he followed in his choral symphony of the same name . The text can encourage a composer to expand a choral symphony past the normal bounds of the symphonic genre , as with Berlioz for his Roméo et Juliette , yet stay within the basic structural or aesthetic intent of symphonic form . It can also influence the musical content in parts where there is no singing , as in Roméo et Juliette . There , Berlioz allows the orchestra to express the majority of the drama in instrumental music and saves words for expository and narrative sections of the work . 
 = = Relation of words and music = = 
 As in an oratorio , the written text in a choral symphony can be as important as the music , and the chorus and soloists can participate equally with the instruments in the exposition and development of musical ideas . The text can also help determine whether the composer follows symphonic form strictly , as in the case of Rachmaninoff , Britten and Shostakovich , or whether they expand symphonic form , as in the case of Berlioz , Mahler and Havergal Brian . Sometimes the choice of text has led the composer to different symphonic structures , as with Szymanowski , Schnittke and , again , Havergal Brian . The composer can also choose to treat the text fluidly , in a manner more like music than narrative . Such was the case with Vaughan Williams , Mahler and Philip Glass . 
 = = = Musical treatment of text = = = 
 Vaughan Williams ' program note for A Sea Symphony discusses how the text was to be treated as music . The composer writes , " The plan of the work is symphonic rather than narrative or dramatic , and this may be held to justify the frequent repetition of important words and phrases which occur in the poem . The words as well as the music are thus treated symphonically . " Walt Whitman 's poems inspired him to write the symphony , and Whitman 's use of free verse became appreciated at a time where fluidity of structure was becoming more attractive than traditional , metrical settings of text . This fluidity helped facilitate the non @-@ narrative , symphonic treatment of text that Vaughan Williams had in mind . In the third movement in particular , the text is loosely descriptive and can be " pushed about by the music " , some lines being repeated , some not consecutive in the written text immediately following one another in the music , and some left out entirely . 
 Vaughan Williams was not the only composer following a non @-@ narrative approach to his text . Mahler took a similar , perhaps even more radical approach in his Eighth Symphony , presenting many lines of the first part , " Veni , Creator Spiritus " , in what music writer and critic Michael Steinberg referred to as " an incredibly dense growth of repetitions , combinations , inversions , transpositions and <unk> " . He does the same with Goethe 's text in Part Two of the symphony , making two substantial cuts and other changes . 
 Other works take the use of text as music still further . Vaughan Williams uses a chorus of women 's voices wordlessly in his Sinfonia <unk> , based on his music for the film Scott of the Antarctic , to help set the bleakness of the overall atmosphere . While a chorus is used in the second and third movements of Glass 's Seventh Symphony , also known as A Toltec Symphony , the text contains no actual words ; the composer states that it is instead formed " from loose syllables that add to the evocative context of the overall orchestral texture " . 
 = = = Music and words as equals = = = 
 Stravinsky said about the texts of his Symphony of Psalms that " it is not a symphony in which I have included Psalms to be sung . On the contrary , it is the singing of the Psalms that I am <unk> " . This decision was as much musical as it was textual . Stravinsky 's counterpoint required several musical voices to function simultaneously , independent melodically and rhythmically , yet interdependent harmonically . They would sound very different when heard separately , yet harmonious when heard together . To facilitate maximum clarity in this interplay of voices , Stravinsky used " a choral and instrumental ensemble in which the two elements should be on an equal footing , neither of them outweighing the other " . 
 Mahler 's intent in writing his Eighth Symphony for exceptionally large forces was a similar balance between vocal and instrumental forces . It was not simply an attempt at grandiose effect , though the composer 's use of such forces earned the work the subtitle " Symphony of a Thousand " from his press agent ( a name still applied to the symphony ) . Like Stravinsky , Mahler makes extensive and extended use of counterpoint , especially in the first part , " Veni Creator Spiritus " . Throughout this section , according to music writer Michael Kennedy , Mahler displays considerable mastery in manipulating multiple independent melodic voices . Musicologist Deryck Cooke adds that Mahler handles his huge forces " with extraordinary clarity " . 
 Vaughan Williams also insisted on a balance between words and music in A Sea Symphony , writing in his program note for the work , " It is also noticeable that the orchestra has an equal share with the chorus and soloists in carrying out the musical ideas " . Music critic Samuel Langford , writing about the premiere of the work for The Manchester Guardian , concurred with the composer , writing , " It is the nearest approach we have to a real choral symphony , one in which the voices are used throughout just as freely as the orchestra . " 
 = = = Words determining symphonic form = = = 
 Rachmaninoff 's choral symphony The Bells reflected the four @-@ part progression from youth to marriage , maturity , and death in Poe 's poem . Britten reversed the pattern for his Spring Symphony — the four sections of the symphony represent , in its composer 's words , " the progress of Winter to Spring and the reawakening of the earth and life which that means .... It is in the traditional four movement shape of a symphony , but with the movements divided into shorter sections bound together by a similar mood or point of view . " 
 The gestation of Shostakovich 's Thirteenth Symphony , Babi Yar , was only slightly less straightforward . He set the poem Babi Yar by Yevgeny Yevtushenko almost immediately upon reading it , initially considering it a single @-@ movement composition . Discovering three other Yevtushenko poems in the poet 's collection <unk> <unk> ( A Wave of the Hand ) prompted him to proceed to a full @-@ length choral symphony , with " A Career " as the closing movement . Musicologist Francis Maes comments that Shostakovich did so by complementing Babi Yar 's theme of Jewish suffering with Yevtushenko 's verses about other Soviet abuses : " ' At the Store ' is a tribute to the women who have to stand in line for hours to buy the most basic foods , ... ' Fears ' evokes the terror under Stalin . ' A Career ' is an attack on bureaucrats and a tribute to genuine creativity " . Music historian Boris Schwarz adds that the poems , in the order Shostakovich places them , form a strongly dramatic opening movement , a scherzo , two slow movements and a finale . 
 In other cases , the choice of text has led the composer to different symphonic structures . Havergal Brian allowed the form of his Fourth Symphony , subtitled " Das <unk> " ( Psalm of Victory ) , to be dictated by the three @-@ part structure of his text , Psalm 68 ; the setting of Verses 13 – 18 for soprano solo and orchestra forms a quiet interlude between two wilder , highly chromatic martial ones set for massive choral and orchestral forces . Likewise , Szymanowski allowed the text by 13th @-@ century Persian poet Rumi to dictate what Dr. Jim Samson calls the " single tripartite movement " and " overall arch structure " of his Third Symphony , subtitled " Song of the Night " . 
 = = = Words expanding symphonic form = = = 
 A composer may also respond to a text by expanding a choral symphony beyond the normal bounds of the symphonic genre . This is evident in the unusual orchestration and stage directions Berlioz prepared for his Roméo et Juliette . This piece is actually in seven movements , and calls for an intermission after the fourth movement – the " Queen Mab Scherzo " – to remove the harps from the stage and bring on the chorus of Capulets for the funeral march that follows . Berlioz biographer D. Kern Holoman observed that , " as Berlioz saw it , the work is simply Beethovenian in design , with the narrative elements overlain . Its core approaches a five @-@ movement symphony with the choral finale and , as in the [ Symphonie ] Fantastique , both a scherzo and a march .... The ' extra ' movements are thus the introduction with its potpourri of subsections and the descriptive tomb scene [ at the end of the work ] . " 
 Mahler expanded the Beethovenian model for programmatic as well as symphonic reasons in his Second Symphony , the " Resurrection " , the vocal fourth movement , " <unk> " , bridging the childlike faith of the third movement with the ideological tension Mahler seeks to resolve in the finale . He then abandoned this pattern for his Third Symphony , as two movements for voices and orchestra follow three purely instrumental ones before the finale returns to instruments alone . Like Mahler , Havergal Brian expanded the Beethovenian model , but on a much larger scale and with far larger orchestral and choral forces , in his Symphony No. 1 " The Gothic " . Written between 1919 and 1927 , the symphony was inspired by Goethe 's Faust and Gothic cathedral architecture . The Brian First is in two parts . The first consists of three instrumental movements ; the second , also in three movements and over an hour in length , is a Latin setting of the Te Deum . 
 = = Symphonies for unaccompanied chorus = = 
 A few composers have written symphonies for unaccompanied chorus , in which the choir performs both vocal and instrumental functions . Granville Bantock composed three such works — Atalanta in <unk> ( 1911 ) , Vanity of Vanities ( 1913 ) and A Pageant of Human Life ( 1913 ) . His Atalanta , called by musicologist Herbert <unk> " the most important [ work of the three ] alike in technical experiment and in inspiration " , was written for a choir of at least 200 , the composer specifying " ' not less than 10 voices for each part , ' " a work with 20 separate vocal parts . Using these forces , Bantock formed groups " of different weights and colors to get something of the varied play of tints and perspective [ of an orchestra ] " . In addition , the choir is generally divided into three sections , approximating the timbres of woodwinds , brass and strings . Within these divisions , <unk> writes , 
 Almost every possible means of vocal expression is employed separately or in combination with others . To hear the different parts of the choir describing in word and tone " laughter " and " tears " respectively at the same time is to realize how little the possibilities of choral singing have as yet been grasped by the ordinary conductor and composer . Such combinations are extremely effective when properly achieved , but they are very difficult to achieve . 
 Roy Harris wrote his Symphony for Voices in 1935 for a cappella choir split into eight parts . Harris focused on harmony , rhythm and dynamics , allowing the text by Walt Whitman to dictate the choral writing . " In a real sense , the human strivings so vividly portrayed in Whitman 's poetry find a musical analog to the trials to which the singers are subjected " , John <unk> writes both of the music 's difficulty for performers and of its highly evocative quality . Malcolm Williamson wrote his Symphony for Voices between 1960 and 1962 , setting texts by Australian poet James McAuley . Lewis Mitchell writes that the work is not a symphony in any true sense , but rather a four @-@ movement work preceded by an invocation for solo contralto . The text is a combination of poems celebrating the Australian wilderness and visionary Christianity , its jagged lines and rhythms matched by the music . Mitchell writes , " Of all his choral works , with the possible exception of the Requiem for a Tribe Brother , the Symphony is the most Australian in feeling " . 
 = = <unk> intent = = 
 Some recent efforts have paid less attention to symphonic form and more to <unk> intent . Hans Werner Henze wrote his 1997 Ninth Symphony in seven movements , basing the structure of the symphony on the novel The Seventh Cross by Anna Seghers . The novel recounts the flight of seven fugitives from a Nazi prison camp , the seven crosses symbolizing the seven death sentences ; the ordeal of the one prisoner who makes it to freedom becomes the crux of the text . Penderecki 's Seventh Symphony , subtitled " Seven Gates of Jerusalem " and originally conceived as an oratorio , is not only written in seven movements but , musicologist Richard Whitehouse writes , is " pervaded by the number ' seven ' at various levels . " An extensive system of seven @-@ note phrases binds the work together , as well as the frequent use of seven notes repeated at a single pitch . Seven chords played fortissimo bring the work to a close . 
 Philip Glass 's Fifth Symphony , completed in 1999 and subtitled " Requiem , Bardo and <unk> " , is written in 12 movements to fulfill its programmatic intent . Glass writes , " My plan has been for the symphony to represent a broad spectrum of many of the world 's great ' wisdom ' traditions " , synthesizing " a vocal text that begins before the world 's creation , passes through earthly life and paradise , and closes with a future dedication " . Glass writes that he considered the millennium at the beginning of the 21st century to be a symbolic bridge between past , present and spiritual rebirth . 
 More recently , Glass based the philosophical and musical structure for his Seventh Symphony on the <unk> sacred trinity . Glass wrote about the work 's respective movement headings and their relation to the overall structure of the symphony , " ' The Corn ' represents a direct link between Mother Earth and the well @-@ being of human beings .... ' The Sacred Root ' is found in the high deserts of north and central Mexico , and is understood to be the doorway to the world of the Spirit . ' The Blue Deer ' is considered the holder of the Book of Knowledge . Any man or woman who aspires to be a ' Person of Knowledge ' will , through arduous training and effort , have to encounter the Blue Deer .... " 
 = = = Words changing programmatic intent = = = 
 Addition of a text can effectively change the programmatic intent of a composition , as with the two choral symphonies of Franz Liszt . Both the Faust and Dante symphonies were conceived as purely instrumental works and only later became choral symphonies . However , while Liszt authority Humphrey Searle asserts that Liszt 's later inclusion of a chorus effectively sums up Faust and makes it complete , another Liszt expert , Reeves Shulstad , suggests that Liszt changed the work 's dramatic focus to the point of meriting a different interpretation of the work itself . According to Shulstad , " Liszt 's original version of 1854 ended with a last fleeting reference to Gretchen and an ... orchestral peroration in C major , based on the most majestic of themes from the opening movement . One might say that this conclusion remains within the persona of Faust and his imagination " . When Liszt rethought the piece three years later , he added a " Chorus <unk> " , the male chorus singing the final words from Goethe 's Faust . The tenor soloist , accompanied by the chorus , sings the last two lines of the text . " With the addition of the ' Chorus <unk> ' text " , Shulstad writes , " the Gretchen theme has been transformed and she no longer appears as a masked Faust . With this direct association to the final scene of the drama we have escaped Faust 's imaginings and are hearing another voice commenting on his striving and redemption " . 
 Likewise , Liszt 's inclusion of a choral finale in his Dante Symphony changed both the structural and programmatic intent of the work . Liszt 's intent was to follow the structure of the Divina Commedia and compose Dante in three movements — one each for the Inferno , Purgatorio and Paradiso . However , Liszt 's son @-@ in @-@ law Richard Wagner persuaded him that no earthly composer could faithfully express the joys of Paradise . Liszt dropped the third movement but added a choral element , a Magnificat , at the end of the second . This action , Searle claims , effectively destroyed the work 's formal balance and left the listener , like Dante , to gaze upward at the heights of Heaven and hear its music from afar . Shulstad suggests that the choral finale actually helps complete the work 's programmatic trajectory from struggle to paradise . 
 Conversely , a text can also spark the birth of a choral symphony , only for that work to become a purely instrumental one when the programmatic focus of the work changes . Shostakovich originally planned his Seventh Symphony as a single @-@ movement choral symphony much like his Second and Third Symphonies . Shostakovich reportedly intended to set a text for the Seventh from the Ninth Psalm , on the theme of vengeance for the shedding of innocent blood . In doing this he was influenced by Stravinsky ; he had been deeply impressed with the latter 's Symphony of Psalms , which he wanted to emulate in this work . While the Ninth Psalm 's theme conveyed Shostakovich 's outrage over Stalin 's oppression , a public performance of a work with such a text would have been impossible before the German invasion . Hitler 's aggression made the performance of such a work feasible , at least in theory ; the reference to " blood " could then be associated at least officially with Hitler . With Stalin appealing to the Soviets ' patriotic and religious sentiments , the authorities were no longer suppressing Orthodox themes or images . Nevertheless , Shostakovich eventually realized that the work encompassed far more than this symbology . He expanded the symphony to the traditional four movements and made it purely instrumental . 
 = = = Supplanting text wordlessly = = = 
 While Berlioz allowed the programmatic aspects of his text to shape the symphonic form of Roméo and to guide its content , he also showed how an orchestra could supplant such a text wordlessly to further illustrate it . He wrote in his preface to Roméo : 
 If , in the famous garden and cemetery scenes the dialogue of the two lovers , Juliet 's asides , and Romeo 's passionate outbursts are not sung , if the duets of love and despair are given to the orchestra , the reasons are numerous and easy to comprehend . First , and this alone would be sufficient , it is a symphony and not an opera . Second , since duets of this nature have been handled vocally a thousand times by the greatest masters , it was wise as well as unusual to attempt another means of expression . It is also because the very sublimity of this love made its depiction so dangerous for the musician that he had to give his imagination a latitude that the positive sense of the sung words would not have given him , resorting instead to instrumental language , which is richer , more varied , less precise , and by its very indefiniteness incomparably more powerful in such a case . 
 As a manifesto , this paragraph became significant for the amalgamation of symphonic and dramatic elements in the same musical composition . Musicologist Hugh MacDonald writes that as Berlioz kept the idea of symphonic construction closely in mind , he allowed the orchestra to express the majority of the drama in instrumental music and set expository and narrative sections in words . Fellow musicologist Nicholas Temperley suggests that , in Roméo , Berlioz created a model for how a dramatic text could guide the structure of a choral symphony without circumventing that work from being recognizably a symphony . In this sense , musicologist Mark Evans Bonds writes , the symphonies of Liszt and Mahler owe a debt of influence to Berlioz . 
 More recently , Alfred Schnittke allowed the programmatic aspects of his texts to dictate the course of both his choral symphonies even when no words were being sung . Schnittke 's six @-@ movement Second Symphony , following the Ordinary of the Mass of the Roman Catholic Church , works programmatically on two levels simultaneously . While soloists and chorus briefly perform the mass , set to chorales taken from the Gradual , the orchestra provides an extended running commentary that can continue much longer than the section of the mass being performed . Sometimes the commentary follows a particular chorale but more often is freer and wider ranging in style . Despite the resulting stylistic disparity , biographer Alexander Ivashkin comments , " musically almost all these sections blend the choral [ sic ] tune and subsequent extensive orchestral ' commentary . ' " The work becomes what Schnittke called an " Invisible Mass " , and Ivashkin termed " a symphony against a chorale backdrop " . 
 The program in Schnittke 's Fourth Symphony , reflecting the composer 's own religious dilemma at the time it was written , is more complex in execution , with the majority of it expressed wordlessly . In the 22 variations that make up the symphony 's single movement , Schnittke enacts the 15 traditional Mysteries of the Rosary , which highlight important moments in the life of Christ . As he did in the Second Symphony , Schnittke simultaneously gives a detailed musical commentary on what is being portrayed . Schnittke does this while using church music from the Catholic , Protestant , Jewish and Orthodox faiths , the orchestral texture becoming extremely dense from the many musical strands progressing at the same time . A tenor and a countertenor also sing wordlessly at two points in the symphony . The composition saves words for a finale that uses all four types of church music contrapuntally as a four @-@ part choir sings the Ave Maria . The choir can choose whether to sing the Ave Maria in Russian or Latin . The programmatic intent of using these different types of music , Ivashkin writes , is an insistence by the composer " on the idea ... of the unity of humanity , a synthesis and harmony among various manifestations of belief " . 
 = Hurricane Nate ( 2005 ) = 
 Hurricane Nate was an Atlantic hurricane that threatened Bermuda but remained at sea during early September 2005 . The fourteenth named storm and seventh hurricane of the annual Atlantic hurricane season , Nate formed southwest of Bermuda on September 5 and initially moved very slowly to the northeast . Early forecasts suggested a possible threat to the island , but Nate passed well to its south as a Category 1 hurricane on September 8 . After moving away from the island , the storm entered a region with cooler sea surface temperatures and unfavorable wind shear , causing it to weaken to a tropical storm before becoming extratropical on September 10 . The extratropical remnant was later absorbed by a larger weather system . 
 The hurricane caused no structural damage while tropical , although it generated rip currents in combination with other storms that killed one person off the New Jersey coast . Nate dropped light rainfall and produced gusty winds on the island of Bermuda . The remnants of hurricanes Nate and Maria contributed to heavy rainfall in parts of Scotland and later Western Norway , triggering a mudslide that killed one person . Canadian Navy ships en route to the US Gulf Coast , carrying relief supplies to assist in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina , were delayed while trying to avoid Nate and Hurricane Ophelia . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave emerged from the west coast of Africa on August 30 and tracked westward across the Atlantic Ocean , maintaining a vigorous area of convection along the wave axis . By September 1 most of the deep convection had been stripped away by southwesterly wind shear . Despite this , the wave remained well @-@ defined as it continued west @-@ northwest . The wave split into two pieces ; the northern portion passed between the Leeward Islands and Hurricane Maria on September 3 , while the southern portion moved into the Caribbean Sea . On September 4 , the northern portion of the wave began to interact with an upper @-@ level low pressure system and an elongated trough that was located between Bermuda and the Leeward Islands — the same trough which contributed to the development of Hurricane Ophelia . As a result of the low wind shear , convection redeveloped and organized along the wave axis . Convective banding formed around a broad surface low . It is estimated that the system developed into a tropical depression at 1800 UTC on September 5 . At the time it was located approximately 350 miles ( 560 km ) to the south @-@ southwest of Bermuda . 
 Upon being designated , Tropical Depression Fifteen developed deep convection close to , and to the east of , the center of circulation . At the same time , banding features became better organized . Later on September 5 , the overall cloud pattern improved while thunderstorm activity condensed and deepened within the increasingly well @-@ defined circulation . Just six hours after being designated as a tropical depression , the cyclone intensified into a tropical storm ; it was given the name Nate by the National Hurricane Center . Over the following two days , Nate drifted slowly northeastward towards Bermuda . 
 Within the early hours of September 6 , Nate became quasi @-@ stationary under a weak steering pattern between Hurricane Maria and a disturbance over The Bahamas . Satellite imagery indicated that the cloud pattern continued to organize with excellent outflow surrounding the storm . Late on September 6 a developing banding eye feature became evident . Tropical Storm Nate strengthened further and became a hurricane at 1200 UTC on September 7 , as it began to turn away from Bermuda . Some models indicated that Nate could have been either absorbed by or merged with the larger Hurricane Maria , but the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) forecast that Nate would survive as a separate system , which it did . The large low to the northeast of The Bahamas gradually opened into a broad trough as a shortwave trough approached from the northwest . The larger trough slowly became elongated in a northeast – southwest manner late on September 7 . At the same time , the shortwave trough moved southward along the west side of the other trough . The increasing southwesterly flow along the southeast side of the broad trough caused Nate to accelerate northeastward . Nate reached its peak intensity of 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) late on September 8 as it passed 120 miles ( 205 km ) southeast of Bermuda , while its strongest winds remained well offshore . 
 While at peak intensity , the storm maintained a well @-@ organized and " impressive " convective pattern . Soon after the storm peaked in strength , increasing wind shear and dry air caused Nate to weaken back into a tropical storm later on September 9 . Satellite imagery showed that the cloud pattern began to rapidly deteriorate . The hurricane was downgraded to a tropical storm at 1800 UTC on September 9 and continued to weaken as wind shear increased in association with an approaching trough and a related cold front . By late on September 9 , all of the already limited convective activity was confined to the eastern semicircle , leaving the low @-@ level center exposed . The storm was reduced to a swirl of low @-@ level clouds just hours later . Nate became extratropical the next day before becoming absorbed by a larger system by 0000 UTC on September 13 , to the north @-@ northeast of the Azores . 
 = = Impact , records , and naming = = 
 A tropical storm watch was issued for Bermuda early on September 7 , and later that day a tropical storm warning and a hurricane watch superseded it . However , the storm did not land on the island and the warnings were canceled as the storm moved away September 8 . Four cruise ships left the island early , and flights were canceled in anticipation of Nate . At 0400 UTC on September 8 , the National Hurricane Center assessed a 34 % chance that Nate would pass within 75 miles ( 121 km ) of the island . 
 The outer bands of Nate brushed Bermuda with sustained winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) and widespread showers . Gusts were higher , peaking at roughly 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) . Less than 1 inch ( 25 mm ) of rain was recorded at Bermuda International Airport . " We definitely did not get the worst case scenario with this storm " , observed the Bermuda Weather Service ; there were no fatalities as a result of the storm in Bermuda , and no damage was reported . Two ships reported tropical storm @-@ force winds in association with the storm : the Maersk New Orleans , to the north of the storm 's center , and a ship with the call sign <unk> to the east @-@ southeast . Rip currents from Nate and the more distant Maria killed one and injured another in New Jersey ; several others were caught in rip currents , though they were able to escape . In the Carolinas , Nate also contributed to heightened seas , though this time in combination with Hurricane Ophelia and persistent unrelated northeasterly winds . A buoy just offshore Cape Fear recorded waves up to 12 ft ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) . 
 Tropical energy from the remnants of Nate and Maria merged to form a broad storm system that would track toward parts of Europe . The mid @-@ latitude cyclone produced a day of heavy rains across the Scottish Highlands that included a 24 @-@ hour precipitation total of 5 @.@ 17 in ( 131 mm ) on the Isle of Skye . As it continued north , the storm also dropped torrential rainfall over Western Norway . The region suffered extensive flooding and mudslides , including one that killed one person and injured nine more . Although the remnants of Nate and Maria avoided England , they broke a streak of above @-@ average temperatures in the region , filtering down much cooler Arctic air . In places , this led to the first frost of the winter season . Temperatures down to − 1 @.@ 7 ° C ( 28 @.@ 9 ° F ) were recorded following the influx of colder air , with readings below freezing as far south as Hertfordshire . 
 Four Canadian Navy ships headed to the Gulf Coast of the United States , carrying relief supplies to help in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina , were slowed down trying to avoid Hurricanes Nate and Ophelia . The convoy included a destroyer , two frigates , and an icebreaker , and developed a plan to travel between the two hurricanes to minimize damage to their cargo . Crews , anticipating potentially rough seas and gusty winds even with the averted course , secured onboard supplies such as generators , chainsaws , diapers , and cots . The genesis of Tropical Storm Nate continued the unprecedented levels of tropical activity during the 2005 hurricane season ; when it developed on September 5 , it was the earliest in any season that the fourteenth named tropical cyclone formed , surpassing the previous record held by an unnamed storm during the 1936 season . 
 = Bribery Act 2010 = 
 The Bribery Act 2010 ( c.23 ) is an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom that covers the criminal law relating to bribery . Introduced to Parliament in the Queen 's Speech in 2009 after several decades of reports and draft bills , the Act received the Royal Assent on 8 April 2010 following cross @-@ party support . Initially scheduled to enter into force in April 2010 , this was changed to 1 July 2011 . The Act repeals all previous statutory and common law provisions in relation to bribery , instead replacing them with the crimes of bribery , being bribed , the bribery of foreign public officials , and the failure of a commercial organisation to prevent bribery on its behalf . 
 The penalties for committing a crime under the Act are a maximum of 10 years ' imprisonment , along with an unlimited fine , and the potential for the confiscation of property under the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 , as well as the disqualification of directors under the Company Directors Disqualification Act 1986 . The Act has a near @-@ universal jurisdiction , allowing for the prosecution of an individual or company with links to the United Kingdom , regardless of where the crime occurred . Described as " the toughest anti @-@ corruption legislation in the world " , concerns have been raised that the Act 's provisions criminalise behaviour that is acceptable in the global market , and puts British business at a competitive disadvantage . 
 = = Background = = 
 Prior to the Act , British anti @-@ bribery law was based on the Public Bodies Corrupt Practices Act 1889 , the Prevention of Corruption Act 1906 and the Prevention of Corruption Act 1916 , a body of law described as " inconsistent , anachronistic and inadequate " . Following the Poulson affair in 1972 , the Salmon Committee on Standards in Public Life recommended updating and codifying these statutes , but the government of the time took no action . Similar suggestions were brought up in the first report of the Committee on Standards in Public Life established by John Major in 1994 , and the Home Office published a draft consultation paper in 1997 , discussing extending anti @-@ bribery and anti @-@ corruption law . This was followed by the Law Commission 's report Legislating the Criminal Code : Corruption in 1998 . The consultation paper and report coincided with mounting criticism from the Organisation for Economic Co @-@ operation and Development , who felt that , despite the United Kingdom 's ratification of the OECD Anti @-@ Bribery Convention , its bribery laws were inadequate . 
 A draft Bribery Bill was announced in the 2002 Queen 's Speech , but was rejected by the joint committee examining it . A second consultation paper was issued in 2005 examining the committee 's concerns , before the government announced in March that " there was broad support for reform of the current law , but there was no consensus as to how this could be achieved " . Following a white paper in March 2009 , the Bribery Bill , based on the Law Commission 's 2008 report Reforming Bribery , was announced in the Queen 's Speech . Initially given all @-@ party support after its introduction by Jack Straw in 2009 , the Bill was , according to The Guardian , subject to an attempted filibuster by Members of Parliament from the Conservative Party . This followed pressure from the Confederation of British Industry , who worried that the Bill in its original form would hamper the competitiveness of British industry . 
 The Bill was given Royal Assent on 8 April 2010 , becoming the Bribery Act 2010 , and was expected to come into force immediately . The government instead chose to hold several rounds of public consultations before announcing that it would come into force in April 2011 . Following the publication of guidance by the Ministry of Justice , the act came into effect on 1 July 2011 . The Ministry of Justice also released a Quick Start Guide , which highlights some key points of the Act . The Quick Start Guide also suggests companies to consult relevant bodies for advice , including the UK Trade and Investment , and the government sponsored Business Anti @-@ Corruption Portal . In October 2011 Munir Patel , a clerk at Redbridge Magistrates Court , became the first person to be convicted under the Bribery Act , along with misconduct in a public office . 
 = = Act = = 
 = = = General bribery offences = = = 
 Sections 1 to 5 of the Act cover " general bribery offences " . The crime of bribery is described in Section 1 as occurring when a person offers , gives or promises to give a " financial or other advantage " to another individual in exchange for " improperly " performing a " relevant function or activity " . Section 2 covers the offence of being bribed , which is defined as requesting , accepting or agreeing to accept such an advantage , in exchange for improperly performing such a function or activity . " Financial or other advantage " is not defined in the Act , but , according to Aisha Anwar and Gavin <unk> in the Scots Law Times , " could potentially encompass items such as contracts , non @-@ monetary gifts and offers of employment " . The " relevant function or activity " element is explained in Section 3 — it covers " any function of a public nature ; any activity connected with a business , trade or profession ; any activity performed in the course of a person 's employment ; or any activity performed by or on behalf of a body of persons whether corporate or unincorporated " . This applies to both private and public industry , and encompasses activities performed outside the UK , even activities with no link to the country . The conditions attached are that the person performing the function could be expected to be performing it in good faith or with impartiality , or that an element of trust attaches to that person 's role . 
 Under Section 4 , the activity will be considered to be " improperly " performed when the expectation of good faith or impartiality has been breached , or when the function has been performed in a way not expected of a person in a position of trust . Section 5 provides that the standard in deciding what would be expected is what a reasonable person in the UK might expect of a person in such a position . Where the breach has occurred in a jurisdiction outside the UK , local practises or customs should be disregarded when deciding this , unless they form part of the " written law " of the jurisdiction ; " written law " is given to mean any constitution , statute or judicial opinion set down in writing . The general offences also cover situations where the mere acceptance of such an advantage would constitute improperly performing relevant functions or activities . 
 = = = Bribery of foreign public officials = = = 
 Bribery of foreign public officials is a distinct crime under Section 6 , in line with the OECD Anti @-@ Bribery Convention . A person will be guilty of this offence if they promise , offer or give a financial or other advantage to a foreign public official , either directly or through a third party , where such an advantage is not legitimately due . A foreign public official is defined , under Section 6 ( 4 ) , as " an individual holding legislative , administrative or judicial posts or anyone carrying out a public function for a foreign country or the country 's public agencies or an official or agent of a public international organisation " . The inclusion of " through a third party " is intended to prevent the use of go @-@ betweens to avoid committing a crime , although if the written law of the country of the foreign public official allows or requires the official to accept the advantage offered , no crime will be committed . Unlike with general bribery offences , there is no requirement to show that the public official acted improperly as a result ; this is a distinction between the Act and the Anti @-@ Bribery Convention . The offence under Section 6 only applies to the <unk> , and not to the official who receives or agrees to receive such a bribe . 
 = = = Failure of commercial organisations to prevent bribery = = = 
 Section 7 creates the " broad and innovatory offence " of the failure of commercial organisations to prevent bribery on their behalf . This applies to all commercial organisations which have business in the UK . Unlike corporate manslaughter , this does not only apply to the organisation itself ; individuals and employees may also be found guilty . The offence is one of strict liability , with no need to prove any kind of intention or positive action . It is also one of vicarious liability ; a commercial organisation can be guilty of the offence if the bribery is carried out by an employee , an agent , a subsidiary , or another third @-@ party , as found in Section 8 . The location of the third @-@ party is irrelevant to the prosecution — according to David <unk> and Nichola Higgins in the Archbold Review , " therefore , a German business with retail outlets in the UK which pays a bribe in Spain could , in theory at least , face prosecution in the UK " . Under Section 7 ( 2 ) , the commercial organisation has a defence if it can show that , while bribery did take place , the commercial organisation had in place " adequate procedures designed to prevent persons associated with [ the organisation ] from undertaking such conduct " . Under the Act 's explanatory notes , the burden of proof in this situation is on the organisation , with the standard of proof being " on the balance of probabilities " . 
 Guidance was published by the Secretary of State three months before the Act came into force . The Guidance sets out 6 principles to be followed by business . They cover such topics as <unk> Procedures , Top @-@ level Commitment , Risk Assessment , Due Diligence , Communication ( including training ) and Monitoring & Review . The one firm conclusion to be drawn from the Guidance is that every commercial organisation that might be subject to the rigours of the Act needs to have a code of conduct in place that appropriately reflects the Guidance and to ensure its personnel are fully conversant with the risks and adequately trained . If it is then charged with the offence of failing to prevent bribery , it would be able to show evidence of the ‘ adequate procedures ’ which it will need in order to defend itself . 
 = = = Prosecution and penalties = = = 
 Section 10 requires the authorisation of any prosecution by the director of the appropriate prosecution agency before a case can go ahead ; this is a shift from the old regime , which required the consent of the Attorney General for England and Wales . Section 11 explains the penalties for individuals and companies found guilty of committing a crime . If an individual is found guilty of a bribery offence , tried as a summary offence , they may be imprisoned for up to 12 months and fined up to £ 5 @,@ 000 . Someone found guilty on indictment , however , faces up to 10 years ' imprisonment and an unlimited fine . The crime of a commercial organisation failing to prevent bribery is punishable by an unlimited fine . In addition , a convicted individual or organisation may be subject to a confiscation order under the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 , while a company director who is convicted may be disqualified under the Company Directors Disqualification Act 1986 . 
 = = = Other provisions = = = 
 The scope of the Act 's provisions is set out in Section 12 . For someone to fall within the Act 's purview , they must have either committed a crime inside the United Kingdom , or acted outside of the United Kingdom in a way which would have constituted a crime had it happened in the UK . For a prosecution in the latter case , the person must have a " close connection " to the UK , which includes being a British citizen , resident or protected person , a company incorporated in the UK , or a Scottish partnership . Section 13 provides the only defence available with the general bribery offences — that the conduct was necessary for the proper functioning of the intelligence services or , when engaged in active service , the armed forces . Under Section 14 , senior officers or directors in a company which commits a general bribery offence will also be liable for the purposes of the Act . In the case of an offence committed by a partnership , Section 15 provides that the prosecution must be brought in the name of the partnership and not in the name of any of the partners . 
 Under Section 16 , the Act applies to servants of the crown , while Section 17 repeals all previous common law and statutory offences relating to bribery , replacing them with provisions of the Act . Section 18 provides that the Act applies to England and Wales , Scotland and Northern Ireland ; while the separate consent of the Scottish Parliament is usually required in such cases , as is made clear in Section 19 , a Legislative Consent Motion was passed on 11 February 2010 , allowing for the application of the Act within Scotland . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 The Act has been described as " the toughest anti @-@ corruption legislation in the world " , raising the bar above the standard set by the United States Foreign Corrupt Practices Act . Despite being " widely drafted and far @-@ reaching in scope [ and ] in many ways an improvement on earlier corruption legislation " , significant concerns have been raised , mainly around the fact that the Act may harm British industry 's competitiveness in the global market . David <unk> and Nichola Higgins , writing in the Archbold Review , argue that section 6 particularly has the potential to include actions which are ethically problematic but seen as legally permissible . Aisha Anwar and Gavin <unk> in the Scots Law Times take a similar line , highlighting as particularly problematic areas corporate hospitality and facilitation payments , described as " essentially a form of extortion on the payer and , although not a common feature in the UK , they are commonplace in many international jurisdictions " , which may fall under the scope of the Act despite being permissible in the commercial world . 
 = Just Like Tom Thumb 's Blues = 
 " Just Like Tom Thumb 's Blues " is a song written and performed by Bob Dylan . It was originally recorded on August 2 , 1965 , and released on the album Highway 61 Revisited . The song was later released on the compilation album Bob Dylan 's Greatest Hits Vol . II and as two separate live versions recorded at concerts in 1966 : the first of which appeared on the B @-@ side of Dylan 's " I Want You " single , with the second being released on The Bootleg Series Vol . 4 : Bob Dylan Live 1966 , The " Royal Albert Hall " Concert . The song has been covered by many artists , including Gordon Lightfoot , Nina Simone , Barry McGuire , Judy Collins , Frankie Miller , Linda Ronstadt , the Grateful Dead , Neil Young , The Black Crowes , and Bryan Ferry . Lightfoot 's version was recorded only weeks after Dylan 's original had been released and reached # 3 on the national RPM singles chart . In addition , the song was sampled by the Beastie Boys for their song " Finger Lickin ' Good . " 
 " Just Like Tom Thumb 's Blues " has six verses but no chorus . The song 's lyrics describe a nightmare vision of the narrator 's experience in Juarez , Mexico , in which he encounters sickness , despair , prostitutes , saints , shady women , corrupt authorities , alcohol and drugs , before finally deciding to return to New York City . The lyrics incorporate literary references to Malcolm Lowry 's Under the Volcano , Edgar Allan Poe 's " The Murders in the Rue Morgue " and Jack Kerouac 's Desolation Angels , while the song 's title references Arthur Rimbaud 's " My Bohemian Life ( Fantasy ) " . William Ruhlmann of the Allmusic website has described the song as a comic tour de force and music journalist Toby Creswell included it on his list of the 1001 greatest songs of all time . Music critic Dave Marsh ranked the live version of " Just Like Tom Thumb 's Blues " from Liverpool that was released as the B @-@ side of " I Want You " as the number 243 greatest single of all time . 
 = = Lyrics and music = = 
 " Just Like Tom Thumb 's Blues " was recorded on August 2 , 1965 , at Columbia Studios in New York , the same day Dylan recorded " Ballad of a Thin Man " , " Highway 61 Revisited " and " Queen Jane Approximately " , three other songs that would appear on Highway 61 Revisited . However , " Just Like Tom Thumb 's Blues " took more attempts to perfect than the other songs recorded that day ; it wasn 't until take 16 that Dylan and his band captured on tape the version that was released on the album . The backing musicians on the take that was used on Highway 61 Revisited were Mike Bloomfield on electric guitar , Al Kooper on Hohner Pianet , Paul Griffin on piano , Harvey Brooks on bass guitar and Bobby Gregg on drums . 
 According to Dylan biographer Clinton Heylin , on early takes of the song , Sam Lay was the drummer and Frank Owens played piano . In Heylin 's opinion , Gregg 's jazzier drumming and Griffin 's more fluid piano playing better communicated the feeling of dislocation that Dylan desired for the song . Take 5 of the song , which , according to Heylin , featured both Lay and Owens , was included on the 2005 album The Bootleg Series Vol . 7 : No Direction Home : The Soundtrack . In 2015 , the entire recording session was released on the 18 @-@ disc edition of The Bootleg Series Vol . 12 : The Cutting Edge 1965 – 1966 , while the 2 @-@ disc version of the album featured Take 3 and the 6 @-@ disc edition contained Takes 1 , 3 and 13 . 
 Lyrically , " Just Like Tom Thumb 's Blues " continues the theme of road weariness from the album 's previous song , " Highway 61 Revisited . " The singer finds himself in Juarez , Mexico , at Easter time , amidst sickness , despair , whores and saints . While there , he encounters corrupt authorities and women of dubious character , named in the song as " Saint Annie " and " sweet Melinda " , before seeking succor in drugs and alcohol . The song establishes a nightmare vision as the singer is influenced by gravity , negativity , sex , drugs , drink , illness , remorse and memory . In the song 's final verse , the singer decides he has had enough and finds the means to leave it all behind and head back to New York City , where things may be better . Author Paul Williams has noted that scene and situation are combined into a gorgeous evocation of muddied consciousness in " Just Like Tom Thumb 's Blues " , without ever resolving into a clear picture of what the song is about . Despite the sordid details of the singer 's experiences in Juarez , the lyrics maintain a sense of humor , and William Ruhlmann of the Allmusic website considers the song a comic tour de force . 
 During a concert in Melbourne in 1966 , Dylan said of the song , " This is about a painter down in Mexico city who travels through the North of Mexico up to Del Rio Texas all the time , his name is Tom Thumb , and right now he is about 125 years old but he 's still going , and everybody likes him a lot down there , he 's got lots of friends , and this is when he was going through his blue period painting , and he 's made countless amounts of paints you couldn 't think of them all . This is his blue period of painting I just dedicate this song that is called Just Like Tom Thumb 's Blues . " 
 Like many of the songs on Highway 61 Revisited , " Just Like Tom Thumb 's Blues " has abundant literary references , including images recalling Malcolm Lowry 's novel Under the Volcano and a street name taken from Edgar Allan Poe 's short story " The Murders in the Rue Morgue " . The song also uses the phrase " housing project hill " which is taken from Jack Kerouac 's novel Desolation Angels . A number of Dylan biographers , including Colin Irwin , Robert Shelton and Andy Gill , have suggested that the song 's title makes reference to Arthur Rimbaud 's poem " My Bohemian Life ( Fantasy ) " , in which Rimbaud refers to himself as " Tom Thumb in a daze . " In addition , some commentators have suggested that there may be a musical reference in the lines " And she takes your voice / And leaves you howling at the moon , " since " Howlin ' at the Moon " is the title of a song by Hank Williams , a musician who Dylan admired . 
 Musically , " Just Like Tom Thumb 's Blues " consists of no chorus , but six verses , varied by a handful of chords and Dylan 's vocal emphasis . Keyboards , drums and vocals provide texture , while Mike Bloomfield plays Latin <unk> fills on electric guitar . The keyboard parts in particular make innovative use of two different pianos , with Al Kooper playing an electric Hohner Pianet and Paul Griffin adding a bar room feel on tack piano . In all but the final verse , the even lines rhyme and the odd lines are unrhymed . In the final verse , however , the odd numbered lines rhyme on " ee " and all the even lines rhyme on " uf . " This change in the rhyming pattern provides a subtle sense of finality to the final two lines : 
 I 'm going back to New York City 
 I do believe I 've had enough . 
 = = Other appearances and acclaim = = 
 In addition to its appearance on the Highway 61 Revisited album , " Just Like Tom Thumb 's Blues " was also included on the compilation album Bob Dylan 's Greatest Hits Vol . II ( known as More Bob Dylan Greatest Hits in Europe ) and on another compilation released exclusively in Europe titled Bob Dylan 's Greatest Hits 2 . Alternate takes of the song from the August 2 , 1965 recording session have been released on The Bootleg Series Vol . 7 : No Direction Home : The Soundtrack and The Bootleg Series Vol . 12 : The Cutting Edge 1965 – 1966 . 
 The song has also been popular live in concert . Clinton Heylin has stated that " as performed live in 1965 – 66 , ' Tom Thumb ' became an inferno of pain . As if pain were indeed art . " A live version recorded at a concert in Liverpool , England on May 14 , 1966 , featuring Dylan backed by The Band , was released as the B @-@ side to the " I Want You " single in 1966 , and later also appeared on the Masterpieces compilation . The song was also performed on May 17 , 1966 by Dylan and The Band at the famous and controversial so @-@ called ' Albert Hall ' concert ( which in fact took place at the Manchester Free Trade Hall ) and consequently it appears on The Bootleg Series Vol . 4 : Bob Dylan Live 1966 , The " Royal Albert Hall " Concert . Dylan also played " Just Like Tom Thumb 's Blues " regularly during his 1974 tour , and has played it in concert occasionally ever since . 
 In a 2005 reader 's poll published in Mojo magazine , " Just Like Tom Thumb 's Blues " was listed as the number 13 all @-@ time greatest Bob Dylan song . In 2002 , Uncut magazine listed it as the number 38 all @-@ time best Bob Dylan song . Music journalist Toby Creswell included " Just Like Tom Thumb 's Blues " on his list of the 1001 greatest songs of all time and music critic Dave Marsh ranked the live version from Liverpool as the number 243 greatest single of all time and as one of the dozen or so truly great B @-@ sides , noting that it demonstrated Dylan 's prowess as a great live performer . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 Canadian singer @-@ songwriter Gordon Lightfoot covered " Just Like Tom Thumb 's Blues " in 1965 in a version that reached number 3 on Canada 's national RPM singles chart , and number 8 on Toronto 's CHUM Chart . Other covers recorded in the 1960s include those by Barry McGuire , on his 1966 album This Precious Time , and Judy Collins , on her 1966 album In My Life . Nina Simone also covered it in 1969 on her To Love Somebody album . Nina Simone 's version differs considerably in tone from Dylan 's : while Dylan 's version is sympathetic , if sneering , towards the foolish subject , Simone 's version is an intense , first @-@ person account of illusions being crushed , until she is finally helpless in the hands of fate . 
 Frankie Miller covered " Just Like Tom Thumb 's Blues " in 1973 on Once in a Blue Moon , Linda Ronstadt covered it in 1998 on We Ran and Bryan Ferry covered it on his 2007 album Dylanesque . The Grateful Dead have , on occasion , covered " Just Like Tom Thumb 's Blues " live in concert , with bassist Phil Lesh taking a rare turn as lead vocalist , and a recording of the song by the band appears on the album View from the Vault , Volume One . Additionally , Neil Young covered the song for the Bob Dylan tribute concert The 30th Anniversary Concert Celebration in 1992 . The Beastie Boys sampled the last two lines of " Just Like Tom Thumb 's Blues " for their song " Finger Lickin ' Good " , which appeared on their 1992 Check Your Head album . 
 = Gyles v Wilcox = 
 Gyles v Wilcox ( 1740 ) 26 ER 489 was a decision of the Court of Chancery of England that established the doctrine of fair abridgement , which would later evolve into the concept of fair use . The case was heard and the opinion written by Philip Yorke , 1st Earl of Hardwicke , and concerned Fletcher Gyles , a bookseller who had published a copy of Matthew Hale 's Pleas of the Crown . Soon after the initial publication , the publishers Wilcox and Nutt hired a writer named Barrow to abridge the book , and repackaged it as Modern Crown Law . Gyles sued for a stay on the book 's publishing , claiming his rights under the Statute of Anne had been infringed . 
 The main issues in the case were whether or not abridgements of a work inherently constituted copyright infringement , or whether they could qualify as a separate , new work . Lord Hartwicke ruled that abridgements fell under two categories : " true abridgements " and " coloured <unk> " . True abridgements presented a true effort on the part of the editor , and by this effort , constituted a new work which did not infringe upon the copyright of the original . Leaving it to literary and legal experts to decide , Hartwicke ruled that Modern Crown Law was not a true abridgement , but merely a duplication intending to circumvent the law . 
 The case set a legal precedent which has shaped copyright law to the present day . It established the common law doctrine of fair abridgement , which was cited in other cases , ultimately building up to the idea of fair use . The opinion also recognised the author 's right to a work through the nature of the labour it took to produce it , shifting copyright away from publishing rights and towards the idea of serving the greater good by encouraging the production of new , useful works . 
 = = Facts = = 
 Fletcher Gyles , an English bookseller , had previously published a book entitled Matthew Hale 's Pleas of the Crown , for which he had purchased the exclusive publishing rights . Around the same time , publishers Wilcox and Nutt paid a writer named Barrow to abridge the book , circulating it under the title Modern Crown Law . Gyles alleged that Modern Crown Law was a near verbatim copy of his publication , with only minor alterations , including the translation of Latin and French passages into English and cutting old , obsolete laws . Seeking to protect his printing rights , Gyles sued both Wilcox and Nutt , along with Barrow , for a stay on the publication . 
 = = Arguments = = 
 The case involved whether Wilcox , Barrow , and Nutt had violated Gyles ' publishing rights as defined under the Statute of Anne , particularly the section stating that an author , or purchaser of an author 's copyrights as Gyles was , " shall have the sole Liberty of Printing and Reprinting such Book and Books for the Term of four @-@ teen years . " Philip Yorke , 1st Earl of Hardwicke presided over and decided the case . 
 Browning , Gyles ' attorney , cited a case which had also appeared before Hardwicke , that of Read v Hodges . In that case , a publisher attempted to circumvent the rights of the author of Czar Peter the Great by including all three volumes in one and cutting several pages . Hardwicke rejected the argument , however , declaring that the former case had been decided merely on a motion , and that he had given his decision and statements without the thought he would have given a normal hearing . Hardwicke further took contention with the Attorney General for England and Wales ' assertion that the Statute of Anne provided a publishing monopoly , instead interpreting the act as one meant to promote public education and the public good . 
 As Hardwicke had decided to interpret the Statute of Anne as for the public good , the main question of the case became which " any such book or books " the act referred to and protected . The defendants argued that his abridgement must be considered separate from the original work published by Gyles . The defendant 's lawyers furthered pushed the court to try the case as if the abridgement had been recorded in the Stationers ' Register , an action that would have given Wilcox and Nutt the right to publish their book , and the lawsuit brought against a second , unique book . Therefore , the only question before the court was whether the second book differentiated sufficiently from the first . Further , the attorneys for the defendants argued that the book was not a direct transcription , but that several chapters had been omitted , while other , original sections had been added to the Wilcox and Nutt publication . They further pointed to the fact that the Gyles ' publication consisted of 275 sheets , whereas the abridgement contained only 35 sheets . 
 = = Judgment = = 
 The opinion , written by Hardwicke , found that a true abridgement of a published book may be considered an entirely separate , new work , as the abridgement showed the labour , originality , education , and judgement of the editor . This new book did not run the risk of infringing the rights of the author or bookseller who owned the publishing rights . However , Lord Hardwicke drew a distinction between works " fairly made " and those " <unk> shortened " . Hardwicke refused to compare the books himself to determine whether Modern Crown Law was indeed a fair abridgement , or to force a judge and jury to sit and hear both books read , instead opting to have two legal experts and a literary master read the books and report the findings to the court . The parties were allowed to choose these examiners , in a way leaving the case to arbitration . After a week in which the parties were given a chance to make amends outside of court , the book in question was ruled a <unk> shortening , created only to circumvent the law , and thus was an infringement of Gyles ' printing rights . 
 In his decision , Hartwicke went counter to the prevailing view that the Statute of Anne should be interpreted very strictly , proclaiming , " I am quite of a different opinion , and that it ought to receive a liberal construction , for it is far from being a monopoly , as it is intended to secure the property of books in the authors themselves , or the purchasers of the copy , as some recompense for their pains and labour in such works as may be of use to the learned world . " 
 = = Consequences = = 
 The case established the doctrine of fair abridgement , which allowed that abridgements displaying a fair amount of labour on the part of the editor , and that differed from the original published work in a significant way , could not be copyright violations . This in effect raised the <unk> to the level of an author . The decision did not define the exact parameters that would qualify a work as a valid abridgement . This distinction came with a later case involving an abridgement of Hawksworth 's Voyages , in a decision written by Lord Chancellor Apsley . This concept of fair abridgement eventually evolved through common law , initiated from Gyles v Wilcox , into the current concept of fair use . Hardwicke 's decision also added the exercise of personal judgement to the list of admissible defences against the charge of copyright infringement , adding to the growing case law establishing that British copyright would be based on labour and not on originality . The opinion advanced the position that copyright law should serve the public interest by promoting the creation of new educational and useful works , rather than focusing on publishing rights . The case played a significant role in the development of English copyright law . The United States federal courts have cited the case as recently as the 1980s . 
 = New York State Route 286 = 
 New York State Route 286 ( NY 286 ) is an east – west state highway in the vicinity of the city of Rochester , New York , in the United States . It links Rochester to its eastern suburbs and to western Wayne County . The western terminus of the route is at exit 7 on NY 590 just inside the Rochester city limits . Its eastern terminus is at NY 350 in Walworth . NY 286 is named Browncroft Boulevard from NY 590 to its junction with Qualtrough and Clark roads in Penfield . This portion of the highway passes through predominantly residential areas . East of this intersection , the route is known as Atlantic Avenue and traverses more rural areas . 
 The entirety of NY 286 east of Blossom Road was originally designated as part of NY 35 during the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . NY 35 exited Rochester on Blossom Road and followed it east to modern NY 286 . The remainder of Browncroft Boulevard was designated as New York State Route 35B , an alternate route of NY 35 , in the mid @-@ 1930s . The NY 35 and NY 35B designations were eliminated in the early 1940s and replaced with NY 383 and New York State Route 383B , respectively . NY 383 was truncated to downtown Rochester in 1949 , at which time its former routing from Rochester to Walworth became NY 286 . NY 383B was renumbered accordingly to New York State Route 286A . 
 In the 1960s , the portion of Browncroft Boulevard from the Sea Breeze Expressway to Blossom Road was upgraded into a divided highway . NY 286 was rerouted to follow the improved Browncroft Boulevard while NY 286A was shifted south onto NY 286 's former alignment along Blossom Road . The NY 286A designation was removed in the early 1970s , but Blossom Road remains state @-@ maintained as NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 286 begins at the ramp connecting NY 590 southbound to Browncroft Boulevard just inside the Rochester city limits . It heads east through residential surroundings as a four @-@ lane highway , proceeding through the remainder of NY 590 exit 7 as it enters the northernmost portion of the town of Brighton . East of NY 590 , NY 286 widens to become a divided highway . It passes into Penfield upon crossing Irondequoit Creek and curves southeast as it straddles the northern boundary of Ellison Park . During this stretch , it intersects with Old Browncroft Boulevard , the pre @-@ divided highway alignment of Browncroft Boulevard which is now discontinuous near its midpoint . 
 The two highways loosely parallel each other southeastward for 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) to White Village Drive , a residential side street branching off Browncroft Boulevard . Here , Old Browncroft Boulevard ends and NY 286 narrows slightly to become a four @-@ lane undivided highway . NY 286 continues eastward , leaving the Ellison Park area and intersecting Blossom Road . East of this junction , NY 286 takes on a linear east – west routing as it becomes Atlantic Avenue at a junction with Qualtrough and Clark Roads . The residential nature of the roadway largely ends at Five Mile Line Road , where the homes that have lined the roadway become more sporadic and give way to open , cultivated fields . NY 286 has a slight s @-@ curve between Five Mile Line and Baird Roads before reverting to its true eastward alignment prior to intersecting NY 250 . 
 Past NY 250 , the route continues to the east toward the Monroe – Wayne county line . Just before crossing into Wayne County , NY 286 curves slightly to the northeast . On the other side of the county line in Walworth , NY 286 turns back to the east at a junction with County Line Road , which is actually located 0 @.@ 3 miles ( 0 @.@ 5 km ) east of the official border . Farther east , NY 286 intersects several local major arterials , including West Walworth Road and Canandaigua Road , as it heads over several small hills and passes through a mixture of open fields and forested areas . NY 286 and Atlantic Avenue both come to an end at an intersection with NY 350 . The portion of NY 286 in Wayne County is maintained by the county as County Route 203 . 
 = = History = = 
 In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , NY 35 was extended northeast from Canawaugus ( west of the village of Avon ) to Ontario by way of Scottsville , Rochester , and Walworth . NY 35 entered Rochester on Scottsville Road and followed Genesee and Main streets through the city . At the east end of Main Street , NY 35 turned south and followed Winton Road to Blossom Road . It curved eastward here to follow Blossom Road east to Browncroft Boulevard in Penfield . At some point between 1934 and 1938 , an alternate route of NY 35 along the portion of Browncroft Boulevard between Winton and Blossom Roads was designated NY 35B . 
 The NY 35 designation remained in place until the early 1940s when it was split into two designations : NY 383 west of Walworth and NY 350 from Walworth to Ontario . As part of the change , NY 35B was renumbered to NY 383B . NY 383 itself was altered on January 1 , 1949 , to end in downtown Rochester . The former routing of NY 383 between East Avenue ( NY 96 ) in Rochester and NY 350 in Walworth became NY 286 while NY 383B was redesignated as NY 286A . 
 The portion of the Sea Breeze Expressway between Empire Boulevard ( at the time U.S. Route 104 and now NY 404 ) and Interstate 490 opened to traffic c . 1961 . Both NY 286 and NY 286A were truncated to begin at their interchanges with the expressway . In Wayne County , the routing of NY 286 was altered slightly in the vicinity of the county line . It originally veered onto what is now Knollwood Drive and followed Knollwood Drive and County Line Road to where the latter met Atlantic Avenue . A new roadway was constructed during the mid @-@ 1960s that directly connected the two portions of Atlantic Avenue and bypassed County Line Road entirely and became part of a realigned NY 286 by 1968 . 
 Browncroft Boulevard was upgraded into a four @-@ lane divided highway between the Sea Breeze Expressway ( NY 47 ) and Blossom Road during the mid @-@ 1960s . Some parts of the highway were upgraded on the spot ; others were bypassed and are now known today as Old Browncroft Boulevard . As a result of the upgrade , the alignments of NY 286 and NY 286A west of Blossom Road were flipped , placing NY 286 on Browncroft Boulevard and NY 286A on Blossom Road . The NY 286A designation was removed in the early 1970s and replaced with NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route 2 @.@ 20 miles ( 3 @.@ 54 km ) in length . Reference markers along Blossom Road still read " 286A " . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Misery ( Gwen Stefani song ) = 
 " Misery " is a song recorded by American singer and songwriter Gwen Stefani , taken from her third studio album , This Is What the Truth Feels Like . While originally intended to be released as the album 's second single , Interscope Records released it as a promotional single on March 11 , 2016 , before Stefani revealed on Instagram that it is the album 's third single . It was serviced to hot adult contemporary radio on May 23 , 2016 . The electropop track was written by Stefani , Justin Tranter , Julia Michaels , Mattias Larsson , and Robin Fredriksson , while production was handled by Mattman & Robin . 
 Lyrically , " Misery " discusses getting over a past lover , while accepting a new one . Many critics felt that the song was inspired by her relationships with Gavin Rossdale and Blake Shelton , and Stefani confirmed in an interview that " Misery " was written about the latter . Upon release , " Misery " received highly positive reviews from music critics , who praised the song for being " addictive " and " catchy " . However , some critics were confused over who the song was written about . A lyric video for the song was uploaded to Stefani 's Vevo account on March 10 , 2016 and featured hand @-@ drawn illustrations created by Stefani ; the song 's official video debuted on May 31 and displayed Stefani in various dresses and outfits . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 After the lackluster response to Stefani 's previous singles , " Baby Don 't Lie " and " Spark the Fire " , she scrapped the release of her studio album to begin work on " more authentic " material . When Stefani divorced her then @-@ husband Gavin Rossdale , she began writing intimate songs for a brand @-@ new project . Following the completion and release of " Used to Love You " , Stefani continued writing personal tracks to express her feelings . Several months after writing various songs , Stefani began shifting focus and writing tracks about Blake Shelton instead of Rossdale ; Stefani confirmed that " Misery " was written about " her newfound happiness with Shelton " in an interview with Dana Ross Falcone of Entertainment Weekly . 
 " Misery " became one of the later songs written for the project , and was later announced to be the second single released from This Is What the Truth Feels Like . Stefani later confirmed via Twitter that " Misery " would be released instead as a promotional single on March 8 , 2016 . After providing a sneak preview of the track on Instagram on March 10 , 2016 , Stefani released the track to the iTunes Store an hour later . The song was serviced to hot adult contemporary radio on May 23 , 2016 as the album 's third single . 
 = = Composition = = 
 An electropop song , " Misery " was written by Stefani , Justin Tranter , Julia Michaels , Mattias Larsson , and Robin Fredriksson ; production of the track was handled by Swedish songwriting duo Mattman & Robin . As described by Dee Lockett of Vulture , " Misery " contains " some synths , a funky bassline , and well @-@ placed hand claps to disguise the pain . " Leoni Cooper of NME stated that " Misery " has " future @-@ disco beats " , and " captures the highs and lows of being " gobsmacked in love , " using the metaphor that " a love is as irresistible as drugs . " Nicki <unk> , writing for the New York Daily News , questioned the song 's subject matter , stating " it 's not clear who she 's crooning about — ex Gavin Rossdale or new love Blake Shelton " ; Alexis Rhiannon of Bustle claimed that the song " give [ s ] an inside look to a painful past relationship . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon release , " Misery " received mostly favorable reviews from contemporary music critics . Daniel Kreps of Rolling Stone called the song " addictive " and " catchy " while having " feel @-@ good lyrics . " Mashable 's Emily Blake praised the song and stated " try not to get hooked . " A reviewer from <unk> enjoyed the " surprisingly upbeat " sound of the track compared to Stefani 's single , " Used to Love You " . Writing for Entertainment Weekly , Leah Greenblatt dubbed " Misery " as a " come @-@ on disguised as [ a ] caution " ; Greenblatt further praised the song for being a " stomper " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant called the track a " standout " . 
 Lucas Villa of AXS praised Stefani for " continu [ ing ] her streak of solid pop tunes by turning her confessional lyrics into completely delectable hooks , " further stating that " if this is misery , sign us up for more of it please " ; similarly , Emilee Lindner of <unk> praised the track for " Gwen 's bouncy voice " . Lauren Duca , writing for The Frisky , labeled " Misery " as " catchy " and joked that " whether the song 's subject is Gavin Rossdale or Blake Shelton , I 'd burn calories listening to this song if it was about a Pomeranian Gwen met at a shelter and regrets not adopting . " On the same subject of Shelton and Rossdale , Amanda Bell of MTV News enjoyed the song , but was confused over the song 's lyrics and compared it to Stefani 's song " Make Me Like You " , stating " and unlike [ " Misery " ] , " Make Me Like You " was pretty straightforward with the ' in like ' adoration message " but later said she 's " miserably stumped " when it comes to " Misery " . 
 = = Music videos = = 
 Two videos were produced for " Misery " . A lyric video for the track was released on March 10 , 2016 on Stefani 's official YouTube account . The video displays handwritten lyrics by Stefani on graph paper , note cards , and post @-@ it notes ; it also features several photos of Stefani during a photo shoot for This Is What the Truth Feels Like . 
 The official music video debuted on May 31 , 2016 , also on her YouTube account . The video directed by longtime collaborator Sophie Muller and was filmed at a warehouse and parking garage with varying locations at a loft space , a staircase , and a hydraulic elevator . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video opens with Stefani standing behind a counter in an abandoned warehouse . Her attire consists of an outfit similar to that of Lady Liberty . Various scenes of Stefani in a garden @-@ inspired sheer dress and a " flower crown " appear , as darkened shots of her face also are shown , amongst a trio of background dancers . For the song 's pre @-@ chorus , Stefani is shown in a gothic , black dress , sitting on a white couch , where she pretends to faint . During the entire chorus , Stefani wears a red , flowing dress and activates a smoke machine . 
 The second verse shows her in the garden dress , where she continually rides an elevator through the warehouse ; in a separate scene , the background dancers also ride the elevator . In front of a flower wallpaper , Stefani wears a fluffy , pink dress where she gracefully falls to floor . The next chorus displays Stefani in a black bob wig , " walk [ ing ] effortlessly down some stairs in patent leather , thigh @-@ high stilettos " . The song 's bridge has Stefani wearing a black and white leotard with thigh @-@ high silver boots , while sitting on a stool . A black horse appears , alongside Stefani in a black and white @-@ striped dress , before she slowly runs away from the horse . The song 's final chorus has Stefani riding a bicycle through a brightly @-@ lit parking garage , before she returns to the smoke machine and , once again , falls to the ground as the screen fades to black . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The official music video received highly favorable reviews from music critics . <unk> Rankin of E ! Online stated " Contrary to the song 's title , this tune and the corresponding video is not actually miserable at all ; it 's quite upbeat . " Madison Vain for Entertainment Weekly applauded the visual , calling it " gorgeous " and a " high @-@ fashion affair " . Matthew Scott Donnelly , writing for Pop Crush , applauded it for " turn [ ing ] a parking garage into [ an ] artist 's oasis " ; he also appreciated the video 's " cool , sexy edge " . Nate Scott from the USA Today acclaimed the video : " Good lord , this video . Who is the art director ? Come take my life over and make everything this beautiful . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Stefani performed " Misery " for the first time on March 17 , 2016 . The performance was during a special private concert for MasterCard users in Tokyo , Japan . During the performance , Stefani wore " cropped red track pants and a red sequined cage top over a black bra " as the lyric video was displayed as the backdrop ; " Misery " was followed by a performance of " Make Me Like You " . On her Saturday Night Live performance of " Misery " , Stefani wore torn jeans and a high @-@ waisted top , accompanied by several backup singers , including No Doubt bandmates Gabrial McNair and Stephen Bradley . Stefani performed " Misery " on April 19 , 2016 on The Voice . Stefani and her back @-@ up dancers wore " colorful , tribal style ensembles " and performed using " a trippy , psychedelic lighting scheme " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Management 
 Recorded at Wolf Cousins Studios , Stockholm , Sweden ; Maratone Studios , Stockholm , Sweden ; and Interscope Studios , Santa Monica , California 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of This Is What the Truth Feels Like 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Byne 's disease = 
 Byne 's disease , more accurately known as Bynesian decay , is a peculiar and permanently damaging condition ( resulting from an ongoing chemical reaction ) which often attacks mollusk shells that are in storage or on display for long periods of time . 
 Bynesian decay is a form of efflorescence of salts formed by the reaction of acidic vapors with the basic shell surface . The efflorescence can sometimes superficially resemble a growth of mold . Although first described in the early 19th century , Bynesian decay was not well understood until almost a hundred years later . The condition is named after the man ( L. Byne ) who is best known for describing it in the late 19th century , even though he was not the first person to describe it in print . In addition , Byne mistakenly assumed that the condition was caused by bacteria , and thus the condition came to be referred to as a " disease " . 
 In addition to mollusk shells , various other natural history specimens are susceptible to this form of decay , including eggshells and some fossils and mineral samples that are composed of calcium carbonate . This condition is of concern for museum scientists , and also for anyone who has a private collection of specimens of these kinds . In order to avoid Bynesian decay , the use of metal , non @-@ reactive polymers and acid @-@ free materials of archival quality are preferred over common paper , wood @-@ based materials , ordinary glues and varnishes in collection environments . Management of affected specimens includes washing and thorough drying , with a subsequent <unk> to an archival setting . 
 = = Appearance = = 
 Byne 's disease can appear as a powdery white coating on a shell . It also often looks as if a shell has been " infected " with mold ; however , under magnification the mold @-@ like appearance is revealed to be a crystalline growth of salts . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1839 , the British naturalist and malacologist Thomas Brown ( 1785 – 1862 ) briefly mentioned this form of deterioration in his book A <unk> 's Text @-@ Book . Agnes Kenyon also described the condition in 1896 , suggesting that " saline particles in the atmosphere [ were ] evidently exerting a corrosive effect " . 
 Origin of the name 
 In 1899 , the British amateur conchologist and naturalist Loftus St. George Byne ( 1872 – 1947 ) described this condition , in a presentation to the <unk> Society of Great Britain in Ireland , and did so again in another presentation in June of that same year . 
 Byne was convinced that butyric acid was present together with calcium acetate in the affected shells , although he never really described the methods he used in the so @-@ called " extensive chemical tests " he claimed to have applied to these specimens . Among other conclusions , he assumed that the butyric acid originated from bacterial activity . He also concluded that the decaying effect ' travelled from shell to shell and drawer to drawer ' , and thus the condition came to be called a " disease " . 
 Clarification and resolution 
 The true nature of the " disease " was partially clarified in 1934 , when the British government chemist John Ralph Nicholls explained that oak cabinets at the Natural History Museum in London were giving off acetic acid fumes , which were attacking the shells stored in them . 
 In 1985 , almost 150 years after the Byne 's disease was first mentioned in the literature , Norman H. Tennent and Thomas Baird published an extensive study on the subject . Their deep analysis , involving many complex and sophisticated techniques such as X @-@ Ray diffraction , infrared spectroscopy , <unk> analysis and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy , finally revealed the true nature of the decaying process . They identified the substances involved ( the calcium salts ) , as well as the chemical reactions that originated them . They concluded that Byne 's disease is not actually a disease , and is in fact caused by simple chemical reactions which occur in the presence of acidic vapors originating from the immediate environment in which the specimens are stored . 
 = = Chemistry = = 
 Bynesian decay usually starts when specimens are stored or displayed for considerable periods of time in an enclosed space . The storage method itself usually causes this problem , when containers , cabinets or display cases are entirely or partially made of wood , plywood or other wood products such as <unk> , or when the specimens are surrounded by , or in contact with , various other kinds of materials that are cellulose @-@ based and can turn water vapor acidic . 
 Other potentially damaging materials include non @-@ archival quality cardboard , card , paper , cotton and cork , all of which give off acidic vapors over time . PVC and polyurethane plastics are also a problem , as they degrade and give off acidic vapors with time . High humidity of the air is a significant contributing factor , as is lack of ventilation of the specimens . High ambient temperatures can increase the rapidity of the decay . 
 Generally , in cabinets or display cases that are entirely or partially made of wood , the hydrolysis of acetyl groups in the wood <unk> creates acetic acid . The rate at which the acetic acid is produced is proportional to the concentration of esters in the wood , the humidity , the temperature , and the overall acidity of the environment . Acidic fumes can also be released from formaldehyde which can occur in wood as a degradation product of lignin . Acidic fumes can also be given off from ubiquitous formaldehyde resins ( commonly urea @-@ formaldehyde resins ) . 
 In the first case , acetic acid reacts with the calcium carbonate ( one of the main components of freshwater , marine and land shells , birds ' eggs and other such specimens ) producing calcium acetate , a salt . <unk> can be oxidized by the oxygen in air to create formic acid , which then has basically the same effects as acetic acid , reacting with calcium carbonate to produce a salt . The salts ( calcium acetate and calcium formate ) crystallize through the specimen 's outer surface , destroying its fine detail and exposing more areas for further reaction . As the condition progresses , the salt crystals build up over the specimen 's surface , which becomes increasingly eroded . 
 The calcium carbonate and acetic acid chemical reaction occurs as follows : 
 CaCO3 + <unk> → Ca ( CH3COO ) 2 + H2O + CO2 
 Calcium carbonate and formic acid chemical reaction occurs as follows : 
 CaCO3 + <unk> → Ca ( HCOO ) 2 + H2O + CO2 
 Calcium carbonate and sulfuric acid chemical reaction occurs as follows : 
 CaCO3 + H2SO4 → CaSO4 + H2O + CO2 
 In this last reaction , calcium carbonate reacts with sulfuric acid and produce calcium sulfate , water and carbon dioxide . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 When specimens are to be placed in any size of container for long @-@ term storage or display , the consistent use of only archival @-@ quality materials prevents the development of Byne 's disease . Thus , materials such as metal cabinets and display cases , archival quality paper labels and card trays are used in museum collections of specimens that might be vulnerable to this reaction . 
 It is also worth mentioning that sea shells , after collecting , need to be washed thoroughly in freshwater to remove the salt that is on and in the shell , and then dried thoroughly before they are stored . Salt attracts moisture and makes shells more vulnerable to Bynesian decay . 
 The following is a chart that shows non @-@ archival materials and their archival equivalents : 
 If possible , the use of wood and cellulose derivatives should be avoided entirely . Many varnishes and paints are well known emitters of volatile organic compounds ( VOCs ) , some of which may be acidic , and thus have the potential to damage calcium carbonate specimens . Because of this , these coatings should also be avoided ; water @-@ based varnishes and paints are considered less harmful , and should be preferred . 
 Because the reactions involved in Bynesian decay require a certain quantity of moisture in the air in order for them to take place , keeping the air somewhat dry , i.e. keeping the environmental relative humidity under control is beneficial . This is achieved by careful monitoring of the relative humidity ( using instruments such as a hygrometer ) , and applying dehumidifiers when necessary ; sometimes , simple air conditioning systems may suffice . Extremely low humidity can damage some specimens , so caution is recommended . Usually , a relative humidity maintained around 50 % is considered to be adequate . Applying <unk> containing a strong base , such as potassium hydroxide , inside the storage environment to protect the specimens against degradation is also possible . Copy paper or KOH @-@ impregnated filter paper are some low cost examples of <unk> which can be used . These strong bases have a preference to react with acid , thus they compete successfully with the calcium carbonate specimens for any acidic vapors that may be present . The bases also help reduce the overall acid concentration inside the enclosed space . 
 = = Management = = 
 The damage to specimens is unfortunately not reversible ; however , the decay can be arrested by washing or soaking the specimens in water , followed by a very thorough drying . The specimens must then be placed in an environment that consists of only archival materials , in a completely archival setting . 
 = = Pyrite disease = = 
 In collections which contain fossils , high humidity can also affect pyrite ( or its more reactive polymorph marcasite ) ( iron sulphide ) fossils in a somewhat similar condition , which is known as pyrite disease . The iron sulfide can react with water and oxygen to form iron sulfates and sulfuric acid , which then can produce Bynesian decay . 
 = R. K. Narayan = 
 R. K. Narayan ( 10 October 1906 – 13 May 2001 ) , full name <unk> Krishnaswami Iyer <unk> , is an Indian writer , best known for his works set in the fictional South Indian town of Malgudi . He is a leading author of early Indian literature in English , along with Mulk Raj Anand and Raja Rao . 
 Narayan 's mentor and friend , Graham Greene was instrumental in getting publishers for Narayan ’ s first four books , including the semi @-@ autobiographical trilogy of Swami and Friends , The Bachelor of Arts and The English Teacher . The fictional town of Malgudi , was first introduced in Swami and Friends . Narayan ’ s The Financial Expert , was hailed as one of the most original works of 1951 , and Sahitya Akademi Award winner The Guide , was adapted for film and for Broadway . 
 Narayan highlights the social context and everyday life of his characters , and he has been compared to William Faulkner , who also created a similar fictional town , and likewise explored with humour and compassion the energy of ordinary life . Narayan 's short stories have been compared with those of Guy de Maupassant , because of his ability to compress a narrative . However , he has also been criticised for the simplicity of his prose . 
 In a career that spanned over sixty years , Narayan received many awards and honours , including the AC Benson Medal from the Royal Society of Literature , the Padma Bhushan and the Padma Vibhushan , India 's third and second highest civilian awards . He was also nominated to the Rajya Sabha , the upper house of India 's parliament . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early days = = = 
 R. K. Narayan was born in Madras ( now Chennai ) , British India . His father was a school headmaster , and Narayan did some of his studies at his father 's school . As his father 's job entailed frequent transfers , Narayan spent part of his childhood under the care of his maternal grandmother , Parvati . During this time his best friends and playmates were a peacock and a mischievous monkey . 
 His grandmother gave him the nickname of <unk> , a name that stuck to him in family circles . She taught him arithmetic , mythology , classical Indian music and Sanskrit . According to his youngest brother R. K. Laxman , the family mostly conversed in English , and grammatical errors on the part of Narayan and his siblings were frowned upon . While living with his grandmother , Narayan studied at a succession of schools in Madras , including the Lutheran Mission School in Purasawalkam , <unk> High School , and the Christian College High School . Narayan was an avid reader , and his early literary diet included Dickens , Wodehouse , Arthur Conan Doyle and Thomas Hardy . When he was twelve years old , Narayan participated in a pro @-@ independence march , for which he was reprimanded by his uncle ; the family was apolitical and considered all governments wicked . 
 Narayan moved to Mysore to live with his family when his father was transferred to the Maharajah 's College High School . The well @-@ stocked library at the school , as well as his father 's own , fed his reading habit , and he started writing as well . After completing high school , Narayan failed the university entrance examination and spent a year at home reading and writing ; he subsequently passed the examination in 1926 and joined Maharaja College of Mysore . It took Narayan four years to obtain his bachelor 's degree , a year longer than usual . After being persuaded by a friend that taking a master 's degree ( M.A. ) would kill his interest in literature , he briefly held a job as a school teacher ; however , he quit in protest when the headmaster of the school asked him to substitute for the physical training master . The experience made Narayan realise that the only career for him was in writing , and he decided to stay at home and write novels . His first published work was a book review of Development of Maritime Laws of 17th @-@ Century England . Subsequently , he started writing the occasional local interest story for English newspapers and magazines . Although the writing did not pay much ( his income for the first year was nine rupees and twelve annas ) , he had a regular life and few needs , and his family and friends respected and supported his unorthodox choice of career . In 1930 , Narayan wrote his first novel , Swami and Friends , an effort ridiculed by his uncle and rejected by a string of publishers . With this book , Narayan created Malgudi , a town that creatively reproduced the social sphere of the country ; while it ignored the limits imposed by colonial rule , it also grew with the various socio @-@ political changes of British and post @-@ independence India . 
 = = = Turning point = = = 
 While vacationing at his sister 's house in Coimbatore , in 1933 , Narayan met and fell in love with Rajam , a 15 @-@ year @-@ old girl who lived nearby . Despite many astrological and financial obstacles , Narayan managed to gain permission from the girl 's father and married her . Following his marriage , Narayan became a reporter for a Madras @-@ based paper called The Justice , dedicated to the rights of non @-@ Brahmins . The publishers were thrilled to have a Brahmin Iyer in Narayan espousing their cause . The job brought him in contact with a wide variety of people and issues . Earlier , Narayan had sent the manuscript of Swami and Friends to a friend at Oxford , and about this time , the friend showed the manuscript to Graham Greene . Greene recommended the book to his publisher , and it was finally published in 1935 . Greene also counseled Narayan on shortening his name to become more familiar to the English @-@ speaking audience . The book was semi @-@ autobiographical and built upon many incidents from his own childhood . Reviews were favourable but sales were few . Narayan 's next novel The Bachelor of Arts ( 1937 ) , was inspired in part by his experiences at college , and dealt with the theme of a rebellious adolescent transitioning to a rather well @-@ adjusted adult ; it was published by a different publisher , again at the recommendation of Greene . His third novel , The Dark Room ( 1938 ) was about domestic disharmony , showcasing the man as the oppressor and the woman as the victim within a marriage , and was published by yet another publisher ; this book also received good reviews . In 1937 , Narayan 's father died , and Narayan was forced to accept a commission from the government of Mysore as he was not making any money . 
 In his first three books , Narayan highlights the problems with certain socially accepted practices . The first book has Narayan focusing on the plight of students , punishments of caning in the classroom , and the associated shame . The concept of horoscope @-@ matching in Hindu marriages and the emotional toll it levies on the bride and groom is covered in the second book . In the third book , Narayan addresses the concept of a wife putting up with her husband 's antics and attitudes . 
 Rajam died of typhoid in 1939 . Her death affected Narayan deeply and he remained depressed for a long time ; he was also concerned for their daughter Hema , who was only three years old . The bereavement brought about a significant change in his life and was the inspiration behind his next novel , The English Teacher . This book , like his first two books , is autobiographical , but more so , and completes an unintentional thematic trilogy following Swami and Friends and The Bachelor of Arts . In subsequent interviews , Narayan acknowledges that The English Teacher was almost entirely an autobiography , albeit with different names for the characters and the change of setting in Malgudi ; he also explains that the emotions detailed in the book reflected his own at the time of Rajam 's death . 
 Bolstered by some of his successes , in 1940 Narayan tried his hand at a journal , Indian Thought . With the help of his uncle , a car salesman , Narayan managed to get more than a thousand subscribers in Madras city alone . However , the venture did not last long due to Narayan 's inability to manage it , and it ceased publication within a year . His first collection of short stories , Malgudi Days , was published in November 1942 , followed by The English Teacher in 1945 . In between , being cut off from England due to the war , Narayan started his own publishing company , naming it ( again ) Indian Thought Publications ; the publishing company was a success and is still active , now managed by his granddaughter . Soon , with a devoted readership stretching from New York to Moscow , Narayan 's books started selling well and in 1948 he started building his own house on the outskirts of Mysore ; the house was completed in 1953 . 
 = = = The busy years = = = 
 After The English Teacher , Narayan 's writings took a more imaginative and creative external style compared to the semi @-@ autobiographical tone of the earlier novels . His next effort , Mr. Sampath , was the first book exhibiting this modified approach . However , it still draws from some of his own experiences , particularly the aspect of starting his own journal ; he also makes a marked movement away from his earlier novels by intermixing biographical events . Soon after , he published The Financial Expert , considered to be his masterpiece and hailed as one of the most original works of fiction in 1951 . The inspiration for the novel was a true story about a financial genius , <unk> , related to him by his brother . The next novel , Waiting for the Mahatma , loosely based on a fictional visit to Malgudi by Mahatma Gandhi , deals with the protagonist 's romantic feelings for a woman , when he attends the discourses of the visiting Mahatma . The woman , named Bharti , is a loose parody of Bharati , the personification of India and the focus of Gandhi 's discourses . While the novel includes significant references to the Indian independence movement , the focus is on the life of the ordinary individual , narrated with Narayan 's usual dose of irony . 
 In 1953 , his works were published in the United States for the first time , by Michigan State University Press , who later ( in 1958 ) , relinquished the rights to Viking Press . While Narayan 's writings often bring out the anomalies in social structures and views , he was himself a traditionalist ; in February 1956 , Narayan arranged his daughter 's wedding following all orthodox Hindu rituals . After the wedding , Narayan began travelling occasionally , continuing to write at least 1500 words a day even while on the road . The Guide was written while he was visiting the United States in 1956 on the Rockefeller Fellowship . While in the U.S. , Narayan maintained a daily journal that was to later serve as the foundation for his book My Dateless Diary . Around this time , on a visit to England , Narayan met his friend and mentor Graham Greene for the first time . On his return to India , The Guide was published ; the book is the most representative of Narayan 's writing skills and elements , ambivalent in expression , coupled with a riddle @-@ like conclusion . The book won him the Sahitya Akademi Award in 1958 . 
 Occasionally , Narayan was known to give form to his thoughts by way of essays , some published in newspapers and journals , others not . Next Sunday ( 1960 ) , was a collection of such conversational essays , and his first work to be published as a book . Soon after that , My Dateless Diary , describing experiences from his 1956 visit to the United States , was published . Also included in this collection was an essay about the writing of The Guide . 
 Narayan 's next novel , The Man @-@ Eater of Malgudi , was published in 1961 . The book was reviewed as having a narrative that is a classical art form of comedy , with delicate control . After the launch of this book , the restless Narayan once again took to travelling , and visited the U.S. and Australia . He spent three weeks in Adelaide , Sydney and Melbourne giving lectures on Indian literature . The trip was funded by a fellowship from the Australian Writers ' Group . By this time Narayan had also achieved significant success , both literary and financial . He had a large house in Mysore , and wrote in a study with no fewer than eight windows ; he drove a new Mercedes @-@ Benz , a luxury in India at that time , to visit his daughter who had moved to Coimbatore after her marriage . With his success , both within India and abroad , Narayan started writing columns for magazines and newspapers including The Hindu and The Atlantic . 
 In 1964 , Narayan published his first mythological work , Gods , Demons and Others , a collection of rewritten and translated short stories from Hindu epics . Like many of his other works , this book was illustrated by his younger brother R. K. Laxman . The stories included were a selective list , chosen on the basis of powerful protagonists , so that the impact would be lasting , irrespective of the reader 's contextual knowledge . Once again , after the book launch , Narayan took to travelling abroad . In an earlier essay , he had written about the Americans wanting to understand spirituality from him , and during this visit , Swedish @-@ American actress Greta Garbo accosted him on the topic , despite his denial of any knowledge . 
 Narayan 's next published work was the 1967 novel , The Vendor of Sweets . It was inspired in part by his American visits and consists of extreme characterizations of both the Indian and American stereotypes , drawing on the many cultural differences . However , while it displays his characteristic comedy and narrative , the book was reviewed as lacking in depth . This year , Narayan travelled to England , where he received the first of his honorary doctorates from the University of Leeds . The next few years were a quiet period for him . He published his next book , a collection of short stories , A Horse and Two Goats , in 1970 . Meanwhile , Narayan remembered a promise made to his dying uncle in 1938 , and started translating the Kamba <unk> to English . The Ramayana was published in 1973 , after five years of work . Almost immediately after publishing The Ramayana , Narayan started working on a condensed translation of the Sanskrit epic , the Mahabharata . While he was researching and writing the epic , he also published another book , The Painter of Signs ( 1977 ) . The Painter of Signs is a bit longer than a novella and makes a marked change from Narayan 's other works , as he deals with hitherto unaddressed subjects such as sex , although the development of the protagonist 's character is very similar to his earlier creations . The Mahabharata was published in 1978 . 
 = = = The later years = = = 
 Narayan was commissioned by the government of Karnataka to write a book to promote tourism in the state . The work was published as part of a larger government publication in the late 1970s . He thought it deserved better , and republished it as The Emerald Route ( Indian Thought Publications , 1980 ) . The book contains his personal perspective on the local history and heritage , but being bereft of his characters and creations , it misses his enjoyable narrative . The same year , he was elected as an honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Letters and won the AC Benson Medal from the Royal Society of Literature . Around the same time , Narayan 's works were translated to Chinese for the first time . 
 In 1983 , Narayan published his next novel , A Tiger for Malgudi , about a tiger and its relationship with humans . His next novel , <unk> Man , published in 1986 , was the tale of an aspiring journalist from Malgudi . During this time , he also published two collections of short stories : Malgudi Days ( 1982 ) , a revised edition including the original book and some other stories , and Under the Banyan Tree and Other Stories , a new collection . In 1987 , he completed A Writer 's Nightmare , another collection of essays about topics as diverse as the caste system , Nobel prize winners , love , and monkeys . The collection included essays he had written for newspapers and magazines since 1958 . 
 Living alone in Mysore , Narayan developed an interest in agriculture . He bought an acre of agricultural land and tried his hand at farming . He was also prone to walking to the market every afternoon , not so much for buying things , but to interact with the people . In a typical afternoon stroll , he would stop every few steps to greet and converse with shopkeepers and others , most likely gathering material for his next book . 
 In 1980 , Narayan was nominated to the Rajya Sabha , the upper house of the Indian Parliament , for his contributions to literature . During his entire six @-@ year term , he was focused on one issue — the plight of school children , especially the heavy load of school books and the negative effect of the system on a child 's creativity , which was something that he first highlighted in his debut novel , Swami and Friends . His inaugural speech was focused on this particular problem , and resulted in the formation of a committee chaired by Prof. Yash Pal , to recommend changes to the school educational system . 
 In 1990 , he published his next novel , The World of Nagaraj , also set in Malgudi . Narayan 's age shows in this work as he appears to skip narrative details that he would have included if this were written earlier in his career . Soon after he finished the novel , Narayan fell ill and moved to Madras to be close to his daughter 's family . A few years after his move , in 1994 , his daughter died of cancer and his granddaughter <unk> ( Minnie ) started taking care of him in addition to managing Indian Thought Publications . Narayan then published his final book , Grandmother 's Tale . The book is an autobiographical novella , about his great @-@ grandmother who travelled far and wide to find her husband , who ran away shortly after their marriage . The story was narrated to him by his grandmother , when he was a child . 
 During his final years , Narayan , ever fond of conversation , would spend almost every evening with N. Ram , the publisher of The Hindu , drinking coffee and talking about various topics until well past midnight . Despite his fondness of meeting and talking to people , he stopped giving interviews . The apathy towards interviews was the result of an interview with Time , after which Narayan had to spend a few days in the hospital , as he was dragged around the city to take photographs that were never used in the article . 
 In May 2001 , Narayan was hospitalised . A few hours before he was to be put on a ventilator , he was planning on writing his next novel , a story about a grandfather . As he was always very selective about his choice of notebooks , he asked N. Ram to get him one . However , Narayan did not get better and never started the novel . He died on 13 May 2001 , in Chennai at the age of 94 . 
 = = Literary review = = 
 = = = Writing style = = = 
 Narayan 's writing technique was unpretentious with a natural element of humour about it . It focused on ordinary people , reminding the reader of next @-@ door neighbours , cousins and the like , thereby providing a greater ability to relate to the topic . Unlike his national contemporaries , he was able to write about the intricacies of Indian society without having to modify his characteristic simplicity to conform to trends and fashions in fiction writing . He also employed the use of nuanced <unk> prose with gentle Tamil overtones based on the nature of his characters . Critics have considered Narayan to be the Indian Chekhov , due to the similarities in their writings , the simplicity and the gentle beauty and humour in tragic situations . Greene considered Narayan to be more similar to Chekhov than any Indian writer . Anthony West of The New Yorker considered Narayan 's writings to be of the realism variety of Nikolai Gogol . 
 According to Pulitzer Prize winner <unk> Lahiri , Narayan 's short stories have the same captivating feeling as his novels , with most of them less than ten pages long , and taking about as many minutes to read . She adds that between the title sentence and the end , Narayan provides the reader something novelists struggle to achieve in hundreds more pages : a complete insight to the lives of his characters . These characteristics and abilities led Lahiri to classify him as belonging to the pantheon of short @-@ story geniuses that include O. Henry , Frank O 'Connor and Flannery O 'Connor . Lahiri also compares him to Guy de Maupassant for their ability to compress the narrative without losing the story , and the common themes of middle @-@ class life written with an unyielding and <unk> vision . 
 Critics have noted that Narayan 's writings tend to be more descriptive and less analytical ; the objective style , rooted in a detached spirit , providing for a more authentic and realistic narration . His attitude , coupled with his perception of life , provided a unique ability to fuse characters and actions , and an ability to use ordinary events to create a connection in the mind of the reader . A significant contributor to his writing style was his creation of Malgudi , a stereotypical small town , where the standard norms of superstition and tradition apply . 
 Narayan 's writing style was often compared to that of William Faulkner since both their works brought out the humour and energy of ordinary life while displaying compassionate humanism . The similarities also extended to their juxtaposing of the demands of society against the confusions of individuality . Although their approach to subjects was similar , their methods were different ; Faulkner was rhetorical and illustrated his points with immense prose while Narayan was very simple and realistic , capturing the elements all the same . 
 = = = Malgudi = = = 
 Malgudi is a fictional , semi @-@ urban town in southern India , conjured by Narayan . He created the town in September 1930 , on Vijayadashami , an auspicious day to start new efforts and thus chosen for him by his grandmother . As he mentioned in a later interview to his biographers Susan and N. Ram , in his mind , he first saw a railway station , and slowly the name Malgudi came to him . The town was created with an impeccable historical record , dating to the Ramayana days when it was noted that Lord Rama passed through ; it was also said that the Buddha visited the town during his travels . While Narayan never provided strict physical constraints for the town , he allowed it to form shape with events in the various stories , becoming a reference point for the future . Dr James M. <unk> , a scholar of Narayan 's works , created a map of Malgudi based on the fictional descriptors of the town from the many books and stories . 
 Malgudi evolved with the changing political landscape of India . In the 1980s , when the nationalistic fervor in India dictated the changing of British names of towns and localities and removal of British landmarks , Malgudi 's mayor and city council removed the long @-@ standing statue of Frederick Lawley , one of Malgudi 's early residents . However , when the Historical Societies showed proof that Lawley was strong in his support of the Indian independence movement , the council was forced to undo all their earlier actions . A good comparison to Malgudi , a place that Greene characterised as " more familiar than Battersea or Euston Road " , is Faulkner 's Yoknapatawpha County . Also , like Faulkner 's , when one looks at Narayan 's works , the town gets a better definition through the many different novels and stories . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Narayan first broke through with the help of Graham Greene who , upon reading Swaminathan and Tate , took it upon himself to work as Narayan 's agent for the book . He was also instrumental in changing the title to the more appropriate Swami and Friends , and in finding publishers for Narayan 's next few books . While Narayan 's early works were not commercial successes , other authors of the time began to notice him . Somerset Maugham , on a trip to Mysore in 1938 , had asked to meet Narayan , but not enough people had heard of him to actually effect the meeting . Maugham subsequently read Narayan 's The Dark Room , and wrote to him expressing his admiration . Another contemporary writer who took a liking to Narayan 's early works was E. M. Forster , an author who shared his dry and humorous narrative , so much so that Narayan was labeled the " South Indian E. M. Forster " by critics . Despite his popularity with the reading public and fellow writers , Narayan 's work has not received the same amount of critical exploration accorded to other writers of his stature . 
 Narayan 's success in the United States came a little later , when Michigan State University Press started publishing his books . His first visit to the country was on a fellowship from the Rockefeller Foundation , and he lectured at various universities including Michigan State University and the University of California , Berkeley . Around this time , John Updike noticed his work and compared Narayan to Charles Dickens . In a review of Narayan 's works published in The New Yorker , Updike called him a writer of a vanishing breed — the writer as a citizen ; one who identifies completely with his subjects and with a belief in the significance of humanity . 
 Having published many novels , essays and short stories , Narayan is credited with bringing Indian writing to the rest of the world . While he has been regarded as one of India 's greatest writers of the twentieth century , critics have also described his writings with adjectives such as charming , harmless and benign . Narayan has also come in for criticism from later writers , particularly of Indian origin , who have classed his writings as having a pedestrian style with a shallow vocabulary and a narrow vision . According to Shashi Tharoor , Narayan 's subjects are similar to those of Jane Austen as they both deal with a very small section of society . However , he adds that while Austen 's prose was able to take those subjects beyond ordinariness , Narayan 's was not . A similar opinion is held by Shashi Deshpande who characterizes Narayan 's writings as pedestrian and naive because of the simplicity of his language and diction , combined with the lack of any complexity in the emotions and behaviours of his characters . 
 A general perception on Narayan was that he did not involve himself or his writings with the politics or problems of India , as mentioned by V. S. Naipaul in one of his columns . However , according to Wyatt Mason of The New Yorker , although Narayan 's writings seem simple and display a lack of interest in politics , he delivers his narrative with an artful and deceptive technique when dealing with such subjects and does not entirely avoid them , rather letting the words play in the reader 's mind . Srinivasa Iyengar , former vice @-@ chancellor of Andhra University , says that Narayan wrote about political topics only in the context of his subjects , quite unlike his compatriot Mulk Raj Anand who dealt with the political structures and problems of the time . Paul Brians , in his book Modern South Asian Literature in English , says that the fact that Narayan completely ignored British rule and focused on the private lives of his characters is a political statement on its own , declaring his independence from the influence of colonialism . 
 In the west , Narayan 's simplicity of writing was well received . One of his biographers , William Walsh , wrote of his narrative as a comedic art with an inclusive vision informed by the transience and illusion of human action . Multiple Booker nominee Anita Desai classes his writings as " compassionate realism " where the cardinal sins are unkindness and immodesty . According to Wyatt Mason , in Narayan 's works , the individual is not a private entity , but rather a public one and this concept is an innovation that can be called his own . In addition to his early works being among the most important English @-@ language fiction from India , with this innovation , he provided his western readers the first works in English to be infused with an eastern and Hindu existential perspective . Mason also holds the view that Edmund Wilson 's assessment of Walt Whitman , " He does not write editorials on events but describes his actual feelings " , applies equally to Narayan . 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 Narayan won numerous awards during the course of his literary career . His first major award was in 1958 , the Sahitya Akademi Award for The Guide . When the book was made into a film , he received the Filmfare Award for the best story . In 1964 , he received the Padma Bhushan during the Republic Day honours . In 1980 , he was awarded the AC Benson Medal by the ( British ) Royal Society of Literature , of which he was an honorary member . In 1982 he was elected an honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Letters . He was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature multiple times , but never won the honour . 
 Recognition also came in the form of honorary doctorates by the University of Leeds ( 1967 ) , the University of Mysore ( 1976 ) and Delhi University ( 1973 ) . Towards the end of his career , Narayan was nominated to the upper house of the Indian Parliament for a six @-@ year term starting in 1989 , for his contributions to Indian literature . A year before his death , in 2001 , he was awarded India 's second @-@ highest civilian honour , the Padma Vibhushan . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Narayan 's greatest achievement was making India accessible to the outside world through his literature . He is regarded as one of the three leading English language Indian fiction writers , along with Raja Rao and Mulk Raj Anand . He gave his readers something to look forward to with Malgudi and its residents and is considered to be one of the best novelists India has ever produced . He brought small @-@ town India to his audience in a manner that was both believable and experiential . Malgudi was not just a fictional town in India , but one teeming with characters , each with their own idiosyncrasies and attitudes , making the situation as familiar to the reader as if it were their own backyard . In 2014 , Google commemorated Narayan 's 108th birthday by featuring a doodle showing him behind a copy of Malgudi Days . 
 " Whom next shall I meet in Malgudi ? That is the thought that comes to me when I close a novel of Mr Narayan 's . I do not wait for another novel . I wait to go out of my door into those loved and shabby streets and see with excitement and a certainty of pleasure a stranger approaching , past the bank , the cinema , the <unk> saloon , a stranger who will greet me I know with some unexpected and revealing phrase that will open a door on to yet another human existence . " 
 = = List of works = = 
 Novels 
 Non @-@ fiction 
 Mythology 
 Short story collections 
 = = = Adaptations = = = 
 Narayan 's book The Guide was adapted to film as Guide , a Hindi movie directed by Vijay Anand . An English @-@ language version was also released . Narayan was not happy with the way the film was made and its deviation from the book ; he wrote a column in Life magazine , " The Misguided Guide , " criticising the film . The book was also adapted to a Broadway play by Harvey Breit and Patricia Rinehart , and was staged at Hudson Theatre in 1968 with Zia <unk> playing the lead role and a music score by Ravi Shankar . 
 His novel Mr. Sampath was made into a Tamil film , Miss Malini , starring <unk> and Kothamangalam Subbu . A Hindi version with Padmini and Motilal was also produced by Gemini Studios . Another novel , The Financial Expert , was made into the Kannada movie Banker <unk> . Swami and Friends , The Vendor of Sweets and some of Narayan 's short stories were adapted by actor @-@ director Shankar Nag into the television series Malgudi Days . Narayan was happy with the adaptations and complimented the producers for sticking to the storyline in the books . 
 = Boddingtons Brewery = 
 Boddingtons Brewery was a regional brewery in Manchester , England , which owned pubs throughout the North West . Boddingtons was best known for Boddingtons Bitter ( Boddies ) , a straw @-@ golden , hoppy bitter which was one of the first beers to be packaged in cans containing a widget , giving it a creamy draught @-@ style head . In the 1990s , the beer was promoted as The Cream of Manchester in a popular advertising campaign credited with raising Manchester 's profile . Boddingtons became one of the city 's most famous products after Manchester United and Coronation Street . 
 Whitbread bought Boddingtons Brewery in 1989 and Boddingtons Bitter received an increased marketing budget and nationwide distribution . Boddingtons achieved its peak market share in 1997 and at the time was exported to over forty countries . Boddingtons beer brands are now owned by the global brewer Anheuser – Busch InBev which acquired the Whitbread Beer Company in 2000 . Strangeways Brewery closed in 2004 and production of pasteurised ( keg and can ) Boddingtons was moved to Samlesbury in Lancashire . Production of the cask conditioned beer moved to Hydes Brewery in Moss Side , Manchester , until it was discontinued in 2012 , ending the beer 's association with the city . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1778 – 1969 = = = 
 Strangeways Brewery was founded in 1778 by two grain merchants , Thomas Caister and Thomas Fry , just north of what is now Manchester city centre . Their principal customers were the cotton workers of Manchester , then a burgeoning mill town . Henry Boddington , born in 1813 in Thame , Oxfordshire , joined the brewery in 1832 as a travelling salesman when the brewery was in the possession of Hole , Potter and Harrison . Like most Manchester breweries at the time , it was a modestly sized operation . Boddington had become a partner by 1848 , alongside John and James Harrison , and by this time the company went under the name John Harrison & Co . In January 1853 , Boddington borrowed money to become its sole owner . Between Boddington 's takeover until 1877 , the brewery 's output increased tenfold from 10 @,@ 000 to 100 @,@ 000 barrels a year , making it not only Manchester 's largest brewery but one of the largest in the North of England , with over 100 tied houses . By 1883 Henry Boddington & Co. was a limited liability company . Henry Boddington 's estate was valued at almost £ 150 @,@ 000 when he died in 1886 . 
 After Henry Boddington 's death , his son , William Slater Boddington became company chairman , and the company went public in 1888 when it was estimated to have assets of £ 320 @,@ 465 . It was now known as Boddingtons Breweries Ltd . The company owned 212 public houses by 1892 , making it the twelfth largest tied estate in the United Kingdom . Its major local competitors were Groves and Whitnall , <unk> and the Manchester Brewing Company . After W. Slater Boddington 's death in 1908 , the family retained an interest in the company and continued to take a practical hand in its running . Henry 's youngest son , Robert Slater Boddington ( 1862 – 1930 ) had a fifty @-@ year association with the company and oversaw the installation of a bottling hall in the 1920s . Robert 's third and fourth sons Philip ( 1893 – 1952 ) and Charles ( 1897 – 1982 ) served as joint chairman after their father 's death , and Charles took sole responsibility after Philip died . 
 By the 1930s , the Boddington family shareholding had dwindled to around 40 per cent . On the 22 December 1940 , the brewery water tanks were hit by bombs during the Manchester Blitz , and the brewery had to be closed down for several months , with production moved temporarily to the nearby Hydes Brewery . The brewery was rebuilt with the most up @-@ to @-@ date and modern equipment of the time , and was the first in Europe to install stainless steel brewing vats . In 1961 , the brewer Whitbread took a 13 per cent stake in the company . In 1962 the company purchased Richard Clarke & Co of Reddish , Stockport , adding 60 public houses to the firm . 
 = = = Mergers and acquisitions = = = 
 In 1969 the large Allied Breweries combine initiated a hostile takeover bid for Boddingtons , which valued the company at £ 5 million . Charles Boddington took the unusual step of issuing a spirited defence of the company to the shareholders : 
 You will be only too aware that present @-@ day pressures bear heavily towards the elimination of individuality and character in many consumer goods . There is an inexorable progression towards the mass @-@ produced nationwide product of standardised quality . You , however , are still , at this moment in time , a shareholder in one of the remaining independent brewery companies whose traditional draught beers have a reputation for quality and individual character beyond the immediate area of the North of England in which we operate ... The takeover of Boddingtons and its consequent elimination can achieve very little . It will do nothing for the national economy , add nothing to the nation 's exports , and contribute nothing at all to the quality of life that we are all used to enjoy . 
 The company 's independence was maintained after Whitbread acted as a white knight by raising its stake in the company from 13 to 23 per cent , and the family and many small shareholders refused to sell their stakes . The chairman of Whitbread , Colonel Whitbread , is reputed to have said , " You are a very old firm . You have a very good name . You mustn 't go out . " At the time , it was rare for a company to win the emotional argument for independence , and it was the first time a regional brewery had headed off an offer from a national company . In 1970 , Charles Boddington retired and his son Ewart assumed the directorship . 
 In 1971 , Allied Breweries sold its 35 per cent stake in the company , leaving Whitbread 25 per cent and the Boddington family 10 per cent , with the remainder of company shares held by small shareholders in the Manchester area . That year Guinness Draught stout and Heineken lager were introduced into the tied estate . During the 1970s the company operated within a 70 @-@ mile radius of Manchester , and growth was driven by the increasing popularity of its main product , Boddingtons Bitter . The Observer commented in 1974 that Boddingtons cheap pricing and distinctive flavour afforded it an unusually loyal following . In 1981 the same newspaper commented , 
 what has stood Boddingtons in good stead is the highly distinctive flavour of its brews , especially its bitters . In fact , in the North @-@ West , Boddies is increasingly becoming a sort of cult brew . 
 In 1982 , Boddingtons bought the Oldham Brewery for £ 23 million , hoping to combine Oldham 's strength in lager and keg bitter with their own expertise in cask ales . After the acquisition , the company owned 272 public houses , 70 per cent of which were within 20 miles of its Manchester brewery . In 1983 , Boddingtons Bitter was distributed in the Home Counties for the first time . In 1985 Boddingtons paid £ 27 @.@ 5 million for the 160 @,@ 000 barrel capacity Higsons Brewery in Liverpool and its tied estate of 160 public houses to form a combine with a £ 65 million turnover . The Guardian commented that the company had paid mere asset value for Higsons as the company had been reporting poor profits . There was virtually no overlap between the two companies , and the takeover brought Boddingtons to Merseyside for the first time . By this time Strangeways was producing only two beers , a bitter and a mild , with bitter constituting over 90 per cent of production . In 1986 , the company employed 280 people and operated 530 tied houses , and while Strangeways Brewery had a capacity of 500 @,@ 000 barrels a year , it was operating at around 50 per cent capacity . That year the company introduced its own lager , brewing <unk> under license . 
 In 1987 , the company rejected a £ 270 million reverse takeover bid by Midsummer Leisure . By this time Boddingtons had a tied estate of 520 pubs . In 1988 , the company closed the Oldham Brewery with the loss of 70 jobs , and shed 140 transport jobs at Higsons and Strangeways by contracting out delivery work to TNT . 
 Boddingtons remained independent until 1989 , when Ewart Boddington sold Strangeways Brewery and the Boddingtons brand ( but not the tied estate ) to Whitbread for £ 50 @.@ 7 million . Whitbread was motivated to plug a gap in its portfolio by owning a credible national cask ale brand . The sale was amicable , with both parties aware that Whitbread capital and distribution could make the Boddingtons brand national , although some Boddington family board members had been resistant to the sale . Boddingtons had been in decline before the Whitbread takeover , and although it retained an almost " cult " following within its Manchester heartland , only 5 per cent of sales were outside the North West . 
 = = = Whitbread era = = = 
 Whitbread transformed the brand from regional to national , expanding production from 200 @,@ 000 to 850 @,@ 000 barrels a year between 1989 and 1995 . By 1993 the cask version was outsold only by Tetley and John Smith 's , and the majority of sales were outside of the North West . By 1994 it was the fourth @-@ highest selling bitter brand in the country . The canned variant was distributed nationwide from 1990 and was the highest @-@ selling canned bitter in the UK from 1992 until 2000 . The beer was officially exported overseas from 1993 , initially to Canada . The rise in sales of the beer coincided with the elevation of Manchester from " city of dark , beaten mills to the cultural magnet of Madchester " . Manchester and the North of England were now fashionable in the public consciousness and rejuvenated from industrial slump . Whitbread chief executive Peter Jarvis commented in 1995 that : 
 It was very fortuitous that the brewery was in Manchester . To outsiders , Manchester is a very attractive place – known the world over for soccer , art , music and broadcasting . It would be difficult to have a Cream of Wolverhampton even though Banks 's beer is very good . People do not aspire to visit Wolverhampton . On the whole they try to by @-@ pass it . 
 Success was attributed to an excellent marketing campaign , and being the first canned ale to be sold with a widget after Guinness . In 1997 Boddingtons sales peaked , and 1998 saw a drop in sales of 10 per cent . Boddingtons had been turned into : " a fashion product ... and as with all fashion products , the drinkers moved on " . In 1998 production of the Flowers ale brands was moved to Strangeways . Boddingtons ' share of the UK ale market grew to 4 @.@ 9 per cent in 1998 @-@ 1999 , and sales grew by 7 @.@ 3 percent during 1999 @-@ 2000 . 
 Meanwhile , in 1995 the independent owner of the 450 @-@ strong former Boddingtons tied estate , The Boddington Group , was taken over by <unk> . 
 = = = Interbrew takeover = = = 
 In May 2000 the Whitbread Beer Company was acquired by the Belgian brewer Interbrew , which owned Stella Artois . At that time one in eight barrels of Boddingtons was exported to some 40 countries worldwide , including China , the United States , Taiwan and the West Indies . The Strangeways Brewery <unk> facility closed in February 2003 with the loss of 50 jobs . In August 2003 , amidst falling sales , Interbrew relaunched the cask product in the North West of England , with an increased strength . The relaunch was unsuccessful and the changes were reversed . 
 In September 2004 the owners ( now known as InBev ) announced plans to close the Strangeways Brewery and move most production from Manchester to Magor in South Wales and Samlesbury , Lancashire , with the loss of 60 jobs . Two years earlier the brewery had employed 250 people . Boddingtons cask ale production , which accounted for less than 10 per cent of output , was moved to Hydes Brewery in Moss Side . The closure plan was made despite the company admitting the brewery was profitable but the brewery site had become a valuable property asset and was subsequently sold for £ 12 million to developers . A spokesman for the firm argued : " [ The ] building was built in the Victorian times and it is an old historic brewery but it was a victim of its age . It is an inflexible brewery – it can 't bottle or can and customer needs have moved on " . Production ended in February 2005 and the brewery was demolished in 2007 . Bloomberg Businessweek described the move by InBev as " unsentimental " . 
 In May 2010 it was speculated in The Times that InBev ( Anheuser @-@ Busch InBev from 2008 onwards ) would attempt to sell the Boddingtons brand to another brewer after its failed attempt to sell the UK rights to Bass ale . The newspaper was damning of what it perceived as InBev 's mismanagement of the brand , which had " declined under AB InBev 's hands . The brand was once a leading part of the old Whitbread Beer Company , but its fortunes had dwindled since the closure in 2005 of the Strangeways Brewery . " 
 In 2010 Boddingtons was the sixth @-@ highest selling bitter in the United Kingdom , although sales had dropped by almost three quarters since the takeover by Anheuser – Busch InBev in 2000 . In July 2011 AB InBev 's UK president Stuart MacFarlane claimed " We still believe in the brand " whilst admitting to not advertising the brand for five years , instead reaping the rewards of memories of earlier advertising . Contract brewing of Boddingtons Cask continued until March 2012 when production of the beer ended . 
 Production was around 250 @,@ 000 hectolitres in 2012 , with around 80 per cent of production destined for the UK market , and around 20 per cent for export markets such as Taiwan , Singapore and the United Arab Emirates . 
 = = Beers = = 
 Boddingtons has a distinctive straw @-@ golden coloured body with a creamy white head , which is achieved by the addition of nitrogen . 
 Boddingtons Draught Bitter ( 3 @.@ 5 % ABV ) 
 The nitrogenated and pasteurised variant of the beer available in kegs and cans . It is brewed in Samlesbury . The canned variant , launched in 1991 , contains a widget to give the beer a creamy white head . The beer 's ABV was reduced from 3 @.@ 8 % to 3 @.@ 5 % in late 2008 . On draught in the United Kingdom it is typically served at 5 to 7 degrees Celsius , although an Extra Cold variant served at 3 to 5 degrees Celsius has been available since 2006 . Its taste , or perceived lack of it , has been criticised by some , with Andrew Jefford describing it as a " blandly foamy <unk> travesty of the original [ cask conditioned version ] " . 
 Boddingtons Pub Ale ( 4 @.@ 6 % ABV ) 
 A higher ABV version of Boddingtons Draught Bitter , brewed since 1993 for export markets . It was available in the United Kingdom from 1995 – 6 as Boddingtons Export . 
 = = Advertising = = 
 The Boddingtons two bees logo was introduced in 1900 . The bees are a symbol of Manchester , from a time when it was a " hive of industry " , but the two bees also represent a pun on the company name of Boddingtons Breweries . 
 Boddingtons largely eschewed above the line advertising until 1987 , when it was first advertised on Granada television in the North West of England . The tagline from 1987 until 1991 was " If you don 't get Boddies , you 'll just get bitter " . Under Whitbread 's custodianship the comedian Frankie Howerd fronted the campaign in a series of six television advertisements which mainly aired in the North West in 1990 – 1991 . Lowe Howard @-@ Spink was the advertising agency responsible for the Howerd advertisements . 
 From July 1991 until 1999 , a series of Boddingtons advertisements created by the Bartle Bogle Hegarty ( BBH ) agency used " The Cream of Manchester " tagline . The campaign , credited with revitalising the image of Manchester , was arguably third behind Manchester United and Coronation Street in raising the city 's profile . Originally a set of print advertisements , the campaign was extended to television in 1992 . The television advertisements featured beautiful women with unlikely Mancunian accents and " achieved the seemingly impossible task of making bitter glamorous " . The most famous television advertisement featured a glamorous couple on @-@ board gondolas on Manchester 's River Irwell , in a parody of a well @-@ known " just one Cornetto " ice cream advertisement . According to the Manchester Evening News , " it told the world something about the reinvention of the murky old city , that its once @-@ filthy waterway could almost pass for Venice . " 
 The series won several international advertising awards for BBH . The brand 's <unk> was emphasised through items such as face cream , ice cream , sun cream and whipped cream . Managing director of Whitbread , Miles Templeman , explained that : 
 We were thinking how to turn a second @-@ rate north @-@ west brand into something more stylish , to make it more appealing again . BBH thought of focusing on the creamy aspect , of selling a beer like a face cream . 
 A previously unknown Melanie Sykes launched her career as a television presenter following her appearances in the adverts from 1996 until 1999 . Animated television advertisements starring the transgender playboy cow Graham Heffer ran from 1999 until 2002 . The adverts attracted complaints from the public for allegedly promoting bestiality , homosexuality and drug @-@ taking . Boddingtons become an official partner of the 2002 XVII Commonwealth Games held in Manchester in a deal worth at least £ 1 million . To mark the occasion , a special Boddingtons 5 % ABV Commonwealth Ale cask ale was produced for the North West of England , and subsequently launched nationwide . The last Boddingtons television advertising campaign in 2005 was criticised for capitalising on the beer 's Manchester heritage with a Happy Mondays soundtrack , even though production had moved out of the city . Mike Thompson , a former worker at the brewery and representative of the Transport & General Workers ' Union , said : 
 This is at best cynical and at worst a slur on our great city , its heritage and the Strangeways workers . People have lost their livelihoods because of how this company has behaved . They will not be best pleased at what we can only see as pouring salt on the wounds . 
 Boddington 's was mentioned in episode 2 season 5 of Friends 
 = Eyre Highway = 
 Eyre Highway is a 1 @,@ 660 @-@ kilometre ( 1 @,@ 030 mi ) highway linking Western Australia and South Australia via the Nullarbor Plain . Signed as National Highways 1 and A1 , it forms part of Highway 1 and the Australian National Highway network linking Perth and Adelaide . It was named after explorer Edward John Eyre , who was the first European to cross the Nullarbor by land , in 1840 – 1841 . Eyre Highway runs from Norseman in Western Australia , past Eucla , to the state border . Continuing to the South Australian town of Ceduna , it then crosses the top of the Eyre Peninsula before reaching the city of Port Augusta in South Australia . 
 The construction of the East – West Telegraph line in the 1870s , along Eyre 's route , resulted in a hazardous trail that could be followed for interstate travel . A national highway was called for , but the federal government did not see the route as important enough until 1941 , when a war in the Pacific seemed imminent . The highway was constructed between July 1941 and June 1942 , but was <unk> by January 1942 . Though originally named Forrest Highway , after John Forrest , by the war cabinet , it was officially named and gazetted Eyre Highway , a name agreed upon by the states ' nomenclature committees . 
 The finished road , while an improvement over the previous route , still was not much more than a track , and remained such throughout the 1940s and 1950s . Efforts to seal the highway began in Norseman in 1960 , with the Western Australian section completed in 1969 and the South Australian section finished in 1976 . Further improvement works have been undertaken since the 1980s , including widening and reconstructing portions of the road . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Eyre Highway is the only sealed road linking the states of Western Australia and South Australia , running east from Norseman in Western Australia for 1 @,@ 200 kilometres ( 750 mi ) across the Nullarbor Plain to Ceduna , South Australia . It then crosses the top of the Eyre Peninsula as it continues eastwards for 470 kilometres ( 290 mi ) , before reaching the city of Port Augusta . Eyre Highway is part of the National Highway route between Perth and Adelaide , and also forms part of Australia 's Highway 1 . It is signed as National Highway 1 in Western Australia , and National Highway A1 in South Australia . The vast majority of the highway is a two @-@ lane single carriageway with a speed limit of 110 kilometres per hour ( 70 mph ) , except in and around built up areas . Road trains ( A @-@ double or B @-@ triple ) up to 36 @.@ 5 metres ( 120 ft ) are permitted on Eyre Highway , but are limited to the slightly lower maximum speed of 100 kilometres per hour ( 62 mph ) . 
 The Western Australian section of Eyre Highway is on the western side of the Nullarbor Plain ; the South Australian section crosses the eastern section of the Nullarbor Plain , and the top of the Eyre Peninsula . The Nullarbor gets its name from Latin for " no tree " , and the typical view is that of a straight highway and practically unchanging flat saltbush @-@ covered terrain , although some parts are located on ridges . The Eyre Peninsula has been extensively cleared for agriculture , although there are remnant corridors of native eucalyptus woodland alongside its roads . 
 Main Roads Western Australia and the Department of Planning , Transport and Infrastructure in South Australia monitor traffic volume across the states ' road networks , including various locations along Eyre Highway . In Western Australia , the recorded traffic volumes ranged between 430 and 760 vehicles per day in 2013 / 14 . In South Australia , the estimated annual average daily traffic as of September 2015 varied between 500 and 1500 west of Lincoln Highway , and was 2700 to the east . 
 Eyre Highway was assessed by the Australian Automobile Association in 2011 to be among the lowest risk highways in the country , based on total number of casualty crashes per length of road . However , individual risk based on casualty crash rates per vehicle kilometre travelled was assessed as high for the 95 @-@ kilometre ( 59 mi ) section east of Yalata to Fowlers Bay , medium for a 106 @-@ kilometre ( 66 mi ) section from Fowlers Bay to Ceduna , low @-@ medium between Ceduna and Port Augusta , and low west of Yalata . In 2013 , Eyre Highway similarly received a lower safety rating for the South Australian sections , compared to the Western Australian section . Out of five stars , approximately 10 % was rated as one- or two @-@ star in Western Australia , generally towards the Norseman end , and 91 % was rated three- or four @-@ star . In South Australia , 49 % was rated as one- or two @-@ star , mostly from Yalata to Ceduna , and across the Eyre Peninsula , with the remaining 51 % rated as three- or four @-@ star . 
 = = = Western Australia = = = 
 Eyre Highway begins at the town of Norseman , on the Coolgardie – Esperance Highway . Apart from Eucla , 12 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) from the South Australia border , roadhouses serving the highway are the only settlements on the 720 @-@ kilometre @-@ long ( 450 mi ) stretch through Western Australia . These are located 65 to 180 kilometres ( 40 to 110 mi ) apart , at Balladonia , Caiguna , Cocklebiddy , Madura , and <unk> . The section between Balladonia and Caiguna includes what is regarded as the longest straight stretch of road in Australia and one of the longest in the world . The road stretches for 145 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 90 @.@ 5 mi ) without turning , and is signposted and commonly known as the " 90 Mile Straight " . Travelling east , the highway descends through the Madura Pass just before the Madura roadhouse from the Nullarbor Plain to the coastal Roe Plains . It skirts the bottom of the escarpment , climbing back through the Eucla Pass just before Eucla . 
 Because of its remoteness , some widened sections of the highway serve as emergency airstrips for the Royal Flying Doctor Service . These airstrips are signposted , have runway pavement markings painted on the road , and turnaround bays for small aircraft . 
 = = = South Australia = = = 
 After crossing the border at the settlement of Border Village , the highway passes through the Nullarbor Wilderness Protection Area and then through the localities of Yalata , Penong and Ceduna . Before arriving at Ceduna , it enters the Eyre Peninsula . After Ceduna , the highway passes the intersection with Flinders Highway and heads south @-@ east towards the town of Kyancutta . After passing through the localities of <unk> , Poochera , <unk> and <unk> , the highway arrives at Kyancutta where it meets the north end of the Tod Highway . After Kyancutta , the highway turns to the east towards the town of Kimba . Before arriving at Kimba , it turns to the north @-@ east . After Kimba , the highway passes through the southern end of the Lake Gilles Conservation Park and to the immediate north of both the town of Iron Knob and the <unk> Training Area before meeting the Lincoln Highway . It then continues north @-@ east until it intersects Augusta Highway and Stuart Highway , north @-@ west of the Joy Baluch AM Bridge which crosses Spencer Gulf at Port Augusta . 
 An alternative route between Ceduna and Port Augusta , formerly signed Alternate Route 1 and now signed B100 , follows Flinders Highway and Lincoln Highway down the western and eastern sides of the peninsula respectively . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Edward John Eyre was the first European to traverse the coastline of the Great Australian Bight and the Nullarbor Plain by land , in 1840 – 1841 , on an almost 2 @,@ 000 @-@ mile ( 3 @,@ 200 km ) trip from Adelaide to Albany , Western Australia . 
 Three decades later , the East – West Telegraph line was installed . Constructed between 1875 and 1877 , it followed the same route across the Nullarbor and along the Great Australian Bight , after John Forrest retraced Eyre 's route in 1870 and confirmed its suitability . Repeater stations were installed at Port Lincoln , Streaky Bay , Smoky Bay , Fowlers Bay , Eucla , Israelite Bay , Esperance , and Bremer Bay . Stations were latter added at Franklin Harbour ( Cowell ) in 1885 , <unk> in 1896 , and Balladonia in 1897 . 
 An inland route across the Nullarbor was established with the 1912 to 1917 construction of the Trans @-@ Australian Railway , from Port Augusta via Tarcoola to Kalgoorlie . With few roads or tracks encountering the line , most of it is only accessible by rail . 
 = = = Highway planning and construction = = = 
 The construction of the telegraph had resulted in a trail that could be followed for interstate travel , but it was a haphazard route which only the more adventurous motorists would take . Many travellers were unprepared for the harsh conditions and lack of services ; they would cause a nuisance for station owners and other travellers by scrounging petrol , contaminating water supplies , leaving gates open , and committing acts of vandalism . In 1938 the Royal Automobile Club of Western Australia ( RAC ) called for a national highway to be constructed by the federal government , as it would be a strategic defence road , provide another link between Western Australia and other states , and improve the tourist experience . The federal government did not see the road as important enough for its involvement . 
 In May 1941 , following the construction of the central north – south Stuart Highway , the federal government announced its decision to build the east – west highway between Norseman and Port Augusta . A northerly route , close to the Trans @-@ Australian Railway , had been considered , but extensive limestone outcrops made it impractical . Taking a route east from Norseman , with some detours around limestone ridges , would allow a road to be formed quickly and easily . With a war in the Pacific seemingly imminent , construction soon began , in July 1941 . The Army was responsible for fuel , food , and communications , while the state government departments of Main Roads ( Western Australia ) and Highways ( South Australia ) managed the actual construction . 
 While initial estimates placed the construction cost at £ 125 @,@ 000 over a period of four months , it actually cost twice as much , and was not completed until June 1942 , though the road was sufficiently <unk> and in use by January 1942 . The finished road , while an improvement over the previous route , still was not much more than a track . The only sections with a bitumen surface were the Madura and Eucla Passes . The formed width was 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) , with some sections lightly gravelled over a 16 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) width . 
 = = = Naming = = = 
 In the 1930s and 1940s , the Western Australian Nomenclature Advisory Committee had been choosing directional names for the state 's main arterial roads ( such as Great Eastern Highway ) , while the South Australian Highways Department had been naming the major roads to other states after explorers ( such as Flinders Highway , named after Matthew Flinders ) . The historical memorials committee of the Royal Geographical Society in South Australia was disappointed in 1938 that no road had been named after Eyre , despite its suggestion that the road from Port Augusta towards Perth should be Eyre Highway . In the same year , the RAC suggested that the proposed new highway be named Forrest Highway , after John Forrest , and the Assistant Minister for Commerce , Senator Macdonald , concurred . 
 On 21 January 1942 , Prime Minister John Curtin announced the war cabinet decision to name the newly constructed road Forrest Highway , for military purposes . Separately , the states ' nomenclature committees were considering names for the road . A proposal for a single name to be used in both states was put by the Western Australian committee to the South Australian committee when the highway was completed . Two names were suggested : Great Western Highway , in line with similar directional names in Western Australia , and Eyre Highway , after the explorer . After several communications between the committees , both decided to use the name Eyre Highway . After a receiving a letter from the South Australian Premier in May 1943 , supporting the nomenclature committee 's recommendation , Curtin agreed to the name , subject to approval from the Western Australian government . 
 The South Australian section was named Eyre Highway on 20 May 1943 , with the portion from Murat Bay ( Ceduna ) to the state border declared a main road . Eyre Highway was gazetted in Western Australia on 11 June 1943 , and included the road from Coolgardie to Norseman until Coolgardie – Esperance Highway was gazetted on 16 August 1957 . 
 = = = Sealing = = = 
 The state of Eyre Highway remained relatively unchanged throughout the 1940s and 1950s . The road received yearly maintenance , but further , more expensive works were not warranted due to the low traffic volume of approximately fourteen vehicles per day . However , the maintenance and grading was hindered by a lack of rainfall – the road was smoothed out each year , and small sections were gravelled , but the soil the road was made from was too weak to be an effective road surface . When it did rain , even in small amounts , the road would become boggy , from patches that had broken down into a powdery substance ( known as " <unk> " ) during dry periods . Large numbers of vehicles travelling the highway in 1962 , for the Commonwealth Games in Perth , damaged the road in numerous locations , and the lack of moisture required salt water to be pumped from 350 feet ( 110 m ) below the surface for use in repairs and maintenance . 
 Work to seal Eyre Highway was undertaken in the 1960s and 1970s . As the federal government refused requests from Western Australia and South Australia for a special allocation to fund the sealed road , the work was left for the states to finance , over a number of years . Construction began in 1960 , at the Norseman end . By the end of that year five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) had been reconstructed , and was ready to be sealed over a 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) width . Fourteen miles ( 23 km ) were sealed in 1961 , another 67 miles ( 108 km ) were completed by 1963 , and in 1964 the seal reached 111 miles ( 179 km ) out from Norseman . By the mid @-@ 1960s , approximately 60 miles ( 100 km ) were being sealed each year . With increased priority given to the project from 1966 , Western Australia 's portion of the highway was completed in 1969 , with a ceremony held in Eucla on 17 October . 
 In South Australia , a decade @-@ long program to seal the highway began in the mid @-@ 1960s . The first section to be completed was the 462 @-@ kilometre ( 287 mi ) route between Port Augusta and Ceduna , in December 1967 . In October 1972 the Ceduna to Penong seal was completed , and the final link to be sealed , between Penong and the state border , was completed with a ceremony held on 29 September 1976 near <unk> Tank , South Australia . Between Yalata and the state border , the highway was realigned and deviated considerably from the original unsealed route . In deciding the new alignment for the South Australian section of the highway between Yalata and the state border , long , straight , flat sections were purposely avoided to prevent driver boredom and consequent fatigue , as well as sun @-@ glare and glare from oncoming headlights . The new alignment also took into consideration the potential tourism opportunities provided along the coast of the Great Australian Bight . The older highway route runs from Border Village to the Nullarbor Homestead , approximately 15 to 20 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 to 12 @.@ 4 mi ) away from the coast . The previous route from the Nullarbor Homestead to <unk> Motel also travelled further inland than the new alignment , past Ivy Tank Motel and Yalata Roadhouse . 
 = = = Further improvements = = = 
 The 1960s standard of a twenty @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 2 m ) sealed width with four @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) gravel shoulders was proving to be inadequate by the 1980s . Increasing numbers of truck and tourist coaches caused fretting , and reduced the actual sealed width to 5 @.@ 6 metres ( 18 ft ) along much of Eyre Highway . Main Roads in Western Australia spent around a million dollars a year on rehabilitating 50 @-@ to @-@ 100 @-@ kilometre ( 30 to 60 mi ) sections . A major project to improve Eyre Highway , rather than just repair the damage , began in 1984 with federal government funding to reconstruct 300 kilometres ( 190 mi ) in Western Australia . 
 The highway was rebuilt with a seven @-@ metre @-@ wide ( 23 ft ) pavement , with shoulders partially sealed to a width of one metre ( 3 ft 3 in ) . Work began in mid @-@ 1985 near Cocklebiddy , with a 58 @-@ kilometre @-@ long ( 36 mi ) section completed in 1986 . Work undertaken from 1987 to 1988 reached out 110 kilometres ( 68 mi ) east of Cocklebiddy , and 225 kilometres ( 140 mi ) had been completed by June 1990 . The upgrade from Cocklebiddy to the state border was completed in October 1994 . 
 Since the 1990s , regular maintenance and minor improvements have been an ongoing effort ; $ 3 @.@ 9 million was spent on these works in Western Australia in 1996 . There have been larger @-@ scale works including reconstruction of sections near Caiguna , Balladonia , and the Frazer Range in Western Australia , as well as <unk> and Kyancutta in South Australia . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Minehead = 
 Minehead is a coastal town and civil parish in Somerset , England . It lies on the south bank of the Bristol Channel , 21 miles ( 34 km ) north @-@ west of the county town of Taunton , 12 miles ( 19 km ) from the border with the county of Devon and in proximity of the Exmoor National Park . The parish of Minehead has a population of approximately 11 @,@ 981 making it the most populous town in the West Somerset local government district . This figure includes Alcombe , a suburban village which has been subsumed into Minehead . 
 There is evidence of human occupation in the area since the Bronze and Iron Ages . Before the Norman Conquest it was held by Ælfgar , Earl of Mercia and after it by William de Moyon and his descendants , who administered the area from Dunster Castle , which was later sold to Sir George Luttrell and his family . There was a small port at Minehead by 1380 , which grew into a major trading centre during the medieval period . Most trade transferred to larger ports during the 20th century , but pleasure steamers did call at the port . Major rebuilding took place in the Lower or Middle town area following a fire in 1791 and the fortunes of the town revived with the growth in sea bathing , and by 1851 was becoming a retirement centre . There was a marked increase in building during the early years of the 20th century , which resulted in the wide main shopping avenue and adjacent roads with Edwardian style architecture . The town 's flood defences were improved after a storm in 1990 caused flooding . 
 Minehead is governed by a town council , which was created in 1983 and has been part of the West Somerset local government district since 1974 . In addition to the parish church of St. Michael on the Hill in Minehead , the separate parish church of St Michael the Archangel is situated in Church Street , Alcombe . Alcombe is also home to the Spiritualist Church in Grove Place . Since 1991 , Minehead has been twinned with Saint @-@ <unk> , a small town close to the regional centre of Laval in the Mayenne département of France . Blenheim Gardens , which is Minehead ’ s largest park , was opened in 1925 . The town is also the home of a Butlins Holiday Park which increases Minehead 's seasonal tourist population by several thousand . 
 There are a variety of schools and religious , cultural and sporting facilities including sailing and wind surfing and golf . One popular ancient local tradition involves the Hobby Horse , or Obby Oss , which takes to the streets for four days on the eve of the first of May each year , with accompanying musicians and rival horses . The town is the starting point of the South West Coast Path National Trail , the nation 's longest long @-@ distance countryside walking trail . The Minehead Railway was opened in 1874 and closed in 1971 but has since been reopened as the West Somerset Railway . 
 = = History = = 
 The town sits at the foot of a steeply rising outcrop of Exmoor known as North Hill , and the original name of the town was <unk> , which means mountain in Welsh . It has also been written as <unk> ( 1046 ) , <unk> ( 1086 ) , <unk> ( 1225 ) and <unk> ( also 1225 ) , which contain elements of Welsh and Old English words for hill . 
 Bronze Age barrows at Selworthy Beacon and an Iron Age enclosure at <unk> Brake , west of the town show evidence of prehistoric occupation of the area , although there is also possible evidence in the intertidal area , where the remains of a submerged forest still exist . 
 Minehead was part of the hundred of Carhampton . It is mentioned as a manor belonging to William de Moyon in the Domesday Book in 1086 , although it had previously been held by Ælfgar , Earl of Mercia . William de Mohun of Dunster , 1st Earl of Somerset and his descendants administered the area from Dunster Castle , which was later sold to Sir George Luttrell and his family . 
 There was a small port at Minehead by 1380 , but it was not until 1420 that money given by Lady Margaret Luttrell enabled improvements to be made and a jetty built . During the reign of Elizabeth I , the town had its own Port Officer similar to the position at Bristol . Vessels in the 15th century included the <unk> which traded between Ireland and Bristol , and others carrying salt and other cargo from La Rochelle in France . Other products included local wool and cloth which were traded for coal from South Wales . In 1559 a Charter of Incorporation , established a free Borough and Parliamentary representation , but was made conditional on improvements being made to the port . The harbour silted up and fell into disrepair so that in 1604 James I withdrew the town 's charter . Control reverted to the Luttrells and a new harbour was built , at a cost of £ 5 @,@ 000 , further out to sea than the original , which had been at the mouth of the Bratton Stream . It incorporated a pier , dating from 1616 , and was built to replace that at Dunster which was silting up . Trade was primarily with Wales for cattle , sheep , wool , butter , fish and coal . These are commemorated in the town arms which include a <unk> and sailing ship . Privateers based at Minehead were involved in the war with Spain and France during 1625 – 1630 and again during the War of the Spanish Succession from 1702 – 1713 . The first cranes were installed after further improvements to the port in 1714 . 
 The Mermaid , one of the oldest business premises in the town , has been , at various times , a ship chandler 's , a nineteenth @-@ century " department store " and in more recent years a tearoom . The building was the home of Minehead ’ s famous Whistling Ghost – Old Mother Leakey , who died in 1634 . The ghost became notorious by allegedly " whistling up a storm " whenever one of her son ’ s ships neared port . The level of anxiety in the town became so great that , in 1636 , the Bishop of Bath and Wells presided over a Royal Commission to inquire into the matter . The commission eventually reported that the witnesses were unreliable and when its findings were signed by Archbishop Laud and ghost 's publicity began to wane . 
 By the beginning of the 18th century , trade between Minehead and Ireland , South Wales , Bristol and Bridgwater grew , with forty vessels based in the harbour for trade and herring fishing . It was also a departure point for pilgrims to Santiago de <unk> . Until the 19th century trade continued with Ireland but Minehead vessels started to travel further afield to Virginia and the West Indies . Further problems with the port continued and led to a decline in trade and the fisheries in the late 18th century and in 1834 the port lost its jurisdiction to Bridgwater . In the 20th century most trade transferred to larger ports , but pleasure steamers did call at the port . Minehead Lifeboat Station was established in 1901 near the harbour . The pier was demolished during the Second World War as it obstructed the view from the gun battery on the quay head , as part of the coastal defence preparations , which stopped steamers calling at the harbour until it was cleared in 1951 . 
 Major rebuilding took place in the Lower or Middle town area following a fire in 1791 . In that year a Carrara marble statue of Queen Anne , sculpted by Francis Bird was presented to the town by Sir Jacob <unk> , who served as the local Member of Parliament from 1698 to 1715 . It originally stood in the parish church but was moved to Wellington Square in 1893 , when the marble pedestal and canopy by H. Dare Bryan were added . Lower town and the quay area were rebuilt and the fortunes of the town revived with the growth in sea bathing , and by 1851 was becoming a retirement centre . 
 Early areas of development of the town include Higher Town with its cottages , many of which are " listed " buildings of historic interest , some of which are still thatched , and the Quay area . In Victorian times wealthy industrialists built large houses on North Hill and hotels were developed so that tourism became an important industry . There was a marked increase in building in the early years of the 20th century when the landowners , the Luttrells of Dunster Castle , released extensive building land . Probably the most prolific Edwardian architect was <unk> from North Devon who settled in the town and was responsible for designing several hundred domestic properties as well as the Market House , Town Hall and Queens Hall . It was in the Edwardian and Victorian era that tourism in the town increased . | Edwardian style architecture . The steamship SS Pelican grounded in Minehead Bay on 22 June 1928 , on an unmarked reef known as the Gables that circles Minehead Bay , 0 @.@ 7 miles ( 1 @.@ 1 km ) from land . The Pelican was sailing from Port Talbot to Highbridge . The crew of five were rescued by the Minehead Lifeboat . Evacuees were billeted in Minehead during the Second World War . Butlins opened in 1962 , and has brought thousands of visitors to the town . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The civil parish of Minehead is governed by a town council , which was created in 1983 . In 2002 , the parish was estimated to have a population of 10 @,@ 330 . Administratively , Minehead has been part of the West Somerset local government district since 1974 , having previously been Minehead Urban District . The district is in turn part of the Somerset shire county , and administrative tasks are shared between county , district and town councils . 
 It falls within the Bridgwater and West Somerset constituency represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom . It elects one Member of Parliament ( MP ) by the first past the post system of election . The current MP is Ian Liddell @-@ Grainger , a member of the Conservative Party . 
 Minehead is within the South West England ( European Parliament constituency ) , which elects six MEPs using the d 'Hondt method of party @-@ list proportional representation . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Minehead is located on the Bristol Channel coast of South @-@ West England , and thus experiences one of the highest tidal ranges in the world . The tidal rise and fall in the Bristol Channel can be as great as 14 @.@ 5 m ( 48 ft ) , second only to the Bay of Fundy in Eastern Canada . 
 The town is overlooked by North Hill , and is just outside the boundaries of Exmoor National Park . The cliff exposures around the shoreline are dramatic and fossils are exposed . Areas of the town included Higher Town , Quay Town and Lower or Middle Town , although they are no longer separate . 
 In 1990 , much of Minehead 's beach was washed away in a severe storm which also caused serious flooding in the town . A £ 12 @.@ 6 million sea defence scheme by the Environment Agency was designed to reduce the risk of this erosion and flooding happening in the future . The Environment Agency built 1 @.@ 1 miles ( 1 @.@ 8 km ) of new sea wall and rock or concrete stepped revetments between 1997 and 1998 and imported 320 @,@ 000 tons of additional sand in 1999 to build a new beach . This beach sits between four rock groynes and has been built at a much higher level than the previous beach so that the waves are broken before they reach the new sea wall . Any waves that do reach the new wall are turned back by its curved shape . The town 's new sea defences were officially opened in 2001 . 
 Blenheim Gardens , which is Minehead ’ s largest park , was opened in 1925 . The bandstand within the park is used to host musical events . 
 Along with the rest of South West England , Minehead has a temperate climate which is generally wetter and milder than the rest of England . The annual mean temperature is about 10 ° C ( 50 ° F ) with seasonal and diurnal variations , but due to the modifying effect of the sea , the range is less than in most other parts of the United Kingdom . January is the coldest month with mean minimum temperatures between 1 ° C ( 34 ° F ) and 2 ° C ( 36 ° F ) . July and August are the warmest months in the region with mean daily maxima around 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) . In general , December is the dullest month and June the sunniest . The south west of England enjoys a favoured location , particularly in summer , when the Azores High extends its influence north @-@ eastwards towards the UK . 
 Cloud often forms inland , especially near hills , and reduces exposure to sunshine . The average annual sunshine totals around 1 @,@ 600 hours . Rainfall tends to be associated with Atlantic depressions or with convection . In summer , convection caused by solar surface heating sometimes forms shower clouds and a large proportion of the annual precipitation falls from showers and thunderstorms at this time of year . Average rainfall is around 800 – 900 mm ( 31 – 35 in ) . About 8 – 15 days of snowfall is typical . November to March have the highest mean wind speeds , with June to August having the lightest . The predominant wind direction is from the south @-@ west . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 The town 's major tourist attraction is Butlins holiday camp . Others include : the terminus of the West Somerset Railway ; the town 's main ornamental park , Blenheim Gardens , off Blenheim Road ; and the Minehead & West Somerset Golf Club , Somerset 's oldest golf club , established in 1882 , which has an 18 @-@ hole links course . A variety of sailing and wind surfing options are on offer , as well as the usual beach activities . There are many other attractions and amusement arcades and a variety of well @-@ known high street stores such as W H Smith and Boots , together with independent local shops . The town has both a Tesco and a Morrisons supermarket on its outskirts with a new <unk> currently under development . 
 The South West Coast Path National Trail starts at a marker , erected in Minehead in 2001 , partly paid for by the South West Coast Path Association . The UK 's longest long @-@ distance countryside walking trail , it runs along the South West Coast to Poole in Dorset . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The town 's location — sea to the north and Exmoor to the south — means that transport links are limited . Minehead is located on the A39 road . 
 Local bus services are operated by Webberbus ( seven routes ) , First Somerset & Avon ( three routes ) , and Quantock Motor Services ( two routes ) . 
 Minehead railway station is close to the beach . The Minehead Railway was opened on 16 July 1874 , linking the town to Taunton and beyond . It was operated by the Bristol and Exeter Railway which was amalgamated into the Great Western Railway in 1876 . The Minehead Railway was itself absorbed into the GWR in 1897 , which in turn was nationalised into British Railways in 1948 . It was closed on 4 January 1971 but has since been reopened as the West Somerset Railway , which is notable for being the longest heritage railway in Britain . 
 = = Education = = 
 In Minehead , there are two first schools , one middle school and an upper school , West Somerset Community College , which provides education for 1298 students between the ages of 13 and 18 . In 2006 there was debate about changing West Somerset 's 3 @-@ tier school system to a 2 @-@ tier system to match the rest of Somerset and the majority of education authorities in the UK . 
 = = Religious sites = = 
 The Anglican parish church of St. Michael dates from the 15th century and has been designated by English Heritage as a Grade II * listed building ; its tower used to display a beacon light for ships approaching the harbour . After being caught in a violent storm at sea , Robert Quirke dedicated a ship and its cargo to God 's service , as well as donating a cellar near the quay for prayers to be offered for those at sea . Dating from 1628 and known as the Gibraltar Celler [ sic ] , it is now the Chapel of St Peter . Quirke also donated money from the sale of the ship and its cargo to build almshouses . 
 St Michael 's parish church contains a number of historical highlights , including an impressive late medieval rood screen and rood stair , and an attractive stained glass window designed by Sir Henry Holiday . The view from the churchyard of the surrounding hills and coastline is breathtaking . 
 The Church of St Michael the Archangel in Alcombe was built in 1903 as a chapel of ease for the Dunster parish , but in 1953 it became the Parish Church of Alcombe in its own right . St. Andrew 's Church , on Wellington Square in the town , was built of red sandstone in 1877 – 1880 , by George Edmund Street . 
 Butlins Minehead is the only Butlins resort still to have a small on @-@ site chapel , and over the Easter period the entire resort plays host to an annual Spring Harvest , the largest Christian festival in the UK . The Catholic parish of Minehead covers an area of 200 square miles ( 520 km2 ) and is served by the Sacred Heart Parish Church , built in 1896 , as well as a mass centre in the nearby village of Watchet . There are also religious sites serving the needs of the Baptist , Evangelical , Methodist and United Reformed communities and the Plymouth Brethren . 
 = = Local economy = = 
 Minehead has one of the UK 's three remaining Butlins holiday camps , and tourism has been a part of Minehead 's economy since Victorian times . At the height of the season in late July and early August , the town 's population is significantly increased by an influx of tourists . 
 There is a Farmers ' Market in the Parade every Friday from 8 @.@ 30 am to 2 pm , with a wide range of reasonably priced local produce . 
 = = Culture = = 
 The town hosts the annual Minehead and Exmoor Festival , a week @-@ long classical music festival that has been running since 1963 . Richard Dickins has held the post of artistic director for the festival since 1982 . 
 The wooded bluffs above Minehead feature as the Hermit 's abode " in that wood which slopes down to the sea " , in The Rime of the Ancient Mariner by Romantic poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge . The poet lived nearby , at Nether Stowey ( between Bridgwater and Minehead ) . His statue can be seen at the nearby harbour at Watchet . He and Wordsworth ( who lived nearby at Alfoxton House ) would often roam the hills and coast on long night walks ; leading to local gossip that they were ' spies ' for the French . The Government sent an agent to investigate , but found they were , indeed , " mere poets " . Cecil Frances Alexander wrote the popular Anglican hymn All Things Bright And Beautiful in Minehead and in nearby Dunster the verse : 
 " The purple headed mountain , The river running by , The sunset and the morning , That brightens up the sky ; − " Refers to Grabbist hill and the River Avill that runs near it through the popular tourist location Snowdrop Valley on Exmoor 
 Minehead was the subject of a parody skit as the fictional target of a takeover in Monty Python 's infamous " Mr. <unk> " sketch , where barely concealed caricatures of Hitler , von Ribbentrop and Heinrich Himmler conspire at a local rooming house . There , the " National <unk> " party wish to unite Minehead and Taunton in a manner similar to the Anschluss between Germany and Austria in 1938 . 
 = = = May Day Hobby Horse = = = 
 One popular ancient local tradition involves the Hobby Horse , or Obby Oss , which takes to the streets on the eve of the first of May each year , with accompanying musicians and rival horses , for four days . In fact there are three rival hobby horses , the Original Sailor 's Horse , the Traditional Sailor 's Horse and the Town Horse . They appear on May Eve ( called " Show Night " ) , on May Day morning ( when they salute the sunrise at a crossroads on the outskirts of town ) , 2 and 3 May ( when a ceremony called " The Bootie " takes place in the evening called " Bootie Night " at part of town called Cher ) . Each horse is made of a boat @-@ shaped wooden frame , pointed and built up at each end , which is carried on the dancer 's shoulders . As at Padstow , his face is hidden by a mask attached to a tall , pointed hat . The top surface of the horse is covered with ribbons and strips of fabric . A long fabric skirt , painted with rows of multicoloured roundels , hangs down to the ground all round . A long tail is attached to the back of the frame . Each horse is accompanied by a small group of musicians and attendants . The Town Horse is accompanied by " Gullivers " , dressed similarly to the horse but without the large frame ; as at Padstow , smaller , children 's horses have sometimes been constructed . The horses ' visits are ( or were ) believed to bring good luck . In the past there was also a similar hobby horse based at the nearby village of Dunster , which would sometimes visit Minehead . The first of May has been a festival day in Minehead since 1465 . 
 = = Sport and recreation = = 
 Minehead Barbarians , the town 's rugby club , have been playing together since the 1930s , but the main local football club , Minehead F.C. , is even older , founded in 1889 . In September 2007 , the <unk> European Outdoor Tug of war Championships was held at the football club 's stadium . Minehead Cricket Club , based at the West Somerset Community College in Alcombe , field four men 's teams and one women 's <unk> there are plans for a swimming pool to be built in the grounds of the West Somerset Community College . There is a bowls club on Irnham Road . 
 Minehead has on several occasions played host to the Britain 's Strongest Man contest , most recently in 2004 , and since 2006 the Butlins Resort has been one of the venues for the World Wrestling Entertainment 's UK winter tour . In 2010 stage four of the Tour of Britain cycling race started in Minehead . 
 In April 2010 <unk> started to broadcast music , travel news , events guide and general to and for the Minehead community . 
 The 2011 European Outdoor Tug of War Championships was held within the grounds at Butlin 's Minehead from 22 to 25 September . 
 Since December 2012 Minehead has hosted the PDC Players Championship Finals . 
 Minehead also hosts many motorsport events including the Somerset Stages Rally which has been hosted in the area for years . There is also the <unk> Quad and Motocross Event held in Bratton Woods . 
 = = Notable residents = = 
 Richard Chorley ( 1927 – 2002 ) , noted physical geographer , was born and raised in Minehead . 
 Arthur C. Clarke ( 1917 – 2008 ) , science fiction writer , was born in Minehead . 
 Peter Hurford ( born 1930 ) , organist and composer , was born in Minehead . 
 Stephen Mulhern ( born 1977 ) , television presenter , was born in Minehead . 
 Adam O 'Brian ( born 1989 ) , actor in The Imposter ( 2012 film ) , was raised in Minehead . 
 Sir Nick Partridge OBE , Chief Executive of The Terrence Higgins Trust , and a key campaigner on HIV and AIDS , lived in the town in the 1970s when his family moved there to run a hotel . 
 Tim Kevan writer , blogger and barrister , author of the Baby <unk> series of books , was raised in Minehead 
 Danielle Waterman ( born 1984 ) , Member of the England women 's national rugby union team and member of the 2014 Women 's Rugby World Cup winning team , was raised in Minehead 
 = Æthelnoth ( archbishop of Canterbury ) = 
 Æthelnoth ( also <unk> , <unk> , or <unk> ; died 1038 ) was a medieval Archbishop of Canterbury . Descended from an earlier English king , Æthelnoth became a monk prior to becoming archbishop . While archbishop , he travelled to Rome and brought back saint 's relics . He consecrated a number of other bishops who came from outside his archdiocese , leading to some friction with other archbishops . Although he was regarded as a saint after his death , there is little evidence of his veneration or of a cult in Canterbury or elsewhere . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Æthelnoth was a son of the Æthelmær the Stout and a grandson of Æthelweard the Historian , who was a great @-@ great @-@ grandson of Æthelred I. In the view of the historian Frank Barlow , Æthelnoth was probably the uncle of Godwin of Wessex . He was baptised by Dunstan , and a story was told at Glastonbury Abbey that as the infant was baptised , his hand made a motion much like that an archbishop makes when blessing . From this motion , Dunstan is said to have prophesied that Æthelnoth would become an archbishop . 
 Æthelnoth became a monk at Glastonbury , then was made dean of the monastery of Christ Church Priory , at Canterbury , the cathedral chapter for the diocese of Canterbury . He was also a chaplain to King Cnut of England and Denmark as well as Dean of Canterbury when on 13 November 1020 Æthelnoth was consecrated as Archbishop of Canterbury . Æthelnoth 's elevation probably was a gesture of appeasement , as Æthelnoth 's brother Æthelweard had been executed in 1017 by Cnut , who also banished a brother @-@ in @-@ law named Æthelweard in 1020 . A later story stated that Cnut favoured Æthelnoth because Æthelnoth had bestowed chrism on the king . This may be a garbled account of Æthelnoth 's participation in Cnut 's confirmation as a Christian in 1016 or his coronation in 1017 . There are some indications that he was a student of Ælfric of Eynsham , the homilist . 
 = = Archbishop of Canterbury = = 
 In 1022 Æthelnoth went to Rome to obtain the pallium , and was received by Pope Benedict VIII . On his return trip , he bought a relic of St Augustine of Hippo for 100 silver talents and one gold talent . He gave the relic to Coventry Abbey . He also presided over the translation of the relics of Ælfheah , his predecessor at Canterbury who was regarded as a martyr and saint . In 1022 Æthelnoth consecrated Gerbrand as bishop for the Diocese of Roskilde , which was in Scandinavia . The archbishop of Hamburg @-@ Bremen was the metropolitan of Roskilde , and the fact that Gerbrand was consecrated by an English archbishop later caused friction between the bishop and his metropolitan . Cnut was forced to concede that in the future he would not appoint bishops in Bremen 's archdiocese without the metropolitan 's advice . A later tradition held that Æthelnoth consecrated two Welsh bishops , one at Llandaff and one at St. David 's . 
 The medieval chronicler William of Malmesbury praised Æthelnoth 's wisdom . A story of doubtful authenticity tells how he refused to crown King Harold Harefoot , as he had promised Cnut to crown none but a son of the king by his wife , Emma . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Æthelnoth died in 1038 , on either 28 October , 29 October , 30 October , or 1 November . Prior to his death , some of his episcopal functions were performed by a royal priest , Eadsige . He was buried in Canterbury Cathedral . He is considered a saint , with a feast day of 30 October . While he is listed in Jean <unk> 's Lives of the Benedictine Saints and in the Acta Sanctorum , there is no contemporary or later evidence of a cult being paid to him at Canterbury or elsewhere . 
 = John Hirst ( historian ) = 
 John Bradley Hirst <unk> ( 9 July 1942 – 3 February 2016 ) was an Australian historian and commentator . He has been described as an " historian , public intellectual , and active citizen " . Born in Adelaide , Hirst attended Unley High School and undertook his undergraduate and postgraduate study at the University of Adelaide . Abandoning an early desire to become a Methodist Minister , in 1968 he was appointed a lecturer at Melbourne 's new La Trobe University , where he remained until the end of his career . His wife and fellow @-@ student Christine accompanied him to Melbourne . They had two children , Catherine and David . Hirst was subsequently head of department and Reader in History at La Trobe . He retired in 2006 , and was an Emeritus Scholar at La Trobe until his death . Hirst had a distinguished career " in teaching , supervision and research . He developed new subjects and methodologies to teach them . In addition to those concerning Australian history there was his pioneering subject designed to inform students about Australia 's European cultural heritage . " This work was published as The Shortest History of Europe and has been translated into nine languages ( Swedish , Greek , Chinese , Spanish , German , Portuguese , Russian , Turkish and Korean ) . Hirst was seconded to the University of Melbourne to edit Historical Studies , Australia 's leading historical journal , from 1977 to 1980 . In retirement , he travelled regularly to Sydney to instruct , without remuneration , groups of post @-@ graduate students in thesis writing . 
 = = Academic contribution = = 
 Hirst produced a large number of important articles , chapters and books on Australian history . His academic interests were wide @-@ ranging , including social , cultural and political history . Hirst 's goal was to elucidate the qualities and characteristics of Australian society and how they had developed . Jeremy Sammut has described him as " an elegant and outstanding stylist , as adept at clarifying complex issues by reducing them to their essentials as he was at crafting the pithy line that eliminated all doubt his interpretation was true and correct " . In his historical work , Hirst 's colleague at La Trobe University , Alan Frost , has noted that Hirst " challenged orthodoxies and produced many new insights " . He wrote two seminal books on colonial New South Wales which Frank <unk> has described as displaying " a raw intellectual power " : Convict Society and its Enemies ( 1983 ) and The Strange Birth of Colonial Democracy ( 1988 ) ( both reprinted as Freedom on the Fatal Shore in 2008 ) . Convict Society and its Enemies was particularly influential , arguing that rather than being a brutal slave society , early New South Wales was a place where rights and freedoms were well @-@ established from the beginning . Hirst 's study of Federation , The Sentimental Nation , was also a ground @-@ breaking work , arguing that national sentiment was more important than economics in uniting the nation . Alan Frost has described Hirst 's shorter analyses as notable : " Distance in Australia : Was It a Tyrant ? " ( 1975 ) , his response to Geoffrey Blainey 's most famous concept , " deserves much more attention than it now receives " ; his " Egalitarianism " ( 1986 ) challenges " received wisdom about colonial life " . Many of his best shorter pieces were collected in Sense and Nonsense in Australian History ( 2009 ) . A major achievement of Hirst 's was a project to index the Melbourne Argus newspaper ( 1860 – 1909 ) . 
 = = Public intellectual = = 
 Frank <unk> described Hirst as a " creative historian capable of engaging a wide audience , as well as a public intellectual who delighted , infuriated and provoked " . He contributed many influential opinion pieces and commentaries to leading Australian newspapers and journals . Jeremy Sammut has noted that Hirst was motivated by an independent mind and a distaste for unthinking conformity . He " defied simplistic categorisation as a partisan because his politics were idiosyncratic " . Hirst described himself as an old @-@ fashioned social democrat . To read Hirst is not to encounter a reactionary but " to be delighted as he marshals facts , logic and evidence with <unk> skill and precision to establish the heterodox case , while conveying powerful insights into whatever historical experience or process is discussed " . A common theme in the obituaries cited is that Hirst was fearlessly honest , whatever the subject . As Sammut has noted , he was inspired by a commitment to " the rigorous pursuit of historical truth that drove him to explore the deeper patterns and meanings of the past , and the contemporary implications , that others had missed or misled us about " . 
 = = Public appointments = = 
 Never an ivory tower academic , Hirst held a number of influential appointments during the course of his career . He was a member of the Prime Minister 's Republic Advisory Committee , the chair of the Commonwealth Civics Education Group , a member of the Film Australia Board , a council member of the National Museum of Australia , and a member of the board of Old Parliament House in Canberra . He wrote the official history of Australia for new citizens and took a prominent part in the history summit convened by Prime Minister John Howard in 2006 . Hirst advised the Victorian Government on the school history curriculum and was history adviser to the National Curriculum Authority . He was elected to the Academy of the Social Sciences in Australia in 1986 . A committed republican , Hirst was the Convenor of the Republican Movement in Victoria . 
 Hirst died on 3 February 2016 at the age of 73 . 
 = Three Words ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Three Words " is the sixteenth episode of the eighth season ( and the 177th episode overall ) of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files and first aired in the United States and Canada on April 8 , 2001 , on Fox . It was written by executive producers Chris Carter and Frank Spotnitz , and directed by Tony Wharmby . The episode explores the series ' overarching mythology and earned a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 6 and was viewed by 7 @.@ 77 million households , receiving mixed to positive reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) , Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder secretly conducts his own investigation after a man is gunned down on the White House lawn attempting to inform the President of a planned alien invasion . However , he is soon in over his head as he tries to expose further evidence of colonization . 
 The episode was written as a way to signal Mulder 's exit from the FBI . The producers and writers felt that , if Mulder 's character was given a clean exit , the show could more easily focus on the characters of John Doggett and Monica Reyes in the following season . Former series star and recurring actor David Duchovny later declared that he had been happy to see his character depart in this manner . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Under the cover of darkness an unidentified man jumps over the fence to the White House and is intercepted by Secret Service personnel . As he struggles with them , he pulls a gun and accidentally shoots himself . Bleeding on the ground , the man hands over a computer disk , begging them to give it to the president . Three words are written on the disk : " <unk> THE FUTURE " . 
 Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) remembers his experiences on the alien ship as he touches the scars on his face and chest . Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) enters with Dr. Lim and they give him surprisingly good news : The neurological condition that was killing him , before his disappearance , is gone and he is in perfect health . Mulder returns to his apartment with Scully and he congratulates her on the pregnancy she had sought for a long time . Meanwhile , in prison , an inmate librarian gives Absalom — the former leader of a doomsday UFO " group " last seen in " DeadAlive " — a book about the apocalypse . Hidden inside is a newspaper article about the man who jumped the fence . Absalom later escapes during a work detail by attacking a guard with a board with a nail in it . 
 At FBI headquarters , Deputy Director Alvin Kersh calls John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) and Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) into his office . He informs them that Mulder has applied for reinstatement to the X @-@ Files . He intends to deny the request , claiming a higher percentage of success with Doggett . Kersh ignores Doggett and Skinner 's defenses of Mulder , perceiving him to be a crusader unfit for proper Bureau work . 
 Agent Doggett returns home after work and finds Absalom waiting for him with a gun . Absalom demands Doggett show the back of his neck to confirm that Doggett is still himself . He tells Doggett that the man killed at the White House , Howard Salt , died for what he knew about an alien invasion . Absalom duct tapes his gun to Doggett 's back in a plan to get Salt 's information with Doggett used as a hostage . The two attempt to sneak into the census bureau 's database ; Absalom claims that the census bureau had data which showed the aliens were already here . Unfortunately , the plan fails because of an X @-@ Ray scanner detecting the gun . Security shoots Absalom through the head despite his use of Doggett as a body shield . 
 While debriefing with Skinner , Mulder enters Skinner 's office and accuses Doggett of deliberately attempting to cover up the truth by setting up Absalom to be killed , an accusation to which Doggett takes great offense . Doggett later meets with his liaison , Knowle Rohrer , who reveals the password to the statistics bureau is " Fight the Future . " 
 Scully , on Doggett 's request , tells Mulder that the disk was labeled “ Fight the Future . ” Mulder realizes that this is the password for the network and attempts to break into the census bureau . Mulder slips into the Center with the help of The Lone Gunmen and begins searching the data on the computers . Doggett soon arrives , realizing that the password leak was a trap . After a bitter argument ( and upon both Scully and the Gunmen revealing to Mulder the arrival of black ops mercenaries on the scene ) , they leave before security arrives . 
 John Doggett confronts Rohrer about the tip he gave but Rohrer claims he was just trying to help Doggett learn the truth . As Doggett and Skinner leave , it can be seen that Rohrer has strange protrusions at the back of his neck . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Three Words " was written by executive producers Chris Carter and Frank Spotnitz , directed by Tony Wharmby and saw Nelson <unk> reprise his role of Doctor Lim , having appeared in the previous episode " Deadalive " . Judson Scott also made his third appearance in the series as cult leader Absalom , reprising the role from both " Deadalive " and " This Is Not Happening " . The baseball field scene was filmed at Cheviot Hills Park , in Los Angeles , the park having previously been used in the sixth season episode " The Unnatural " and would be later re @-@ used in the ninth season episode " Lord of the Flies " . 
 In the episode , Mulder prepares to submit his application to be reassigned to X @-@ Files division . Meanwhile , Mulder 's boss , Deputy Director Kersh , informs Doggett that he intends to deny the request . As season eight was nearly over , the producers and writers decided to refuse Mulder re @-@ admittance into the FBI as a way to segue John Doggett and Monica Reyes into the series as the new main stars of season nine . David Duchovny agreed with this method , noting , " I completely thought it was correct that they should be trying to focus elsewhere , and that , since I was going to come back for the second half of season eight , if you were to refocus on whatever Mulder 's up to , you 'd be in the same lousy situation at the beginning of season nine . " 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 The episode first aired on Fox on April 8 , 2001 , earning a Nielsen household rating of 7 @.@ 6 , meaning that it was seen by 7 @.@ 6 % of the nation 's estimated households . " Three Words " was viewed by 7 @.@ 77 million households and ranked as the 32nd most @-@ watched episode for the week ending April 8 . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " Who will control the X @-@ Files ? " The episode was later included on The X @-@ Files Mythology , Volume 4 – Super Soldiers , a DVD collection that contains episodes involved with the alien super soldiers arc . 
 " Three Words " received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode five stars out of five , calling it " extremely well @-@ performed by all concerned . " Shearman and Pearson felt that the episode was similar to the earlier " Per Manum " and was somewhat formulaic ; however , they noted that this was a necessary and positive step towards redefining the series after the changes made in its last two seasons explaining " the point of all this is only to emphasise how different The X @-@ Files universe now feels , the familiarity of the ingredients only making us more aware that the mix is never going to be the same again " . Writing for Television Without Pity , Jessica Morgan rated the episode a " B " , although she felt that by this stage the series ' mythology was moving " in concentric circles of pain and confusion " . 
 Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B + " and wrote that the episode , " finds Duchovny back on his feet and ready for action , and he brings a new energy to the part . " He enjoyed the way the show presented the story as one wherein , " we spend as much time watching Mulder from the outside as we do seeing events from his perspective , " because it " makes things interesting . " Handlen also wrote that while the episode did not hit the emotional notes that its predecessor , " Deadalive " , did , it was nonetheless " stronger <unk> " and built to an " inevitable conclusion in classic X @-@ Files style " . 
 Not all reviews were positive ; Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations , gave the episode a mixed review , writing , " This was an episode that had tremendous promise and Carter and Spotnitz almost got it right . Sadly , they failed to invest themselves fully and intelligently into Mulder 's return . " Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a largely negative review and awarded it one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . Vitaris wrote that , despite opening " with tremendously affecting acting from [ David ] Duchovny " , the episode lapses into " a lost opportunity to explore the psyche of a person who has suffered torture " . 
 = Tahirih Justice Center = 
 The Tahirih Justice Center , known simply as Tahirih , is a United States @-@ based non @-@ governmental organization ( NGO ) that provides pro bono direct legal services and social and medical service referrals to immigrant women and girls who are fleeing from gender @-@ based violence and persecution . Tahirih helps women who are attempting to escape from such abuse as female genital cutting , domestic violence , human trafficking , torture and rape . The organization also conducts public policy initiatives designed to achieve legislative change for women fleeing from human rights abuses , to highlight problems faced by immigrant women in the United States , and to end the possible exploitation of mail @-@ order brides by international marriage brokers . In 2007 , the Tahirih Justice Center won The Washington Post Award for Excellence in Nonprofit Management . In 2012 , Tahirih 's executive director won the Diane Von Furstenberg Choice Award . 
 <unk> Miller @-@ Muro founded the Tahirih Justice Center in 1997 following a well @-@ publicized asylum case in which she was involved as a student attorney . Miller @-@ Muro later co @-@ wrote a book with the client she had aided and used her portion of the proceeds for the initial funding of Tahirih . As of 2012 , the organization had assisted more than 13 @,@ 000 women and children fleeing from a wide variety of abuses . The organization played a significant role in the passage of the International Marriage Broker Regulation Act ( IMBRA ) , which was signed by President Bush in early 2006 and incorporated into the Violence Against Women Act ( VAWA ) . IMBRA gives foreign women important information about prospective American husbands ( for a summary , see also Mail @-@ order bride , Legal issues ) . 
 The organization is named after <unk> , an influential female poet and theologian in 19th @-@ century Persia who campaigned for women 's rights . Tahirih is a Bahá 'í @-@ inspired organization , although its clients and employees vary widely in ethnicity , religious identification , and nationality . 
 = = History = = 
 The Tahirih Justice Center opened in September 1997 and has become one of the most prominent organizations in the United States for women seeking justice from human rights abuses . Tahirih continually expanded its number of annual clients and hired more employees as the demand for its services grew in the late 1990s and into the next decade . 
 = = = Beginning = = = 
 Fauziya <unk> was a <unk> teenager who fled her native land in 1994 to escape from a forced polygamous marriage and a tribal practice of female genital cutting . She went through Ghana and Germany before arriving at Newark Liberty International Airport in New Jersey , where she was detained and incarcerated by INS officials . She spent the next year and a half in various prisons throughout the Eastern United States while her legal team attempted to obtain asylum for her . In a case that made history in immigration law , she was finally granted asylum in June 1996 by the Board of Immigration Appeals . Gender @-@ based violence had been established as grounds for seeking asylum in the U.S. 
 Miller @-@ Muro had been a student attorney in Fauziya 's case and the two became strong friends . The successful outcome led her to co @-@ author with Ms. <unk> the book Do they hear you when you cry ? ( 1998 ) , about the latter 's case and life . After Miller @-@ Muro discovered that few organizations offered legal assistance to women seeking asylum or refugee status in the Washington , D.C. area , she founded the Tahirih Justice Center in 1997 to build on the accomplishments of Matter of Kasinga and to provide extensive legal coverage of immigrant women and girls fleeing to the U.S. from gender @-@ based violence . 
 = = = Growth = = = 
 Tahirih 's creation and growth was fueled by the widespread abuses suffered by women and girls around the world and the limited resources available to them when seeking protection in the United States . According to the United Nations , two million women undergo female genital cutting in Africa every year . A recent CIA report estimated that between 45 @,@ 000 and 50 @,@ 000 women and children are brought to the U.S. every year under false pretenses and are forced to work as prostitutes , abused laborers or servants . UNICEF estimates that more than 200 @,@ 000 children are enslaved by cross @-@ border smuggling in West and Central Africa . Although Tahirih can only provide immediate assistance to immigrant women and girls that are already within U.S. borders , its cases are representative of the types of violence from which women and girls are fleeing . The organization grew consistently over the years : in 2001 , it helped a total of 618 people . In 2011 , Tahirih helped 1 @,@ 051 people . 
 The continual success of competent legal representation prompted Tahirih 's enlargement . The last publicly reported rate of approval for asylum applications in the U.S. before 2001 was 23 @.@ 3 % . Applications written by the Tahirih Justice Center had a 99 % success rate , a figure it continues to maintain . The organization hired its first paid staff in August 1998 and had expanded to 36 employees by 2010 . The organizational structure has grown and Tahirih has expanded nationally , adding an office in Houston , TX in 2009 and one in Baltimore , MD in 2010 , all while assisting more than 13 @,@ 000 people since opening its doors . Tahirih clients come from five continents — North America , South America , Europe , Africa , and Asia , and from nations such as Mexico , Argentina , Algeria , Mongolia , Turkey , South Africa , Iran , and Syria . 
 = = Goals and organization = = 
 The Tahirih Justice Center is " founded on the belief that the achievement of full equality between women and men is necessary for society to progress . " 
 As part of this mission , the organization <unk> in gender @-@ based asylum , gender @-@ based persecution , and domestic violence cases . The organization has urged what it believes are repressive , negligent or dismissive governments throughout the world to take responsibility for acts of gender @-@ based violence and persecution by providing victims with shelters and ensuring prompt , responsive police forces , all while doing more to eliminate overt and harmful policies designed to suppress and incite fear among women . 
 The Tahirih Justice Center is governed by a 16 @-@ member Board of Directors that oversees the organization 's functions . Each board member serves a two @-@ year term and has the option to remain for an indefinite number of terms if repeatedly elected . Board members are individuals usually concerned or involved with issues pertinent to Tahirih . A 17 @-@ member Board of Advisors , composed of lawyers , judges , and human rights activists , helps the organization by making recommendations . 
 = = Strategy and programs = = 
 To fulfill its objectives , the Tahirih Justice Center is involved in legal services , fundraising , public policy advocacy , and reaches out to other international groups and organizations . 
 = = = Legal services = = = 
 Tahirih conducts a wide array of legal services to help its clients . The Pro Bono Network , a network of pro bono attorneys and referral resources for clients , is the largest and most important . In 2010 , Tahirih received US $ 6 @,@ 813 @,@ 094 in donated professional services , including from pro bono lawyers representing Tahirih clients . In 2010 , 77 % of Tahirih 's income came from donated professional services with slightly more than 23 % from grants , corporations , and individuals . The program offers individual and group training for pro bono attorneys , and connects clients with other community resources such as peer support groups , medical and mental health services , housing , and public benefits . The Pro Bono Network allows staff to engage in educational initiatives to immigrant community groups , social service programs , and legal service providers . These are designed to highlight Tahirih 's services and the special rights and needs of immigrant women and girls fleeing violence . 
 The organization aids clients holistically , trying to connect women with community resources that may improve the quality of their lives in addition to dealing with their legal problems . Tahirih 's referral programs direct women to literacy programs , English language instruction , day care , and job skills training . Tahirih maintains a core of medical volunteers who evaluate the conditions of clients to support their legal claims and assists clients in accessing psychological counseling in the United States . 
 = = = Fundraising = = = 
 The Tahirih Justice Center holds the Annual Fundraising Benefit to highlight its accomplishments over the year and promote its issues by having former clients share their stories . The Benefit features speakers closely associated with Tahirih issues and awards to recognize important and groundbreaking work in helping women fleeing from gender @-@ based violence . For the 2005 Annual Benefit , Queen Noor of Jordan was the keynote speaker . The Center founded the Washington Lawyers ' Network ( <unk> ) to mobilize and sustain a philanthropic network of Washington @-@ area attorneys that promote awareness and provide funding for Tahirih . In 2003 , Tahirih raised over $ 12 @,@ 000 through <unk> fundraising events and membership drives . However , the vast majority of the organization 's revenue comes from non @-@ fundraising sources . 
 = = = Public policy advocacy = = = 
 The Tahirih Justice Center conducts national and regional advocacy campaigns to educate the public and law enforcement institutions about the threats faced by immigrant women and girls who do not have easy access to legal services . Tahirih employees have given presentations in universities and public forums throughout the United States on issues ranging from the equality of men and women in religious traditions to gender @-@ based violence and persecution . Tahirih has set focused primarily on four public policy areas over the past decade : ( 1 ) Forced Marriage Initiative ; ( 2 ) Campaign to Prevent Abuse and Exploitation through the International Marriage Broker Industry ; ( 3 ) Protecting and Promoting the Rights of Immigrant Survivors of Crime ; and ( 4 ) Protecting and Promoting Access to Asylum for Women and Girls Fleeing Gender @-@ Based Persecution . 
 Tahirih has highlighted the possible dangers of recent , post @-@ 9 / 11 Congressional initiatives to enforce federal civil immigration law that may make immigrant women reluctant to report crime to authorities for fear of deportation . Specifically , Tahirih is concerned that the <unk> of state and local police as immigration agents by the Clear Law Enforcement for Criminal Alien Removal ( CLEAR ) and Homeland Security Enhancement Acts would increase the barriers some women face to reach safety . After the CLEAR Act was reintroduced in June 2005 , Tahirih spearheaded a sign @-@ on letter to Congress from nearly 100 organizations that advocate for immigrant survivors of domestic violence , sexual assault , human trafficking , and other crimes . Tahirih works with other non @-@ governmental organizations like Amnesty International to promote its issues and advocate on legislative agenda . 
 One of Tahirih 's largest and most successful public policy initiatives has been the Campaign to End the Exploitation and Abuse of Women by International Marriage Brokers . A 2003 Tahirih survey of 175 legal service providers revealed that more than 50 % were serving or had served women who met their spouses through a broker . Tahirih joined other like @-@ minded organizations in this campaign and led a four @-@ year effort that culminated in the passage of the International Marriage Broker Regulation Act of 2005 ( IMBRA ) when it was attached to the bill that reauthorized VAWA . IMBRA provides foreign women with important information about their prospective American husbands , such as whether the men have violent criminal histories . The law mandates that foreign women know the rights and resources available to domestic violence victims in the United States . Through this law , foreign women who marry American men will be given critical tools to protect themselves and their children from domestic violence . 
 = = Issues = = 
 The Tahirih Justice Center deals with a number of human rights issues related to women and girls . The organization focuses on cases that fall within the scope of its mission and goals . In particular , accepted requests must involve the protection of women from persecution , although men may be eligible for assistance to protect their female family members from abuse . Women who wish to receive Tahirih 's services free of charge must demonstrate that they are not able to afford to pay for such services . When requests for assistance fall outside Tahirih 's scope , staff members attempt to locate other legal service providers who can offer the prospective client assistance . 
 = = = Domestic violence and genital mutilation = = = 
 Women who come to the United States with immigrant husbands or who marry American citizens once they are in the country are vulnerable to domestic violence because of their unfamiliarity with legal rights in the United States . Many Tahirih clients are women who have suffered from domestic violence and whose cases can be covered under VAWA . VAWA allows immigrants who can prove they have been victims of domestic abuse and would otherwise be able to gain legal status the ability to self @-@ petition for a green card . Tahirih attempts to help these women by making them lawful permanent residents independent of their husbands . Tahirih has initiated the Battered Immigrant Women Advocacy Project to advocate before the INS and immigration courts on behalf of battered immigrant women seeking lawful permanent residence . 
 The Tahirih Justice Center considers female genital cutting , which " comprises all procedures involving partial or total removal of the external female genitalia or other injury to the female genital organs whether for cultural or other non @-@ therapeutic reasons , " a violation of human rights . The Tahirih Justice Center 's pioneering work in gender @-@ based asylum law attempts to find protection for women fleeing from the practice to the United States . Tahirih staff have received media requests to comment on matters surrounding the issue , and the organization frequently publicizes the issue in annual reports , brochures , and other informational material . 
 = = = " Mail @-@ order " brides = = = 
 In recent years , the organization has worked to protect women from abroad who are unfamiliar with the English language and the U.S. legal system from abusive marital relationships that have been arranged by international marriage brokers . The international marriage broker industry has grown in response to a demand by American men , some of whom turn out to be sexual predators , for traditional wives from countries such as the Philippines , Russia , and Ukraine . Tahirih 's Campaign to Prevent Abuse and Exploitation through the International Marriage Broker Industry advocates for the accountability of marriage agencies , seeks legislative change , and engages in litigation and public outreach to protect women from abuse . The Tahirih Justice Center was instrumental in Washington , D.C. law firm Arnold & Porter 's successful fraud lawsuit against international marriage broker Encounters International on behalf of Nataliya Fox . The Tahirih Justice Center helped draft the International Marriage and Broker Regulation Act ( IMBRA ) and continues to work with other human rights organizations to ensure its implementation . 
 = = = Trafficking of women = = = 
 The Tahirih Justice Center works within the legal confines established by Congress to ensure the safety of women and girls who are trafficked , defined as " the recruitment , harboring , transportation , provision , or obtaining of a person for labor or services , through the use of force , fraud or coercion for the purpose of subjection to involuntary servitude , peonage , debt bondage , or slavery " to the U.S. The organization has pushed for legislation and regulations to protect and assist trafficking victims , such as the Trafficking Victims Protection Act ( <unk> ) and the Women Immigrants Safe Harbor Act ( <unk> ) . Partly through Tahirih 's efforts , in the 2005 fiscal year , the United States Department of Homeland Security issued 112 T @-@ visas to foreign survivors of human trafficking identified in the United States . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 Criticism of the Tahirih Justice Center and other like @-@ minded organizations often involves the manner in which they portray information . In particular , Tahirih 's work against international marriage brokers , especially its leading role in supporting IMBRA , has drawn <unk> from some who believe American males are being characterized in an unfairly negative light . International marriage broker agencies cite the alleged low levels of divorce among their clients , compared with the American national average , as proof of success . Tahirih counters that many of the men who use these brokers are repeat abusers looking for their next victim . Tahirih claims that international marriage brokers market and advertise mostly to men who are potentially dangerous . Miller @-@ Muro , Tahirih 's Executive Director , stated that " The agencies have a financial incentive to ensure the satisfaction of their paying clients — the men — but there is no comparable incentive to safeguard the woman . " 
 Scholars are worried about the mental images and conceptions that the general public forms about the origins of practices that Tahirih condemns . When describing the Matter of Kasinga and the associated media attention , historian Charles <unk> was concerned about the perpetration of possibly negative and racist stereotypes about Africa . In an analysis of several New York Times articles about the case , <unk> called the " evocation of images of the immutable nature of patriarchal tradition " in Africa " extraordinary . " Tahirih argues that several cultural practices throughout the world have adverse health effects that often go unnoticed because of poor education among the local community . Tahirih posits that many of the subjects who undergo practices such as female genital cutting are uninformed about the potential pain and other consequences that result from the procedure . Since Tahirih views these issues as ones relating to human rights , it believes in the protection of individuals who may experience these acts . 
 = Dangerously in Love 2 = 
 " Dangerously in Love 2 " is a song written and produced by Beyoncé and Errol McCalla , Jr . The ballad was first recorded by Destiny 's Child for their third studio album Survivor ( 2001 ) , under the title " Dangerously in Love " . The song later became the title track to Beyoncé 's debut album with some minor adjustments instrumentally . " Dangerously in Love 2 " is an R & B and soul ballad , the lyrics of which detail romantic obsession . 
 " Dangerously in Love 2 " received generally positive response from music critics , who wrote that the song effectively shows the vocal capabilities of Beyoncé . It won a Grammy Award for Best Female R & B Vocal Performance at the 46th Grammy Awards . Though not released as a single , " Dangerously in Love 2 " charted at number 57 the US Billboard Hot 100 chart and at number 17 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . Beyoncé performed the ballad at the 46th Grammy Awards , the Verizon Ladies First Tour , the Dangerously in Love Tour , The Beyoncé Experience and the I Am ... Tour . Beyoncé has earned a number of positive reviews for her live performances of the song on her tours . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Dangerously in Love " was written and produced by Beyoncé and Errol McCalla , Jr . It was recorded for the Destiny 's Child album , Survivor ( 2001 ) . Beyoncé re @-@ recorded the song at the <unk> Studios in Houston , Texas in 2002 for her debut solo album , Dangerously in Love . Her version , which was titled " Dangerously in Love 2 " , features a modified arrangement . It was set as a remix track , but later became the title track to her debut studio album . 
 " Dangerously in Love 2 " is a moderate R & B , soul and quiet storm ballad pacing in medium time . It was written in the key of F major , and moves at a moderate tempo set at 100 beats per minute . Vocal elements of the song range from E3 to D5 . " Dangerously in Love " is backed by piano and thumping drum instrumentation . Many music critics noted it to be musically similar to the original Destiny 's child version . Lyrically , the song is about being romantically obsessed , as indicated in the chorus : " I am in love with you / You set me free / I can 't do this thing called life without you here with me " . According to Lisa Verrico of The Times , " Dangerously in Love 2 " bears resemblance to Janet Jackson 's work if viewed from a " flirty " perspective . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Dangerously in Love 2 " received mostly positive reviews from music critics . Natalie Nichols of Los Angeles Times stated that the song is just one of many wailing ballads designed to demonstrate " the soulful bleating of Beyonce , the centerpiece of R & B star trio Destiny 's Child . " Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine gave a mixed review of the song , stating that it seemed a bit dated and that it was " a near @-@ carbon copy of Survivor ’ s melodramatic ' Dangerously in Love ' [ that ] is completely superfluous . " While covering the 2004 reunion of Destiny 's Child , Jet Magazine considered the song a major hit of Beyoncé 's debut album . In an article from Teen Ink , the song was noted as one of the top " lush ballads " of the album . " Dangerously in Love 2 " won in the category Best Female R & B Vocal Performance at the 46th Grammy Awards on February 8 , 2004 . 
 Beyoncé 's version charted on a few Billboard component charts . " Dangerously in Love 2 " made its first chart appearance on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart at number 73 on July 3 , 2004 . For the following seven weeks , the song kept on charting in the lower positions of the chart , until it was titled as the greatest gainer on the chart issue dated August 21 , 2004 , ascending 28 places from number 71 to number 43 . Its entry on the US Radio Songs chart at number 75 , prompted its debut on the US Billboard Hot 100 issue dated September 18 , 2004 at number 76 . " Dangerously in Love 2 " was propelled to number 60 on the Hot 100 chart the following week as it made the largest chart move on the Radio Songs chart by ascending to number 59 . The song peaked at number 17 on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart on September 25 , 2004 , and at number 57 US Billboard Hot 100 on October 2 , 2004 . On June 14 , 2006 , the song was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( 2006 ) for sales of over 500 @,@ 000 ringtones . As at October 6 , 2010 , " Dangerously in Love 2 " had sold around 130 @,@ 000 digital downloads in the United States . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Destiny 's Child performed " Dangerously in Love " live for the first time at the Pepsi Arena in Albany , New York in 2001 . The performance was also part of the setlist for their World Tour . Beyoncé also famously performed the song at the 2004 Grammy Awards on February 8 , 2004 , where it won in the category of Best Female R & B Vocal Performance . Beyoncé was wearing a long , glittery turquoise and silver dress . She positioned herself between the edges of a giant picture frame and sung " Dangerously in Love 2 " as if she were in a living oil painting . She was joined by seventeen backup singers , musicians and dancers . At the end , she held out her hand and a dove landed in her outstretched palm . Jon Wiederhorn of MTV News commented that the performance was " nothing short of extravagant . " 
 Beyoncé also added the song to the track @-@ listing of her first solo @-@ tour Dangerously in Love Tour , notably at Wembley Arena in London , United Kingdom . There she performed a special rendition of the song that came in at well over 8 @-@ minutes . During the Verizon Ladies First Tour which also featured Alicia Keys , Missy Elliott and Tamia , Beyoncé performed " Dangerously in Love 2 " in New York in front of more than 20 @,@ 000 fans . Before starting her performance , she asked the audience whether they have ever fell in love . As she started to sing , more dancers joined in on smaller and circular platforms . Simultaneously , fire shot from the floor and a long , rectangular screen merged video of flames with images of the performers , seemingly setting them on fire . Shaheem Reid of MTV News complimented the performance writing : " [ Beyoncé ] had New Yorkers cheering like the Yankees had just won the World Series when she perfectly hit the high note toward the end of ' Dangerously in Love 2 ' . " 
 On August 5 , 2007 , Beyoncé performed the song at the Madison Square Garden in Manhattan . While singing , Beyoncé was accompanied by her all @-@ female band , and she incorporated Jill Scott 's " He Loves Me " in " Dangerously in Love 2 " . Shaheem Reid of MTV News praised the performance , writing : " For all the dancing she did , Beyoncé got an equally big — if not more resounding — response for displaying her undeniable vocal ability on the ballads [ ... ] ' Dangerously in Love ' . " Another review from PopEater stated : " Beyoncé Knowles transforms into an open book of emotion , sensuality , physics @-@ defying dance moves and goosebump @-@ inducing vocals . [ ... ] she showed us that even her ballads could be over @-@ the @-@ top and her voice had enough star power even when it wasn ’ t complemented by her gyrating hips . " 
 Beyoncé additionally performed the song on a number of other occasions , including the song as part of her set list on The Beyoncé Experience in Los Angeles and I Am ... Tour during the first stops in the beginning of the tour . In Los Angeles , Beyoncé gave a full @-@ length performance of the song , dressed in a long <unk> number that flowed straight down to her feet . It was executed with several female and male backup dancers , and live instrumentation . Jon Pareles of The New York Times praised the performance , stating : " Beyoncé needs no distractions from her singing , which can be airy or brassy , tearful or vicious , rapid @-@ fire with staccato syllables or sustained in curlicued melismas . But she was in constant motion , strutting in costumes [ ... ] " . Although the song was performed on selected dates of the I Am ... Tour , it was not included on the physical release of the tour on DVD / CD . The song was also performed during the I Am ... Yours 2009 Las Vegas revue show , in a medley that included an acoustic version of " Sweet Dreams " and a cover of Anita Baker 's song " Sweet Love " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits taken from Dangerously in Love liner notes . 
 Vocals : Beyoncé Knowles 
 Writing : Beyoncé Knowles , Errol McCalla Jr . 
 Vocal Engineer : Brian Springer 
 Mix engineer : Dexter Simmons 
 Guitars : Dan Workman 
 Additional Guitars : John " Jab " Broussard 
 Instrument Engineer : Dan Workman 
 Producing : Beyoncé Knowles , Errol " <unk> " McCalla Jr . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Flight feather = 
 Flight feathers ( <unk> <unk> ) are the long , stiff , asymmetrically shaped , but symmetrically paired pennaceous feathers on the wings or tail of a bird ; those on the wings are called remiges ( singular remex ) while those on the tail are called rectrices ( singular <unk> ) . The primary function of the flight feathers is to aid in the generation of both thrust and lift , thereby enabling flight . The flight feathers of some birds have evolved to perform additional functions , generally associated with territorial displays , courtship rituals or feeding methods . In some species , these feathers have developed into long showy plumes used in visual courtship displays , while in others they create a sound during display flights . Tiny serrations on the leading edge of their remiges help owls to fly silently ( and therefore hunt more successfully ) , while the extra @-@ stiff rectrices of woodpeckers help them to brace against tree trunks as they hammer . Even flightless birds still retain flight feathers , though sometimes in radically modified forms . 
 The moult of their flight feathers can cause serious problems for birds , as it can impair their ability to fly . Different species have evolved different strategies for coping with this , ranging from dropping all their flight feathers at once ( and thus becoming flightless for some relatively short period of time ) to extending the moult over a period of several years . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 <unk> ( from the Latin for " oarsman " ) are located on the posterior side of the wing . <unk> attach the long calami ( quills ) firmly to the wing bones , and a thick , strong band of tendinous tissue known as the <unk> helps to hold and support the remiges in place . Corresponding remiges on individual birds are symmetrical between the two wings , matching to a large extent in size and shape ( except in the case of mutation or damage ) , though not necessarily in pattern . They are given different names depending on their position along the wing . 
 = = = Primaries = = = 
 Primaries are connected to the manus ( the bird 's " hand " , composed of carpometacarpus and phalanges ) ; these are the longest and narrowest of the remiges ( particularly those attached to the phalanges ) , and they can be individually rotated . These feathers are especially important for flapping flight , as they are the principal source of thrust , moving the bird forward through the air . Most thrust is generated on the downstroke of flapping flight . However , on the upstroke ( when the bird often draws its wing in close to its body ) , the primaries are separated and rotated , reducing air resistance while still helping to provide some thrust . The flexibility of the remiges on the wingtips of large soaring birds also allows for the spreading of those feathers , which helps to reduce the creation of wingtip vortices , thereby reducing drag . The barbules on these feathers , friction barbules , are specialized with large lobular barbicels that help grip and prevent slippage of overlying feathers and are present in most of the flying birds . 
 Species vary somewhat in the number of primaries they possess . The number in non @-@ passerines generally varies between 9 and 11 , but grebes , storks and flamingos have 12 , and ostriches have 16 . While most modern passerines have ten primaries , some have only nine . Those with nine are missing the most distal primary ( sometimes called the <unk> ) which is typically very small and sometimes rudimentary in passerines . 
 The outermost primaries — those connected to the phalanges — are sometimes known as pinions . 
 = = = Secondaries = = = 
 Secondaries are connected to the ulna . In some species , the ligaments that bind these remiges to the bone connect to small , rounded projections , known as quill knobs , on the ulna ; in other species , no such knobs exist . Secondary feathers remain close together in flight ( they cannot be individually separated like the primaries can ) and help to provide lift by creating the airfoil shape of the bird 's wing . Secondaries tend to be shorter and broader than primaries , with blunter ends ( see illustration ) . They vary in number from 6 in hummingbirds to as many as 40 in some species of albatross . In general , larger and longer @-@ winged species have a larger number of secondaries . Birds in more than 40 non @-@ passerine families seem to be missing the fifth secondary feather on each wing , a state known as <unk> . In these birds , the fifth set of secondary covert feathers does not cover any remex , possibly due to a twisting of the feather papillae during embryonic development . Loons , grebes , pelicans , hawks and eagles , cranes , sandpipers , gulls , parrots , and owls are among the families missing this feather . 
 = = = Tertials = = = 
 Tertials arise in the brachial region and are not considered true remiges as they are not supported by attachment to the corresponding bone , in this case the humerus . These elongated " true " tertials act as a protective cover for all or part of the folded primaries and secondaries , and do not qualify as flight feathers as such . However , many authorities use the term tertials to refer to the shorter , more symmetrical innermost secondaries of passerines ( arising from the olecranon and performing the same function as true tertials ) in an effort to distinguish them from other secondaries . The term humeral is sometimes used for birds such as the albatrosses and pelicans that have a long humerus . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The calami of the flight feathers are protected by a layer of non @-@ flight feathers called covert feathers or <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , at least one layer of them both above and beneath the flight feathers of the wings as well as above and below the rectrices of the tail . These feathers may vary widely in size — in fact , the upper tail <unk> of the male peafowl , rather than its rectrices , are what constitute its elaborate and colorful " train " . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The outermost primaries of large soaring birds , particularly raptors , often show a pronounced narrowing at some variable distance along the feather edges . These <unk> are called either notches or <unk> depending on the degree of their slope . An emargination is a gradual change , and can be found on either side of the feather . A notch is an abrupt change , and is only found on the wider trailing edge of the <unk> . ( Both are visible on the primary in the photo showing the feathers ; they can be found about halfway along both sides of the left hand feather — a shallow notch on the left , and a gradual emargination on the right . ) The presence of notches and <unk> creates gaps at the wingtip ; air is forced through these gaps , increasing the generation of lift . 
 = = = Alula = = = 
 Feathers on the alula or bastard wing are not generally considered to be flight feathers in the strict sense ; though they are asymmetrical , they lack the length and stiffness of most true flight feathers . However , alula feathers are definitely an aid to slow flight . These feathers — which are attached to the bird 's " thumb " and normally lie flush against the anterior edge of the wing — function in the same way as the slats on an airplane wing , allowing the wing to achieve a higher than normal angle of attack – and thus lift – without resulting in a stall . By manipulating its thumb to create a gap between the alula and the rest of the wing , a bird can avoid stalling when flying at low speeds or landing . 
 = = = Delayed development in hoatzins = = = 
 The development of the remiges ( and <unk> ) of nestling hoatzins is much delayed compared to the development of these feathers in other young birds , presumably because young hoatzins are equipped with claws on their first two digits . They use these small rounded hooks to grasp branches when clambering about in trees , and feathering on these digits would presumably interfere with that functionality . Most youngsters shed their claws sometime between their 70th and 100th day of life , but some retain them — though <unk> @-@ over and unusable — into adulthood . 
 = = Rectrices = = 
 Rectrices ( from the Latin for " helmsman " ) , which help the bird to brake and steer in flight , lie in a single horizontal row on the rear margin of the anatomic tail . Only the central pair are attached ( via ligaments ) to the tail bones ; the remaining rectrices are embedded into the <unk> bulbs , complex structures of fat and muscle that surround those bones . Rectrices are always paired , with a vast majority of species having six pairs . They are absent in grebes and some ratites , and greatly reduced in size in penguins . Many grouse species have more than 12 rectrices . Some species ( including ruffed grouse , hazel grouse and common snipe ) have a number that varies among individuals . Domestic pigeons have a highly variable number , due to centuries of selective breeding . 
 = = Numbering conventions = = 
 In order to make the discussion of such topics as moult processes or body structure easier , ornithologists assign a number to each flight feather . By convention , the numbers assigned to primary feathers always start with the letter P ( P1 , P2 , P3 , etc . ) , those of secondaries with the letter S , those of tertials with T and those of rectrices with R. 
 Most authorities number the primaries <unk> , starting from the innermost primary ( the one closest to the secondaries ) and working outwards ; others number them ascendantly , from the most distal primary inwards . There are some advantages to each method . Descendant numbering follows the normal sequence of most birds ' primary moult . In addition , in the event that a species is missing the small distal 10th primary , as some passerines are , its lack does not impact the numbering of the remaining primaries . Ascendant numbering , on the other hand , allows for uniformity in the numbering of non @-@ passerine primaries , as they almost invariably have four attached to the manus regardless of how many primaries they have overall . This method is particularly useful for indicating wing formulae , as the outermost primary is the one with which the measurements begin . 
 Secondaries are always numbered ascendantly , starting with the outermost secondary ( the one closest to the primaries ) and working inwards . Tertials are also numbered ascendantly , but in this case , the numbers continue on consecutively from that given to the last secondary ( e.g. ... S5 , S6 , T7 , T8 , ... etc . ) . 
 Rectrices are always numbered from the <unk> pair outwards in both directions . 
 = = Specialized flight feathers = = 
 The flight feathers of some species have undergone evolutionary changes which allow them to provide additional functionality . 
 In some species , for example , either remiges or rectrices make a sound during flight . These sounds are most often associated with courtship or territorial displays . The outer primaries of male broad @-@ tailed hummingbirds produce a distinctive high @-@ pitched trill , both in direct flight and in power @-@ dives during courtship displays ; this trill is diminished when the outer primaries are worn , and absent when those feathers have been moulted . During the northern lapwing 's zigzagging display flight , the bird 's outer primaries produce a humming sound . The outer primaries of the male American woodcock are shorter and slightly narrower than those of the female , and are likely the source of the whistling and twittering sounds made during his courtship display flights . Male club @-@ winged <unk> use modified secondaries to make a clear trilling courtship call . A curve @-@ tipped secondary on each wing is dragged against an adjacent ridged secondary at high speeds ( as many as 110 times per second — slightly faster than a hummingbird 's wingbeat ) to create a stridulation much like that produced by some insects . Both Wilson 's and common snipe have modified outer tail feathers which make noise when they are spread during the birds ' roller coaster display flights ; as the bird dives , wind flows through the modified feathers and creates a series of rising and falling notes , which is known as " winnowing " . Differences between the sounds produced by these two former conspecific subspecies — and the fact that the outer two pairs of rectrices in Wilson 's snipe are modified , while only the single outermost pair are modified in common snipe — were among the characteristics used to justify their splitting into two distinct and separate species . 
 Flight feathers are also used by some species in visual displays . Male standard @-@ winged and pennant @-@ winged nightjars have modified P2 primaries ( using the descendant numbering scheme explained above ) which are displayed during their courtship rituals . In the standard @-@ winged nightjar , this modified primary consists of an extremely long shaft with a small " pennant " ( actually a large web of barbules ) at the tip . In the pennant @-@ winged nightjar , the P2 primary is an extremely long ( but otherwise normal ) feather , while P3 , P4 and P5 are successively shorter ; the overall effect is a broadly forked wingtip with a very long plume beyond the lower half of the fork . 
 Males of many species , ranging from the widely introduced ring @-@ necked pheasant to Africa 's many <unk> , have one or more elongated pairs of rectrices , which play an often @-@ critical role in their courtship rituals . The outermost pair of rectrices in male <unk> are extremely long and strongly curved at the ends . These plumes are raised up over the bird 's head ( along with a fine spray of modified uppertail coverts ) during his extraordinary display . <unk> modification reaches its pinnacle among the birds of paradise , which display an assortment of often bizarrely modified feathers , ranging from the extremely long plumes of the ribbon @-@ tailed <unk> ( nearly three times the length of the bird itself ) to the dramatically coiled twin plumes of the magnificent bird @-@ of @-@ paradise . 
 Owls have remiges which are serrated rather than smooth on the leading edge . This adaptation disrupts the flow of air over the wings , eliminating the noise that airflow over a smooth surface normally creates , and allowing the birds to fly and hunt silently . 
 The rectrices of woodpeckers are proportionately short and very stiff , allowing them to better brace themselves against tree trunks while feeding . This adaptation is also found , though to a lesser extent , in some other species that feed along tree trunks , including woodcreepers and treecreepers . 
 Scientists have not yet determined the function of all flight feather modifications . For instance , male swallows in the genera <unk> and <unk> have tiny recurved hooks on the leading edges of their outer primaries , but the function of these hooks is not yet known ; some authorities suggest they may produce a sound during territorial or courtship displays . 
 = = <unk> in flightless birds = = 
 Over time , a small number of bird species have lost their ability to fly . Some of these , such as the steamer ducks , show no appreciable changes in their flight feathers . Some , such as the Titicaca grebe and a number of the flightless rails , have a reduced number of primaries . 
 The remiges of ratites are soft and downy ; they lack the interlocking hooks and barbules that help to stiffen the flight feathers of other birds . In addition , the emu 's remiges are proportionately much reduced in size , while those of the cassowaries are reduced both in number and structure , consisting merely of 5 – 6 bare quills . Most ratites have completely lost their rectrices ; only the ostrich still has them . 
 Penguins have lost their differentiated flight feathers . As adults , their wings and tail are covered with the same small , stiff , slightly curved feathers as are found on the rest of their bodies . 
 The ground @-@ dwelling kakapo , which is the world 's only flightless parrot , has remiges which are shorter , rounder and more symmetrically vaned than those of parrots capable of flight ; these flight feathers also contain fewer interlocking barbules near their tips . 
 = = Moult = = 
 Once they have finished growing , feathers are essentially dead structures . Over time , they become worn and abraded , and need to be replaced . This replacement process is known as moult ( molt in the United States ) . The loss of wing and tail feathers can affect a bird 's ability to fly ( sometimes dramatically ) and in certain families can impair the ability to feed or perform courtship displays . The timing and progression of flight feather moult therefore varies among families . 
 For most birds , moult begins at a certain specific point , called a focus ( plural foci ) , on the wing or tail and proceeds in a sequential manner in one or both directions from there . For example , most passerines have a focus between the innermost primary ( P1 , using the numbering scheme explained above ) and outermost secondary ( S1 ) , and a focus point in the middle of the center pair of rectrices . As passerine moult begins , the two feathers closest to the focus are the first to drop . When replacement feathers reach roughly half of their eventual length , the next feathers in line ( P2 and S2 on the wing , and both <unk> on the tail ) are dropped . This pattern of drop and replacement continues until moult reaches either end of the wing or tail . The speed of the moult can vary somewhat within a species . Some passerines that breed in the Arctic , for example , drop many more flight feathers at once ( sometimes becoming briefly flightless ) in order to complete their entire wing moult prior to migrating south , while those same species breeding at lower latitudes undergo a more protracted moult . 
 In many species , there is more than one focus along the wing . Here , moult begins at all foci simultaneously , but generally proceeds only in one direction . Most grouse , for example , have two wing foci : one at the wingtip , the other between feathers P1 and S1 . In this case , moult proceeds <unk> from both foci . Many large , long @-@ winged birds have multiple wing foci . 
 Birds that are heavily " wing @-@ loaded " — that is , heavy @-@ bodied birds with relatively short wings — have great difficulty flying with the loss of even a few flight feathers . A protracted moult like the one described above would leave them vulnerable to predators for a sizeable portion of the year . Instead , these birds lose all their flight feathers at once . This leaves them completely flightless for a period of three to four weeks , but means their overall period of vulnerability is significantly shorter than it would otherwise be . Eleven families of birds , including loons , grebes and most waterfowl , have this moult strategy . 
 The cuckoos show what is called <unk> or <unk> wing moults . In simple forms this involves the moulting and replacement of odd @-@ numbered primaries and then the even @-@ numbered primaries . There are however complex variations with differences based on life history . 
