 = = Film career = = 
 = = = Metro years and freelancing = = = 
 Kurrle 's first foray into the film industry was on the 1916 film , Her Great Price , directed by Edwin Carewe . He later collaborated with Carewe on a number of pictures during the 1920s . He began his career working for Metro Pictures , where he stayed at until 1921 . Metro was one of the film companies which merged in 1924 to form Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer . The quality of Kurrle 's work was noticed even early in his career . His filming of 1919 's Lion 's Den was called " spectacular " . Kurrle 's work the following year on The Right of Way was described by some as " ... remarkable even in this day of almost perfect cinematography . " By 1921 , Kurrle was already a member of the American Society of Cinematographers ( ASC ) . Early that year , he followed Carewe and left Metro to become a freelance cinematographer . Fifteen of the twenty @-@ four films Kurrle worked on during 1921 @-@ 27 were directed by Carewe . In 1922 , while filming a Carewe picture , I Am the Law , Kurrle successfully tested a new high @-@ speed film from Eastman . The new film allowed interior filming with less lighting , reducing both equipment and staffing costs . 
 Over the course of his career , <unk> received numerous positive criticism and attention from other industry members and publications . He was highlighted in American Cinematographer on many occasions , the first time being in the 1922 edition , where he was called a " valued member " of the ASC . When he was selected to man the camera for fellow ASC member Phil Rosen 's film , Abraham Lincoln , a prominent industry magazine stated that <unk> 's career had been " brilliant " up to that point . In July 1924 , after Kurrle 's return from north Africa where he shot A Son of the Sahara , American Cinematographer called him " ... a master of his profession . " 
 For 1926 's Wings of the Storm , Kurrle 's exterior shots in Mt . Rainier National Park received positive comments from industry trade papers . In 1927 Kurrle was lauded for his camerawork on the film adaptation of Tolstoy 's Resurrection , which was directed by his long @-@ term collaborator <unk> . The following year , in the first ever American Cinematographer poll of the top Hollywood directors , Kurrle was selected as one of the top 10 cinematographers in the industry . That same year , 1928 , his camera work on Sadie Thompson , was lauded as " ... beautifully done , and the settings are completely in the mood of the story " . 
 = = = Universal and Warner Brothers = = = 
 By 1928 Kurrle was being called a " camera ace " , a reference not only to his skill behind the camera , but also to the fact that he was one of the few people in Hollywood to own their own plane . In 1928 he worked exclusively with Universal Pictures , before returning to freelance the following year . In mid @-@ 1930 , Kurrle signed a contract with Warner Brothers . Over the next two years he rose to become their top cinematographer . During his sixteen @-@ year career , he worked with such notable directors as John Ince , William Wellman , Raoul Walsh , Michael Curtiz , Archie Mayo , and William Dieterle ( who directed the final film Kurrle photographed ) . In 1928 Kurrle was one of the inaugural members of the International Photographers branch of the International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees ( <unk> ) . 
 Even when the film was given less than stellar press , Kurrle 's work was often praised , as in the case of the 1929 film Her Majesty , Love , where it was noted , " The story is negligible , the cast , though capable , has nothing to do , and the direction is heavy handed and slow . But Robert Kurrle 's cinematography is outstanding . " That same year , his camerawork on another Carewe film , an adaptation of Longfellow 's Evangeline , was deemed as " beautiful " by the Film Daily . The magazine also rated his photography as " excellent " for Merian Cooper 's version of the classic tale , The Four Feathers . There were times when his work only garnered average reviews in some papers , such as 1930 's Hit the Deck , while still gaining praise in others . 
 Kurrle was behind the camera for Lloyd Bacon 's 1930 version of Moby Dick , for which his work received high praise , being called " ... one of the three outstanding elements of the entire work . " In 1931 , his work on Resurrection was described as " ... brilliant and sweeping " . During 1932 , Kurrle was the director of photography on ten feature films which were released that year . In September and October 1932 , he worked on back to back films . The first was The Match King , featuring Warren William and Lily Damita , followed by Lawyer Man , starring William Powell and Joan Blondell . Lawyer Man was his final film . 
 = = Death = = 
 Following the completion of his work on Lawyer Man , he went to the hospital for treatment of a persistent cold . This developed into a sinus infection , which further worsened into an infection in his brain . He remained in the hospital for over a week , fighting the infection , but eventually died from it . His death at the age of 42 on October 27 , 1932 , shocked the film industry . Later it was reported that the infection was meningitis . The last two films he worked on were released posthumously . Upon his death , American Cinematographer said , " The Motion Picture Industry lost one of its greatest cinematographers and finest gentlemen ... " 
 His memorial service was held at The Little Church of the Flowers in Glendale , California , after which he was interred in Forest Lawn Memorial Park , also in Glendale . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 ( Per AFI database ) 
 = Little Sammy Sneeze = 
 Little Sammy Sneeze was a comic strip by American cartoonist Winsor McCay . In each episode the titular Sammy sneezed himself into an awkward or disastrous predicament . The strip ran from July 24 , 1904 , until December 9 , 1906 , in the New York Herald , where McCay was on the staff . It was McCay 's first successful comic strip ; he followed it with Dream of the Rarebit Fiend later in 1904 , and his best @-@ known strip Little Nemo in Slumberland in 1905 . 
 In contrast to the imaginative layouts of Little Nemo , Sammy Sneeze was confined to a rigid grid and followed a strict formula : Sammy 's sneeze would build frame by frame , contorting the protagonist 's face until it erupted in the second @-@ to @-@ last panel . In the closing panel he suffered the consequences — often a kick in the rear . McCay targeted middle @-@ class pretensions such as consumerism and squeamishness over bodily functions , while reaffirming the social order by ensuring that Sammy received punishment . 
 McCay 's artwork was finely detailed and highly accurate in its persistent repetition . He delved into modernist experimentation , shattering fourth walls and even the strip 's panel borders . The panel @-@ by @-@ panel buildup displayed McCay 's concern with depicting motion , a concern that was to culminate in his pioneering animated films of the 1910s , such as Gertie the Dinosaur ( 1914 ) . 
 = = Premise = = 
 The strip followed a simple concept : each week , little Sammy would sneeze with such power that it wreaked havoc with his surroundings . His sneeze would build up until its release with the onomatopoeia " Chow ! " in the second @-@ to @-@ last panel . In the last panel he would suffer the consequences — being driven away by one of his victims , or often receiving a kick in the rear . 
 Examples of ' ' Little Sammy Sneeze ' ' 
 = = Background = = 
 Winsor McCay had worked in dime museums in Cincinnati from 1891 , where he drew posters and advertisements . McCay 's ability to draw quickly with great accuracy drew crowds when he painted advertisements in public . He began working as a newspaper cartoonist full @-@ time in 1898 , and also freelanced for humor magazines . McCay moved to New York City in 1903 to work for the New York Herald , leaving behind his first comic strip , A Tale of the Jungle Imps by Felix Fiddle . From January 1904 he created a number of other short @-@ lived strips , before finding popular success with Sammy Sneeze that July . 
 McCay was noted not only for his exceptional drafting skills , but also his remarkable <unk> . In addition to his editorial cartooning , in 1905 he was producing five regular comic strips : Little Sammy Sneeze , Dream of the Rarebit Fiend , Little Nemo in Slumberland , Hungry Henrietta , and A Pilgrim 's Progress . 
 = = Style and analysis = = 
 The strip was almost always laid out in a rigid grid : Sammy 's sneeze would build in the first four panels to a release in the fifth and consequences for Sammy in the sixth . This is in contrast to the great variety of panel sizes and layouts displayed in McCay 's earlier strip The Jungle Imps , and later much more prominently in Little Nemo . Though not to the degree applied to Little Nemo , McCay 's backgrounds were heavily detailed , and he drew monotonous , repetitive images with great accuracy ; McCay later applied these skills to his animation work . Sammy was inarticulate , making little more than mouth noises ; the adults around him conversed , but in a monotonous manner that did not invite careful reading . 
 The artwork displays an attention to detail McCay is known for . The backgrounds remain the same from panel to panel , while passersby unwittingly pass Sammy during his buildup . McCay took the visual ideas he experimented with in Little Sammy Sneeze and Dream of the Rarebit Fiend ( also 1904 ) and more fully explored them when he began Little Nemo the following year . 
 Examples of ' ' Little Sammy Sneeze ' ' 
 While the technical dexterity Little Nemo draws the greatest share of attention among McCay 's works , Katherine Roeder finds the formally lower @-@ key Sammy Sneeze " tested the limits of visual representation and demonstrated the comic strip 's potential as a vehicle for modernist experimentation " . McCay was fond of breaking the fourth wall , a well @-@ known example of which is the September 24 , 1905 , episode : the gag unfolds according to formula , culminating in the destruction of the very panel borders of the comic strip itself . The strip may pay homage to Fred Ott 's Sneeze — a filmstrip of the progression of a man sneezing . The photographs appeared in Harper 's Magazine in 1884 and were well known . As in the film , and unusual for the Sammy Sneeze strip , the September 24 episode has a closeup of the <unk> against a blank background , and Sammy 's gestures echo those of Ott . 
 McCay was concerned with depicting the seldom @-@ perceived minutiae of movement , though his was not the scientific curiosity found in the <unk> of Eadweard Muybridge , Étienne @-@ Jules Marey , and Georges <unk> . McCay emphasizes the lack of order and irrational unpredictability of the human body . McCay 's concern was to culminate in his pioneering animated films such as Gertie the Dinosaur ( 1914 ) . 
 Though the story of mischievous children and the trouble they caused was typical of comic strips of the day , in contrast to such other popular strips as The Katzenjammer Kids and Buster Brown , the havoc Sammy wreaked was unintentional . To Roeder , the humor at the expense of both the adults and the child likely appealed to a broad range of readers , and may have broadened the appeal of comic strips to conservative middle @-@ class audiences . These audiences may have seen the inevitable consequences for Sammy as a restoration of a natural social order , one that was left rent asunder in other comic strips . 
 Sammy is given an unappealing character design and personality , with dull features and expression that do not invite the reader 's sympathy ; his character is never developed . Similar to Buster Brown , Sammy dresses in a dress shirt , lace collar , and cravat . This style associated with middle @-@ class aspirations and popularized toward the end of the 19th century in the wake of the success of Little Lord Fauntleroy . By the time Sammy Sneeze had begun the style was a subject of ridicule ; in an age where respectable society went to lengths to avoid drawing attention to bodily functions , it emphasized the humorous contortions of Sammy 's face as he built up toward his sneeze . His sneeze could also tear down other symbols of the middle @-@ class , such as an expansive department store display of goods at Christmas . 
 The strip 's header declared to each side of the title " He just simply couldn 't stop " and " He never knew when it was coming " , and never strayed from the basic formula of build @-@ up , release , and consequence . McCay was to make use of such framing devices throughout his career , as in Little Nemo where the reader could rely on the protagonist awakening in the closing panel each week . Scott <unk> and Thierry Smolderen saw the monotony of Sammy Sneeze as an attempt by McCay at parody — one that , in Smolderen 's words , " chuckles at the absurdity of ... doing the same thing ad nauseam " . Noah Berlatsky objected to the idea , calling the strip " excessive and infantile , linked , not to a sense of irony , but a sense of wonder " , which he compared to the " eternal appetite of infancy " that G. K. Chesterton in Orthodoxy ( 1908 ) attributed to the Christian God . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Little Sammy Sneeze began on July 24 , 1904 , in the New York Herald , where McCay had joined the staff in 1903 . It ran in color until partway through 1905 , and came to an end December 9 , 1906 . In 1906 , a compilation volume of the strips appeared — not only in the United States , but in France where the Herald 's publisher James Gordon Bennett , Jr. was based . Sammy was one of the earliest American strips to appear in Europe . 
 Sunday Press Books released a deluxe 11 in × 16 in ( 28 cm × 41 cm ) landscape @-@ format hardcover volume called Little Sammy Sneeze : The Complete Color Sunday Comics 1904 – 1905 in 2007 . On the reverse of each Sammy Sneeze page was printed a non @-@ Sammy Sneeze strip — the complete run of McCay 's The Story of Hungry Henrietta , as well as selections from John Prentiss Benson 's The <unk> , and Gustave Verbeek 's The Upside @-@ Downs of Little Lady <unk> and Old Man <unk> and The Terrors of the Tiny <unk> . These bonus strips appeared in monochrome to Sammy Sneeze 's color , as they would have at the time when newspapers normally printed color on only one side of the page . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year run , McCay dropped the strip , while continuing to work on Dream of the Rarebit Fiend , Pilgrim 's Progress , and his best @-@ known work , Little Nemo . It has since mostly been remembered as a precursor to McCay 's better @-@ known strips , receiving little attention itself outside of a few key strips . The strip 's concept was later picked up by the creators of characters such as <unk> Seal and Li 'l <unk> . 
 = Mzoli 's = 
 Mzoli 's ( also known as Mzoli 's Place , Mzoli 's Meat , or Mzoli 's <unk> ) is a butchery in Gugulethu , a township on the outskirts of Cape Town , South Africa . Since Mzoli 's opened in early 2003 , the restaurant has become a popular gathering spot for Cape Town residents and a tourist attraction . Amongst Gugulethu 's residents , Mzoli 's Place has a reputation for public drunkenness and disrespect for the local community . Mzoli 's is named after the founder and owner , Mzoli Ngcawuzele . 
 = = History = = 
 The establishment opened in early 2003 . Owner Mzoli Ngcawuzele obtained start @-@ up funding from the Development Bank of South Africa , which supports black @-@ owned businesses . In October 2006 , an economic study said that Mzoli had " moved , from selling meat informally from a garage , to owning one of the most popular hangouts in Cape Town " . 
 In November 2006 , more than 30 restaurant patrons , including a group of tourists and Democratic Alliance councillor <unk> <unk> , were arrested in a police raid for drinking in public . The restaurant did not sell alcohol , but Ngcawuzele explained that he could not stop people from bringing their own . The incident generated controversy in the local press . Tour operator Ryan Hunt claimed that police swore at the patrons and threatened people for asking questions . " The police created a dangerous situation . People are always encouraged to visit township attractions , but now they are turned away with that kind of situation , " he said . <unk> , a member of Cape Town 's economic development committee , added , " Mzoli 's is internationally acclaimed and is key to township tourism . What kind of message is the police sending ? " The African National Congress approved the police actions , citing a need to curtail public drunkenness . 
 = = Business = = 
 Located in the township of Gugulethu , a black neighbourhood 15 kilometres southeast of the centre of Cape Town , Mzoli 's is a " do @-@ it @-@ yourself " market and eatery , selling meat to patrons who in turn hire independent entrepreneurs running <unk> stalls on the grounds to grill the meat and prepare meals . Mzoli 's also provides live entertainment and has become noted as a venue for deep house and <unk> music . 
 As well as local people , Mzoli 's attracts television stars , DJs such as DJ Fresh , politicians such as Tony <unk> , businesspeople , tourists , and college students . Mzoli 's is considered to be a " base camp " where " black diamonds " gather and network . In September 2006 , Sasha Planting of Financial Mail called it " the destination for everyone " . 
 = = Reception by locals = = 
 Some local residents near a long @-@ planned shopping mall that is being built by a business partly owned by Mzoli 's owner criticized his plans in 2008 . Some businesses were legally evicted or threatened with eviction from older buildings owned by Mzoli , which were then knocked down to make room for the new property development . Other nearby residents have complained that the property developer has not hired enough local residents . Critics threatened to vandalize or burn both Mzoli 's Place and Ngcawuzele 's home if he did not meet their demands for jobs and permanent , guaranteed space for informal traders at the new shopping mall . 
 = SMS Lützow = 
 SMS Lützow was the second Derfflinger @-@ class battlecruiser built by the German Kaiserliche Marine ( English : Imperial Navy ) before World War I. Ordered as a replacement for the old protected cruiser Kaiserin Augusta , Lützow was launched on 29 November 1913 , but not completed until 1916 . Lützow was a sister ship to Derfflinger from which she differed slightly in that she was armed with an additional pair of 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 inch ) secondary guns and had an additional watertight compartment in her hull . She was named in honor of the Prussian general Ludwig Adolf Wilhelm von Lützow who fought in the Napoleonic Wars . 
 Lützow was commissioned on 8 August 1915 , but did not join the I Scouting Group until 20 March due to engine damage during trials . This was after most of the major actions conducted by the German battlecruiser force had taken place . As a result , Lützow saw very little action during the war . She took part in only one bombardment operation : the Bombardment of Yarmouth and Lowestoft on 24 – 25 April 1916 , after which she became Admiral Franz von Hipper 's flagship . One month later , the ship was heavily engaged during the Battle of Jutland , on 31 May – 1 June . During the battle , Lützow sank the British battlecruiser HMS Invincible and is sometimes given credit for the armored cruiser HMS Defence . However , she was heavily damaged by an estimated 24 heavy @-@ caliber shell hits . With her bow thoroughly flooded , the ship was unable to make the return voyage to German ports ; her crew was evacuated and she was sunk by torpedoes fired by one of her escorts , the torpedo boat G38 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Lützow was ordered as Ersatz Kaiserin Augusta , to replace the elderly protected cruiser Kaiserin Augusta , which was by then 20 years old . Built by Schichau @-@ Werft in Danzig , her keel was laid down in May 1912 , and she was launched on 29 November 1913 . Lützow was commissioned on 8 August 1915 for trials , and was sent to Kiel on 23 August . There she completed her final fitting out , including her armament . While on trials on 25 October , Lützow 's port low @-@ pressure turbine was badly damaged . Repairs were conducted in Kiel until late January 1916 , after which the ship underwent further trials . These were finished on 19 February ; Lützow was assigned to the I Scouting Group on 20 March , and arrived at her new unit four days later . 
 On completion she displaced nearly 27 @,@ 000 t ( 27 @,@ 000 long tons ; 30 @,@ 000 short tons ) and was 210 @.@ 40 metres ( 690 ft 3 in ) long . The ship was capable of a top speed of 26 @.@ 4 knots ( 48 @.@ 9 km / h ; 30 @.@ 4 mph ) , and could steam for 5 @,@ 600 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 400 km ; 6 @,@ 400 mi ) at a cruising speed of 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) . Mounting a main armament of eight 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 in ) guns , Lützow was the largest and most powerful German battlecruiser at the time , along with her elder sister Derfflinger . 
 = = Service = = 
 = = = Bombardment of Yarmouth and Lowestoft = = = 
 Lützow ' first major operation was the bombardment of Yarmouth and Lowestoft on 24 – 25 April . Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper , the commander of the I Scouting Group , was away on sick leave , so the German ships were under the command of Rear Admiral Friedrich Boedicker . The German battlecruisers Seydlitz , the flagship , followed by Derfflinger , Lützow , Moltke , and Von der Tann left the Jade Estuary at 10 : 55 on 24 April , and were supported by a screening force of 6 light cruisers and two torpedo boat flotillas . The heavy units of the High Seas Fleet sailed at 13 : 40 , with the objective to provide distant support for Boedicker 's ships . The British Admiralty was made aware of the German sortie through the interception of German wireless signals , and deployed the Grand Fleet at 15 : 50 . 
 By 14 : 00 , Boedicker 's ships had reached a position off Norderney , at which point he turned his ships northward to avoid the Dutch observers on the island of Terschelling . At 15 : 38 , Seydlitz struck a mine , which tore a 15 @-@ metre ( 49 ft ) long hole in her hull , just abaft of the starboard broadside torpedo tube , allowing 1 @,@ 400 short tons ( 1 @,@ 250 long tons ) of water to enter the ship . Seydlitz turned back with the screen of light cruisers at a speed of 15 knots ( 28 km / h ) . The four remaining battlecruisers turned south immediately in the direction of Norderney to avoid further mine damage . By 16 : 00 , Seydlitz was clear of imminent danger , so the ship stopped to allow Boedicker to disembark . The torpedo boat V28 brought Boedicker to Lützow . 
 At 04 : 50 on 25 April , the German battlecruisers were approaching Lowestoft when the light cruisers Rostock and Elbing , which had been covering the southern flank , spotted the light cruisers and destroyers of Commodore Tyrwhitt 's Harwich Force . Boedicker refused to be distracted by the British ships , and instead trained his ships ' guns on Lowestoft . The German battlecruisers destroyed two 6 in ( 15 cm ) shore batteries and inflicted other damage to the town . In the process , a single 6 in shell from one of the shore batteries struck Moltke , but the ship sustained no significant damage . 
 At 05 : 20 , the German raiders turned north , towards Yarmouth , which they reached by 05 : 42 . The visibility was so poor that the German ships fired one salvo each , with the exception of Derfflinger , which fired fourteen rounds from her main battery . The German ships turned back south , and at 05 : 47 encountered for the second time the Harwich Force , which had by then been engaged by the six light cruisers of the German screening ships . Boedicker 's ships opened fire from a range of 12 @,@ 000 m ( 13 @,@ 000 yards ) . Tyrwhitt immediately turned his ships around and fled south , but not before the cruiser Conquest sustained severe damage . Due to reports of British submarines and torpedo attacks , Boedicker broke off the chase and turned back east towards the High Seas Fleet . At this point , Scheer , who had been warned of the Grand Fleet 's sortie from Scapa Flow , turned back towards Germany . 
 = = = Battle of Jutland = = = 
 At 02 : 00 CET , on 31 May 1916 , the I Scouting Group departed the Jade estuary ; Lützow , Hipper 's flagship , was the leading vessel , followed by her sister Derfflinger , Seydlitz , Moltke , and Von der Tann . The ships were accompanied by the II Scouting Group , under the command of Rear Admiral Boedicker , composed of the four light cruisers Frankfurt , Wiesbaden , Pillau , and Elbing . The reconnaissance force was screened by 30 torpedo boats of the II , VI , and IX Flotillas , directed by the cruiser Regensburg . 
 An hour and a half later , the High Seas Fleet — under the command of Admiral Scheer — left the Jade with 16 dreadnoughts . It was accompanied by the IV Scouting Group , composed of the light cruisers Stettin , München , Hamburg , Frauenlob , and Stuttgart , and 31 torpedo boats of the I , III , V , and VII Flotillas , led by the light cruiser Rostock . The six pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the II Battle Squadron had departed from the Elbe roads at 02 : 45 , and rendezvoused with the battle fleet at 5 : 00 . The operation was to be a repeat of previous German fleet actions : to draw out a portion of the Grand Fleet and destroy it . 
 = = = = Opening actions = = = = 
 Shortly before 16 : 00 , Hipper 's force encountered Vice Admiral Beatty 's 1st Battlecruiser Squadron . At 16 : 00 , Hipper ordered the signal " Distribution of fire from left " be hoisted on Lützow . The German ships were the first to open fire , at a range of approximately 15 @,@ 000 yards ( 14 @,@ 000 m ) . The two leading British battlecruisers , Lion and Princess Royal , concentrated their fire on Lützow . The British rangefinders had misread the range to their German targets , and so the first salvos fired by the British ships fell a mile beyond their German opponents . As the two lines of battlecruisers deployed to engage each other , Lützow began to duel with her opposite in the British line , Lion . By 16 : 51 , Lützow had hit her opponent twice , but caused no significant damage . Nine minutes later , Lion scored the first hit on Lützow ; a salvo from the British ship struck the battlecruiser on her forecastle , but no major damage was done . Nearly simultaneously , Lützow dealt a tremendous blow to Lion ; one of her 30 @.@ 5 cm shells penetrated the roof of Lion 's center " Q " turret and detonated the munitions that were stored inside . Only by the resolute actions of the turret commander — Major Francis Harvey , who ordered the magazine be flooded — did the ship avoid a catastrophic magazine explosion . Indeed , approximately 30 minutes after the turret was destroyed , the fire in the turret spread to the working chamber that was directly above the magazine ; there it detonated propellant charges that had been stored there . The resulting explosion would have likely destroyed the ship if the ammunition magazine had not been flooded . 
 At 17 : 03 , the rearmost British battlecruiser , Indefatigable , was struck by several shells from her opponent , Von der Tann . The forward ammunition magazines were penetrated and set on fire ; the resulting explosion tore the ship apart . Shortly thereafter , Lützow scored several more hits on Lion , though without serious damage being done . In an attempt to regroup his ships , Admiral Beatty sought to turn his ships away by 2 degrees while the Queen Elizabeth @-@ class battleships of the 5th Battle Squadron arrived on the scene and provided covering fire . As the British battlecruisers began to turn away , Seydlitz and Derfflinger were able to concentrate their fire on Queen Mary . Witnesses reported at least 5 shells from two salvos hit the ship , which caused an intense explosion that ripped the Queen Mary in half . Shortly after the destruction of Queen Mary , both British and German destroyers attempted to make torpedo attacks on the opposing lines . The British destroyers Nestor and Nicator each fired two torpedoes at Lützow , though all four missed . 
 The leading ships of the German battle fleet had by 18 : 00 come within effective range of the British ships , and had begun trading shots with the British battlecruisers and Queen Elizabeth @-@ class battleships . During the engagements between the combined German fleet and the British 1st Battlecruiser and 5th Battle Squadrons , Lützow had both of her wireless transmitters damaged ; after that point , the only method of communication between ships was via searchlight . 
 = = = = <unk> engage = = = = 
 Shortly after 19 : 00 , the German cruiser Wiesbaden had become disabled by a shell from the battlecruiser Invincible ; the German battlecruisers made a 16 @-@ point turn to the northeast and made for the crippled cruiser at high speed . The III Battle Squadron of the German fleet , which contained the most powerful battleships of the German navy , also altered course to assist Wiesbaden . Simultaneously , the British III and IV Light Cruiser Squadrons began a torpedo attack on the German line ; while advancing to torpedo range , they smothered Wiesbaden with fire from their main guns . During the turn to the northeast , the British destroyers Onslow and Acasta approached to launch torpedoes at Lützow , though without success . Onslow was hit three times by Lützow 's secondary battery and was forced to withdraw . 
 At 19 : 15 , the German battlecruisers spotted the British armored cruiser Defence , which had joined the attack on Wiesbaden . Hipper initially hesitated , believing the ship was the German cruiser Rostock , but at 19 : 16 , Kapitän zur See ( KzS ) Harder , Lützow 's commanding officer , ordered his ships ' guns to fire . The other German battlecruisers and battleships joined in the melee ; Lützow fired five broadsides in rapid succession . In the span of less than 5 minutes , Defence was struck by several heavy @-@ caliber shells from the German ships . One salvo penetrated the ship 's ammunition magazines and , in a massive explosion , destroyed the cruiser . 
 By 19 : 24 , the 3rd Battlecruiser Squadron had formed up with Beatty 's remaining battlecruisers ahead of the German line . The leading British ships spotted Lützow and Derfflinger , and began firing on them . In the span of 8 minutes , the battlecruiser Invincible scored eight hits on Lützow ; these hits were mainly concentrated in the ship 's bow and were the primary cause of the flooding that would eventually cause her to sink . In return , both Lützow and Derfflinger concentrated their fire on Invincible , and 19 : 33 , Lützow 's third salvo penetrated Invincible 's center turret and ignited the magazine ; the ship disappeared in a series of massive explosions . 
 By 19 : 30 , the High Seas Fleet , which was by that point pursuing the British battlecruisers , had not yet encountered the Grand Fleet . Scheer had been considering retiring his forces before darkness exposed his ships to torpedo boat attack . He had not yet made a decision when his leading battleships encountered the main body of the Grand Fleet . This development made it impossible for Scheer to retreat , for doing so would have sacrificed the slower pre @-@ dreadnought battleships of the II Battle Squadron . If he chose to use his dreadnoughts and battlecruisers to cover their retreat , he would have subjected his strongest ships to overwhelming British fire . Instead , Scheer ordered his ships to turn 16 points to starboard , which would bring the pre @-@ dreadnoughts to the relative safety of the disengaged side of the German battle line . 
 = = = = Lützow withdraws = = = = 
 The other battlecruisers followed the move , but Lützow had lost speed and was unable to keep up . Instead , the ship tried to withdraw to the southwest to escape the punishing British gunfire . By 20 : 00 , flooding in the forward part of the ship had reached the magazine for the forward turret . The gun crew brought up as many shells and propellant charges as could be stored in the working chamber below the turret . Shortly before , at 19 : 50 , Kommodore Michelson , aboard the cruiser Rostock , dispatched the torpedo boats of I Half @-@ Flotilla to assist Lützow . G39 came alongside and took Hipper and his staff aboard , in order to transfer him to one of the other battlecruisers . <unk> and <unk> began laying a smoke screen between the battered ship and the British line , but at 20 : 15 , before it was finished , Lützow was struck in quick succession by four heavy @-@ caliber shells . One pierced the ship 's forward superfiring turret and temporarily disabled it . The shell detonated a propellant charge and the right gun was destroyed . The second hit disabled the electric training gear of the rearmost turret , which now had to be operated by hand . Lützow fired her last shot at 20 : 45 , at which point the smoke screen had successfully hidden her from the British line . 
 As the German fleet began to withdraw after nightfall , Lützow , steaming at 15 knots , attempted to pass behind the German line to seek the safety of the disengaged side . By 22 : 13 , the last German ship in the line lost sight of Lützow , which was unable to keep up with the fleet . Admiral Reinhard Scheer , the commander of the High Seas Fleet , hoped that in the foggy darkness , Lützow could evade detection and successfully return to a German port . By 21 : 30 , the ship was settling deeper into the sea . Water began to wash onto the deck and into the forecastle above the main armored deck ; this would prove to be a significant problem . 
 = = = = Lützow scuttled = = = = 
 At midnight , there was still hope that the severely wounded Lützow could make it back to harbor . The ship was capable of 7 knots up until around 00 : 45 when she began taking on more water . By 01 : 00 , there was too much water in the hull for the pumps to handle . Water began to enter the forward generator compartments , which forced the crew to work by candlelight . Lützow was so low in the water by 01 : 30 that water began to flood the forward boiler room . By that point , almost all of the compartments in the forward part of the ship , up to the conning tower and below the main armored deck , were thoroughly flooded . Water had also entered the ship through shell holes in the forecastle above the armored deck ; the majority of the upper portion of the ship forward of the forward @-@ most barbette was flooded as well . The battlecruiser 's crew attempted to patch the shell holes three times , but as the flooding worsened and the draft increased , water increasingly washed over the deck and inhibited progress on the repair work . 
 The crew attempted to reverse direction and steam backwards , but this had to be abandoned when the bow became so submerged that the propellers were pulled partially out of the water ; forward draft had increased to over 17 meters . By 2 : 20 , an estimated 8 @,@ 000 tons of water was in the ship , and she was in serious danger of capsizing , so KzS Harder gave the order to abandon ship . The torpedo boats <unk> , G38 , <unk> , and <unk> came alongside the stricken battlecruiser to evacuate the ship 's crew , though six men were trapped in the bow and could not be freed . By 02 : 45 Lützow was submerged up to her bridge . G38 fired two torpedoes into the ship , and two minutes later she disappeared below the waves . The ship was approximately 60 km ( 37 mi ) north @-@ west of Horns Reef when she was scuttled . The position of the wreck is estimated to be 56 ° 15 ′ N 5 ° 53 ′ E. 
 During the battle , Lützow had fired an estimated 380 main battery shells and 400 rounds from her secondary guns , as well as two torpedoes . In return , she was hit 24 times by British heavy @-@ caliber shells . The ship 's crew suffered 115 men killed and another 50 wounded , second only to Derfflinger , which lost 157 men killed and 26 wounded . 
 In 2015 , the survey ship HMS Echo conducted an exploration of the area while laying a tide gauge . During the search , Echo 's sonar located Lützow on the sea floor , some eight miles from her last recorded position . Echo took sonar images of the wreck , which her commander stated would " ensure the ship 's final resting place is properly recognised as a war grave . " 
 = Misterioso ( Thelonious Monk album ) = 
 Misterioso is a 1958 live album by American jazz ensemble the Thelonious Monk Quartet . By the time of its recording , pianist and composer Thelonious Monk had overcome an extended period of career difficulties , including the loss of his cabaret card . After a six @-@ month residency at the New York City 's Five Spot Café in 1957 , he returned the following year for a second stint with his quartet , featuring drummer Roy Haynes , bassist Ahmed Abdul @-@ Malik , and tenor saxophonist Johnny Griffin . Along with Thelonious in Action ( 1958 ) , Misterioso captured portions of the ensemble 's August 7 show at the venue . 
 The title of Misterioso referred to Monk 's reputation as an enigmatic , challenging musician . The album 's cover art , which appropriated Giorgio de Chirico 's 1915 painting The Seer , was part of Riverside 's attempt to capitalize on Monk 's popularity with listeners such as the intellectual and bohemian audiences at the Five Spot Café . The record features four of his earlier compositions , which Monk reworked live . It was one of the first successful live recordings of his music and was produced by Orrin Keepnews , who said that Monk played more distinctly than on his studio albums in response to the audience 's enthusiasm . 
 Misterioso was released in 1958 by Riverside Records to a mixed critical reaction ; reviewers complimented Monk 's performance but were critical of Griffin , whose playing they felt was out of place with the quartet . The album was remastered and reissued in 1989 and 2012 by Original Jazz Classics , and has since received retrospective acclaim from critics , some of whom viewed Griffin 's playing as the record 's highlight . 
 = = Background = = 
 After twenty years of career struggles and obscurity , Thelonious Monk had become a jazz star with a residency at the Five Spot Café in New York City 's East Village . In his first stable job in years , he helped transform the small bar into one of the city 's most popular venues , as it attracted bohemians , hipsters , and devout fans of Monk 's music . His employment there was a result of an appeal by his manager Harry Colomby to the State Liquor Authority ( SLA ) to restore Monk 's cabaret card . Monk was stripped of the card in 1951 when he was convicted of narcotics possession ; he had refused to betray his friend and pianist Bud Powell to the police after they discovered Powell 's <unk> envelope of heroin laying beside Monk 's feet in the car of Powell 's female companion . 
 Although the loss limited Monk as a performer , he recorded several albums of original music and received much attention from the press , which led Colomby to argue to the SLA that he was " a drug @-@ free , law @-@ abiding citizen , whose productivity and growing popularity as a recording artist demonstrates his standing as a responsible working musician " . In May 1957 , the SLA said Monk needed to get a club owner to hire him first , so Colomby considered the Five Spot Café : " I wanted to find a place that was small . I once drove past this place in the Village and there was a bar and I heard music ... A place where poets hung out . " Joe Termini , who co @-@ owned the venue with his brother Iggy , testified at Monk 's police hearing , which resulted in his card being reinstated . 
 In July 1957 , Monk began to perform at the venue for six months with saxophonist John Coltrane , bassist Ahmed Abdul @-@ Malik , and drummer Shadow Wilson in his group . However , by the time Monk 's employment there ended in December , he had lost Wilson to poor health , while Coltrane left in pursuit of a solo career and a return to Miles Davis 's group . After returning to New York City 's club scene with a new quartet , Monk received an eight @-@ week offer from Joe and Iggy Termini to play the Five Spot Café beginning on June 12 , 1958 . He played most nights during the weekend to capacity crowds with Abdul @-@ Malik , drummer Roy Haynes , and tenor saxophonist Johnny Griffin , who had performed with Monk before . Griffin was unfamiliar with all of his repertoire and , like Coltrane , found it difficult to solo over Monk 's comping during their first few weeks : " Any deviation , one note off , and you sound like you 're playing another tune , and you 're not paying attention to what 's going on . And it 's so evident ... there 's no space . " During their performances , Monk often left the stage for a drink at the bar or danced around , which gave Griffin an opportunity to play with more space . However , the quartet eventually developed a sufficient rapport and grasp of the set list . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Producer Orrin Keepnews attempted to record the quartet live at the Five Spot Café on two different occasions in 1958 . His first recording of the ensemble was of two sets during their July 9 show . Monk was disappointed with the recording and did not allow his label Riverside Records to release it , although it was released later after his death . Keepnews returned to the venue on August 7 when Monk performed an evening show in the club 's overcrowded room set up with recording equipment . This yielded both Misterioso and Thelonious in Action , which was released first in 1958 . The show was believed to be the first successful live recording of Monk 's music , until the recording of his 1957 concert with Coltrane at Carnegie Hall was discovered and released in 2005 . The two live albums from the Five Spot Café are the only recordings that document Monk 's time with Griffin . 
 According to Keepnews , who produced Misterioso , the album and its title track were named as a slight play on the words " mist " and " mystery " , meant to evoke the perception of Monk 's music as enigmatic and challenging at the time . Jazz critic Neil <unk> said that the word , which is Latin for " in a mysterious manner " , was " used most often as a musical direction in classical music scores . But by the time Monk 's quartet recorded this music [ in 1958 ] ' Misterioso ' had largely come to identify Monk himself . " 
 To capitalize on Monk 's popularity with intellectual and bohemian fans from venues such as the Five Spot Café , Riverside released Misterioso and reissues of his older records with designs referencing 20th century works of art . The album 's cover art is a reproduction of Giorgio de Chirico 's 1915 painting The Seer , which was originally painted as a tribute to French poet Arthur Rimbaud . Monk biographer Robin Kelley argued that , because Rimbaud had " called on the artist to be a seer in order to plumb the depths of the unconscious in the quest for clairvoyance " , the painting was the best choice for the cover : " The one @-@ eyed figure represented the visionary ; the architectural forms and the placement of the chalkboard evoked the unity of art and science — a perfect symbol for an artist whose music has been called ' mathematical . ' " According to musicologist Robert G. O <unk> , the cover reflected " the mysterious violations of convention of perspective , the silences , and oddly attractive angles ( the overall futuristic quality ) in Monk 's music " . 
 = = Composition and performance = = 
 According to jazz critic Gary Giddins , Misterioso is a hard bop record . The songs performed for the album were arranged by Monk , who reworked four of his earlier compositions . In the album 's liner notes , Keepnews wrote of Monk 's approach to arrangements : " It should be axiomatic that Monk is a constantly self @-@ renewing composer @-@ arranger @-@ musician , that each new recording of an ' old ' number , particularly with different personnel , represents a fresh view of it — almost a new composition . " According to Keepnews , he played piano more vividly and less introspectively than on his studio recordings in response to the enthusiastic crowds he drew nightly to the Five Spot Café . 
 On " Nutty " , Griffin incorporated lines from " The Surrey with the Fringe on Top " and exhibited a frenetic swing that was complemented by counterplay from Haynes and Monk . " Blues Five Spot " , a new composition by Monk for the album , is a twelve @-@ bar blues homage to the Five Spot Café and featured solos from each player . Griffin and Monk transfigured chord structures and melodies throughout the performance . Griffin 's solo vamp maintained the rhythm while quoting lines from other pieces , including the theme song for the animated Popeye theatrical shorts ; he played " The Sailor 's <unk> " at the end of " Blues Five Spot " . 
 The quartet began " In Walked Bud " with an eight @-@ bar piano intro and thirty @-@ two @-@ bar form . Griffin began his solo a minute into the song with saxophone wails . In the third minute , Monk did not play , while Griffin played fast phrases at the top of his register with intermittently slower R & B and free jazz elements . Monk shouted approvingly throughout Griffin 's solo before he resumed piano and played a two @-@ minute theme . " Just a Gigolo " , a standard , was the only song on the album not composed by Monk , who performed it in a brief , unaccompanied version . It was played as a single chorus repeated at length . 
 The title track — first recorded for Blue Note Records in 1948 with vibraphonist Milt Jackson — is one of Monk 's most influential recordings and is based on a series of minor second clusters . His performance of the song at the Five Spot Café showcased his idiosyncratic playing of one blue note next to another . Monk superimposed musical ideas that deviated from the song 's original tonal center , adding a C blue note to the D @-@ flat blue note . Haynes ' subdued drumming backed Griffin 's aggressive bop playing and extended solo on " Misterioso " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Misterioso was released in 1958 by Riverside and was Monk 's eighth album for the label . Writing for Hi Fi Review , critic Nat Hentoff said the record was " not one of his best " and observed " too little space for Monk 's soloing and somewhat too much " for Griffin , whose saxophone cry and timing were more impressive than his solos . Hentoff also believed Haynes and Abdul @-@ Malik did not support Monk as creatively as Wilbur Ware and Art Blakey had on his previous Riverside albums , where he said Monk was in more compelling form . In 1959 , Monk was voted the pianist of the year in an annual poll of international jazz critics from Down Beat magazine , who said he was heard " at his challenging , consistently creative best " on Misterioso . When Misterioso was released in 1964 in the United Kingdom , Charles Fox gave it a positive review in Gramophone . He found its music on @-@ par with Monk 's usual standards and highlighted by exceptional playing by him and the rhythm section , particularly Haynes , who showed " once again what a great drummer he was then — and , indeed , still is today " . However , Fox felt Griffin did not fit in with the quartet and overshadowed Monk 's compositions , finding his solos diffuse and characterized by trivial quotations rather than musical development . 
 In the All Music Guide to Jazz ( 2002 ) , Lindsay Planer wrote that Monk 's quartet " continually reinvented " their strong , cohesive sound with " overwhelming and instinctual capacities " throughout Misterioso . He especially praised Griffin , saying he " consistently liberated the performances " . Monk biographer Robin Kelley felt because he had mastered Monk 's songs at that point , his solos on Misterioso and Thelonious in Action were excursive and spirited . Jazz critic Scott Yanow found Misterioso to be the superior record because of what he said was Griffin 's unforgettable solo on a passionate rendition of " In Walked Bud " , while music historian Ted Gioia listed Monk and Griffin 's " freewheeling " performance on the title track as one of his recommended recordings of the composition . According to Robert Christgau , both this record and Brilliant Corners ( 1957 ) represented Monk 's artistic peak . He cited Misterioso as his favorite album and , in a 2009 article for The Barnes & Noble Review , wrote that Griffin 's tenor solo during " In Walked Bud " remained his " favorite five minutes of recorded music " . Liam McManus from PopMatters was less enthusiastic about Griffin 's playing , which he believed was occasionally heavy @-@ handed and detracted from the music , but still recommended Misterioso as an exceptional Monk record featuring him in a casual performance with his quartet . 
 In 1989 , Misterioso was digitally remastered by mastering engineer Joe Tarantino for the album 's CD reissue . Tarantino used 20 @-@ bit K2 Super Coding System technology at Fantasy Studios in Berkeley , California . On May 15 , 2012 , Concord Music Group also reissued the album as part of their Original Jazz Classics Remasters series , along with Jazz at Massey Hall ( 1953 ) and Bill Evans ' 1962 record Moon Beams . The reissue featured 24 @-@ bit remastering by Tarantino and three bonus tracks , including a medley of " Bye @-@ Ya " and " <unk> " performed with drummer Art Blakey . Concord vice president Nick Phillips , who produced the reissue series , said Misterioso was " an all @-@ time classic live Thelonious Monk record " and " an indelible snapshot of Monk live in the late ' 50s . " In a 2012 review , McManus wrote that as with most reissues of jazz albums , the bonus tracks on Misterioso were valuable and showcased uninhibited performances of Monk 's past compositions . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs were composed by Thelonious Monk , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = St. Louis Eagles = 
 The St. Louis Eagles were a professional ice hockey team and a former member of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) based in St. Louis , Missouri . The Eagles existed for only one year , playing in the 1934 – 35 NHL season . 
 The team was originally founded in 1883 as the Ottawa Senators , a successful independent team that joined the NHL as a charter member in 1917 . From the mid @-@ 1920s onward , they endured financial strain caused in part by being in the NHL 's smallest market . The financial problems forced the Senators to suspend operations for the 1931 – 32 season . Upon their return to play – and having sold their better players in an effort to raise funds – the Senators finished in last place for two straight seasons and continued to lose money . Following the repeat last place finish , the team decided it could not survive in Ottawa and hoped to move to a bigger market . 
 In an attempt to recoup losses and pay outstanding debts , the Senators moved the NHL franchise to St. Louis , where it was nicknamed the Eagles . However , the team continued to lose money due to travel expenses , and it was forced to sell players to other teams to meet its financial obligations . After the season , the owners asked the NHL for a second time for permission to suspend operations . This time , the NHL refused the request . Instead , the league bought back the franchise , halted its operations and dispersed its players among the remaining teams . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = The move from Ottawa = = = 
 The Ottawa Senators were founded in 1883 as an amateur club . They began paying their players " under the table " in 1903 and turned openly professional in 1907 . They were a charter member of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) in 1917 , and won the Stanley Cup four times in the NHL 's first decade ( and seven times prior to the league 's formation – including their time as the Silver Seven ) . 
 However , for the better part of their tenure in Ottawa , the Senators played in the smallest market in the NHL . The 1931 census listed only 110 @,@ 000 people in the city of Ottawa — roughly one @-@ fifth the size of Toronto — which was the league 's second @-@ smallest market . The team started having attendance problems when the NHL expanded to the United States in 1924 ; games against the new American teams did not draw well . Despite winning what would be its last Stanley Cup in 1927 , the team lost $ 50 @,@ 000 for the season . The Senators asked the NHL for permission to suspend operations for the 1931 – 32 season in order to help eliminate debt . The league granted the request and during their suspended season Ottawa received $ 25 @,@ 000 for the use of its players , while the NHL co @-@ signed a Bank of Montreal loan of $ 28 @,@ 000 for the franchise . The Senators returned for the 1932 – 33 season and finished in last place . They finished last again in 1933 – 34 season . After the season , the Ottawa Auditorium , owners of the Senators , announced that the team would be moving elsewhere for the next season due to losses of $ 60 @,@ 000 over the previous two seasons . Auditorium officials said they needed to move the Senators to a larger city in order to protect the shareholders and pay off their debts . 
 The Senators ' owners ultimately decided to move the franchise to St. Louis , Missouri and the transfer was approved by the league on May 14 , 1934 . Thomas Franklin Ahearn resigned as president of the Ottawa Auditorium and Redmond Quain became president . Quain transferred the players ' contracts and franchise operations to a new company called the Hockey Association of St. Louis , Inc . Eddie Gerard was hired to coach the new team . The club was renamed the Eagles , inspired by the logo of the Anheuser @-@ Busch brewing company , which was founded in St. Louis . The Senators name and logo remained in Ottawa and would be used by a senior amateur team until 1954 . At the time , St. Louis was the seventh largest city in the United States , with over 800 @,@ 000 inhabitants — over seven times larger than Ottawa . Despite this , St. Louis had been denied an NHL franchise in 1932 because travel to the Midwest was considered too expensive during the Great Depression . 
 Even before the official debut of the Eagles , a problem had arisen for the new NHL club . There was already a professional hockey team in the city , the St. Louis Flyers , playing in the minor @-@ pro American Hockey Association ( AHA ) . The owners of the Flyers claimed they had an agreement with the NHL which prevented it from settling west of the Mississippi . They threatened to sue for $ 200 @,@ 000 in compensation as soon as the Eagles played their first game . Following a visit from the AHA President , the Flyers were asked not to go forward with the lawsuit . The Flyers did not pursue further legal action and eventually changed home venues . 
 = = = 1934 – 35 season = = = 
 At the time there were nine teams in the NHL , divided into two divisions , the Canadian and American . Logically , the Eagles should have been placed in the American Division with the Boston Bruins , Chicago Black Hawks , New York Rangers and Detroit Red Wings . However , in defiance of all geographic reality , the Eagles retained the Senators ' place in the Canadian Division alongside the Toronto Maple Leafs , Montreal Canadiens , Montreal Maroons , and New York Americans . The core of the Senators ' players returned and the team played their games in the St. Louis Arena . The arena was built in 1929 to host the National Dairy Show , but had suffered financially . In 1931 , an ice hockey rink was set up to attract new business . Once the Eagles began play the St. Louis Arena gained the distinction of being the only NHL stadium with racially segregated seating . 
 In their first game the Eagles succumbed to a late rally by the defending Stanley Cup champion Black Hawks , losing 3 – 1 . They registered their first win in the next game winning 4 – 2 over the Rangers . Following the win the Eagles went on an eight @-@ game losing streak . After the first 13 games the Eagles posted a 2 – 11 – 0 record placing them last in their division . Gerard resigned as head coach and was replaced by George " Buck " Boucher , the coach that Gerard himself had replaced after the franchises last season in Ottawa . 
 Under Boucher 's coaching the team showed improvement , posting a 3 – 3 – 3 record in the first nine games . However , the early losing streak had already damaged the fan base . Their inaugural game drew 12 @,@ 622 fans , but attendance quickly diminished . In early January 1935 the team cut ticket prices to the lowest in the league in an attempt to bring out fans . By February the financial state of the team forced the Eagles to essentially sell leading goal scorer Syd Howe to the Detroit Red Wings . Officially , the trade broke down as such - Detroit received Howe and Ralph Bowman in exchange for Teddy Graham and $ 50 @,@ 000 . At the time it was considered a large sum of money . Likewise Frank Finnigan was sold to the Maple Leafs . The Eagles were unable to maintain the early success under Boucher , and finished last in the Canadian division with a record of 11 – 31 – 6 . With only 84 goals scored , they were the lowest scoring team in the league . Only the Montreal Canadiens allowed more goals during the season , surrendering 145 to the Eagles ' 144 . 
 = = = The end of the Eagles = = = 
 By season 's end the Eagles ownership had lost $ 70 @,@ 000 , due primarily to the cost of train travel . In those days , NHL teams traveled primarily by rail . Due to being in the Canadian Division , the Eagles had to make a large number of trips to Montreal and Toronto . An attempt to stabilize the franchise by selling off some of its players netted $ 58 @,@ 000 . The owners had hoped to move once more to save the franchise . There was interest from Cleveland and also in a return to Ottawa , but neither came to fruition . 
 As a result , the ownership again petitioned the NHL to allow them to suspend operations for a year . This time the NHL refused and the Eagles were put up for sale . After no credible offers surfaced , the NHL bought the franchise and player contracts for $ 40 @,@ 000 , and opted to play as an eight @-@ team league . If the NHL ever resold the franchise , proceeds were to go to the Ottawa Hockey Association . The NHL distributed the players under contract with St. Louis through a dispersal draft . Teams selected players in an order based on the previous season 's standings . Teams with the lowest point totals selected first . The Chicago Black Hawks did not participate in the draft . Eighteen of the twenty @-@ three players under contract were selected with the remaining players being placed in the minor leagues . The players were distributed as follows : 
 New York Americans : Forwards : Pete Kelly , Eddie Finnigan 
 Montreal Canadiens : Goaltender : Bill Beveridge , Defenseman : Irv Frew , Forwards : Paul <unk> , Henri Lauzon 
 Detroit Red Wings : Forward : Carl Voss , Goaltender : William Peterkin 
 New York Rangers : Forward : Glen <unk> , Defenseman : Vernon Ayres 
 Montreal Maroons : Forward : Joe Lamb , Goaltender : Bill <unk> 
 Boston Bruins : Forward : Bill Cowley , Defenseman : Teddy Graham 
 Toronto Maple Leafs : Forwards : Gerry Shannon , Cliff Purpur , Jim Dewey , Defenseman : Mickey Blake 
 No credible offers to purchase the dormant franchise ever surfaced . As a result , the once @-@ proud Senators / Eagles franchise never took the ice again , and remain one of two NHL teams to fold after winning a Stanley Cup ( the other being the Maroons ) . 
 In 1938 , the Montreal Maroons attempted to move to St. Louis . They were denied by the NHL due to the high travel costs that plagued the Eagles . The NHL eventually returned to St. Louis in 1967 , when the league doubled in size from the Original Six . The new team was named the Blues and they joined the Minnesota North Stars , Los Angeles Kings , Oakland Seals , Philadelphia Flyers , and Pittsburgh Penguins as part of the new expansion . 
 = = Final standings = = 
 Note : W 
 = Wins , L = 
 Losses , T 
 = Ties , GF = 
 Goals For , GA 
 = Goals Against , Pts = 
 Points 
 Teams that qualified for the playoffs are highlighted in bold . 
 = = Players = = 
 Twenty @-@ nine players in all represented the Eagles during their lone season of existence . The last active player who played with the Eagles was Bill Cowley , who retired in 1947 after his final season with the Boston Bruins . He was also the only player in franchise history to start his career with the Eagles and be inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame . Syd Howe was the only captain of the team during its existence and the two players were the only Eagles players to be inducted into the Hall of Fame . 
 Carl Voss led the team with 18 assists and 31 points Howe led them in goalscoring registering 14 , despite being traded midway through the season . The totals were much lower than the NHL leaders as Charlie Conacher of Toronto led the league with 36 goals and 57 points , while Art Chapman of the Americans led for assists notching 34 . Bill Beveridge was the only goaltender the team used during the season . Out of his 11 wins three were shutouts . 
 The list of players in the history of the team is presented below . 
 Goaltending 
 All player stats taken from Hockey @-@ Reference.com 
 = = = Team captains = = = 
 Syd Howe , 1934 – 35 
 = New Guys = 
 " New Guys " is the first episode of the ninth season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's 177th episode overall . It originally aired on NBC on September 20 , 2012 . The episode was written and directed by series creator Greg Daniels ; this is his first writing credit for the series since the seventh season episode " Goodbye , Michael " , and his first directing credit since " PDA " . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , two new employees ( Clark Duke and Jake Lacy ) are hired by the Scranton branch and cause trouble for Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) and Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) . Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) returns from manager training , hoping for revenge on Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) . Oscar Martinez ( Oscar Nunez ) considers adopting Angela Lipton 's ( Angela Kinsey ) cat . Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) tries to save a turtle . 
 " New Guys " was the inception of several story arcs and saw the departure of Mindy Kaling as Kelly Kapoor , due to her involvement in her own sitcom The Mindy Project . " New Guys " received largely positive pre @-@ release reviews from television critics . Post @-@ release reviews were moderately positive ; while many felt that the episode was a distinct step in the right direction for the show , others took issues with some of the comedic aspects of the episode . " New Guys " was viewed by 4 @.@ 28 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 1 rating among adults between the age of 18 and 49 , making it the show 's lowest @-@ rated season premiere . The episode ranked second in its timeslot and was also the highest @-@ rated NBC series of the night . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Over the summer , Kevin ( Brian Baumgartner ) tried to save a turtle that he ran over , but only ended up killing it . Kelly Kapoor ( Mindy Kaling ) moved to Ohio with her fiancé Ravi and Ryan Howard ( B. J. Novak ) also moved to Ohio for " unrelated reasons . " Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) learned that he is not the biological father of Angela 's ( Angela Kinsey ) baby . 
 While talking to the camera , Jim ( John Krasinski ) and Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) reveal that Jim was offered an entrepreneurial sports job by an old college friend based on an idea the two had in college . Jim tells the camera that he turned it down , because it would not be good for his family . Pam and Jim begin to take off their microphones and Pam makes a remark , noting that , after nine years , the cameramen should have enough footage for a documentary . One of the cameramen then addresses the two , saying that they are more interested in the developments of the office workers themselves , especially Jim and Pam , rather than the office now . Jim looks pensive when Pam tells the cameramen that , with work and kids , nothing interesting will happen to the <unk> in a long time . 
 Two new employees , Clark ( Clark Duke ) and Pete ( Jake Lacy ) , who are quickly dubbed " Dwight , Jr . " and " The New Jim , " are hired by the Scranton branch and cause trouble for Jim and Dwight . At first , Dwight is happy to have a protege , acting as a fatherly figure to Clark due to the office noting their visual similarity , but soon begins to fear that Clark is after his job . Jim , on the other hand , does not feel that Pete is anything like him . However , after hearing Pete discuss his future plans , Jim realizes that he used to have Pete 's ambition but has become stuck at the same job for over nine years . Meanwhile , Angela puts one of her cats , Comstock , up for adoption as her baby is allergic to it . Oscar ( Oscar Nunez ) initially refuses to adopt Comstock despite Angela 's pleas , but agrees to adopt it after learning that it is her husband Robert 's ( Jack Coleman ) favorite cat . It is implied that Robert and Oscar are having an affair , as Robert told Angela he was having a business dinner on the night he actually had plans with Oscar . 
 Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) returns from Outward Bound manager training — where he became more " decisive and confident " — hoping for revenge on Nellie ( Catherine Tate ) for commandeering his job during the previous spring . To do this , Andy sets up a <unk> in the parking lot and makes the employees walk across it , humiliating Nellie as she insists on walking in her heels and fails to keep her balance . After Clark proves that he is talented at balancing , Dwight attempts to one @-@ up him , but ends up failing repeatedly and hurting himself . Eventually , Dwight tries to prove his superiority by riding a bicycle across a tight @-@ rope suspended between the roof and a telephone pole , but the photocopier he is using as a counterweight is not heavy enough and he ends up losing his balance and hanging from the bicycle above the parking lot . Much to his embarrassment , he has to be rescued by a team of firefighters , while Creed ( Creed Bratton ) mistakenly believes the incident to be a circus act . While everyone is outside crowding around Dwight , Jim calls up his old college friend and tells him that he wants to be involved in the new business deal , even though he did not have Pam 's approval . 
 = = Production = = 
 On May 11 , 2012 , NBC renewed The Office for a ninth season and it was later announced that Greg Daniels , who had been the series showrunner from season one through five , would be returning . " New Guys " was written and directed by Daniels . This is his first writing credit for the series since the seventh season entry , " Goodbye , Michael " , and his first directing credited since season seven 's " PDA " . This also marks the third time he has both written and directed an episode , after the first season episode " Basketball " and the fourth season opener , " Fun Run " . Daniels later revealed that " New Guys " would be the inception of big season arcs . He went on the record saying " I 'll tell you that the last couple of years , I don 't think we did any big arc @-@ type things in the way that we used to in the beginning , I think the thing we 're going to do is bring back a lot of arcs " . Jenna Fischer later stated that part of the Jim and Pam arc would be dependent on " things that happened in seasons past that didn 't seem very relevant at the time and [ that ] they 're going to become important this season . " 
 " New Guys " featured one of the final few performances of Mindy Kaling as Kelly Kapoor , who left the series to star in her own comedy television series The Mindy Project , which was created for the Fox Broadcasting Company . Both Novak and Kaling appeared in two episodes of the season — " New Guys " and " Finale " . The episode features both Clark Duke and Jake Lacy as two new Dunder Mifflin employees who have been hired to " go through the back log of over 4 @,@ 000 unanswered customer complaints that " Kelly has ignored the past few years . Duke noted that filming the slack lining scene " was not that fun ; it was really hard " . He did , however , state that Helms was able to do it well " with no practice " . The voice of the documentarian that responds to Jim is that of series director David Rogers . Rogers also voiced the same character in the penultimate episode opener " A.A.R.M. " . Originally , Daniels had re @-@ recorded the line in " New Guys " , but ended up liking Roger 's voice better . He asked him to reprise the role in " A.A.R.M. " to preserve continuity . 
 The official website of The Office included several cut scenes from " New Guys " within a week of the episode 's release . In the first 40 @-@ second clip , Dwight tries to bond with Clark by discussing an article he read in Time magazine about dub @-@ step . Clark teases Dwight for reading the magazine , something he considers for older audiences , but Dwight is oblivious . In the second 75 @-@ second clip , Toby calls a workplace bullying meeting and the office discussing how Andy has been harassing various people . Kevin tries to maintain that Angela bullies him , and states that she will not give him her cat because he killed his turtle " a few times " . In the third and final 30 @-@ second clip , Jim tries to convince Dwight that the relationship Dwight shares with Clark is similar to that of Darth Vader and Luke Skywalker , characters from the popular science fiction movie franchise Star Wars . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Much like the sixth season starter " Gossip " — which featured parkour in the cold opening — the seventh season opener " Nepotism " — which started with a lip dub — and the eighth season premiere " The List " — which opened with a bit about planking — " New Guys " also contains a plot involving a popular Internet meme , in this case slacklining , which is a practice in balance that typically uses nylon webbing tensioned between two anchor points . When Ryan is leaving , he claims he is going to Ohio because " they call it the Silicone Prairie , " a reference to Silicon Valley , a part of the San Francisco Bay Area in Northern California in the United States that is home to many of the world 's largest technology corporations . Andy returns from Outward Bound , an organization that aims to foster the personal growth and social skills of participants by using challenging expeditions in the outdoors . Dwight tries to talk to Clark about the heavy metal band Slayer , noting that he has tickets for a show in ten months . Jim asks Pete if he likes the Philadelphia Phillies , but Pete mistakes his reference to mean horses . 
 Erik Adams of The A.V. Club compared Dwight and Clark 's relationship to that of the mythical characters of King Laius and Oedipus , respectively . The story , which was later turned into a popular play Oedipus Rex by Greek writer Sophocles , tells of how Laius hears of a prophecy that his son will kill him . Fearing the prophecy , Laius abandons his son , Oedipus ' , who is raised in the city of Thebes . Oedipus later crosses paths with Laius and gets into a fight and , not knowing that Laius is his father , kills him . Adams , thus , states that the " break @-@ room conversation " Dwight and Clark share starts to make Dwight paranoid and fear that Clark is after his job . 
 Many reviewers noted that the episode made references to previous episodes of the series . The ending , featuring Dwight riding a bicycle on the roof , was positively compared to the third season episode " Safety Training " . Adams wrote that many of the scenes " take characters to corners of the office tied to memories of episode ’ s [ sic ] past " , such as Oscar 's phone call , which takes place in the stairwell where Dwight pumped himself up for his work review in the second season episode " Performance Review " , and Pam climbing up the rooftop access ladder , which is reminiscent of Pam and Jim 's first " date " in the second season episode " The Client " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " New Guys " originally aired on NBC on September 20 , 2012 . The episode was viewed by 4 @.@ 28 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 1 / 6 percent share in the 18 – 49 demographic . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 1 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 6 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This marked a 46 percent drop in viewership from the season eight premiere " The List " and made it the lowest premiere of the The Office to air . The Office finished second in its time slot , being beaten by an episode of the Fox series Glee , which received a 2 @.@ 9 / 8 percent rating . " New Guys " , however , finished ahead of repeats of the CBS show Two and a Half Men and the ABC series Grey 's Anatomy and a new episode of The CW show The Next . The Office was also the highest @-@ rated NBC television program of the night . " New Guys " was the twenty @-@ first most @-@ watched show for the week of broadcast among adults aged 18 – 49 . This marked a slight improvement from the season eight premiere , " The List " , which ranked as the twenty @-@ second . When DVR numbers were included , the episode increased its ratings up 52 percent to a 3 @.@ 2 , meaning it was seen by , in total , 3 @.@ 2 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Several pre @-@ release reviews of the episode were generally positive . Bruce Miller of the Sioux City Journal gave the episode a largely positive review and noted that " If you can erase last season from your mind , you 'll see this [ ... ] is exactly how The Office should have carried on after Steve Carell left . " Furthermore , he praised the addition of Duke and Lacy , calling their performances " so good you could see them become the centerpiece of a new series . " Verne Gay of Newsweek awarded the episode an " A – " and called the installment " very ( very ) funny . " He was especially happy about the addition of Lacy and Duke , calling them " flashbacks to a younger Jim and Dwight . " Furthermore , he noted that " the ninth and final season actually may offer completion " of a show that has just " merely offered variations on [ the characters ' ] tics " for the past eight seasons . Bob Owen of the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette called the episode " generally funnier than [ the show ] was last season " and wrote that the episode would be a good opportunity " for viewers who quit the [ series ] last year [ ... ] to come back to the show . " Particularly , he was excited to " see the seeds of the show 's end planted . " 
 Entertainment Weekly writer Ken Tucker concluded that " New Guys " has " a lot more snap and vigor than most of last season 's episodes . " He was extremely complimentary towards the Pam and Jim story arc that was hinted at , noting that , after settling into a comfortable marriage , the show was finally trying to make them interesting again . David Silverberg of <unk> called the entry " one of the show 's best [ premieres ] in recent years " and concluded that the addition of Duke and Lacy " work as a better foil than Nellie and the creepy boss played by James Spader . " Adams awarded the episode a " B + " and called it " a fresh start " for the series after the eighth season . Adams also complimented the show for " stop [ ing ] every so often to acknowledge the fans that have stuck with the series [ and ] also mak [ ing ] subtler callbacks to the show ’ s glory days . " He was also complimentary towards the fact that Duke and Lacy have not been thrown into stories of their own , rather , they " serve as parallels and stimulants to Dwight and Jim . " 
 Nick Campbell of TV.com called the episode " a decent " and " moderately sharp " season premiere . He concluded that , " While the episode still wasn 't on par with those of the show 's earliest seasons , [ ... ] The episode wasn 't lazy — and for The Office , that 's a win . " Other reviews were slightly more mixed . TV Fanatic reviewer Dan Forcella awarded the episode a three out of five , but was appreciative of the additions to the cast , as well as many of the actors story lines . Jeffrey Hyatt of Screencrave noted that the episode was similar in tone to the season eight finale , " Free Family Portrait Studio " , but that " the addition of Lacy and Duke pay quick dividends as the opener provides flashes of comedy moxie , while helping wash away painful memories of last season . " David Hinckley of the New York Daily News awarded the episode three stars out of five and wrote that " The deadpan goofiness remains fresh enough to keep fans interested " and that " the fact that this whole drama doesn ’ t feel new and shiny anymore isn ’ t anyone ’ s fault . [ ... ] All The Office needs to do now is march out proudly random , zany and off @-@ center . " HitFix 's Alan Sepinwall , however , was critical of the episode 's humor , noting that it " didn 't give me a lot of hope for a last @-@ minute resurgence " . Matt Roush of TV Guide wrote that the " one interesting storyline " may make him watch the remainder of Pam and Jim 's story , but not " the rest of this sadly played @-@ out workplace comedy . " 
 Many reviews were complimentary towards the interaction Pam and Jim had with the cameramen . Silverberg called it " a nice surprise " . Tucker called the sequence one of the " biggest reveals " in the episode . Sepinwall , despite being critical of the episode 's humor , found the sub @-@ plot " interesting " . He called it " a character arc I 've been waiting for the show to remember to do for years now , and the scenes here were promising ( if not incredibly funny ) " . 
 = Amanita thiersii = 
 Amanita thiersii , commonly called Thiers ' <unk> , is a North @-@ American saprotrophic basidiomycete fungus in the genus Amanita . It is a white mushroom originally described from Texas but today found in nine states of North America . It was named after Harry Delbert Thiers . The cap of this small mushroom is white and convex , measuring 35 – 100 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) and covered by volval remnants . It is sticky to the touch when wet . The gills are variable in length and number and are densely packed in some specimens and widely spaced in others . They are not attached to the stipe , which is 8 – 20 cm ( 3 – 8 in ) long and about 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) thick , with a white ring . The spores measure 7 @.@ 8 – 9 @.@ 8 by 7 @.@ 3 – 9 @.@ 0 µm and are roughly spherical in shape . The spore print is white . 
 The mushroom grows in lawns , pastures and prairies . It is a saprotroph , living on decaying plant material , and not mycorrhizal as is the case in most other species of Amanita . Fruit bodies appear during July and August , either in isolation or in groups , and often form fairy rings . The genome of A. thiersii is being sequenced as part of the United States Department of Energy 's Joint Genome Institute Community Sequencing Program . It is hoped that this will provide a better understanding of the cellulose decomposition capabilities of the fungus . The toxicity of A. thiersii has not been studied but it is suspected of being poisonous . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Amanita thiersii was first described in 1957 by Harry Delbert Thiers , an American mycologist , who had spotted it on a campus lawn when he was a student . He named it Amanita alba but that name was disallowed as it had already been used for another species . In 1969 it was renamed by the Dutch mycologist Cornelis Bas as Amanita thiersii in honour of its finder . It is placed in the genus Amanita in the section Lepidella and subsection <unk> . Bas created the stirps ( an informal ranking below species level ) <unk> , in which he places A. thiersii along with A. <unk> , A. <unk> , A. foetens and A. <unk> . The mushroom is commonly called " Thiers ' <unk> " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is white and dry , measuring 35 – 100 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) wide , and convex in shape ( <unk> or plano @-@ convex ) . It often has a broad low umbo . The cap 's flesh may be 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) thick . At first the cap is covered by the soft , white fragmentary remains of the universal veil , which become more widely separated as the cap expands . They are shaggy and somewhat sticky . 
 The gills are of varying lengths . They are free from the stipe and vary from crowded to widely spaced . They may be narrow or broad and are white to creamy yellow in color . The stipe is white and is 80 – 200 mm ( 3 – 8 in ) long and 10 – 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) wide . In some specimens , the stipe bruises to a yellow color . It is either hollow or lightly stuffed with a cottony tissue . The bulb at the base is slightly broader than the rest of the stipe . The bulb is 25 mm ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) long and 22 mm ( 0 @.@ 9 in ) wide . A shaggy , drooping ring is present which is often shed before maturity . 
 Spores of A. thiersii are white and roughly spherical . They measure approximately 7 @.@ 8 – 9 @.@ 8 by 7 @.@ 3 – 9 @.@ 0 µm and are amyloid . In an analysis , both monokaryotic ( one nucleus per cell ) and dikaryotic ( two nuclei per cell ) strains were isolated from fruit bodies . All the spores were found to be binucleate but the researchers believed that in the monokaryotic strain , the second nucleus had failed to pass through the germ tube . 
 The odor of this mushroom is indistinct but with age can become unpleasant , like that of decay or cheese . The fungus is said to taste oily bitter or bitter metallic . 
 = = = Identification = = = 
 A. thiersii may be gathered inadvertently and thought to be edible due to the fact that it grows on lawns among grasses . This is in contrast to most of the other Amanita species which grow around trees and are thus usually seen in forests . It can be distinguished from other white fungi growing in grassland by its fluffy cap , though the white veil fragments may eventually get washed away by rain . 
 It is similar in appearance to a number of other Amanita species . It can be distinguished from A. <unk> microscopically by the absence of clamp connections between the cells in A. thiersii . Both A. thiersii and A. <unk> have hollow stems but the latter has a more tapering stipe and the whole fruit body is yellower . A. <unk> is another species that grows in similar locations in grassland in Texas and H. D. Thiers described the taste of both it and A. thiersii as being bitter . It can be distinguished by its darker coloration and more warted appearance . 
 = = Toxicity = = 
 The species is suspected of being toxic as is the case in most of its close relatives . Handling the mushroom is harmless ; poisoning occurs only on ingestion . A case of poisoning that may have been caused by A. thiersii has been reported from the state of Puebla , Mexico . The outcome of this case is unknown . Symptoms of poisoning in humans include reversible impairment of kidney function . A Meixner test revealed that amatoxins were not involved in the Puebla case . 
 = = Ecology and habitat = = 
 Amanita thiersii inhabits lawns , pastures and prairies throughout the Mississippi River Basin . It often forms fairy rings or arcs but also sometimes fruits as isolated specimens . It has been found growing in the same lawn as <unk> <unk> . Analysis using stable carbon isotopes has proved that this mushroom is saprotrophic in nature , unlike the other mycorrhizal Amanitas . 
 The fruit bodies of A. thiersii grow during the mid or late summer until early fall . Since it was first reported in 1952 in Texas , this species has been expanding its range . It appeared in southern Illinois in the 1990s and has since spread to central Illinois , where it is the most common mushroom found in lawns during July and August . Today it occurs in nine states including Missouri , Oklahoma , Texas , Kentucky , Ohio , Kansas and Illinois . It also occurs in Mexico . 
 = = Genome project = = 
 The main source from which A. thiersii derives its carbon is the cellulose of the decomposing plant material found in its grassland habitat . The enzymes that degrade cellulose are homologous to the enzymes used by ectomycorrhizal fungi that have symbiotic associations with plant roots . In an attempt to identify the genes involved in these processes , researchers at the United States Department of Energy and Harvard University are jointly working to sequence the A. thiersii genome and to compare it with that of Amanita bisporigera , a species which forms mycorrhizal relationships with tree and which has already been partly sequenced . They hope to better understand the genetic pathways involved in the evolution of ectomycorrhizal associations . Another research objective is to establish whether the enzymes used by A. thiersii to degrade cellulose can be cost @-@ effectively used in the conversion of crop residues into biofuels . A. thiersii seems to be expanding its range northwards and its genome may provide clues as to how it is adapting to climate change and further information on mycorrhizal relationships . 
 This research has shown that there was a single origin of ectomycorrhizal symbiosis in the Amanita genus . DNA analysis has shown that a group of species in the subsection <unk> ( which includes A. thiersii ) has few derived characteristics . This clade has a single ancestor ( or a very small number ) and seems to have come into being at a very early stage in the evolution of the genus . 
 = Jack the Writer = 
 " Jack the Writer " is the fourth episode of the first season of the American situation comedy 30 Rock , which aired on November 1 , 2006 on the NBC network in the United States , and on November 1 , 2007 in the United Kingdom . The episode was written by Robert Carlock and was directed by Gail Mancuso . Guest stars in this episode include Katrina Bowden , Keith Powell , Maulik Pancholy , Tom Broecker , Jonathan Lutz , James Anderson and Sharon Wilkins . 
 The episode focuses on the relationship between Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) , head writer of TGS with Tracy Jordan , and Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) , her boss ; and the distractions the writers of TGS face when writing sketches . This becomes evident when Liz 's assistant , Cerie ( Katrina Bowden ) , wears sexually suggestive clothing ; and when Jack decides to join the writers for observation . Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) learns that working for Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) , the main star of TGS , is more than he expected . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The staff are preparing to write sketches for TGS with Tracy Jordan when Jack arrives and announces that he went through a program at General Electric ( GE ) called Six Sigma , which encourages bosses to interact with their staff . He tells Liz and the writers that he will be sitting in the writers ' room every day as an observer . As days pass , Jack begins to interfere with the writers ' work , and instead of just being an observer , he regularly gives the writers ideas for upcoming sketches . This causes a major frustration for the staff , so Liz tells Jack that the writers do not like his involvement . Jack says that although he enjoyed joining the writers every day , he tells Liz that he accepts their decision . 
 Afterwards , Jack 's secretary tells Liz that Jack wants her to apologize , but that she has to pretend that it was her idea . Liz goes to Jack 's office and apologizes , and they forgive each other . While the staff eats their lunch , Jack introduces the staff to two of his guests . The writers mention to Liz that they would love to go outside to the same roof that is used for The Today Show , and Liz tells them that she can make it happen now that she and Jack are friends . Liz asks Jack , but he denies the request . He tells her that the two guests were his bosses from GE , and then criticizes Liz and her staff . He apologizes to Liz , but she says that their friendship is over . Having settled the situation with Jack , Liz tries to talk to her assistant Cerie about her attire , which seems to distract the writers . Liz attempts to convince her to wear something conservative , but Cerie tells Liz that she would look great in something sexy herself , and Liz is later seen walking down the hallway with a dress that reads " Dirty Diva " . 
 Kenneth , who is now working for Tracy , learns that working for Tracy is more than he expected . Tracy orders Kenneth to complete several tasks , including going to the Yankee Stadium for nachos , and picking up an important package , which turns out to be an illegal fish that Tracy wants to put in his aquarium . Tracy then tells Kenneth to buy something for his wife , Angie Jordan ( Sharon Wilkins ) , and to take her to a fancy restaurant , where he gives her Tracy 's gift . 
 = = Production = = 
 30 Rock and Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip , both of which debuted on 2006 – 07 NBC lineup , revolved around the off @-@ camera happenings on a sketch comedy series . Evidence of the overlapping subject matter between the shows , as well as the conflict between them , arose when Aaron Sorkin , the creator of Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip , asked Lorne Michaels to allow him to observe Saturday Night Live for a week , a request Michaels denied . Despite this , Sorkin sent Fey flowers after NBC announced it would pick up both series , and wished her luck with 30 Rock . Fey wound up " winning " over Sorkin when Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip was cancelled after one season and 30 Rock was renewed for a second . Though 30 Rock 's first season ratings proved lackluster and were lower than those of Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip , the latter was more expensive to produce . " Jack the Writer " contains a self @-@ referencing walk and talk sequence , which is commonly used on Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip and Sorkin 's previous series . 
 Star Wars is frequently referenced in 30 Rock , beginning with the pilot episode where Tracy Jordan is seen shouting that he is a Jedi . Liz Lemon admits to being a huge fan of Star Wars , saying that she had watched it many times with Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) , and saying she dressed up as the Star Wars character Princess Leia for several Halloweens . Fey , a fan of Star Wars herself , said that the weekly Star Wars joke or reference " started happening organically " when the crew realized that they had a Star Wars reference " in almost every show " . Fey said that from then on " it became a thing where [ they ] tried to keep it going " , and that even though they could not include one in every episode , they still had a " pretty high batting average " . Fey attributed most of the references to Robert Carlock , who she described as " the resident expert " . In this episode , Liz repeatedly uses analogies from Star Wars for her situation with Jack , when she realizes that she " need [ s ] to get new DVDs " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen ratings system , " Jack the Writer " was watched by approximately 4 @.@ 61 million American viewers , ranking eighty @-@ first in the weekly charts . The episode received a rating of 1 @.@ 7 / 5 in the key adults 18 – 49 demographic . The 1 @.@ 7 refers to 1 @.@ 7 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and the 5 refers to 5 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . In the United Kingdom , the episode attracted 500 @,@ 000 viewers and a 4 % share of the viewing audience at the time of the broadcast . 
 Robert Canning of IGN felt that while the episode was " still an entertaining half @-@ hour , there was nothing to it that was incredibly memorable . " He said that Tracy Jordan was " quickly becoming one of the more enjoyable aspects of the show " . Matt Webb Mitovich of TV Guide felt that " this outing fell a bit flat for [ him ] " . He thought that " the best moment this week , by far , had to be that big , fat wink to Aaron Sorkin 's Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip ( and West Wing , and Sports Night ... ) , where Liz and Pete , upon realizing that they had traveled in a small circle over the course of a banter exchange , shrugged and said , ' Nice walk @-@ and @-@ talk ' , and then bumped fists . Nice . " 
 = The Twilight Saga ( film series ) = 
 The Twilight Saga is a series of five romance fantasy films from Summit Entertainment based on the four novels by American author Stephenie Meyer . The films star Kristen Stewart , Robert Pattinson , and Taylor Lautner . The series has grossed over $ 3 @.@ 3 billion in worldwide receipts and consists , to date , of five motion pictures . The first installment , Twilight , was released on November 21 , 2008 . The second installment , New Moon , followed on November 20 , 2009 , breaking box office records as the biggest midnight screening and opening day in history , grossing an estimated $ 72 @.@ 7 million . The third installment , Eclipse , was released on June 30 , 2010 , and was the first Twilight film to be released in IMAX . 
 The series was in development since 2004 at Paramount Pictures , during which time a screen adaptation of Twilight that differed significantly from the novel was written . Three years later , Summit Entertainment acquired the rights to the film . After Twilight grossed $ 35 @.@ 7 million on its opening day , Summit Entertainment announced they would begin production on New Moon ; they had acquired the rights to the remaining novels earlier that same month . A two @-@ part adaptation of Breaking Dawn began shooting in November 2010 with November 18 , 2011 , and November 16 , 2012 , release dates . 
 = = Development = = 
 Twilight was in development for approximately three years at Paramount Pictures 's MTV Films , during which time a screen adaptation differing significantly from the novel was written . For example , the script transformed Bella into a star athlete . Stephenie Meyer stated that there was some debate in allowing the movie to be made because of the negative or positive outcome of the movie compared to the book , ' " They could have put that [ earlier ] movie out , called it something else , and no one would have known it was Twilight ! " The idea of seeing a scene converted correctly , specifically the meadow scene , convinced Meyer to sell the rights . In seeing the script , she was frightened that she had made the wrong decision . When Summit Entertainment reinvented itself as a full @-@ service studio in April 2007 , it successfully acquired the rights to the novel . Erik Feig , President of Production at Summit Entertainment , guaranteed a close adaptation to the book . The company perceived the film as an opportunity to launch a franchise based on the success of Meyer 's book and its sequels . Meyer felt that Summit was open to letting her be a part of the film . Catherine Hardwicke was hired to direct the film , and soon afterward , Melissa Rosenberg was selected to be the film 's structural base as the writer of the film . 
 Rosenberg developed an outline by the end of August and collaborated with Hardwicke on writing the screenplay during the following month . " [ She ] was a great sounding board and had all sorts of brilliant ideas .... I 'd finish off scenes and send them to her , and get back her notes . " Because of the impending WGA strike , Rosenberg worked full @-@ time to finish the screenplay before October 31 . In adapting the novel for the screen , she " had to condense a great deal . " Some characters were left out , and others were combined . " [ O ] ur intent all along was to stay true to the book , " Rosenberg explained , " and it has to do less with adapting it word for word and more with making sure the characters ' arcs and emotional journeys are the same . " Hardwicke suggested the use of voice over to convey the protagonist 's internal dialogue , since the novel is told from Bella 's point of view ; and she sketched some of the storyboards during pre @-@ production . 
 Meyer , the author , and Hardwicke , the director , had a close relationship while developing Twilight . Hardwicke wanted to embrace the experience and make the characters in the books come to life . She would call Meyer after changing a scene slightly , which surprised the author because , " I 've heard the stories ... I know it 's not normally like that when you adapt a book . " Meyer , a natural pessimist , was waiting for the worst but , instead , called her experience in the book 's film adaptation " the best I could have hoped for . " 
 Originally scheduled for release in December 2008 , Twilight was moved to a worldwide release of November 21 , 2008 , after Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince moved from a November 2008 release to being released in July 2009 . 
 = = Casting = = 
 Kristen Stewart was on the set of Adventureland when Hardwicke visited her for an informal screen test , which " captivated " the director . Hardwicke did not initially choose Robert Pattinson for the role of Edward Cullen ; but , after an audition at her home with Stewart , he was selected . Meyer allowed Pattinson to view a manuscript of the unfinished Midnight Sun , which chronicles the events in Twilight from Edward 's point of view . Meyer was " excited " and " ecstatic " in response to the casting of the two main characters . She had expressed interest in having Emily Browning and Henry Cavill cast as Bella and Edward , respectively , prior to pre @-@ production . 
 Peter Facinelli was not originally cast as Carlisle Cullen : " [ Hardwicke ] liked [ him ] , but there was another actor that the studio was pushing for . " For unknown reasons , that actor was not able to play the part , and Facinelli was selected in his place . The choice of Ashley Greene to portray Alice Cullen was criticized by some fans because Greene is 7 inches ( 18 cm ) taller than her character as described in the novel . Meyer said that Rachael Leigh Cook resembled her vision of Alice . Nikki Reed had previously worked with Hardwicke on the successful Thirteen ( 2003 ) , which they co @-@ wrote , and Lords of Dogtown ( 2005 ) . 
 Kellan Lutz was in Africa , shooting the HBO miniseries Generation Kill , when the auditions for the character of Emmett Cullen were conducted . The role had already been cast by the time the HBO production ended in December 2007 , but the selected actor " fell through " . Lutz subsequently auditioned and was flown to Oregon , where Hardwicke personally chose him . 
 Rachelle Lefèvre wanted a role in the film because Hardwicke was director ; she saw " the potential to explore a character , hopefully , over three films " ; and she wanted to portray a vampire . " [ She ] thought that vampires were basically the best metaphor for human anxiety and questions about being alive . " Christian Serratos initially auditioned for Jessica Stanley , but she " fell totally in love with Angela " after reading the books and took advantage of a later opportunity to audition for Angela Weber . The role of Jessica Stanley went to Anna Kendrick , who got the part after two mix @-@ and @-@ match auditions with various actors . 
 Because of major physical changes that occur in the character of Jacob Black between Twilight and New Moon , director Chris Weitz considered replacing Taylor Lautner in the sequel with an actor who could more accurately portray " the new , larger Jacob Black . " Trying to keep the role , Lautner worked out extensively and put on 30 lbs . In January 2009 , Weitz and Summit Entertainment announced that Lautner would continue as Jacob in The Twilight Saga : New Moon . 
 In late March 2009 , Summit Entertainment released a list of the actors who would be portraying the " wolf pack " alongside Lautner . The casting for the rest of the Quileute tribe was headed by casting director Rene Haynes , who has worked on films with large American Indian casts , such as Dances with Wolves and Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee . 
 In mid @-@ 2009 , it was announced that Bryce Dallas Howard would be replacing Rachelle Lefevre as Victoria for the third Twilight film , The Twilight Saga : Eclipse . Summit Entertainment attributed the change to scheduling conflicts . Lefevre said she was " stunned " and " greatly saddened " by the decision . <unk> Ferland was cast as the newly turned vampire , Bree . Other new cast members for the third film include Xavier Samuel as Riley , Jack Huston as Royce King II , Catalina Sandino Moreno as Maria , Julia Jones as Leah Clearwater , and <unk> Stewart as Seth Clearwater . 
 = = Production = = 
 Principal photography for Twilight took 44 days , after more than a week of rehearsals , and completed on May 2 , 2008 . Similar to her directorial debut thirteen , Hardwicke opted for an extensive use of hand @-@ held cinematography to make the film " feel real " . Meyer visited the production set three times , and was consulted on different aspects of the story ; she also has a brief cameo in the film . To make their bodily movements more elegant , and to get used to their characters ' fighting styles , the cast playing vampires participated in rehearsals with a dance choreographer and observed the physicality of different panthera . Instead of shooting at Forks High School itself , scenes taking place at the school were filmed at Kalama High School and Madison High School . Other scenes were also filmed in St. Helens , Oregon , and Hardwicke conducted some reshooting in Pasadena , California , in August . 
 In early November 2008 , Summit announced that they had obtained the rights to the remaining books in Stephenie Meyer 's Twilight series : New Moon , Eclipse , and Breaking Dawn . On November 22 , 2008 , one day after the theatrical release of Twilight , Summit confirmed that they would begin working on New Moon . Melissa Rosenberg had been working on adapting the novel prior to Twilight 's release and handed in the draft for New Moon during Twilight 's opening weekend in November 2008 . 
 In early December 2008 , it was announced that Twilight director Catherine Hardwicke would not be returning to direct the sequel . Hardwicke cited time restrictions as the reason behind her leaving the project . Instead , Chris Weitz , director of The Golden Compass and co @-@ director of American Pie , was hired to direct The Twilight Saga : New Moon . Filming for New Moon began in Vancouver in late March 2009 , and in Montepulciano , Italy , in late May 2009 . 
 In early 2009 , before the release of The Twilight Saga : New Moon , Summit confirmed that they would begin production on The Twilight Saga : Eclipse . Since Weitz would be in post @-@ production for New Moon when The Twilight Saga : Eclipse began shooting , he would not be directing the third film . Instead , The Twilight Saga : Eclipse was helmed by director David Slade , with Melissa Rosenberg returning as screenwriter . Filming began on August 17 , 2009 at Vancouver Film Studios and finished in late October , with post @-@ production beginning early the following month . In April 2010 , it was revealed that re @-@ shoots of the film were needed . Slade , who previously said he would not be around for them , was seen , along with Stephenie Meyer , on set . The three main stars were also present . 
 Wyck Godfrey , producer of the previous films in the series , stated in mid @-@ 2009 that they had every intention to make the film version of Breaking Dawn . Following months of speculation and cast rumors , it was officially announced on April 28 , 2010 , that Academy Award winner Bill Condon , who directed Gods and Monsters and Dreamgirls , would direct Breaking Dawn ; producing the film will be Wyck Godfrey , Karen Rosenfelt , and author Stephenie Meyer . " I 'm very excited to get the chance to bring the climax of this saga to life on @-@ screen . As fans of the series know , this is a one @-@ of @-@ a @-@ kind book – and we 're hoping to create an equally unique cinematic experience , " said Bill Condon . A November 18 , 2011 release date has been set for the first part , while the second is scheduled for release on November 16 , 2012 . Following that announcement , Summit officially confirmed that a two @-@ part adaption of the fourth book would start production in the fall on June 11 , 2010 . With this announcement , it was made clear that all major actors , including the three lead roles , the Cullen family , and Charlie Swan , would return for both parts . Bill Condon was also confirmed to direct both parts . 
 In order to keep the budget on both parts of Breaking Dawn reasonable , which would be substantially greater than the previous installments in the series , filming in Louisiana is also being negotiated . Shooting in Louisiana would provide larger tax credits , which a studio as low @-@ profile as Summit Entertainment would benefit from . 
 = = Films = = 
 = = = Twilight ( 2008 ) = = = 
 Twilight was directed by Catherine Hardwicke and written by Melissa Rosenberg . It focuses on the development of a personal relationship between human teenager Bella Swan ( Kristen Stewart ) and vampire Edward Cullen ( Robert Pattinson ) , and the subsequent efforts of Edward and his family to keep Bella safe from a separate group of hostile vampires . 
 The film was released theatrically starting on November 21 , 2008 . It grossed $ 35 @.@ 7 million on its opening day , and has come to gross US $ 408 @.@ 9 million worldwide . The DVD was released on March 21 , 2009 and grossed an additional $ 201 million from sales . 
 = = = The Twilight Saga : New Moon ( 2009 ) = = = 
 The Twilight Saga : New Moon was directed by Chris Weitz and written by Melissa Rosenberg . The film follows Bella Swan 's fall into a deep depression until she develops a strong friendship with werewolf Jacob Black . Jacob and his tribe must protect Bella from Victoria , a gregarious herd of vampires . The film was released theatrically starting on November 20 , 2009 , and set numerous records . It is currently the biggest advance @-@ ticket seller on Fandango and held the biggest midnight opening in domestic ( United States and Canada ) box office history , grossing an estimated $ 26 @.@ 3 million . Its sequel , The Twilight Saga : Eclipse , broke that record in June 2010 , grossing $ 72 @.@ 7 million on its opening day domestically , $ 709 Million Worldwide and becoming the biggest single @-@ day opening in domestic history . It is the twelfth highest opening weekend in domestic history with $ 142 @,@ 839 @,@ 137 . 
 = = = The Twilight Saga : Eclipse ( 2010 ) = = = 
 The Twilight Saga : Eclipse was directed by David Slade and written by Melissa Rosenberg . The film follows Bella Swan as she develops awareness of the complications of marrying Edward Cullen . As Victoria draws nearer with a group of newborn vampires , Jacob Black and the rest of the werewolves form a temporary alliance to destroy her , in turn , to keep Bella safe . While Bella tries to decide who she is , a fight brews and the consequences are paid once Jacob gets hurt . Intent on keeping a compromise with Edward , she vows to keep true to her engagement and marry him . 
 The film was released theatrically starting on June 30 , 2010 , and is the first Twilight film to be released in IMAX . It set a new record for biggest midnight opening in domestic ( United States and Canada ) in box office history , grossing an estimated $ 30 million in over 4 @,@ 000 theaters . The previous record holder was the previous film in the series , The Twilight Saga : New Moon with $ 26 @.@ 3 million in 3 @,@ 514 theaters . The film then scored the biggest Wednesday opening in domestic history with $ 68 @,@ 533 @,@ 840 beating Transformers : Revenge of the Fallen 's $ 62 million . The Twilight Saga : Eclipse has also become the film with the widest independent release , playing in over 4 @,@ 416 theaters , surpassing its predecessor , The Twilight Saga : New Moon , which held the record since November 2009 . 
 = = = The Twilight Saga : Breaking Dawn – Part 1 ( 2011 ) = = = 
 The Twilight Saga : Breaking Dawn was directed by Bill Condon , and author Stephenie Meyer co @-@ produced the film along with Karen Rosenfelt and Wyck Godfrey , with Melissa Rosenberg penning the script . The book 's plot was split into two films , the first of which was released on November 18 , 2011 . The filming of Breaking Dawn began in November 2010 . The first part follows Bella and Edward as they get married and then learn that Bella has become pregnant . They deal with her struggle of being pregnant and almost passing away because of the half vampire @-@ half human child . 
 = = = The Twilight Saga : Breaking Dawn – Part 2 ( 2012 ) = = = 
 The Twilight Saga : Breaking Dawn Part 2 was directed by Bill Condon , and author Stephenie Meyer co @-@ produced the film along with Karen Rosenfelt and Wyck Godfrey , with Melissa Rosenberg penning the script . The book 's plot was split into two films , the first of which was released on November 18 , 2011 . The second was released on November 16 , 2012 . The second part of Breaking Dawn saw the climax of Bella and Edward 's relationship , as Bella must learn to adapt to immortality as a newly transformed vampire and motherhood . 
 = = Soundtracks = = 
 = = = Twilight = = = 
 The Twilight Original Motion Picture Soundtrack was chosen by music supervisor Alexandra Patsavas . The album was released on November 4 , 2008 by Patsavas ' Chop Shop label , in conjunction with Atlantic Records . The album debuted at # 1 on the Billboard 200 , having sold about 165 @,@ 000 copies in its first week of release , 29 % of which were digital downloads . Twilight is the best @-@ selling theatrical movie soundtrack in the United States since Chicago . 
 Twilight : The Score was composed and orchestrated by Carter Burwell over a 9 – 10 week period , and was recorded and mixed in about 2 weeks in late September 2008 . Burwell began the score with a " Love Theme " for Bella and Edward 's relationship , a variation of which became " Bella 's Lullaby " that Robert Pattinson plays in the film , and that is included on the Twilight Original Motion Picture Soundtrack . The original theme is featured throughout the film , and serves to " play the romance that drives the story " . Another theme Burwell composed was a " Predator Theme " , which opens the film , and is intended to play Edward 's vampire nature . Other themes include a bass @-@ line , drum beat and distorted guitar sound for the nomadic vampires , and a melody for the Cullen family . Twilight : The Score was released digitally on November 25 , 2008 and in stores on December 9 . 
 = = = The Twilight Saga : New Moon = = = 
 The score for The Twilight Saga : New Moon was composed by Alexandre Desplat while Alexandra Patsavas returned as music supervisor for the rest of the soundtrack . Weitz has a working relationship with Desplat , who scored one of his previous films , The Golden Compass . The The Twilight Saga : New Moon : Original Motion Picture Soundtrack album was released on October 16 , 2009 by Patsavas ' Chop Shop label , in conjunction with Atlantic Records . The album debuted at # 2 on the Billboard 200 , later jumped to # 1 with 153 @,@ 000 copies sold . The Twilight Saga : New Moon : The Score was released on November 24 @,@ 2009 . 
 = = = The Twilight Saga : Eclipse = = = 
 The score for The Twilight Saga : Eclipse was composed by Howard Shore , who composed the scores for The Lord of the Rings trilogy . The film 's soundtrack was released on June 8 , 2010 by Atlantic Records in conjunction with music supervisor Alexandra Patsavas ' Chop Shop label . The lead single from the soundtrack is " Neutron Star Collision ( Love Is Forever ) " , performed by the British band Muse . The soundtrack debuted at number two on the U.S. Billboard 200 albums chart with estimated sales of 144 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = = The Twilight Saga : Breaking Dawn – Part 1 = = = 
 The Breaking Dawn – Part 1 soundtrack saw the release of two singles : " A Thousand Years " by Christina Perri and " It Will Rain " by Bruno Mars . The former reached number one and the latter of the two number three on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 = = = The Twilight Saga : Breaking Dawn – Part 2 = = = 
 = = Reaction = = 
 = = = Box office performance = = = 
 Twilight grossed over $ 7 million in ticket sales from midnight showings alone on November 21 , 2008 . It grossed $ 35 @.@ 7 million on its opening day . For its opening weekend in the United States and Canada , Twilight accumulated $ 69 @.@ 6 million from 3 @,@ 419 theaters at an average of $ 20 @,@ 368 per theater . 
 The film has made $ 192 @.@ 7 million in the United States and Canada , and a further $ 192 @.@ 2 million in international territories for a total of $ 384 @.@ 9 million worldwide . 
 The film was released on DVD in North America on March 21 , 2009 through midnight release parties , and sold over 3 million units in its first day . It has continued to sell units , totaling as of July 2012 , making $ 201 @,@ 323 @,@ 629 . 
 The Twilight Saga : New Moon set records for advance ticket sales , causing some theaters to add additional showings . The film set records as the biggest midnight opening in domestic ( United States and Canada ) box office history , grossing an estimated $ 26 @.@ 3 million in 3 @,@ 514 theatres , before expanding to 4 @,@ 024 theaters . The record was previously held by Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince , which grossed $ 22 @.@ 2 million domestically during its midnight premiere . The film grossed $ 72 @.@ 7 million on its opening day domestically , becoming the biggest single @-@ day opening in domestic history , beating The Dark Knight 's $ 67 @.@ 2 million . This opening strongly contributed to another record : the first time that the top ten films at the domestic box office had a combined gross of over $ 100 million in a single day . 
 The opening weekend of The Twilight Saga : New Moon is the ninth @-@ highest opening weekend in domestic history with $ 142 @,@ 839 @,@ 137 . The film also has the sixth highest worldwide opening weekend with $ 274 @.@ 9 million total . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 While The Twilight Saga has been successful in the box office , critical reception of the films was mixed , and significantly declined as the series continued . 
 New York Press critic Armond White called Twilight " a genuine pop classic " , and praised Hardwicke for turning " Meyer 's book series into a Brontë @-@ esque vision " . USA Today gave the film two out of four stars and Claudia Puig wrote : " Meyer is said to have been involved in the production of Twilight , but her novel was substantially more absorbing than the unintentionally funny and quickly forgettable film . " 
 Robert Ignizio of the Cleveland Scene described The Twilight Saga : New Moon as an " entertaining fantasy " , and noted that it " has a stronger visual look [ than Twilight ] and does a better job with its action scenes while still keeping the focus on the central love triangle . " Michael O 'Sullivan of The Washington Post gave the film two and half stars out of four , praised Kristen Stewart 's performance in the film and wrote : " Despite melodrama that , at times , is enough to induce diabetes , there 's enough wolf whistle in this sexy , scary romp to please anyone . " The Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer gave the film a " B " grading and said , " the movie looks tremendous , the dialogue works , there are numerous well placed jokes , the acting is on point . " Mick Lasalle from the San Francisco Chronicle responded with a more mixed review , stating , " [ E ] <unk> this film to satisfy its fans . Everybody else , get ready for a bizarre soap opera / pageant , consisting of a succession of static scenes with characters loping into the frame to announce exactly what they 're thinking . " Roger Ebert gave the film 1 star out of 4 and said that it " takes the tepid achievement of Twilight , guts it , and leaves it for undead . " The release of the movie has also inspired feminist criticism , with Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly making light of the claim that Edward Cullen is little better than a stalker . In any case , the influx of female viewers into the theaters indicates the increasing importance of the female demographic in dictating Hollywood 's tastes . 
 The Hollywood Reporter posted a positive review of The Twilight Saga : Eclipse , saying the film " nails it " . Variety reports that the film " finally feels more like the blockbuster this top @-@ earning franchise deserves " . One review stated the film was the best in The Twilight Saga so far , acknowledging that , " The person who should be worried is Bill Condon , the director tapped for the two @-@ part finale , Breaking Dawn . He 's got a real challenge to make movies as good as Eclipse . " A.O. Scott of The New York Times praised David Slade 's ability to make an entertaining film , calling it funny and better than its predecessors , but pointed out the acting hasn 't improved much . 
 A more negative review said that while " Eclipse restores some of the energy New Moon zapped out of the franchise and has enough quality performances to keep it involving " , the film " isn 't quite the adrenaline @-@ charged game @-@ changer for love story haters that its marketing might lead you to believe . The majority of the ' action ' remains protracted and not especially scintillating should @-@ we @-@ or @-@ shouldn 't @-@ we conversations between the central triangle . " Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun Times gave the film a more positive review than for the first two films in the saga , but still felt the movie was a constant , <unk> conversation between the three main characters . He criticized the " gazes " both Edward and Jacob give Bella throughout the movie , and noted that the mountain range that appears in the film looks " like landscapes painted by that guy on TV who shows you how to paint stuff like that . " He also predicted that a lack of understanding for the film series in general would not bode well with the audience , stating , " I doubt anyone not intimately familiar with the earlier installments could make head or tails of the opening scenes . " He gave the film 2 stars out of 4 . 
 Breaking Dawn – Part 1 received mostly negative reviews from critics . Review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reports that just 24 % of critics ( of the 188 counted reviews ) gave the film a positive review , and the site 's consensus reads " Slow , joyless and loaded with unintentionally humorous moments , Breaking Dawn Part 1 may satisfy the Twilight faithful , but it 's strictly for fans of the franchise " . Part 2 had a mixed critical reception but was much more favorable than Part 1 . Bruce <unk> of New Yorkers gave the film a positive review , citing " A feast of ripe dialogue and bloodsucking action " . On the other hand , Richard Roeper said that " The fifth and final entry in the historically successful Twilight franchise is the most self @-@ aware and in some ways the most entertaining " . 
 = = = Review aggregate results = = = 
 = = = Home media sales = = = 
 List indicator ( s ) 
 ( B ) indicates the yearly rank based on the number of DVDs sold during the year released ( calculated by The Numbers ) . 
 = = Twilight in popular culture = = 
 The 2010 Portuguese teen series Lua <unk> ( Red Moon ) had a similar premise of vampire romance but differed in the story . 
 The 2010 parody film Vampires Suck spoofed the film series . A television show within the canon of Canadian teen vampire film My Babysitter 's a Vampire and the television series sequel called Dusk is a parody of Twilight . 
 The 2012 film Breaking Wind ( parodying the title of Breaking Dawn , but parodying the whole film series ) , directed by Craig Moss ( best known for The 41 @-@ Year @-@ Old Virgin Who Knocked Up Sarah Marshall and Felt Superbad About It ) , is also a spoof of the films and a parody version of Breaking Dawn Part – 1 . 
 The 2012 animated movie Hotel Transylvania has a scene inspired by Twilight . 
 The 2013 Filipino comedy sitcom entitled My Daddy is a Vampire resembled some Twilight scenes . 
 = Panzer Dragoon Saga = 
 Panzer Dragoon Saga ( <unk> <unk> <unk> RPG , Azel : Panzer Dragoon RPG ) is a 1998 role @-@ playing video game ( RPG ) for the Sega Saturn , published by Sega and developed by Sega 's Team Andromeda studio . It is the third game in the main Panzer Dragoon series and the only instalment that is not a rail shooter , combining traditional role @-@ playing elements such as random encounters with the 3D shooting elements of previous games . 
 The player controls Edge , a young mercenary who battles an empire on a flying dragon and encounters a mysterious girl from a vanished civilization . Unlike the other Panzer Dragoon games , whose gameplay takes place while flying on the dragon , the player has full 3D movement and some areas are explored on foot . The battle system mixes real @-@ time and turn @-@ based elements , with the player circling enemies on the dragon to expose weak spots and escape dangerous positions . 
 Development of Panzer Dragoon Saga began around the same time as that of its predecessor , Panzer Dragoon II Zwei ( 1996 ) . According to director Yukio Futatsugi , the need to blend the series ' shooting elements into an RPG with full 3D and voice acting - both unusual for RPGs at the time - made it the most difficult Panzer Dragoon game to develop . Two staff members died during its two @-@ year development , which Futatsugi attributed to the stressful working conditions of the video game industry . 
 According to GameRankings , Panzer Dragoon Saga is the most critically acclaimed Saturn game , winning praise for its story , graphics , music , and unusual battle system . It has appeared in several " greatest games of all time " lists . As Sega had shifted its focus to its next console , the Dreamcast , the game had a limited release outside Japan , attracting a cult following . It has not been rereleased and is now a rare collector 's item . After its release , Sega disbanded Team Andromeda ; several staff joined Sega 's Smilebit studio and went on to develop the final game in the series , Panzer Dragoon Orta , released for Xbox in 2002 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Unlike the <unk> Dragoon games , which are rail shooters , Panzer Dragoon Saga is a role @-@ playing video game ( RPG ) . The player controls the young mercenary Edge , who flies a powerful dragon . Gameplay is divided into three modes : traversing large areas on the dragon , battling enemies , and exploring on foot . The game uses a random encounter system , whereby battles are triggered randomly as the player flies . 
 Movement is not " on rails " , and the player can explore the 3D environments in all directions . A targeting reticle is used to interact with locks , doors , and other elements ; on the dragon , this can also be used to fire lasers to activate triggers or break objects . On foot , Edge can talk to non @-@ player characters and buy items including health potions and weapon upgrades . Different zones are accessed via a map screen , which changes as the game progresses . Campsites serve as rest areas and save points . 
 As with other Panzer Dragoon games , the characters speak a fictional language , " <unk> " , which combines elements of Ancient Greek , Latin and Russian . However , <unk> is only used in the introduction sequence ; the rest of the dialogue is in Japanese , subtitled in English for the western release . 
 = = = Battle system = = = 
 Panzer Dragoon Saga 's battles mix real @-@ time and turn @-@ based elements , with three action gauges that charge in real time . When a gauge fills , the player can make a move , such as attacking or using an item such as a shield or poison cure . Waiting for multiple gauges to charge facilitates more options , such as making multiple moves in quick succession , but this gives the enemy more opportunity to attack . The speed at which the gauges charge is governed by the dragon 's agility attribute ; if this is higher than the enemy 's agility attribute , the player can make moves more frequently than the enemy , and vice @-@ versa . 
 During combat , the player can circle the enemy to expose weak points and escape dangerous positions . Changing position temporarily stops the gauges charging . Likewise , enemies may change position to force the dragon into vulnerable areas ; a radar at the bottom of the screen indicates safe , neutral and dangerous areas , with the front and rear areas typically posing the most danger . Weak points can sometimes only be attacked from dangerous areas , and enemies ' attack patterns often change mid @-@ battle , forcing the player to adapt . 
 The player can attack with the dragon 's laser , which strikes multiple targets simultaneously , or Edge 's gun , which focuses damage on a single target and is useful for striking weak points . Edge 's gun can be upgraded with power @-@ ups including three @-@ way fire and the " Sniper " modification , which deals additional damage to weak points . The dragon 's " berserks " , the equivalent of magic spells in other RPGs , have effects including powerful attacks , healing , and boosting the dragon 's defense or agility . <unk> require berserk points ( BP ) and sometimes multiple action gauges . 
 The dragon can be morphed to change its attack , defense , agility and spiritual attributes . Boosting one attribute diminishes another ; for example , boosting the attack attribute reduces the spiritual attribute , meaning berserks require more BP , while boosting means gauges fill faster at the expense of defense . Certain berserks are only available in certain dragon configurations . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Edge , a mercenary hired by the Empire , guards a site where artefacts from an ancient advanced civilization are being excavated . <unk> off an ancient monster , he discovers a girl buried in a wall . The site is attacked by the mutinous Black Fleet , who seize the girl and kill Edge 's companions . Edge escapes with the help of a mysterious flying dragon and swears revenge on the Black Fleet leader , Craymen . 
 Edge rescues Gash , one of a band of scavengers called the Seekers , from a monster . Gash directs him to a nearby nomadic caravan , where he learns the location of the Black Fleet . Edge and the dragon defeat the fleet , but learn that Craymen has already reached the Tower , an ancient structure of tremendous power . They fend off an attack by the girl from the excavation site , who has sworn allegiance to Craymen and rides an enormous dragon , Atolm . 
 In the town of Zoah , Edge meets an engineer , Paet , who will trade information about the Tower for ancient artefacts . Searching an ancient vessel for parts , Edge is captured by imperial soldiers but rescued by Gash . Paet reveals that the Tower can be reached via the ruins of Uru ; there , Edge is attacked again by the girl and Atolm . After the battle , separated from their dragons , he and the girl fall into an ancient underground facility and form a truce to escape . The girl explains that she is an ancient bio @-@ engineered being named Azel , created in the facility , and designed to interface with ancient technology . After Edge 's dragon rescues them , Azel warns Edge that she will kill him if he crosses Craymen 's path again and leaves on Atolm . 
 Craymen surprises Edge in Zoah and asks for his help fighting the Empire . Paet tells Edge he can find the Tower by deactivating an ancient machine , Mel @-@ Kava , that obscures the Tower 's location with fog . In exchange for destroying an imperial base , the village leader gives Edge access to an ancient artefact that grants him a vision of Mel @-@ Kava 's location . Edge and the dragon destroy Mel @-@ Kava , clearing the fog , but are attacked again by Azel and Atolm . They shoot down Atolm and rescue Azel as she falls . 
 The Emperor 's flagship , <unk> Orig , destroys Zoah , but the Black Fleet intervenes before Edge and the dragon are killed . At the Tower , Craymen tells Edge that it is one of several that manufacture monsters to combat humanity 's destructive forces . He needs Azel to activate the Tower and destroy the Empire before they can use it for themselves . Imperials arrive and capture Edge and Craymen . After the Emperor forces Azel to activate the Tower , monsters emerge and kill everyone but Edge and Azel , who escape on Edge 's dragon . At the Seeker stronghold , Gash explains that the Tower will destroy humanity if it is not deactivated . He believes Edge 's dragon is the prophesied Divine Visitor who will be humanity 's salvation . Edge and the dragon battle rampaging monsters and destroy the infested <unk> Orig . 
 Edge rescues Azel from monsters in the Uru facility , where she has returned to contemplate her purpose . They infiltrate the Tower and Azel prepares to transfer Edge and the dragon into Sestren , the AI network that controls the towers . She confesses her love for Edge and he promises to return . Inside Sestren , Edge and the dragon defeat the network 's " anti @-@ dragon " programs . Through visions , Edge learns his dragon originated as the Heresy Program , a rogue AI purged from Sestren . The Heresy Program explains that the Divine Visitor is actually " the one from the outside world " who has guided Edge , and who must now destroy Sestren with Edge inside . 
 Gash awaits Edge in the desert , to no avail . Travelling alone , Azel asks directions across treacherous land . 
 = = Development = = 
 Panzer Dragoon Saga was developed by Sega 's Team Andromeda studio for the Saturn over approximately two years . Development began around the same time as development of the game 's predecessor , Panzer Dragoon II Zwei ( 1996 ) , with a team of about 40 , twice as many as the Zwei team . Director Yukio Futatsugi stated that Saga was the hardest Panzer Dragoon game to develop , as the team had to implement fully 3D environments and full voice acting , unusual for RPGs at the time . 
 It took about a year to rework the previous games ' shooting gameplay into an RPG . Once the team had settled on the core action of " locking on " to targets , such as enemies , NPCs , or other elements , the rest of the design followed . Futatsugi originally conceived a battle system in which the player would fight enemies for space , which became the game 's positioning system . The dragon 's morphing ability was added to compensate for the lack of a party of characters with different skills common in other RPGs . The team wanted to show the dragon morphing between forms , but dismissed the idea as too difficult to implement ; one day , a programmer surprised them with a working prototype , and the idea became a feature . After the battle system was finalized , development proceeded quickly and some members were moved to help complete Zwei . 
 Rather than create a " save @-@ the @-@ world " story with a large cast , Futatsugi wanted to concentrate on a small number of characters " who you are really close to " , which he felt would make the story more meaningful . An early version had Edge as an imperial soldier who defects ; Craymen also had an extensive backstory , explaining his motivations for betraying the Empire . Both stories were cut for time . Although Edge is not a silent protagonist , Futatsugi minimized his dialogue outside cutscenes to focus on Azel 's story , whom he felt was the most important character . 
 The team did not want the android Azel to be a typical energetic anime @-@ style heroine , and instead tried to make her simultaneously appealing and frightening . Her character underwent the most revisions , emphasizing her human and non @-@ human aspects , and one early design had a hole in her torso . Art director Manabu Kusunoki picked Katsumi Yokota to design the characters ; according to Futatsugi , Yokota is " a very , very good artist . The fragility of the character Azel exists because of Yokota @-@ san . " 
 The game uses the Zwei engine . As the dragon 's movement is not " on rails " , unlike other Panzer Dragoon games , the engine had to support free exploration along with battle sequences and real @-@ time morphing and shading ; according to GameSpot , this pushed the Saturn 's hardware further than any game . Futatsugi felt it would not have been possible on PlayStation , as the Saturn 's " cloudier " palette gives the Panzer Dragoon series its atmosphere . Rather than using pre @-@ recorded music , the game 's soundtrack is mostly generated via pulse @-@ code modulation by the Saturn ’ s sound hardware , as with Zwei . 
 Two staff died during development : one in a motorcycle accident and the other from suicide . Futatsugi attributed the deaths to the stressful working conditions of the video game industry . In 2013 , he said : " All we could do was carry on and finish the game - it was out of my hands . Part of me did want to stop though . That was definitely the toughest project I 've ever worked on . Personal relationships became strained . The stress was overwhelming . " Despite the difficulty of the project , he felt it had benefited from having " someone who plays the bad guy role , someone who acts a little selfish , acts a little forceful to the team to achieve specific goals ... Having team members that will support that kind of bad cop is necessary , and if they don 't exist then you can 't get those kind of results . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Panzer Dragoon Saga was released in North America in April 1998 on four CDs , one of the last Saturn games released outside Japan . As Sega had moved its focus to its next console , the Dreamcast , fewer than 20 @,@ 000 copies were released in the west and the game 's Japanese voice acting was subtitled rather than rerecorded in English . IGN 's Levi Buchanan characterized the release as an example of the Saturn 's " ignominious send @-@ off " , writing that " sunset Saturn games like Panzer Dragoon Saga and Burning Rangers demanded far better launches . The way these games were slipped into retail with zero fanfare and low circulation was insulting to both hard @-@ working developers and Sega fans . " 
 Because of its limited release , English @-@ language copies of Panzer Dragoon Saga are rare and sell for high prices . It has not been re @-@ released . In 2009 , game @-@ downloading service GameTap ’ s general manager <unk> Sorrow stated that GameTap had the rights to distribute the game , but as Saturn emulation is difficult , he did not believe there was enough demand to make it a priority . In the same year , Futatsugi stated that Sega had lost the game 's source code , which would make porting the game difficult . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 According to the review aggregator GameRankings , Panzer Dragoon Saga is the most critically acclaimed Saturn game , with an aggregate score of 92 % . It received praise for its graphics , gameplay , story and music , and many critics felt it was one of the best RPGs of all time . In 2007 , Game Informer wrote that " critically , the game was a smash hit , lauded as one of the year 's best , and generally considered the Saturn 's finest title . " 
 Edge praised the game 's range of enemies , tactical gameplay , and especially its extensive FMV cutscenes , which have " a cinematic quality that shames the work of almost every other developer " . It concluded that the game had " true creative integrity " and lamented that the Saturn 's failure meant it would not find a wider audience . Game Informer described it as " easily " the best Saturn RPG , praising its graphics , story , sound , and originality , and felt it was rivalled on other consoles only by Final Fantasy VII , released the previous year . Sega Saturn Magazine described the game as " a monumental effort , a work of art , and quite clearly a labour of love " , concluding that it was the best adventure on the Saturn . GameSpot praised its graphics , music , battle system , and story , concluding that it was " flawlessly executed " and " possibly the finest RPG of 1998 " . Electronic Gaming Monthly reviewers unanimously praised the game as one of the best RPGs of all time . 
 In 2007 , 1UP described Panzer Dragoon Saga as " the greatest RPG you 've never played " and one of the " most unique " RPGs of all time . In 2005 , Electronic Gaming Monthly placed Panzer Dragoon Saga # 1 in its list of cult classic games . Game Informer ranked it # 1 in its 2006 list of the " top 10 rare RPGs you need " . It was named one of best games of all time by Computer and Video Games in 2000 , Electronic Gaming Monthly in 2001 and 2006 , IGN readers in 2005 , IGN in 2007 and G4 in 2012 . In 2010 , NowGamer named it the 30th greatest retro game and called it " one of Sega ’ s greatest non @-@ hedgehog moments " . 
 After the game 's completion , Sega disbanded Team Andromeda . Futatsugi left Sega and joined Konami , while other staff moved to Sega teams including Smilebit , which went on to develop the final Panzer Dragoon game , Panzer Dragoon Orta ( 2002 ) , for Xbox . 
 = Typhoon Vera ( 1983 ) = 
 Typhoon Vera , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Bebeng , was a tropical cyclone that brought significant flooding to the Philippines in July 1983 . The monsoon trough spawned a tropical depression on July 12 east of the Philippines . Although the depression was initially slow to organize , the system headed west @-@ northwestward , strengthening to a tropical storm the following day and a typhoon on the July 14 . Vera moved onshore early the next day as a minimal typhoon in the Philippines before weakening slightly over the islands . However , Vera managed to restrengthen over the South China Sea while accelerating , later attaining winds of 85 mph ( 135 km / h ) . After crossing Hainan while still at peak intensity and moving into the northern portion of the Gulf of Tonkin , Vera gradually weakened before moving ashore in northern Vietnam on July 18 . By July 19 , Vera had dissipated inland . 
 Across the Philippines , Typhoon Vera killed 123 and left 60 missing and 45 hurt . Approximately 200 @,@ 000 people were homeless . The typhoon destroyed 29 @,@ 054 dwellings and " badly " damaged 5 @,@ 558 others . A total of 76 @,@ 346 homes were " partially " damaged . Moreover , 24 @,@ 280 people sought shelter due to Vera . Around 80 % of Manila 's residents lost power . Many low @-@ lying areas of Manila were underwater while strong winds damaged homes and trees . The province of Bataan sustained the worst damage from the storm and 10 nearby villages were destroyed . Throughout the province , 50 people perished , primarily due to drownings . In all , damage totaled $ 42 million ( 1983 USD ) . In addition to the impact on the Philippines , Typhoon Vera claimed three lives in Vietnam and damaged 2 @,@ 500 houses . Offshore China , a swimmer drowned due to rough seas caused by Vera . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Typhoon Vera can be traced back to a poorly organized monsoon trough that extended westward from the Philippines to the 160th meridian east in early July . On July 4 , the storm developed a persistent circulation . Four days later , a pair of organized areas of convection began to form , one near the 120th meridian east and another close to Guam . A Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert ( TCFA ) was issued at 0600 UTC on July 10 after the storm developed a well @-@ defined upper @-@ level circulation . However , further development was slow to occur and the TCFA was re @-@ issued 24 hours later despite Hurricane Hunters suggesting that the storm did not have a low @-@ level circulation . Early on July 12 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) upgraded the system into a tropical depression after Hurricane Hunters indicated that the system had developed a closed wind circulation . Twelve hours later , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) classified the system as a tropical storm , bypassing the tropical depression stage . 
 After tropical cyclogenesis , the depression began to strengthen quite steadily . Meanwhile , the storm slowed down , and by July 13 , Verna turned west @-@ northwest and towards the Central Philippines . At 1200 UTC , the JMA estimated that Vera had deepened into a severe tropical storm . Several hours later , the JTWC upgraded the storm into a typhoon . At 0000 UTC on July 14 , the JMA upgraded Vera into a typhoon while skirting Samar . Around this time , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration also monitored the storm and assigned it with the local name Bebeng . Even though meteorologists from the JTWC anticipated weakening as it moved through the island group , this did not occur . Convention gradually increased , until very early on July 15 , when the storm started to interact with rugged terrain near Manila . Around this time , the JMA downgraded Vera into a severe tropical storm as it passed very close to Manila Bay . Within the next several hours , the JMA decreased the winds to 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . Late on July 15 , the storm began to reintensify and the JTWC upgraded Vera back to typhoon status . Early the following morning , the JMA followed suit . Accelerating , the storm continued to slowly deepen and early on July 27 , the JMA reported that Vera reached its peak intensity , with winds of 85 mph ( 135 km / h ) . Around this time , the JTWC estimated peak winds of 105 mph ( 170 km / h ) , making it equivalent to a Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale . After crossing Hai @-@ Nan at peak intensity and moving into the northern portion of the Gulf of Tonkin , Vera slowly weakened before moving ashore near Haiphong at around 0000 UTC on July 18 . At the time of landfall , the JMA estimated winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . Severe Tropical Storm Vera rapidly weakened over land and by July 19 , the JMA stopped monitoring Vera . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 = = = Philippines = = = 
 Prior to the arrival of Vera , schools and government offices were shut down . Railway services were suspended ; Philippine Airlines called off domestic services . 
 Upon making landfall , Vera became the first storm to hit the nation in eight months while helping to relieve drought conditions . Typhoon Vera killed 123 and left 60 others missing across the Philippines , including 100 in Luzon alone . A total of 145 people were also injured . Around 200 @,@ 000 people were homeless . The typhoon destroyed 29 @,@ 054 houses and " badly " damaged 5 @,@ 558 others . A total of 76 @,@ 346 homes were " partially " damaged , which directly affected 628 @,@ 985 people . According to authorities , 24 @,@ 280 persons sought shelter . Moreover , more than 40 domestic flights were canceled due to the storm . 
 About 80 % of Manila 's 7 million residents lost power due to the storm . Low @-@ lying areas of Manila were underwater as strong winds blew away roofs of shacks and uprooted trees . Throughout the city , four deaths happened . One man was electrocuted while another man was crushed by debris . Fifty people were confirmed to have died and 2 @,@ 089 dwellings were damaged in nearby Bataan after storm surge crashed into the area . Most of the casualties in Bataan were due to drownings ; the city was also the hardest hit by the storm . Throughout the area near Bataan , 10 villages were destroyed . In <unk> Luma , all but four of the town 's 400 huts were destroyed . 
 About 30 houses in San Pablo , Laguna were either demolished by strong winds or by falling coconut trees . Elsewhere , in Zambales , a woman was killed after she was struck by lighting . In Lucena City , a farmer was swept away via floods and two boys died due to fallen trees . The resort city of Legaspi suffered severe damage because hundreds of dwellings were destroyed , forcing many residents to seek shelter in schools or churches . Along the east coast of Luzon , seven people perished when hit by falling coconut trees in Quezon . Meanwhile , three casualties occurred in a fire in the province of Sorsogon . A total of 15 people drowned in the town of <unk> . The nearby towns of <unk> and <unk> saw two drownings each . In the city of Manila or the provinces of Batangas , Quezon , Laguna , and Cavite , 34 @,@ 000 people were displaced . Overall , damage totaled $ 42 million ( 1983 USD ) . Infrastructure damage totaled $ 31 million . However , damage to crops totaled to only $ 9 @.@ 4 million since residents were just beginning to replant fields . 
 According to the Philippine Red Cross , 26 @,@ 845 families necessitated emergency assistance . Government agencies were ordered to arrest profiteers , hoarders and looters . President Ferdinand Marcos ordered all relief agencies to submit damage reports so emergency funds can be issued . 
 = = = Vietnam and China = = = 
 After striking Vietnam , Typhoon Vera claimed three lives and damaged 2 @,@ 500 houses . Heavy rains helped alleviate a prolonged drought in northern Vietnam , which had prevented the planting of rice . Because Typhoon Vera posed a threat to Southern China , 36 bulletins were issued by the Hong Kong Royal Observatory . A Typhoon signal No. 3 was also issued . After passing south of the area , a peak windspeed of 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) was measured at Tate 's Cairn . In addition , the storm generated showers and squally weather to the region . One swimmer drowned due to rough seas . 
 = Alaska @-@ class cruiser = 
 The Alaska class was a class of six large cruisers ordered before World War II for the United States Navy . They were officially classed as large cruisers ( CB ) , but others have regarded them as battlecruisers . They were all named after territories or insular areas of the United States , signifying their intermediate status between larger battleships and smaller heavy / light cruisers . Of the six planned , two were completed , the third 's construction was suspended on 16 April 1947 , and the last three were canceled . Alaska and Guam served with the U.S. Navy for the last year of World War II as bombardment ships and fast carrier escorts . They were decommissioned in 1947 after spending only 32 and 29 months in service , respectively . 
 The idea for a large cruiser class originated in the early 1930s when the U.S. Navy sought to counter Deutschland @-@ class " pocket battleships " being launched by Germany . Planning for ships that eventually evolved into the Alaska class began in the late 1930s after the deployment of Germany 's Scharnhorst @-@ class battleships and rumors that Japan was constructing a new battlecruiser class . To serve as " cruiser @-@ killers " capable of seeking out and destroying these post @-@ Treaty heavy cruisers , the class was given large guns of a new and expensive design , limited armor protection against 12 @-@ inch shells , and machinery capable of speeds of about 31 – 33 knots ( 36 – 38 mph , 58 – 61 km / h ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 Heavy cruiser development steadied between World War I and World War II thanks to the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty and successor treaties and conferences , where the United States , Britain , Japan , France , and Italy agreed to limit heavy cruisers to 10 @,@ 000 tons displacement with 8 @-@ inch main armament . Up until the Alaska class , US cruisers designed between the wars followed this pattern . 
 The initial impetus for the Alaska design came from the deployments of Germany 's so @-@ called pocket battleships in the early 1930s . Though no actions were immediately taken , these thoughts were revived in the late 1930s when intelligence reports indicated Japan was planning or building " super cruisers " that would be much more powerful than the current US heavy cruisers . The navy responded in 1938 when the General Board asked the Bureau of Construction and Repair to conduct a " comprehensive study of all types of naval vessels for consideration for a new and expanded building program " . The US President at the time , Franklin Delano Roosevelt , may have taken a lead role in the development of the class with his desire to have a counter to raiding abilities of Japanese cruisers and German pocket battleships . While these claims are difficult to verify , they have led to the speculation that their design was " politically motivated " . These were the most powerful cruisers ever built . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 One historian described the design process of the Alaska class as " torturous " due to the numerous changes and modifications made to the ship 's layouts by numerous departments and individuals . Indeed , there were at least nine different layouts , ranging from 6 @,@ 000 @-@ ton Atlanta @-@ class anti @-@ aircraft cruisers to " overgrown " heavy cruisers and a 38 @,@ 000 @-@ ton mini @-@ battleship that would have been armed with twelve 12 @-@ inch and sixteen 5 @-@ inch guns . The General Board , in an attempt to keep the displacement under 25 @,@ 000 tons , allowed the designs to offer only limited underwater protection . As a result , the Alaska class , when built , were vulnerable to torpedoes and shells that fell short of the ship . The final design was a scaled @-@ up Baltimore @-@ class class that had the same machinery as the Essex @-@ class aircraft carriers . This ship combined a main armament of nine 12 @-@ inch guns with protection against 10 @-@ inch gunfire into a hull that was capable of 33 knots ( 61 km / h ; 38 mph ) . 
 The Alaskas were officially funded in September 1940 along with a plethora of other ships as a part of the Two @-@ Ocean Navy Act . Their role had been altered slightly : in addition to their surface @-@ to @-@ surface role , they were planned to protect carrier groups . Because of their bigger guns , greater size and increased speed , they would be more valuable in this role than heavy cruisers , and would provide insurance against reports that Japan was building super cruisers more powerful than U.S. heavy cruisers . 
 = = = Possible conversion to aircraft carriers = = = 
 Yet another drastic change was considered during the " carrier panic " in late 1941 , when the Navy realized that they needed more aircraft carriers as quickly as possible . Many hulls currently under construction were considered for conversion into carriers . At different times , they considered some or all of the Cleveland @-@ class light cruisers , the Baltimore @-@ class heavy cruisers , the Alaska @-@ class , and even one of the Iowa @-@ class battleships ; in the end , they chose the Clevelands , resulting in the conversion of nine ships under construction at the New York Shipbuilding Corporation shipyard as the light aircraft carriers comprising the Independence @-@ class . 
 A conversion of the Alaska cruisers to carriers was " particularly attractive " because of the many similarities between the design of the Essex @-@ class aircraft carriers and the Alaska class , including the same machinery . However , when Alaska cruisers were compared to the Essex carriers , converted cruisers would have had a shorter flight deck ( so they could carry only 90 % of the aircraft ) , would have been 11 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) lower in the water , and could travel 8 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 15 @,@ 000 km ) less at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . In addition , the large cruiser design did not include the massive underwater protections found in normal carriers due to the armor weight devoted to counter shell fire . Lastly , an Alaska conversion could not satisfy the navy 's goal of having new aircraft carriers quickly , as the work needed to modify the ships into carriers would entail long delays . With this in mind , all planning to convert the Alaskas was abandoned on 7 January 1942 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Of the six Alaska @-@ class cruisers that were planned , only three were laid down . The first two , Alaska and Guam , were completed . Construction of Hawaii , the third , was suspended on 16 April 1947 when she was 84 % complete . The last three , Philippines , Puerto Rico , and Samoa , were delayed since all available materials and slipways were allocated to higher priority ships , such as aircraft carriers , destroyers , and submarines . Construction had still not begun when steel shortages and a realization that these " cruiser @-@ killers " had no more cruisers to hunt — as the fleets of Japanese cruisers had already been defeated by aircraft and submarines — made the ships " white elephants " . As a result , construction of the last three members of the class never began , and they were officially canceled on 24 June 1943 . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Alaska and Guam served with the U.S. Navy during the last year of World War II . Similar to the Iowa @-@ class fast battleships , their speed made them useful as shore bombardment ships and fast carrier escorts . Both protected Franklin when she was on her way to be repaired in Guam after being hit by two Japanese bombs . Afterward , Alaska supported the landings on Okinawa , while Guam went to San Pedro Bay to become the leader of a new task force , Cruiser Task Force 95 . Guam , joined by Alaska , four light cruisers , and nine destroyers , led the task force into the East China and Yellow Seas to conduct raids upon shipping ; however , they only encountered Chinese junks . By the end of the war , the two had become celebrated within the fleet as excellent carrier escorts . During the war , both ships were part of Cruiser Division 16 commanded by Rear Admiral Francis S. Low , USN . 
 After the war , both ships served as part of Task Force 71 , the designation for the U.S. Seventh Fleet 's North China Naval Force . Its mission was to support the allied occupation of the Korean peninsula . This included executing various show @-@ the @-@ flag operations along the western coast of Korea as well as in the Gulf of <unk> . These naval demonstrations preceded Operation Campus , the amphibious landing of U.S. Army ground forces at Jinsen , Korea , on 8 September 1945 . Subsequently , both ships returned to the United States in mid @-@ December 1945 , and they were decommissioned and " mothballed " in 1947 @.@ after having spent 32 months ( Alaska ) and 29 months ( Guam ) in service . 
 In 1958 , the Bureau of Ships prepared two feasibility studies to explore whether Alaska and Guam could be suitably converted into guided @-@ missile cruisers . The first study involved removing all of the guns in favor of four different missile systems . At $ 160 million , the cost of this proposed removal was seen as prohibitive , so a second study was initiated . The study left the forward batteries ( the two 12 @-@ inch triple turrets and three of the 5 @-@ inch dual turrets ) unchanged , and added a reduced version of the first plan on the stern of the ship . Even though the proposals would have cost approximately half as much as the first study 's plan ( $ 82 million ) , it was still seen as too expensive . As a result , both ships were stricken from the Naval Vessel Register on 1 June 1960 . Alaska was sold for scrap on 30 June 1960 , and Guam on 24 May 1961 . 
 The still @-@ incomplete Hawaii was considered for a conversion to be the Navy 's first guided @-@ missile cruiser ; this thought lasted until 26 February 1952 , when a different conversion to a " large command ship " was contemplated . In anticipation of the conversion , her classification was changed to CBC @-@ 1 . This would have made her a " larger sister " to Northampton , but a year and a half later ( 9 October 1954 ) she was re @-@ designated CB @-@ 3 . Hawaii was stricken from the Naval Vessel Register on 9 June 1958 and was sold for scrap in 1959 . 
 = = " Large cruisers " or " battlecruisers " = = 
 Early in its development , the class used the US battlecruiser designation CC , which had been planned for the Lexington class . However , the designation was changed to CB to reflect their new status , " large cruiser " , and the practice of referring to them as battlecruisers was officially discouraged . The U.S. Navy then named the individual vessels after U.S. territories , rather than states ( as was the tradition with battleships ) or cities ( for which cruisers were named ) , to symbolize the belief that these ships were supposed to play an intermediate role between heavy cruisers and fully @-@ fledged battleships . 
 The Alaska class certainly resembled contemporary US battleships ( particularly the North Carolina class , South Dakota class , and Iowa class ) in appearance , including the familiar 2 @-@ A @-@ 1 main battery and massive columnar mast , and displaced twice that of the newest heavy cruisers ( the Baltimore class ) . In weight , the ships were only 5 @,@ 000 tons less than the London Treaty battleship standard displacement limit of 35 @,@ 000 long tons ( 36 @,@ 000 t ) , also longer than several treaty battleships such as the King George V and North Carolina @-@ classes . 
 In design and armor the Alaska class are regarded as " large cruisers " rather than battlecruisers . Their design was scaled up from the treaty cruisers limited by the Washington , London and Second London naval treaties . In common with U.S. heavy cruisers , they had aircraft hangars and a single large rudder . Their armor lacked the underwater protection systems found on full @-@ fledged battleships and even intermediate capital ships like the French Dunkerque and German Scharnhorst classes . This left the Alaskas virtually defenseless against torpedoes , as well as vulnerable to shells falling slightly short and continuing underwater to hit the hull . While the Alaskas had more side armor than other contemporary U.S. cruisers , their protection was only marginally capable of stopping 12 " fire ; they were vulnerable to battleship fire ( 14 – 16 " fire ) at any range . 
 In addition , despite being much larger than the Baltimore class , the numbers of secondary and anti @-@ aircraft batteries of the Alaskas were similar . Whereas the Alaska class carried twelve 5 " / 38 caliber in six twin turrets , fifty @-@ six 40 mm , and thirty @-@ four 20 mm guns , the Baltimore class carried the same number of 5 " / 38s , eight fewer 40 mm , and ten fewer 20 mm . , considerably fewer than new U.S. battleships that had ten ( save for South Dakota ( BB @-@ 57 ) ) 5 " / 38 twin mounts while older refitted U.S. battleships had eight . Author Richard Worth remarked that when they were finally completed , launched , and commissioned , they had the " size of a battleship but the capabilities of a cruiser " . The Alaska class was similarly expensive to build and maintain as contemporary battleships yet far less capable due to armor deficiencies , while only able to put up an anti @-@ aircraft defense comparable to the much cheaper Baltimore cruisers . 
 Despite these cruiser @-@ like characteristics , and the U.S. Navy 's insistence on their status as cruisers , the Alaska class has been frequently described as battlecruisers . The official navy magazine All Hands said " The Guam and her sister ship Alaska are the first American battle cruisers ever to be completed as such . " Some modern historians take the view that this is a more accurate designation because they believe that the ships were " in all senses of the word , battlecruisers " , with all the vulnerabilities of the type . The traditional Anglo @-@ American battlecruiser concept had always sacrificed protection for the sake of speed and armament — they were not intended to stand up against the guns they themselves carried . The Alaska 's percentage of armor tonnage , 28 @.@ 4 % , was slightly less than that of fast battleships ; the British King George V @-@ class , the American Iowa class , and the battlecruiser / fast battleship HMS Hood all had armor percentages between 32 and 33 % , whereas the Lexington @-@ class battlecruiser design had a nearly identical armor percentage of 28 @.@ 5 % . In fact , older battlecruisers , such as the Invincible ( 19 @.@ 9 % ) , had a significantly lower percentage . Armament @-@ wise , they had much larger guns than contemporary heavy cruisers ; while the Baltimore class only carried nine 8 " / 55 caliber Marks 12 and 15 guns , the Alaska class carried nine 12 " / 50 caliber guns that were as good as , if not superior to , the old 14 " / 50 caliber gun used on the U.S. Navy 's pre @-@ treaty battleships . 
 = = Armament = = 
 = = = Main battery = = = 
 As built , the Alaska class had nine 12 " / 50 caliber Mark 8 guns mounted in three triple ( 3 @-@ gun ) turrets , with two turrets forward and one aft , a configuration known as " 2 @-@ A @-@ 1 " . The previous 12 " gun manufactured for the U.S. Navy was the Mark 7 version , which had been designed for and installed in the 1912 Wyoming @-@ class battleships . The Mark 8 was of considerably higher quality ; in fact , it " was by far the most powerful weapon of its caliber ever placed in service . " Designed in 1939 , it weighed 121 @,@ 856 pounds ( 55 @,@ 273 kg ) , including the breech , and could sustain an average rate of fire of 2 @.@ 4 – 3 rounds a minute . It could throw a 1 @,@ 140 @-@ pound ( 520 kg ) Mark 18 armor @-@ piercing shell 38 @,@ 573 yards ( 35 @,@ 271 m ) at an elevation of 45 ° , and had a 344 @-@ shot barrel life ( about 54 more than the much larger but similar 16 " / 50 caliber Mark 7 gun found in the Iowa battleships . ) . The Alaska 's Mark 8 guns were the heaviest main battery of any cruiser of World War II , and as capable as the old 14 " / 50 caliber gun used on the U.S. Navy 's pre @-@ treaty battleships . 
 The turrets were very similar to those of the Iowa @-@ class battleships , but differed in several ways ; for example , the Alaska class had a two @-@ stage powder hoist instead of the Iowa class 's one @-@ stage hoist . These differences made operating the guns safer and increased the rate of fire . In addition , a " projectile rammer " was added to Alaska and Guam . This machine transferred shells from storage on the ship to the rotating ring that fed the guns . However , this feature proved unsatisfactory , and it was not planned for Hawaii or any subsequent ships . 
 Because Alaska and Guam were the only two ships to mount these guns , only ten turrets were made during the war ( three for each ship including Hawaii and one spare ) . They cost $ 1 @,@ 550 @,@ 000 each and were the most expensive heavy guns purchased by the U.S. Navy in World War II . 
 = = = Secondary battery = = = 
 The secondary battery of the Alaska class was composed of twelve dual @-@ purpose ( anti @-@ air and anti @-@ ship ) 5 " / 38 caliber guns in twin mounts , with four offset on each side of the superstructure ( two on each beam ) and two centerline turrets fore and aft . The 5 " / 38 was originally intended for use on only destroyers built in the 1930s , but by 1934 and into World War II it was being installed on almost all of the U.S. ' s major warships , including aircraft carriers , battleships , and heavy and light cruisers . 
 = = = Anti @-@ aircraft battery = = = 
 For anti @-@ aircraft armament , the Alaska @-@ class ships carried 56 × 40 mm guns and 34 × 20 mm guns . These numbers are comparable to 48 × 40 mm and 24 × 20 mm on the smaller Baltimore @-@ class heavy cruisers and 80 × 40 mm and 49 × 20 mm on the larger Iowa battleships . 
 Arguably the most efficient light anti @-@ aircraft gun of World War II , the 40 mm Bofors was used on nearly every major warship in the U.S. and UK fleets during World War II from about 1943 to 1945 . Although they were a descendant of German and Swedish designs , the Bofors mounts used by the United States Navy during World War II had been heavily " Americanized " to U.S. Navy standards . This new standard resulted in a gun system set to English standards ( now known as the Standard System ) with interchangeable ammunition , simplifying the logistics situation for World War II . When coupled with hydraulic couple drives to reduce salt contamination and the Mark 51 director for improved accuracy , the 40 mm Bofors became a fearsome adversary , accounting for roughly half of all Japanese aircraft shot down between 1 October 1944 and 1 February 1945 . 
 The Oerlikon 20 mm anti @-@ aircraft gun was one of the most extensively used anti @-@ aircraft guns of World War II ; the U.S. alone manufactured a total of 124 @,@ 735 of these guns . When activated in 1941 , they replaced the 0 @.@ 50 " M2 Browning machine gun on a one @-@ for @-@ one basis . The Oerlikon gun remained the primary anti @-@ aircraft weapon of the United States Navy until the introduction of the 40 mm Bofors in 1943 . 
 = = Ships = = 
 USS Alaska ( CB @-@ 1 ) was commissioned on 17 June 1944 . She served in the Pacific , screening aircraft carriers , providing shore bombardment at Okinawa , and going on raiding missions in the East China Sea . She was decommissioned on 17 February 1947 after less than three years of service and was scrapped in 1960 . 
 USS Guam ( CB @-@ 2 ) was commissioned on 17 September 1944 . She served in the Pacific with Alaska on almost all of the same operations . Along with Alaska , she was decommissioned on 17 February 1947 and was scrapped in 1961 . 
 USS Hawaii ( CB @-@ 3 ) was intended as a third ship of the class , but she was never completed . Numerous plans to utilize her as a guided @-@ missile cruiser or a large command ship in the years after the war were fruitless , and she was scrapped . 
 USS Philippines ( CB @-@ 4 ) , Puerto Rico ( CB @-@ 5 ) , and Samoa ( CB @-@ 6 ) were planned as the fourth , fifth , and sixth ships of the class , respectively . All were going to be built at Camden , New Jersey , but they were canceled before construction could begin . 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = Vijayanagara literature in Kannada = 
 Vijayanagara literature in Kannada is the body of literature composed in the Kannada language of South India during the ascendancy of the Vijayanagara Empire which lasted from the 14th through the 16th century . The Vijayanagara empire was established in 1336 by Harihara I and his brother Bukka Raya I. Although it lasted until 1664 , its power declined after a major military defeat by the Shahi Sultanates in the battle of Talikota in 1565 . The empire is named after its capital city Vijayanagara , whose ruins surround modern Hampi , now a World Heritage Site in Karnataka . 
 Kannada literature during this period consisted of writings relating to the socio @-@ religious developments of the Veerashaiva and Vaishnava faiths , and to a lesser extent to that of Jainism . Writing on secular topics was popular throughout this period . Authorship of these writings was not limited to poets and scholars alone . Significant literary contributions were made by members of the royal family , their ministers , army commanders of rank , nobility and the various subordinate rulers . In addition , a vast body of devotional folk literature was written by musical bards , mystics and saint @-@ poets , influencing society in the empire . Writers of this period popularised use of the native metres : shatpadi ( six @-@ line verse ) , sangatya ( compositions meant to be sung to the accompaniment of a musical instrument ) , and tripadi ( three @-@ line verse ) . 
 The development of Veerashaiva literature was at its peak during the reign of King Deva Raya II , the best @-@ known of the Sangama dynasty rulers . The rule of King Krishnadeva Raya of the Tuluva dynasty and his successors was a high point in Vaishnava literature . The influence of Jain literature , which had dominated Kannada language in the previous centuries , was on the wane with increasing competition from the resurgent Veerashaiva faith and Vaishnava bhakti movement ( devotional movement of the haridasas ) . Interaction between Kannada and Telugu literatures left lasting influences that continued after the Vijayanagara era . 
 = = Court literature = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 Before the 12th century , Jain writers had dominated Kannada literature with their champu ( verses mixed with prose ) style of writings popular in court literature . In the later medieval period , they had to contend with the Veerashaivas who challenged the very notion of royal literature with their vachana poetry , a stylised form of spoken language , more popular in folk genres . The popular growth of Veerashaiva ( devotees of the Hindu god Shiva ) literature began in the 12th century , while Vaishnava ( devotees of the Hindu god Vishnu ) writers began to exert their influence from the 15th century . Jain writers had to reinvent their art , moving away from the traditional themes of renunciation and tenets to focus on contemporary topics . Andayya 's 13th century classic Kabbigara Kava ( " Poets defender " ) was an early example of the change in literary style , and also reflected the hostility toward the Veerashaivas ; the Jain author found it ideal to narrate the story of Manmatha , the God of Love , who turned Shiva into a half woman . The Veerashaivas had initiated an important change , casting aside the concept of formal literature and making way for shorter local genres . The Vaishnava haridasas later popularised musical forms that were more acceptable to the common man . Written classics eulogising kings and commanders were a thing of the past . Kannada literature had moved closer to the spoken and sung folk traditions , with <unk> being its hallmark , and devotion to God its goal . 
 This significant shift in the literary landscape was coupled with major political changes that were taking place in southern India in the early 14th century . With the decline of the regional Hindu kingdoms , the Vijayanagara Empire had risen as a bulwark against Muslim incursions from the north while creating an atmosphere conducive to development of the fine arts . In an important age of Kannada literature , competition between Vaishnava and Veerashaiva writers came to the fore . Literary disputations between the two sects were common , especially in the court of King Deva Raya II . Acute rivalry led to " organised processions " in honour of the classics written by poets of the respective sects . With the exception of the best @-@ known writers from these faiths , many authors produced lesser quality writings with a sectarian and propagandist bent . 
 The Vaishnava writers consisted of two groups who seemed to have no interaction with each other : the Brahmin commentators who typically wrote under the patronage of royalty ; and the Bhakti ( devotion ) poets who played no role in courtly matters , instead taking the message of God to the people in the form of melodious songs composed using folk genres . Kumara Vyasa and Timmanna Kavi were well @-@ known among the Brahmin commentators , while Purandara Dasa and Kanaka Dasa were the most famous of the Bhakti writers . The philosophy of Madhvacharya , which originated in the Kannada – speaking region in the 13th century , spread beyond its borders over the next two centuries . The itinerant haridasas , best described as mystic saint @-@ poets , spread the philosophy of Madhvacharya in simple Kannada , winning mass appeal by preaching devotion to God and extolling the virtues of jnana ( enlightenment ) , bhakti ( devotion ) and vairagya ( detachment ) . 
 This was the age of the shatpadi metre , although only the most skilled of poets , such as Chamarasa , Kumara Vyasa , Kanaka Dasa and Bhaskara used it to the best effect . Mentioned for the first time in Kannada literature by Nagavarma I in his <unk> ( c . 990 ) and successfully used by the 12th century Hoysala poet Raghavanka , this hexa @-@ metre style suited for narrative poetry found immense popularity throughout the Vijayanagara period . The shataka metre ( string of 100 verses ) was put to best use by the Veerashaivas who produced most of the didactic writings in this metre , although the Jain poet Ratnakaravarni is the most famous exponent of it . The writings of Ratnakaravarni and Kanaka Dasa in sangatya metre are considered masterpieces from this period . 
 In the royal courts , there was increased interaction between Kannada and Telugu literatures , continuing a trend which had begun in the Hoysala period . Translations of classics from Kannada to Telugu and vice versa became popular . Well @-@ known bilingual poets of this period were Bhima Kavi , <unk> Somanatha and <unk> . Some Telugu poets , including <unk> , were so well versed in Kannada that they freely used many Kannada terms in their Telugu writings . It was because of this " familiarity " with Kannada language that the notable writer <unk> called his Telugu writings " Kannada " . Translations by bilingual writers continued in the centuries to follow . 
 With the disintegration of the Vijayanagara Empire in the late 16th and early 17th centuries , the centres of Kannada literature moved to the courts of the emerging independent kingdoms , the Kingdom of Mysore and the Keladi Nayakas . Writers in these courts , many of whom were Veerashaiva by faith , were not only adept in Kannada but often also in Sanskrit and / or Telugu . Two such writers were Kalale Nanjaraja and Kempe Gowda , the founder of Bangalore . This multi @-@ <unk> was perhaps a lingering legacy of the cosmopolitan Vijayanagara literary culture and the emerging social responsibilities of the Veerashaiva monastic order which no longer confined itself to a Kannada only audience , but rather sought to spread its influence across southern India . 
 In the Kingdom of Mysore , the Veerashaiva literary school was challenged by the growing influence of the Srivaishnava intelligentsia in the Wodeyar court . The Srivaishnava writers ( followers of a sect of Vaishnavism ) of Kannada literature were also in competition with Telugu and Sanskrit writers , their predominance continuing into the English colonial rule over the princely state of Mysore . Meanwhile , the radical writings of 16th @-@ century poet Ratnakaravarni had made way for a new kind of poetry heralded by those who were not poets in the traditional courtly sense , rather itinerant poets who travelled across the Kannada @-@ speaking region , cutting across court and monastery , writing poems ( in the tripadi metre ) and influencing the lives of people with their humanistic values which overcame the social barriers of caste and religion . Sarvajna ( often compared to Telugu poet <unk> ) , <unk> Sherif , <unk> <unk> , <unk> and <unk> <unk> are the best @-@ known among them . These maverick poets heralded yet another epoch of unconventional literature in Kannada language , free of courtly conservatism and established literary tastes . 
 = = = Vaishnava writings = = = 
 Vaishnava authors wrote treatments of the Hindu epics , the Ramayana , the Mahabharata and the Bhagavata , as well as the Vedanta and other subjects from the Hindu puranic traditions . This was the age of Kumara Vyasa , an influential Vaishnava poet and a doyen of medieval Kannada epic poetry . Historians have drawn parallels between Adikavi Pampa ( c . 941 ) and Kumaraya Vyasa , while identifying fundamental differences in their style . Both are considered masters of their respective periods ; while Pampa is identified as a stylist of the classical age , Kumara Vyasa is considered a generalist of the medieval age . Unlike Pampa , a product of the marga ( Sanskritic @-@ mainstream ) period of Kannada literature , Kumara Vyasa successfully wielded the flexibility of the desi ( native ) shatpadi metre , which used a range of language that included metaphors , similes , humour and even vulgarity . 
 Kumara Vyasa wrote <unk> Bharata in 1430 in the Vyasa tradition . The title of the work is a reference to <unk> ( modern Gadag ) , where the author lived . The writing is based on the first ten chapters of the Hindu epic Mahabharata and is also alternatively titled Karnata Bharata Kathamanjari or <unk> Bharata . It is a dedication to the deity of Gadag and emphasises the divinity and grace of the Hindu god Krishna . Unlike Pampa , who adhered to a strictly Jain interpretation of the epic in his Vikramarjuna Vijaya ( 941 ) , eulogising Pandava Arjuna as the hero , making Draupadi solely Arjuna 's wife and casting the Kaurava prince Duryodhana and his loyal companion Karna as lofty individuals , Kumara Vyasa portrays all characters with the exception of Krishna as deeply human with foibles . His depiction of the secondary characters , such as the cunning Keechaka and the coward Uttara Kumara , is also noteworthy . An interesting aspect of the work is the sense of humour exhibited by the poet and his hero , Krishna . This work marks the transition in Kannada literature from old to modern . Particularly known for his use of sophisticated metaphors , Kumara Vyasa earned the title <unk> <unk> Chakravarti ( " Emperor of the land of <unk> " ) . The remaining chapters of the epic were translated by Timmanna Kavi ( 1510 ) of the court of King Krishnadevaraya . The poet named his work <unk> Bharata after his patron king . Airavata ( 1430 ) by Kumara Vyasa recounts an episode from the Mahabharata and is a story of the elephant ridden by god Indra . 
 Inspired by Kumara Vyasa , the first complete brahminical adaptation of the epic Ramayana was written by Kumara Valmiki ( a pseudonym of <unk> , 1500 ) and is called Torave Ramayana after the village Torave , where it was composed . As with the Mahabharata , this adaptation veers away from the Jain version by Nagachandra ( 1105 ) . Nagachandra had used the champu metre popular in Sanskrit works and sought to portray Ravana as a tragic hero . In a departure from the original version ( by Valmiki ) , the Jain epic ends with Rama 's asceticism and nirvana . Kumara Valmiki 's account , written in the Valmiki tradition , is in the shatpadi metre and is steeped in the author 's devotion for the god Rama , an incarnation of the god Vishnu . According to the author , the epic he wrote was actually a recounting of Shiva 's conversation with his consort Parvati . In this version of the epic , King Ravana , the villain , is one of the suitors at Sita 's Swayamvara ( lit a ceremony of " choice of a husband " ) . His failure in winning the bride 's hand results in jealousy towards Rama , the eventual bridegroom . As the story progresses , Hanuman , for all his services , is heaped with encomium and is exalted to the status of " the next creator " . At the end of the story , during the war with Rama , Ravana realises that Rama is none other than the god Vishnu and hastens to die at his hands to achieve salvation . The chapter narrating the war ( <unk> ) is given prominence over all other chapters . The writing has remained popular for centuries and inspired folk theatre such as the Yakshagana , which draws from episodes of Torave Ramayana for enactment . The influence of the Puranic tradition and that of <unk> are visible in this lively yet religious narration that uses every opportunity to glorify its hero , Rama . However , the author has been criticised for dwelling in abstractions and for not reaching the graceful poetic level of his predecessor Kumara Vyasa . 
 The early Bhagavata writings in Sanskrit by well @-@ known acharyas ( gurus ) were solely meant to have a proselytising effect on the masses , encouraging them to a theistic way of life and belief in the god Krishna . Chatu <unk> , who flourished as a court poet of King Krishnadeva Raya and his successor King Achyuta Raya , was the first to translate the Bhagavata into Kannada in a voluminous writing comprising 12 @,@ 247 stanzas divided into 280 sections . The work covered the entire original version in shatpadi metre . Two other names appear in the <unk> , Sadananda Yati and <unk> <unk> , prompting some scholars to attribute the work to the group while others consider them alternate names of the same writer . The work covers all ten avatars of the god Vishnu , though it is essentially centred on the depiction of Krishna as the supreme Lord . The purana covers stories of Vishnu 's famous devotees such as Prahlad and Dhruva in detail , as well as stories of demons <unk> , Hiranyakashipu and others who sought to attain salvation by dying at the hands of Vishnu . Most noteworthy is the epic 's influence on the compositions of the Haridasas . Though the writing is not considered as important as the other two epics of the period , its significance to religiously minded people is well accepted . Chatu <unk> wrote a fuller version of portions of the epic Mahabharata as well . Other notable writers of the 16th century were Tirumala Bhatta ( Siva <unk> ) and <unk> ( Saundarya <unk> , using tripadi metre ) . 
 = = = Veerashaiva writings = = = 
 The Veerashaiva writers were devotees of the Hindu god Shiva , his 25 forms , and the expositions of Shaivism . An important development in their literature during this period was the recasting the saints of the 12th century Veerashaiva movement ( Basavanna , Allama Prabhu and others ) as the protagonists of their writings . 
 Bhima Kavi paved the way for the shatpadi metre tradition in his work Basavapurana ( <unk> ) , a form first experimented with by the 12th century Hoysala poet Raghavanka . Bhima Kavi 's work , a biography of Basavanna , is an important Veerashaiva purana . It was inspired by earlier biographies of Basavanna by the Hoysala poet Harihara ( the author of the first biographical narrative poem of the protagonist 's life called Basavaraja Ragale ) and the Telugu writings of Palkuriki Somanatha of the 13th century . Bhima Kavi humbly acknowledges and eulogises his predecessors in a writing full of well @-@ known personalities . 
 The author starts with Basavanna 's birth and weaves episodes of other famous <unk> ( devotees of Hindu god Shiva ) — such as Allama Prabhu — into his life history . Basavanna is depicted as a saintly person , a great devotee of Shiva , an incarnation of Nandi , a man of miracles and one with a mission , sent to re @-@ establish the Veerashaiva faith on earth . The work is arranged into eight <unk> ( divisions ) containing sixty @-@ one <unk> ( chapters ) and 3 @,@ 621 verses . The narration includes stories of devotees of Shiva who overcame their egos . Apart from a few variations , the writings of Bhima Kavi and his predecessors are complementary . Two lost works of Bhima Kavi are the <unk> Ragale and the <unk> . 
 Chamarasa , Lakkanna Dandesa and Jakkanarya flourished under the patronage of King Deva Raya II . Chamarasa , champion of the Veerashaiva faith , was a rival of Kumara Vyasa in the court of King Deva Raya II . His magnum opus , the Prabhulinga Lile ( 1430 ) was a eulogy of 12th @-@ century saint Allama Prabhu ; it was translated into Telugu and Tamil language at the behest of his patron king , and later into the Sanskrit and Marathi languages . In the story , the saint is considered an incarnation of Hindu god Ganapathi while Parvati took the form of a princess of Banavasi . In stark contrast to Kumara Vyasa 's war @-@ torn epic , Chamarasa delivered a writing full of spirituality . A remark made by the poet in the writing , that his story is " not about ordinary mortals " , implied that the Vaishnava epics the Ramayana and the Mahabharata were about mortals ; this was evidence of rivalry between the two faiths . 
 Lakkanna Dandesa , the king 's prime minister and provincial governor , wrote an encyclopaedia on the beliefs and rites of the Veerashaiva faith titled <unk> Chintamani . This work is an account of the life of Basavanna , the progenitor of the faith , and hundreds of his followers , making it valuable material for students of the Lingayat movement . Numerous references are made in this work to the capital city of Vijayanagara and its suburbs . Jakkanarya , a minister in the court , not only wrote <unk> ( one hundred and one stories ) but also was patron to <unk> <unk> and <unk> Deva , poet @-@ saints who wrote vachana poems and books on the Shaiva philosophy ( called <unk> ) . Other writers of the 15th century worthy of mention are Kavi Linga ( 1490 ) , court poet of King Saluva Narasimha I , <unk> ( <unk> Charitra ) , Bommarasa ( <unk> Purana ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> Bommarasa ( <unk> Purana ) , <unk> Kavi ( <unk> <unk> Charitre ) , and <unk> ( <unk> Charitra ) , court poet of the Ummattur chieftain <unk> . 
 In 1500 , inspired by Palkuriki Somanatha ( a bilingual poet in Kannada and Telugu ) , Singiraja synthesised an account on the life of Basavanna titled Maha Basavaraja Charitra ( or Singiraja Purana ) , using the protagonist 's vachana poems and giving details of his 88 famous deeds , as well as information about his opponents in the court of Southern Kalachuri King Bijjala II . An eminent poet of this time was Guru Basava , known for his authorship of seven famous poems ( Sapta Kavya ) , all but one being written in the shatpadi metre . He expounded on religious teachings in the form of formal discussions between the guru and disciple . His <unk> ( classical epic poems ) deal with spiritualism and extrasensory perception . 
 <unk> of Gubbi , a poet bilingual in Kannada and Sanskrit , enjoyed the patronage of King Krishnadeva Raya . His important writings in Kannada in the shatpadi metre are the Bhava <unk> ( also called Satyendra <unk> <unk> , 1513 ) and the <unk> Purana ( 1530 ) . The former was based on a 7th @-@ century Tamil work and about a Chola King in the context of the Shaiva faith ; the latter is a writing of encyclopedic proportions that goes beyond philosophical content , describing the various forms ( or sports , called <unk> ) of god Shiva and the lives of famous Shaiva saints . 
 In 1584 , Virupaksha Pandita , the head priest at the Virupaksha Temple in Vijayanagara , wrote an account on the life and deeds of the 12th @-@ century saint and vachana poet Chennabasava . The writing , titled Chenna Basava Purana , regards the protagonist as an incarnation of god Shiva and describes the glory of Shiva and his famous devotees . The book gives valuable information , including dates , about early Veerashaiva saints and <unk> ( vachana poets ) . In addition to religious content , the writing provides useful insights about the former capital Vijayanagara , its royal palace , its market places and merchants , its military encampments , specialisations and divisions and the guilds of workers who served the military in various capacities . Other authors from the 16th century were <unk> ( <unk> Kavya ) , <unk> ( Virabhadra Vijaya ) , <unk> ( Mahadevi <unk> Purana ) , <unk> of Ikkeri ( <unk> Kavya ) and Sadasiva Yogi ( Ramanatha Vilasa ) . 
 = = = Jain writings = = = 
 The cultural supremacy of the Jains steadily diminished from the 12th century ; the decline began in the 10th century after the conquest of the predominantly Jain Rashtrakutas by the Western Chalukya Empire , and the defeat of the Ganga kingdom by the Cholas of Tanjore . While Veerashaivism flourished in northern Karnataka from the time of Basavanna , Sri Vaishnavism ( a branch of Vaishnavism ) thrived in the South due to the influence of Ramanujacharya . The Hoysala king Vishnuvardhana and his descendants took to Vaishnavism . Though tolerant of all faiths , the founders of the Vijayanagara Empire and the succeeding kings of the Sangama dynasty were Shaivas by faith ( devotees of Shiva ) while the later Tuluva dynasty kings were Sri Vaishnavas ( followers of Sri Vaishnavism ) . The Jain population appears to have begun its decline from this period ; however , available records include a decree by King Bukka Raya I giving Jains freedom of worship , following their complaint of persecution . Although the influence of Jainism and its literature was on the wane , the coastal areas of modern Karnataka , where important Jain monuments and monoliths were constructed , remained a stronghold . As in earlier centuries , Jain authors wrote about tirthankars , princes and other personages important to the Jain religion . Most famous among Jain poets from the coastal Karnataka region were Ratnakaravarni , Abhinava <unk> Vidyananda , Salva and <unk> . 
 Ratnakaravarni of <unk> ( 1557 ) , court poet at Karkala under the patronage of <unk> Wodeyar , is famous for successfully integrating an element of worldly pleasure into asceticism and for treating the topic of eros with discretion in a religious epic , his magnum opus the Bharatadesa Vaibhava . One of the most popular poets of Kannada literature , Ratnakaravarni 's writings were popular across religions and sects . He appears to have had tense relationships with both court and monastery , however , owing to writings on erotics and the science of pleasure , rather than purely spiritual poetry . A radical and sensitive poet , he once claimed that spiritual meditation " was boring " . Tradition has it that Ratnakaravarni converted to Veerashaivism when his Bharatadesa Vaibhava ( also called <unk> Charite ) was initially scorned , later to return to the Jain fold and pen other important writings . The Bharatadesa Vaibhava is written in eighty cantos and includes 10 @,@ 000 verses . His other important writings include the 2 @,@ 000 spiritual songs called <unk> ( " Songs of the Brothers " ) and the three <unk> : the Ratnakara sataka , the <unk> shataka ( a discourse on Jain morals , renunciation and philosophy ) and the <unk> shataka , an account of the universe as seen by Jains , consisting of heaven , hell and the intermediate worlds . 
 Bharatadesa Vaibhava is a version of the earlier <unk> by <unk> and reflects a different perspective than the Adipurana written by Adikavi Pampa c . 941 . Centred on the glorification of the enlightened Bharata , the son of the first Jain tirthankar <unk> , Ratnakaravarni cleverly focuses on those aspects that the original by Pampa ignored . Ratnakaravarni goes into minute detail about prince Bharata who , according to the author , serves as the ideal balance between detachment ( yoga ) and attachment ( bhoga ) . Though married to " 96 @,@ 000 women " , Bharata is depicted as one who at once could separate himself from worldly pleasures . Unlike Pampa , who focused on the conflict between the brothers Bahubali and Bharata , ending with Bahubali 's asceticism and Bharata 's humiliation , Ratnakaravarni 's eulogy of Bharata leaves room only for Bahubali 's evolution towards sainthood . Eventually , Bharata attains moksha ( liberation from the cycle of death and rebirth ) by burning himself in ascetic fire . The author showers encomium on Bharata in his various roles as monarch , husband , son , friend and devotee , a rare description of a " perfect human being " among Jain writings . Since details of the early life of Bharata as a young ruler did not exist in previous writings or in tradition , much of Ratnakaravarni 's vivid description of that period was a product of his imagination . This work finds its pride of place in Kannada 's epic poetry as the longest poem in the folk sangatya metre . 
 Salva ( 1550 ) , who was the court poet of a Konkan prince named <unk> , wrote a propagandist work called the Salva Bharata . This was a Jain version of the epic Mahabharata in sixteen <unk> ( divisions ) , intended to compete with the Vaishnava version of the epic written by Kumar Vyasa in the mid @-@ 15th century . Abhinava <unk> Vidyananda of <unk> ( 1553 ) wrote Kavya Sara , a 1 @,@ 143 verse anthology of extracts of subjects written about by earlier poets between 900 and 1430 . The text closely resembles an anthology written by Hoysala poet Mallikarjuna ( 1245 ) , with some additions to account for writings in the post Mallikarjuna era . A staunch Jain and a <unk> , Vidyananda argued for the cause of his faith in the Vijayanagara court and other provincial courts . <unk> ( 1559 ) wrote Jnana Bhaskara Charite on the importance of inner contemplation rather than rituals as the correct path towards emancipation . 
 In Vijayanagara , Madhura was the court poet of King Harihara II and King Deva Raya I under the patronage of their respective prime ministers . He is famous for his account of the 15th tirthankar titled <unk> Purana ( 1385 ) , written in a style similar to that of Jain poets of earlier centuries . Madhura is also credited with a poem about Gomateshwara of Shravanabelagola . <unk> Varma , who is tentatively dated to 1400 , translated from Sanskrit a champu ( mixed prose @-@ verse ) titled Ratna <unk> describing Jain ideologies . <unk> , a feudatory king of Kallahalli and a Vijayanagara general of rank , wrote two books . <unk> <unk> , completed in 1508 , was an account of the life of the 22nd Jain tirthankar ; Samyukta <unk> , written in 1509 , comprised 18 short stories on religious values and morals . 
 An important shatpadi writing from this period is the <unk> Charite ( 1424 ) by Bhaskara , a story of Prince <unk> , who regained the throne usurped by his father . Other well @-@ known Jain writers were <unk> ( <unk> , 1439 ) , <unk> ( <unk> , 1440 ) , <unk> ( <unk> , 1448 ) , Bommarasa of <unk> ( <unk> Charite , 1485 ) , <unk> ( 1500 ) , <unk> III ( <unk> Kavya ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> Purana , 1519 ) , <unk> ( Chandraprabha Purana , 1550 ) , <unk> ( Chandraprabha Purana , 1578 ) and Bahubali Pandita of Sringeri ( <unk> , 1352 ) . 
 = = = Secular writings = = = 
 Although most of the writings that have survived from this period are religious in nature , there is sufficient literary evidence that secular writing was also popular in the imperial court . Some of these writings carry useful information on urban life , grandeur of the imperial and provincial courts , royal weddings and ceremonies . Other works refer the general town planning , fortifications and ordnance details at Vijayanagara and other important cities , irrigation reservoirs , merchants and shops dealing in a variety of commodities . On occasion , authors dwell on mythical cities that reflect their idealised views on contemporary life . Commonly found in these works are description of artists and professionals and their relationship with the court . These included poets , bards , composers , painters , sculptors , dancers , theatrical performers and even wrestlers . Others who find mention are political leaders , ambassadors , concubines , accountants , goldsmiths , moneylenders and even servants and door keepers . 
 Writings in various literary genres such as romance , fiction , erotica , folk songs and musical compositions were popular . A wealth of literature dealing in subjects such as astronomy , meteorology , veterinary science and medicine , astrology , grammar , philosophy , poetry , prosody , biography , history and lexicon , as well as dictionaries and encyclopedias , were written in this era . 
 In 1360 , <unk> I wrote a book on medicine called <unk> Mani <unk> , basing it on the 5th century writings of <unk> . <unk> ( 1385 ) wrote a biography of his ancestor Kereya Padmarasa , a Hoysala minister and poet , in a work titled <unk> Purana . The writing provides details about the Hoysala Empire and notable personalities such as the poets Harihara and Raghavanka . <unk> ( or <unk> ) , a court poet of Deva Raya II , wrote an account on the Virupaksha temple , its precincts and settlements at <unk> ( modern Hampi ) in the <unk> <unk> in 1430 . Mangaraja II authored a lexicon called Mangaraja <unk> in 1398 , while Abhinava Chandra gave an account on veterinary science in his book called <unk> Vaidya in the 14th century . Kavi Malla wrote on erotics in the <unk> in the 14th century . In the 15th century , Madhava translated an earlier Sanskrit poem by Dandi and called it <unk> , and Isvara Kavi ( also called Bana Kavi ) wrote a prosody called <unk> <unk> . 
 <unk> , a member of the royal family , authored <unk> and a collection of romantic stories called the Sobagina <unk> ( 1410 ) , written in the form of a narration by the author to his wife . However , according to <unk> , Sobagina <unk> was actually written by King Deva Raya II . The writing contains interesting details on the king 's hunting expeditions and on the professional hunters who accompanied him . In 1525 , <unk> Kavi , a feudatory prince wrote on local history , published a eulogy of prince Ramanatha ( also called Kumara Rama ) titled Ramanatha Charite ( or Kumara Rama Sangatya ) in the sangatya metre . The poem is about the prince of Kampili and his heroics at the dawn of the Muslim invasion into southern India . This work combines folk and epic literature . The protagonist rejects the advances of his stepmother , only to be condemned to death . He is rescued by a minister , but eventually achieves martyrdom fighting Muslim invaders at the capital . 
 In 1567 , Jain ascetic <unk> of Mysore translated from Sanskrit a biographic poem of a Hoysala lady <unk> in <unk> Charite . The writing goes into detail about a city ( believed to be Vijayanagara , the royal capital ) , discussing its shops , guilds and businesses . The text describes the rigid caste @-@ based human settlements and notes that people involved in mundane duties such as washing , barbering , pot @-@ making and carpentry lived outside the fort walls in streets constructed specifically for them . Salva ( 1550 ) authored two poems called Rasa <unk> and Sharada Vilas . The former is about rasa ( poetical sentiment or flavour ) and the latter , only portions of which have been recovered , is about the <unk> ( suggested meaning ) in poems . <unk> 's <unk> of the 16th century also discusses poetical flavour . In the 16th century , lexicons were written by <unk> ( <unk> ) and <unk> ( <unk> Ratnakara ) . At the turn of the 17th century , <unk> Deva wrote comprehensively on old Kannada grammar . His Karnataka <unk> is modelled on the lines of Sanskrit grammar and is considered an exhaustive work . 
 = = Bhakti literature = = 
 = = = Vaishnava writings = = = 
 Unlike the Veerashaiva movement which preached devotion to the god Shiva with an insistence on a classless society and had its inspiration from the lower classes of society , the haridasa movement started from the higher echelons and preached devotion to the god Vishnu in a more flexible caste @-@ based society , eventually becoming popular among the common people . The beginnings of the haridasa tradition can be traced to the Vaishnava school of Dvaita philosophy pioneered by Madhvacharya . Its influence on Kannada literature in the early 14th century is seen in the earliest known compositions written by Naraharitirtha , a prominent disciple of Madhvacharya . 
 The Vaishnava Bhakti ( devotional ) movement involving well @-@ known haridasas ( devotee saints ) of the 14th through 16th centuries made an indelible imprint on Kannada literature , with the development of a body of literature called Haridasa Sahitya ( " Haridasa literature " ) . This philosophy presented another strong current of devotion , pervading the lives of millions , similar to the effects of the Veerashaiva movement of the 12th century . The haridasas conveyed the message of Madhvacharya through esoteric Sanskrit writings ( written by Vyasa kuta or Vyasa school ) and simple Kannada language compositions , appealing to the common man , in the form of devotional songs ( written by the Dasa Kuta or Dasa school ) . The philosophy of Madhvacharya was spread by eminent disciples such as Naraharitirtha , Jayatirtha , Vyasatirtha , Sripadaraya , Vadirajatirtha , Purandara Dasa , Kanaka Dasa and others . 
 Compositions in the haridasa literature are sub @-@ divided into four types : kirthane , suladi , ugabhoga and <unk> . <unk> are devotional musical compositions with refrains based on raga and tala and celebrate the glory of god . The suladi are tala based , the ugabhoga are melody based while the <unk> are in the form of riddles . Compositions were also modelled on <unk> ( lullaby songs ) and <unk> ( marriage songs ) . A common feature of haridasa compositions are influences from the Hindu epics , the Ramayana , the Mahabharata and Bhagavata . 
 Haridasa poetry , which faded for a century after the death of Naraharitirtha , resurfaced with Sripadaraya , who was for some time the head of the Madhva matha ( monastery of Madhvacharya ) at <unk> ( in modern Kolar district ) . About a hundred of his <unk> have survived , written under the pseudonym " Sriranga <unk> " . Sripadaraya is considered a pioneer of this genre of devotional songs . Sripadaraya 's disciple , Vyasatirtha ( or <unk> ) , is most famous among the latter day Madhva saints . It was he who created the Vyasa kuta and Dasa kuta schools within the Madhva order . He commanded respect from King Krishnadeva Raya , who honoured him with the title <unk> ( family god ) . A poet of merit in Kannada and the author of seminal works in Sanskrit , Vyasatirtha was the guru responsible for shaping the careers of two of Kannada 's greatest saint @-@ poets , Purandara Dasa and Kanaka Dasa . Another prominent name in the age of Dasa ( devotee ) literature is Vadirajatirtha , a contemporary of Purandara Dasa and the author of many works in Kannada and Sanskrit . 
 Purandara Dasa ( 1484 – 1564 ) , a wandering bard who visited Vijayanagara during the reign of King Achyuta Raya , is believed to have composed 475 @,@ 000 songs in the Kannada and Sanskrit languages , although only about 1 @,@ 000 songs are known today . Composed in various ragas , and often ending with a salutation to the Hindu deity Vittala , his compositions presented the essence of the Upanishads and the Puranas in simple yet expressive language . He also devised a system by which the common man could learn Carnatic music , and codified the musical composition forms <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Owing to his contributions in music , Purandara Dasa earned the honorific Karnataka Sangeeta Pitamaha ( " Father of Carnatic Music " ) . 
 Kanaka Dasa ( whose birth name was <unk> Nayaka , 1509 – 1609 ) of <unk> ( in modern Haveri district ) was an ascetic and spiritual seeker , who according to historical accounts came from a family of Kuruba ( shepherds ) or <unk> ( hunters ) . Under the patronage of the Vijayanagara king , he authored such important writings as <unk> ( " River of Delight " , 1550 ) , written in dedication to King Krishnadevaraya , which narrates the story of Krishna in sangatya metre . His other famous writings are <unk> , a work dealing with glory of God Narasimha , <unk> , the story of Nala , which is noted for its narration , and Hari <unk> , a spontaneous writing on devotion in shatpadi metre . The latter writing , which is on <unk> ( morals ) , bhakti ( devotion ) and vairagya ( renunciation ) , continues to be a popular standard book of learning for children . A unique allegorical poem titled <unk> Charitre ( " Story of Rama 's Chosen Grain " ) which exalts ragi over rice was authored by Kanaka Dasa . In this poem , a quarrel arises between ragi , the food grain of the poor , and rice , that of the rich , as to which is superior . Rama decides that ragi is superior because it does not rot when preserved . This is one of the earliest poetic expressions of class struggle in the Kannada language . In addition to these classics , about 240 songs written by Kanaka Dasa are available . 
 For a brief period following the decline of the Vijayanagara Empire , the devotional movement seemed to lose momentum , only to become active again in the 17th century , producing an estimated 300 poets in this genre ; famous among them are Vijaya Dasa ( 1682 – 1755 ) , Gopala Dasa ( 1721 – 1769 ) , Jagannatha Dasa ( 1728 – 1809 ) , <unk> Dasa ( 1750 ) , <unk> <unk> and others . Over time , their devotional songs inspired a form of religious and didactic performing art of the Vaishnava people called the <unk> ( " Stories of Hari " ) . Similar developments were seen among the followers of the Veerashaiva faith , who popularised the <unk> ( " Stories of Shiva " ) . 
 = = = Veerashaiva writings = = = 
 Vachana poetry , developed in reaction to the rigid caste @-@ based Hindu society , attained its peak in popularity among the under @-@ privileged during the 12th century . The Veerashaivas , who wrote this poetry , had risen to influential positions by the Vijayanagara period . Following the Muslim invasions in the early 14th century , Brahmin scholars methodically consolidated writings of Hindu lore . This inspired several Veerashaiva anthologists of the 15th and 16th centuries to collect Shaiva writings and vachana poems , originally written on palm leaf manuscripts . Because of the cryptic nature of the poems , the anthologists added commentaries to them , thereby providing their hidden meaning and esoteric significance . An interesting aspect of this anthological work was the translation of the Shaiva canon into Sanskrit , bringing it into the sphere of the Sanskritic cultural order . 
 Well @-@ known among these anthologies are <unk> <unk> by <unk> <unk> ( 1430 ) , <unk> <unk> by <unk> ( 16th century ) and <unk> <unk> by Siddha Basavaraja ( 1600 ) . The unique <unk> ( the ' mystical zero ' ) was compiled in four versions . The first among them was anthologised by <unk> <unk> ( 1400 ) , who set the pattern for the other three to follow . The poems in this anthology are essentially in the form of dialogues between patron saint Allama Prabhu and famous <unk> ( devotees ) , and was meant to rekindle the revolutionary spirit of the 12th century . <unk> Arya ( 1500 – 1530 ) , Gummalapura Siddhalinga Yati ( 1560 ) and <unk> <unk> ( 1570 ) produced the later versions . 
 Though the writing of vachana poems went into decline after the passing of the Basavanna era in the late 12th century , latter day <unk> such as <unk> <unk> ( or Siddhalinga Yati ) , a noted Shaiva saint and guru of King Virupaksha Raya II , started a revival . He wrote <unk> <unk> ( 1540 ) , a collection of 700 poems . In 1560 , Virakta <unk> made the life of <unk> <unk> the central theme in his writing Siddhesvara Purana . Virakta <unk> , Gummalapura Siddhalinga , Swatantra <unk> ( 1560 ) and <unk> ( 1560 ) are some well @-@ known vachana poets who tried to recreate the glory days of the early poets , though the socio @-@ political expediency did not exist . 
 Mystic literature had a resurgence towards the beginning of the 15th century , in an attempt to synthesise the Veerashaiva and <unk> ( monistic ) philosophies ; this trend continued into the 19th century . Prominent among these mystics was <unk> Shivayogi , by tradition a petty chieftain near the Kollegal region ( modern Mysore district ) turned Shaiva saint , who composed devotional songs collectively known as Kaivalya sahitya ( or Tattva <unk> , literally " songs of the pathway to emancipation " ) . Shivayogi 's songs were reflective , philosophical and concerned with yoga . They were written in almost all the native metres of Kannada language with the exception of shatpadi metre . 
 Shivayogi 's other writings include a scientific encyclopaedia called <unk> , so well regarded that it was translated into Marathi language in 1604 and Sanskrit language in 1652 and again in the 18th century . The writing categorises 1 @,@ 500 topics based on subject and covers a wide array such as poetics , dance and drama , musicology and erotics . His translation of the Shiva Yoga Pradipika from Sanskrit was done to elucidate the Shaiva philosophy and benefit those ignorant of the original language . 
 In the post @-@ Vijayanagara era , the Kaivalya tradition branched three ways . The first consisted of followers of the <unk> Shivayogi school , the second was more elitist and brahminical in nature and followed the writings of <unk> ( 1675 ) , while the third was the branch that kept the vachana tradition alive . Well @-@ known poet @-@ saints from this vachana tradition were Shivayogi 's contemporary <unk> <unk> , whose collection of songs are called the <unk> ; Chidananda <unk> of the 17th century ; and <unk> Shivayogi of the 18th century . So vast is this body of literature that much of it still needs to be studied . 
 = Pepper Martin = 
 Johnny Leonard Roosevelt " Pepper " Martin ( February 29 , 1904 – March 5 , 1965 ) was an American professional baseball player and minor league manager . He was known as the Wild Horse of the Osage because of his daring , aggressive baserunning abilities . Martin played in Major League Baseball as a third baseman and an outfielder for the St. Louis Cardinals during the 1930s and early 1940s . He was best known for his heroics during the 1931 World Series , in which he was the catalyst in a Cardinals ' upset victory over the Philadelphia Athletics . 
 Martin was an integral member of the Cardinals ' teams of the 1930s that became known as the Gashouse Gang for their roguish behavior and practical jokes . Early in his career , he was labeled by some contemporary press reports as the next Ty Cobb because of his spirited , hustling style of play . However , because his headlong attitude on the playing field took a physical toll on his body , he never lived up to those initial expectations . After the end of his playing career , he continued his career in baseball as a successful minor league baseball manager . 
 = = Baseball career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Born in Temple , Oklahoma , Martin moved to Oklahoma City with his parents at the age of six where he grew up playing baseball . He began his professional baseball career at the age of 19 when he signed to play as a shortstop in the Oklahoma State League for a team in Guthrie , Oklahoma . When the league folded in 1924 , his contract was sold to the Greenville Hunters of the East Texas League . In 1925 , he posted a .340 batting average in 98 games for the Hunters . He continued to post batting averages above the .300 mark and in 1927 , he was signed by the St. Louis Cardinals to play for their affiliate , the Houston Buffaloes . He hit for a .306 average in 147 games with Houston , he earned a promotion to the major leagues . 
 After spending five years in the minor leagues , Martin made his major league debut with the Cardinals on April 16 , 1928 at the age of 24 . He posted a .308 batting average in 39 games as a utility player , helping the Cardinals win the National League pennant . Martin made one appearance as a pinch runner in the 1928 World Series , when the Cardinals lost in four straight games to the New York Yankees . Despite his respectable batting average , Martin was sent back to the Houston Buffaloes in January 1929 where he hit for a .298 batting average . The following season , he was promoted to the Rochester Red Wings where his offensive statistics improved with 20 home runs , a .363 batting average and a <unk> slugging percentage , helping the Red Wings win the 1930 International League title . The Red Wings then defeated the Louisville Colonels of the American Association to win the Junior World Series . 
 Martin 's performance earned him a return to the major leagues with the Cardinals in 1931 . When veteran center fielder Taylor Douthit went into a hitting slump , Martin replaced him and played well enough that Cardinals ' president , Branch Rickey , traded Douthit to the Cincinnati Reds in June . Martin impressed observers with his hustle in the outfield as well as on the base paths where he often slid into bases head @-@ first . He ended the year with a .300 batting average along with seven home runs and 75 runs batted in to help the Cardinals clinch the 1931 National League pennant by 13 games over the New York Giants . 
 = = = World Series star = = = 
 The 1931 World Series was a rematch of the previous year 's participants , pitting the Cardinals against the Philadelphia Athletics . Led by Connie Mack , the Athletics had won the previous two World Series and were heavily favored to win for a third consecutive year . They featured a lineup that included five future National Baseball Hall of Fame members in Mickey Cochrane , Jimmie Foxx , Lefty Grove , Waite Hoyt and Al Simmons . 
 In Game 1 held at Sportsman 's Park in St. Louis , Martin had three hits , including a double , a stolen base and drove in one run in a 6 @-@ 2 loss to the ace of the Athletics staff , 31 @-@ game winning pitcher Lefty Grove . Martin proved to be the difference in Game 2 in what was otherwise a tight pitching duel between Bill Hallahan of the Cardinals and George Earnshaw for the Athletics . He scored the first run of the game in the second inning by stretching a single into a double when the ball was mishandled in the outfield , stealing third base , and then scoring on a sacrifice fly . Martin added another run in the seventh inning when he hit a single , stole second base , took third base on a fielder 's choice , and then scored on a squeeze bunt . Those would be the only runs of the game as Hallahan pitched a three @-@ hit shutout to even the series at one win apiece . The series then moved to Shibe Park in Philadelphia for Game 3 , where Martin had two hits , including a double and scored twice in a 5 @-@ 2 Cardinals ' victory over Grove . In Game 4 , he produced the only two hits by the Cardinals as they lost to Earnshaw , 3 @-@ 0 . Martin almost single @-@ handedly provided the offense for the Cardinals in Game 5 , driving home four runs with two singles , a home run and a sacrifice fly , as the Cardinals triumphed 5 @-@ 1 . Although he was held hitless in the final two games of the series , he made an impressive catch to extinguish an Athletics two @-@ run rally in the ninth inning of Game 7 to end the game and clinch the world championship for the Cardinals . 
 He set a then record 12 hits in the series , including four doubles , a home run , five stolen bases and five runs batted in . Martin 's .500 series batting average may have made the difference in the series outcome , as without him the Cardinals batted just .205 as a team . During the series , Martin was asked how he had learned to run so fast ; he replied , " I grew up in Oklahoma , and once you start runnin ' out there there ain 't nothin ' to stop you " . Longtime major league manager , John McGraw , described Martin 's performance as " the greatest individual performance in the history of the World Series . " In December , he was selected as male athlete of the year by the Associated Press . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 Martin experienced an injury @-@ plagued season in 1932 , missing several weeks when he dislocated his shoulder in April and missed a month and a half when he broke a finger in July while sliding into home plate . In August , Cardinals manager Gabby Street converted Martin into a third baseman in an attempt to fill the gap left by the injured Sparky Adams . Martin was not a naturally gifted third baseman , often fielding balls after having stopped them with his chest . He ended the season with a .238 batting average with four home runs and 34 runs batted in as the Cardinals fell to seventh place in the National League . 
 Having rebounded from his injuries , in 1933 Martin was leading the league in hitting with a .363 batting average in the middle of June , earning him a starting role as the third baseman for the National League team in the inaugural Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Game held on July 6 , 1933 . Now hitting as the Cardinals ' leadoff hitter , he finished the season ranked sixth in the league with a career @-@ high .316 average and led the league with 122 runs scored and 26 stolen bases . Martin ranked tenth in the league with a .456 slugging percentage , and he had a career @-@ high .387 on @-@ base percentage along with 36 doubles , 12 triples and eight home runs as the Cardinals improved to a fifth @-@ place finish . He came in fifth place in the voting results for the 1933 National League Most Valuable Player Award . 
 Martin 's batting average dropped to .289 in 1934 , but he once again led the league in stolen bases as the Cardinals rallied from seven games behind the New York Giants in early September to win the National League pennant on the last day of the season . He made an appearance as a relief pitcher on August 19 , allowing one hit in two innings pitched . In a memorable 1934 World Series against the Detroit Tigers , the Cardinals were down 3 games to 2 , before rebounding to win the final two games . The series was highlighted by several rough plays on the base paths that culminated in Game 7 , when Joe Medwick made a rough slide into Tigers ' third baseman Marv Owen . The following inning , outraged Detroit fans pelted Medwick with debris when he assumed his defensive position in the outfield . The disturbance wasn 't quelled until the umpires appealed to Baseball Commissioner Kenesaw Mountain Landis , who had Medwick removed from the game . Martin ended the series with 11 hits for a .355 average , stole two bases and scored eight runs in the series . He experienced difficulties in the field , committing 3 errors in Game 4 and setting a World Series record with four errors overall . While in a St. Louis hospital in December 1934 , for a minor operation on his left arm , Martin insisted that he be entertained by a cowboy musical group that he had hired . He created such a disturbance among the other patients that the hospital staff moved him to an isolated wing . Martin , along with Cardinals teammates such as Leo Durocher , Dizzy Dean and Joe Medwick among others , became known as the 1934 Gashouse Gang due to their boisterous activities on and off the field . He played the guitar in a hillbilly band composed of Cardinals players named The Mudcat Band . 
 Although Martin had a good year offensively in 1935 , he continued to struggle defensively at third base . In the midst of a tight pennant race in July , he committed three costly errors in a loss to the New York Giants , and ended the year with 30 errors . He was hitting for a .333 average by mid @-@ season to earn the starting third baseman 's position in the 1935 All @-@ Star Game . For the season , he hit for a .299 average with nine home runs and 54 runs batted in . In October , Martin underwent surgery again , this time on his right arm . In January 1936 , Branch Rickey asked Martin to curtail his extra @-@ curricular activities . Already well known as a hunting and fishing enthusiast , Martin had taken up the hobby of midget car racing and was also playing in football and basketball games during the winter months . He also became the vice @-@ president and general manager of an Oklahoma City ice hockey team . 
 Martin moved back to the outfield , playing as the Cardinals ' right fielder in 1936 as the Cardinals battled the New York Giants for the National League title before settling for second place . He responded with a good year offensively , hitting for a .309 average with career @-@ highs in home runs ( 11 ) and in runs batted in ( 76 ) . Martin also led the National League in stolen bases with 23 . He continued to hit well , by 1937 although , he was relegated to a part @-@ time role , as his spirited , headlong style of play took its toll on his body . At the beginning of the 1939 season , he was named as the Cardinals ' team captain , taking the job from Leo Durocher who had been traded to the Brooklyn Dodgers . He experienced a resurgence , leading the team with a .340 batting average in June before a sprained wrist put him out of action for two weeks . He ended the season with a .306 batting average in 88 games , helping the Cardinals to finish second in the National League . Martin hit for a respectable .316 average in 1940 before the Cardinals named him as the player @-@ manager of the Sacramento Solons of the Pacific Coast League in October . 
 Martin led Sacramento to a second @-@ place finish in 1941 before leading them to their first Pacific Coast League championship in 38 years in 1942 . He then became a player @-@ manager for the Rochester Red Wings in 1943 . When professional baseball experienced a shortage of players during World War II , Martin returned to the major leagues in 1944 with the Cardinals at the age of 40 . In 40 games with the Cardinals , he posted a .279 batting average and an impressive .386 on @-@ base percentage to help the Cardinals clinch the 1944 National League pennant . Martin did not appear in the 1944 World Series , playing his final major league game on October 1 , 1944 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 In a 13 @-@ year major league career , Martin played in 1 @,@ 189 games , accumulating 1 @,@ 227 hits in 4 @,@ 117 at bats for a .298 career batting average along with a .443 slugging percentage , 59 home runs , 501 runs batted in , 146 stolen bases and an on @-@ base percentage of .358 . He retired with a .973 career fielding percentage in 613 games as an outfielder and a .927 fielding percentage in 429 games as a third baseman . A four @-@ time All @-@ Star , Martin 's World Series career batting average of <unk> is still a series record , and he is tied for 10th with seven World Series stolen bases . He led the National League three times in stolen bases and once in runs scored . On May 5 , 1933 , Martin hit for the cycle in a game against the Philadelphia Phillies at the Baker Bowl . 
 = = Managing career = = 
 After the end of his major league career , Martin returned to the minor leagues , serving as a player @-@ manager with the San Diego Padres of the Pacific Coast League in 1945 and 1946 before becoming the player @-@ manager for the Greenville Spinners of the South Atlantic League in 1947 . His fiery , competitive nature was still evident in July 1945 when it was reported that he had punched one of his players for not performing to his standards . While managing the Miami Sun Sox of the Florida International League in 1949 , he was fined and suspended for the remainder of the season for choking an umpire . In August 1951 , he made news again when he was arrested after a Sun Sox game when he went into the stands to punch a spectator in Lakeland , Florida . 
 When the Sun Sox released him , Martin was hired to manage the Miami Beach Flamingos of the Florida International League in 1952 . Despite leading them to a 103 @-@ 49 record , the <unk> finished the season one game behind his former team , the Sun Sox . In 1953 , he became the manager of the Fort Lauderdale Lions and led them to the Florida International League title . After spending the 1954 season as the manager for the Portsmouth <unk> , Martin was named as a coach for the Chicago Cubs in September 1955 . Stan Hack was fired as the Cubs manager when they finished in last place in the 1956 season , and the new Cubs manager , Bob <unk> , asked for Martin 's resignation along with the rest of the coaching staff . Martin returned to the minor leagues once again where he became a player @-@ coach for the Tulsa Oilers , playing his final game at the age of 54 . He took his final field assignment as the manager of the Miami Marlins in 1959 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Before his death , he served briefly as the athletic director of the Oklahoma State Penitentiary at McAlester , Oklahoma . Martin died on March 5 , 1965 , after suffering a heart attack . His wife , Ruby , survived him by over four decades , dying just after her 99th birthday in 2009 . Martin was inducted into the Oklahoma Sports Hall of Fame in 1992 . 
 = Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood = 
 Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood ( traditional Chinese : <unk> ; simplified Chinese : <unk> , also known as Robin @-@ B @-@ Hood ) is a 2006 Hong Kong action comedy film written , produced and directed by Benny Chan , and starring Jackie Chan , Louis Koo , Yuen Biao and Michael Hui . The film was produced with a budget of HK $ 130 million ( US $ 16 @.@ 8 million ) and filmed between December 2005 and January 2006 . Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood is the first film in over 30 years in which Jackie Chan plays an anti @-@ hero . 
 Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood tells the story of a kidnapping gone wrong in Hong Kong ; a trio of burglars consisting of Thongs ( Chan ) , Octopus ( Koo ) and the Landlord ( Hui ) kidnap a baby from a wealthy family on behalf of triads . With the Landlord arrested , Thongs and Octopus take care of the baby for a short time , developing strong bonds with him . Reluctant to hand the baby over , the two are forced to protect him from the triads who hired them in the first place . 
 Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood was released in Hong Kong , China and Southeast Asia on 29 September 2006 based in Hong Kong to generally positive reviews . The film topped the Chinese box office in October 2006 and despite not being given a release in most European and North American countries , it grossed over US $ 20 million worldwide . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film begins showing Thongs and Octopus evading security guards in a hospital , having stolen money and cancer medication from the safe . Meanwhile , a newborn baby to the wealthy Lee family is snatched by Max , the mother 's ex @-@ boyfriend , prompting the security guards give chase , ignoring the burglars , and corner Max on an escalator . Following a violent struggle , Max and the baby fall over the side — the baby is caught by Thongs , while Max plummets to his death . While the guards are distracted , Thongs and Octopus leave in the Landlord 's minivan . 
 A few months later , the Landlord finds his flat burgled , his life savings gone . He receives a phone call from his middleman Uncle Seven , offering him a job to kidnap baby Lee on behalf of a triad boss , who claims the baby is his grandson . Enticed by the HK $ 7 million reward , Thongs and Octopus accept the job without knowing its objectives , finding out only after the Landlord has fled the Lees ' mansion with the baby . Disgusted by the idea of kidnapping a baby , Thongs threatens to return him , but relents after the Landlord tells him of his predicament . En route to their rendezvous point in Sai Kung , the trio encounter a police road block which the Landlord attempts to outrun , only to crash his van down a hill . As the police close in on them , the stuck Landlord instructs Thongs and Octopus to leave with the baby . While in custody for reckless driving , the Landlord learns of the baby 's value through the news . He phones Thongs , instructing him not to hand the baby over to anyone prior to his release so he can jack up the price . Over the next few days , Thongs and Octopus take care of the baby , developing a strong bond with him . The two begin to regret their vices : Thongs resists the urge to gamble , while Octopus feels sorry for cheating on his wife . Meanwhile , both the triads and the police are after the baby . The triad boss , enraged by the non @-@ delivery of his " grandson " , sends his men to retrieve the baby from Thongs ' flat . Confronted by both the triads and Police Inspector Mok , Thongs and Octopus go into hiding with the baby . 
 Shortly after his release , the Landlord is brought to the triad boss , who increases his offer to HK $ 30 million for the baby . He finds Thongs and Octopus at the hospital , where the baby is being treated for fever . The Landlord informs the two of the triads ' latest offer , but Thongs and Octopus are more concerned about the baby 's welfare than the cash . However , the two agree to bring the baby to the triad boss ' mansion , where the Landlord will meet them with the rest of the money . They reach the triad boss ' mansion and hand over the baby reluctantly . As the trio are about to leave , they hear the baby crying for them as a blood sample is taken from his arm . Thongs and Octopus experience a flashback of the days they spent with the baby . Overcome by their feelings , they fight their way into the triad boss ' private amusement park to recover the baby while the Landlord leaves with the money . Thongs almost manages to escape with the baby , but is forced to surrender when the triads threaten to hurl Octopus to his death . 
 Thongs and Octopus are taken to the triad boss , who insists the baby is his grandson , only to be proven wrong by the blood test . Driven mad , the boss places the baby in a deep freeze room next to Max 's corpse so the baby can be with his son , prompting Thongs and Octopus to fight for the baby . The two end up trapped in the room with two minions , but are saved when Inspector Mok arrives with the Landlord , who swiftly cracks the lock to the room . Thongs and Octopus run to the garage with the comatose baby , where Thongs attempts to revive him with a makeshift defibrillator powered by a car battery from a <unk> Zonda . Despite his efforts , the baby does not come to and is driven off in an ambulance , where his heart is found to be beating weakly . Imprisoned for kidnapping , Thongs , Octopus and the Landlord volunteer for a mock capital punishment demonstration during an open day , using the opportunity to apologise to their loved ones . After the demonstration , Inspector Mok informs the three that their sentences have been further reduced by the Department of Justice . Thongs , Octopus , and the Landlord then see the baby alive and well with his parents . As a token of appreciation for saving the baby 's life , Thongs , Octopus and the Landlord are offered jobs by the Lee family as a bodyguard , chauffeur and head of security respectively . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Jackie Chan ( <unk> ) as Thongs ( <unk> ) : A professional burglar who has stolen a variety of expensive goods . A compulsive gambler , he has fallen out with his family over his lifestyle , resulting in his father having a stroke . Despite his vices , Thongs maintains a sense of ethics , making him reluctant to kidnap the baby . The name " Thongs " refers to his flip @-@ flop footwear . 
 Louis Koo ( <unk> ) as Octopus ( <unk> ) : A fellow burglar working with Thongs . He uses the money he steals to buy expensive cars and to court a rich girl . He neglects his pregnant wife ( played by Charlene Choi ( <unk> ) , forcing her into a series of dead end jobs to make ends meet . 
 Michael Hui ( <unk> ) as The Landlord ( <unk> ) : The mentor of Thongs and Octopus for over 20 years . Unlike his trainees , the Landlord does not spend his share of the loot , instead stashing it in a safe in his home . 
 Matthew Medvedev as Matthew the Baby : The infant son of the wealthy Lee family , kidnapped by Thongs , Octopus and the Landlord on behalf of a triad boss . 
 Yuen Biao ( <unk> ) as Inspector Steve Mok ( <unk> ) : The policeman in charge of the case involving the baby 's disappearance . 
 Teresa Carpio as The Landlady ( <unk> ) : The Landlord 's wife . Driven mad by the death of her only son many years earlier , the Landlady carries a doll of a baby boy with her at all times . 
 Gao Yuanyuan ( <unk> ) as Melody : A student nurse from the Peking University , who works as a part @-@ time childcare consultant , teaching Thongs and Octopus how to take care of the baby , and later becomes Thong 's love interest . 
 Terence Yin ( <unk> ) as Max : The former boyfriend of the baby 's mother who claims the baby as his . He dies from a fall following a struggle for the baby in a hospital soon after it is born . 
 Chen <unk> ( <unk> ) as The Triad boss : Having lost his only son Max , the triad boss will stop at nothing to capture the baby . 
 Ken Lo ( <unk> ) and Hayama Go ( <unk> ) as <unk> and Tokyo Joe : Two high @-@ ranking minions of the triad gang . 
 Daniel Wu as <unk> Daniel ( cameo appearance ) 
 Nicholas Tse as <unk> Nicholas ( cameo appearance ) 
 = = = Jackie Chan stunt team = = = 
 Chan Man @-@ ching 
 Nicky Li 
 Ken Lo 
 Wu Gang 
 He Jun 
 Park Hyun Jin 
 Lee In <unk> 
 Han Kwan Hua 
 = = Production = = 
 Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood was a joint production from JCE Movies Limited , a company set up by Jackie Chan in 2003 , and <unk> Brothers Film & Taihe Investment Company , distributors of films such as Warriors of Heaven and Earth , The Banquet and <unk> : Mountain Patrol . Chan has starred in over 50 action films , and has intimated in recent years that he has grown tired of being typecast as the " nice guy " . The film is notable as the first in over 30 years , in which he plays a negative character — a criminal and compulsive gambler . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Jackie Chan contacted Benny Chan shortly after the release of New Police Story to discuss plans for a new action film . Chan stated that he did not want to play the typical nice guy role that has been the staple of his previous films . Eventually , Benny Chan and scriptwriter Alan Yuen came up with a daring idea : Chan will play Thongs , a petty criminal who has fallen out with his family over his gambling habit . Benny Chan had originally intended for Jackie to play a full @-@ fledged villain , who " hits women and burns people with cigarettes " . However , the script was toned down to appease the Chinese censors , who found the character to be too evil . Nevertheless , for only the third time in his acting career , Chan plays a character who is sentenced to prison . 
 Chan co @-@ wrote the film and designed the action sequences , whilst director Benny Chan wrote the film 's dramatic elements , completing the script by October 2005 . Two additional protagonists were designed as Thongs ' partners in crime , with the intention of increasing the comedic value of the film through their interactions . The film 's Chinese title is Bo Bui Gai Wak ( Cantonese : <unk> , literally Project BB , with " BB " being a homophone for " Baby " ) , a reference to Chan 's award winning 1983 film Project A ( Cantonese : A Gai Wak , <unk> ) . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The cast of Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood includes actors ranging from newcomer Gao Yuanyuan to veteran actor Chen <unk> . Daniel Wu and Nicholas Tse , stars of New Police Story , make cameo appearances as homosexual security van drivers during a car chase in the film . 
 Octopus , Thong 's partner in crime , is played by Louis Koo , an award winning actor with past appearances including the TVB drama series Detective Investigation Files IV and the films Election and Election 2 . Although Koo co @-@ starred with Jackie Chan , a number of action scenes involving his character were shot with a stunt double . In addition , Koo was the baby 's favourite on set — Whenever the baby cried , Koo was always the first to cheer him up . 
 The Landlord , the leader of Thongs and Octopus , is played by Michael Hui , a Hong Kong Film Award @-@ winning comedic actor who starred in various box office hits from 1970s to 1990s before emigrating to Canada shortly before the handover of Hong Kong . Hui was chosen for the part because he is the ideal actor to play a character who persuades others to do bad things . The producers had originally intended Hui to fight along with Chan and Koo , however , it was eventually decided that Hui would simply act as the brains of the gang . 
 Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood features a collaboration between Jackie Chan and Yuen Biao . The pair , along with Sammo Hung , were Peking Opera School classmates and co @-@ starred in a number of action comedy films in the 1980s , including Project A , Wheels on Meals , and the Lucky Stars trilogy . Chan had originally intended to co @-@ star with both Yuen and Hung , reuniting the trio for the first time since 1988 film Dragons Forever . However , Hung declined due to a scheduling conflicts . Yuen Biao plays the role of Police Inspector Steve Mok , assigned to investigate the baby 's disappearance . Some of Yuen 's past antics were revisited in Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood , including a fight in which he tried in vain to handcuff Chan 's character . 
 Over 100 auditions were held before the suitable baby was found to star in the film . Benny Chan chose Matthew Medvedev , a one @-@ year @-@ old infant of Chinese and Colombian descent . Medvedev , known as Baby Matthew , was literally recruited off the street when an assistant director spotted him with his parents on the MTR . Although his family was simply visiting Hong Kong , they agreed to stay and let Matthew appear in Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood is the third Jackie Chan film directed by Benny Chan , following Who Am I ? and New Police Story . Filming took place in Hong Kong between December 2005 and April 2006 with a budget of HK $ 16 @.@ 8 million . Filming locations included Central , Sai Kung , Sha Tin , Hong Kong Ocean Park , <unk> , Tai Po Waterfront Park and Victoria Prison . 
 Benny Chan described the filming process as some of the darkest days of his career , explaining that the baby was a factor beyond his control , and could not work more than eight hours a day . Whenever a scene involving the baby was shot , the crew members had to be silent , communicating in sign language . Benny Chan stated it took time , patience , and money to guide the baby through each shot , and numerous retakes were required due to the baby 's constant crying and napping . As a result , production went over budget . Special methods were sometimes used to coax the baby into co @-@ operation . One scene required the baby to suckle Chan 's nipple . The baby was initially hesitant , but relented after the crew brushed a large amount of honey onto the nipple . 
 Jackie Chan was the stunt director of Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood , having choreographed all the stunts with the Jackie Chan Stunt Team . He continued his tradition of performing his own stunts in the film , for example , jumping between several air @-@ conditioners on the outer wall of a tall building to reach the ground . Several scenes required Chan to co @-@ ordinate his stunts with the baby , including a car chase around the Sha Tin industrial area , in which he managed to snatch the baby away seconds before a car crashed into him ; and a scene in Ocean Park in which he climbed on the underside of a roller coaster with the baby in hand . Chan suffered minor injuries attempting stunts in the film , having been kicked in the chest by a stuntman wearing the wrong boots and fallen off a quad bike , while attempting to perform a wheelie . Chan 's combat choreography included the use of improvised weapons in combat ; when he fought a pair of skilled henchmen in a deep freeze room , he defeated them by spraying them with milk and then using a large fan to blast them with cold air . 
 = = Releases = = 
 Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood had its world premiere at the Venice Film Festival on 8 September 2006 . After the film 's premiere at the Venice Film Festival , several scenes highlighting the personal relationships between characters were deleted from Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood prior to its release to the general public . Benny Chan explains that including too many dramatic scenes may distract the audience from the plot . The uncut version of Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood is included in the DVD release as the " Extended Version " feature . 
 The cut version of the film was released simultaneously in Hong Kong , China , Singapore , Malaysia and other Southeast Asian countries on 29 September . Afterwards , Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood was released in Japan on 7 April 2007 . Greece remains the only European country in which Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood was released , on 13 February 2007 . The film is rated IIA in Hong Kong ( unsuitable for children ) , G in Singapore and U in Malaysia . 
 The Japanese title of Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood is <unk> ( <unk> BB ) , literally Project BB , the name initially proposed for the film . In Greece , the film is known as <unk> <unk> ( transliteration : <unk> <unk> ) , meaning <unk> Frauds . In the United States , the film is known as Robin @-@ B @-@ Hood . 
 = = = DVD = = = 
 The first pressing of the DVD was released in Hong Kong in November 2006 on Region 0 . This has since been discontinued and the subsequent standard and limited edition releases were on Region 3 . All Hong Kong versions contain two discs : a movie disc and an extras disc . The movie disc features both the cinematic and uncut versions of the film , along with a commentary track by Benny Chan . The extras disc contains a " behind @-@ the @-@ scenes " video , the post @-@ production press conference , a collection of deleted scenes and the music video of the theme song . 
 The limited edition DVD is housed in a box @-@ file style box and contains various pieces of merchandise including branded sandals and door signs . An even more limited release of 5000 units was briefly available , and handed out at various film festivals . This edition contained a crystal dummy , an imitation bank note and a branded 2007 calendar in addition to the merchandise in the other limited edition release . 
 The DVD was later released in other East Asian countries , including China ( Region 6 ) , Japan ( Region 2 ) , South Korea , Thailand and Malaysia ( Region 3 ) . On 26 December 2007 , the DVD was released in the US ( Region 1 ) by Dragon Dynasty in a " two @-@ disc ultimate edition " , which contains much of the same extras as the Hong Kong releases , including the commentary by Benny Chan , though with US trailers replacing the domestic ones . However , the runtime for this release is 126 : 28 , which is somewhere between the theatrical cut ( 121 : 46 ) and the director 's cut ( 135 : 11 ) on the Hong Kong releases . 
 On 24 May 2010 , DVD was released by Cine Asia in a two @-@ disc ultimate edition at the United Kingdom in Region 2 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood was generally well received by critics . Jay Weissberg of Variety described the film as " a mildly fun ride that banked on Jackie 's tried @-@ and @-@ true comic charm in a standard baby kidnapping farce enlivened by just enough action sequences to keep hoary diaper scenes from soiling the playpen " . Credit was given to the stunt choreography and the acting partnership of Jackie Chan and Louis Koo , although some reviewers were disappointed about the absence of Sammo Hung . 
 The plot of Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood received mixed reviews : The Chinese newspaper Xiao Xiang Chen Bao found it concise , hilarious and touching , whereas Jay Weissberg criticised it for being unoriginal . In addition , Felix Cheong of Channel <unk> found the subplots involving the antagonists ' families redundant , detracting from the main story and making the film " tediously long " . However , Chan was praised for his decision to play a darker character in Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood . Andrew Sun of South China Morning Post stated that " one of the best things Chan can do for his flagging movie career is to play a heavy — a nasty , scum @-@ of @-@ the @-@ earth antagonist , since you do not always have to play a hero to be a hero . " Sun emphasised the need for Chan to show flexibility in his roles , citing a number of actors that have thrived by playing the occasional villain . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood grossed HK $ 1 @.@ 2 million the day it was released in Hong Kong . In China , the film topped the box office during the four @-@ day National Day holiday weekend , grossing ¥ 8 @.@ 9 million . It went on to top the Chinese box office in October with box office figures exceeding ¥ 90 million . Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood performed well in Southeast Asia , grossing US $ 404 @,@ 000 in Singapore , US $ 400 @,@ 000 in Malaysia and US $ 604 @,@ 000 in Thailand during its first four days . In total , Rob @-@ B @-@ Hood had a worldwide gross of US $ 20 @,@ 434 @,@ 179 despite not being released in North America and most of Europe . 
 = Landkreuzer P. 1000 Ratte = 
 The Landkreuzer P. 1000 " Ratte " ( English : Land Cruiser P. 1000 " Rat " ) was a design for a super @-@ heavy tank for use by Nazi Germany during World War II , proposed by Krupp director Edward Grotte in June 1942 , who had already named it " Landkreuzer " . Submitted designs and drawings of the tank went under the names OKH Auftrag Nr. 30404 and E @-@ 30404 / 1 , which were presented in December 1942 . The tank was planned to be 1000 metric tonnes , being far heavier than the Panzer VIII " Maus " , the heaviest tank ever built ( weighing 188 tonnes ) . The project gained the approval of Adolf Hitler , who had expressed interest in the development of the tank . The project was canceled by Albert Speer in early 1943 , with no prototype tank ever built . 
 = = Development = = 
 The development history of the Ratte originated with a 1941 strategic study of Soviet heavy tanks conducted by Krupp , the study also giving birth to the Panzer VIII Maus super @-@ heavy tank . The study led to a suggestion from Krupp 's director ( Grotte ) , a special officer for submarine construction , who , on 23 June 1942 , proposed to Hitler a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ tonne tank which he named " Landkreuzer " . It was to be armed with naval artillery and armored with 25 centimetres ( 10 in ) of hardened steel , so heavy that only similar weapons could hope to affect it . 
 Hitler became enamored with Grotte 's concept and ordered Krupp to begin development of it in 1942 . As of December 29 , 1942 a few preliminary drawings had been completed , by which time the concept had been named " Ratte " ( Rat ) by Hitler himself . These submitted designs went under the titles OKH Auftrag Nr. 30404 and E @-@ 30404 / 1 . Albert Speer saw no reasonable use of the tank and canceled the project in 1943 before any prototype could be manufactured , although this did lead to the concept of the Landkreuzer P. 1500 Monster self @-@ propelled siege gun , which would have been heavier than the Ratte . The general idea for such a big tank was best summed up by Heinz Guderian , saying that : " Hitler 's fantasies sometimes shift into the gigantic " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Ratte is known for its enormous size : it would have weighed 1 @,@ 000 tonnes , five times the weight of the Panzer VIII Maus . The divided weight of the Ratte includes 300 tonnes of armament ( the total weight of the guns themselves are 100 tonnes , so turret armour would have weighed 200 tonnes ) , 200 tonnes of armour and frame and 100 tonnes of track and automotive components , while remaining weight would be distributed to miscellaneous features . It was planned to be 35 m ( 115 ft ) long ( 39 metres ( 128 ft ) when including naval guns ) , 11 m ( 36 ft ) high and 14 m ( 46 ft ) wide . To compensate for its immense weight , the Ratte would have been equipped with three 1 @.@ 2 m ( 3 ft 11 in ) wide and 21 m ( 69 ft ) long treads on each side with a total tread width of 7 @.@ 2 m ( 23 ft 7 in ) . This would help stability and weight distribution , but the vehicle 's sheer mass would have destroyed roads and rendered bridge crossings next to impossible . It was expected that its height , and its ground clearance of 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) , would have allowed it to ford most rivers with relative ease . 
 Planned propulsion was by two MAN <unk> / 44 24 @-@ cylinder marine diesel engines of 6 @,@ 300 kW ( 8 @,@ 400 hp ) each ( as used in U @-@ boats ) or eight Daimler @-@ Benz MB 501 20 @-@ cylinder marine diesel engines of 1 @,@ 500 kW ( 2 @,@ 000 hp ) each ( as used in E @-@ boats ) to achieve the 12 @,@ 000 kW ( 16 @,@ 000 hp ) needed to move this tank . The engines were to be provided with snorkels , also like those used by German submarines . The snorkels were designed to provide a way for oxygen to reach the engine , even during amphibious operations passing through deep water . 
 The Ratte 's primary weapon would have been a dual 280 mm SK C / 28 gun turret . This was the same turret that was used on the German capital ship Gneisenau but modified by removing one of the guns and its associated loading mechanism . Removing the third gun allowed extra accommodation of ammunition , which on ships is stored in the hull and later on sent to the turret through an ammunition elevator . This reduced the total weight of the tank by 50 tonnes . The guns used for the Ratte would have fired ammunition developed for other naval guns . It also included armour @-@ piercing rounds with 8 @.@ 1 kg ( 18 lb ) of explosive filler , and high @-@ explosive rounds with 17 @.@ 1 kg ( 38 lb ) of explosive filler . 
 Further armament was to consist of a 128 mm anti @-@ tank gun of the type used in the Jagdtiger or Maus , two 15 mm Mauser MG 151 / 15 autocannons , and eight 20 mm Flak 38 anti @-@ aircraft guns , probably with at least four of them as a Flakvierling quad mount . The 128 mm anti @-@ tank gun 's precise location on the Ratte is a point of contention among historians , most believing that it would have been mounted within the primary turret , with some others thinking a smaller secondary turret at the rear of the Ratte more logical . Some concept drawings exist to suggest a flexible mount on the glacis plate . The tank was to be provided with a vehicle bay that could hold two BMW R12 motorcycles for scouting , and several smaller storage rooms , a compact infirmary area , and a self @-@ contained lavatory system . 
 = = Issues = = 
 Its large size and weight would have rendered the tank unable to cross bridges at the risk of collapsing them , and travelling on roads would soon destroy them . Its top intended speed was 40 kilometres per hour , resulting in a slow , highly visible tank , vulnerable to air bombardment and artillery fire , despite having heavy armour . Issues with transporting the vehicle to the battlefield were also prominent . No railway or train car could bear the weight and the width would be too large for any railway or tunnel to accommodate . 
 = 100 @,@ 000 @-@ year problem = 
 The 100 @,@ 000 @-@ year problem ( " 100 ky problem " , " 100 ka problem " ) of the Milankovitch theory of orbital forcing refers to a discrepancy between the reconstructed geologic temperature record and the reconstructed amount of incoming solar radiation , or insolation over the past 800 @,@ 000 years . Due to variations in the Earth 's orbit , the amount of insolation varies with periods of around 21 @,@ 000 , 40 @,@ 000 , 100 @,@ 000 , and 400 @,@ 000 years ( Milankovitch cycles ) . Variations in the amount of incident solar energy drive changes in the climate of the Earth , and are recognised as a key factor in the timing of initiation and termination of glaciations . 
 While there is a Milankovitch cycle in the range of 100 @,@ 000 years , related to Earth 's orbital eccentricity , its contribution to variation in insolation is much smaller than those of precession and obliquity . The 100 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ problem refers to the lack of an obvious explanation for the periodicity of ice ages at roughly 100 @,@ 000 years for the past million years , but not before , when the dominant periodicity corresponded to 41 @,@ 000 years . The unexplained transition between the two periodicity regimes is known as the mid @-@ Pleistocene transition , dated to some 800 @,@ 000 years ago . 
 The related " 400 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ problem " refers to the absence of a 400 @,@ 000 @-@ year periodicity due to orbital eccentricity in the geological temperature record over the past 1 @.@ 2 million years . 
 = = Recognition of the 100 @,@ 000 @-@ year cycle = = 
 The geologic temperature record can be reconstructed from sedimentary evidence . Perhaps the most useful indicator of past climate is the fractionation of oxygen isotopes , denoted δ18O . This fractionation is controlled mainly by the amount of water locked up in ice and the absolute temperature of the planet , and has allowed a timescale of marine isotope stages to be constructed . 
 By the late 1990s , δ18O records of air ( in the Vostok ice core ) and marine sediments was available and was compared with estimates of insolation , which should affect both temperature and ice volume . As described by Shackleton ( 2000 ) , the deep @-@ sea sediment record of δ18O " is dominated by a 100 @,@ 000 @-@ year <unk> that is universally interpreted as the main ice @-@ age rhythm " . Shackleton ( 2000 ) adjusted the time scale of the Vostok ice core δ18O record to fit the assumed orbital forcing and used spectral analysis to identify and subtract the component of the record that in this interpretation could be attributed to a linear ( directly proportional ) response to the orbital forcing . The residual signal ( the remainder ) , when compared with the residual from a similarly retuned marine core isotope record , was used to estimate the proportion of the signal that was attributable to ice volume , with the rest ( having attempted to allow for the Dole effect ) being attributed to temperature changes in the deep water . 
 The 100 @,@ 000 @-@ year component of ice volume variation was found to match sea level records based on coral age determinations , and to lag orbital eccentricity by several thousand years , as would be expected if orbital eccentricity were the pacing mechanism . Strong non @-@ linear " jumps " in the record appear at <unk> , although the 100 @,@ 000 @-@ year periodicity was not the strongest periodicity in this " pure " ice volume record . 
 The separate deep sea temperature record was found to vary directly in phase with orbital eccentricity , as did Antarctic temperature and CO2 ; so eccentricity appears to exert a geologically immediate effect on air temperatures , deep sea temperatures , and atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations . Shackleton ( 2000 ) concluded : " The effect of orbital eccentricity probably enters the paleoclimatic record through an influence on the concentration of atmospheric CO2 " . 
 <unk> and Rial ( 2001 ) identified the 100 ka cycle as one of five main challenges met by the Milankovitch model of orbital forcing of the ice ages . 
 = = Hypotheses to explain the problem = = 
 As the 100 @,@ 000 @-@ year periodicity only dominates the climate of the past million years , there is insufficient information to separate the component frequencies of eccentricity using spectral analysis , making the reliable detection of significant longer @-@ term trends more difficult , although the spectral analysis of much longer <unk> records , such as the <unk> and <unk> stack of marine cores and James <unk> ' composite isotopic record , helps to put the last million years in longer term context . Hence there is still no clear proof of the mechanism responsible for the 100ka periodicity — but there are several credible hypotheses . 
 = = = Climatic resonance = = = 
 The mechanism may be internal to the Earth system . The Earth 's climate system may have a natural resonance frequency of 100ka ; that is to say , feedback processes within the climate automatically produce a 100ka effect , much as a bell naturally rings at a certain pitch . Opponents to this claim point out that the resonance would have to have developed 1 million years ago , as a 100ka periodicity was weak to non @-@ existent for the preceding 2 million years . This is feasible — continental drift and sea floor spreading rate change have been postulated as possible causes of such a change . Free oscillations of components of the Earth system have been considered as a cause , but too few Earth systems have a thermal inertia on a thousand @-@ year timescale for any long @-@ term changes to accumulate . The 100 @,@ 000 year problem has been scrutinized by José A. Rial , <unk> Oh and Elizabeth <unk> who find that master @-@ slave synchronization between the climate systems natural frequencies and the eccentricity forcing started the <unk> ice ages of the late Pleistocene and explain their large amplitude . 
 = = = Orbital inclination = = = 
 Orbital inclination has a 100ka periodicity , while eccentricity 's 95 and <unk> periods could inter @-@ react to give a <unk> effect . While it is possible that the less significant , and originally overlooked , inclination variability has a deep effect on climate , the eccentricity only modifies insolation by a small amount : 1 – 2 % of the shift caused by the 21 @,@ 000 @-@ year precession and 41 @,@ 000 @-@ year obliquity cycles . Such a big impact from inclination would therefore be disproportionate in comparison to other cycles . One possible mechanism suggested to account for this was the passage of Earth through regions of cosmic dust . Our eccentric orbit would take us through dusty clouds in space , which would act to occlude some of the incoming radiation , shadowing the Earth . In such a scenario , the abundance of the isotope 3He , produced by solar rays splitting gases in the upper atmosphere , would be expected to decrease — and initial investigations did indeed find such a drop in 3He abundance . But the idea of an inclination effect has been deemed unnecessary ( Rial 1999 ) . However , there is still the possibility that the 100ka eccentricity cycle acts as a " pacemaker " to the system , amplifying the effect of precession and obliquity cycles at key moments , pushing the system out of a locally stable state and triggering a swift melting phase , by a small perturbation . 
 = = = Precession cycles = = = 
 A similar suggestion holds the 21 @,@ 636 @-@ year precession cycles solely responsible . Ice ages are characterized by the slow buildup of ice volume , followed by relatively swift melting phases . It is possible that ice built up over several precession cycles , only melting after four or five such cycles . 
 = = = Solar Luminosity <unk> = = = 
 A mechanism that may account for periodic fluctuations in solar luminosity has also been proposed as an explanation . Diffusion waves occurring within the sun can be modeled in such a way that they explain the observed climatic shifts on earth . However , the <unk> signal again appears to contradict this finding . 
 = = = Land vs. oceanic photosynthesis = = = 
 The Dole effect describes trends in δ18O arising from trends in the relative importance of land @-@ dwelling and oceanic photosynthesizers . Such a variation is a plausible cause of the phenomenon . 
 = = = Ongoing research = = = 
 The recovery of higher @-@ resolution ice cores spanning more of the past 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 years by the ongoing <unk> project may help to shed more light on the matter . A new , high @-@ precision dating method developed by the team allows better correlation of the various factors involved and puts the ice core chronologies on a stronger temporal footing , endorsing the traditional Milankovitch hypothesis , that climate variations are controlled by insolation in the northern hemisphere . The new chronology is inconsistent with the " inclination " theory of the 100 @,@ 000 @-@ year cycle . The establishment of leads and lags against different orbital forcing components with this method — which uses the direct insolation control over nitrogen @-@ oxygen ratios in ice core bubbles — is in principle a great improvement in the temporal resolution of these records and another significant validation of the Milankovitch hypothesis . An international climate modelling exercise ( Abe @-@ <unk> et al . , Nature , 2013 ) demonstrated that climate models can replicate the 100 @,@ 000 year <unk> given the orbital forcing and carbon dioxide levels of the late Pleistocene . The isostatic history of ice sheets was implicated in mediating the 100 @,@ 000 year response to the orbital forcing . Larger ice sheets are lower in elevation because they depress the continental crust upon which they sit , and are therefore more vulnerable to melting . 
 = S. A. Andrée 's Arctic Balloon Expedition of 1897 = 
 S. A. Andrée 's Arctic balloon expedition of 1897 was an effort to reach the North Pole in which all three expedition members perished . S. A. Andrée ( 1854 – 97 ) , the first Swedish balloonist , proposed a voyage by hydrogen balloon from Svalbard to either Russia or Canada , which was to pass , with luck , straight over the North Pole on the way . The scheme was received with patriotic enthusiasm in Sweden , a northern nation that had fallen behind in the race for the North Pole . 
 Andrée ignored many early signs of the dangers associated with his balloon plan . Being able to steer the balloon to some extent was essential for a safe journey , and there was plenty of evidence that the drag @-@ rope steering technique he had invented was ineffective ; yet he staked the fate of the expedition on drag ropes . Worse , the polar balloon <unk> ( The Eagle ) was delivered directly to Svalbard from its manufacturer in Paris without being tested ; when measurements showed it to be leaking more than expected , Andrée refused to acknowledge the alarming implications of this . Most modern students of the expedition see Andrée 's optimism , faith in the power of technology , and disregard for the forces of nature as the main factors in the series of events that led to his death and those of his two companions Nils Strindberg ( 1872 – 97 ) and Knut Frænkel ( 1870 – 97 ) . 
 After Andrée , Strindberg , and Frænkel lifted off from Svalbard in July 1897 , the balloon lost hydrogen quickly and crashed on the pack ice after only two days . The explorers were unhurt but faced a grueling trek back south across the drifting <unk> . <unk> clothed , equipped , and prepared , and shocked by the difficulty of the terrain , they did not make it to safety . As the Arctic winter closed in on them in October , the group ended up exhausted on the deserted Kvitøya ( White Island ) in Svalbard and died there . For 33 years the fate of the Andrée expedition remained one of the unsolved riddles of the Arctic . The chance discovery in 1930 of the expedition 's last camp created a media sensation in Sweden , where the dead men had been mourned and idolized . 
 Andrée 's motives have since been re @-@ evaluated , along with assessing the role of the polar areas as the proving @-@ ground of masculinity and patriotism . An early example is Per Olof Sundman 's fictionalized bestseller novel of 1967 , The Flight of the Eagle , which portrays Andrée as weak and cynical , at the mercy of his sponsors and the media . ( This was later adapted and filmed as Flight of the Eagle , 1982 , directed by Jan Troell . ) The verdict on Andrée by modern writers for virtually sacrificing the lives of his two younger companions varies in harshness , depending on whether he is seen as the manipulator or the victim of Swedish nationalist fervor around the turn of the 20th century . 
 = = S. A. Andrée 's scheme = = 
 The second half of the 19th century has often been called the Heroic Age of polar exploration . The inhospitable and dangerous Arctic and Antarctic regions appealed powerfully to the imagination of the age , not as lands with their own ecologies and cultures , but as challenges to be conquered by technological ingenuity and manly daring . 
 The Swede Salomon August Andrée shared these enthusiasms , and proposed a plan for letting the wind propel a hydrogen balloon from Svalbard across the Arctic Sea to the Bering Strait , to fetch up in Alaska , Canada , or Russia , and passing near or even right over the North Pole on the way . Andrée was an engineer at the patent office in Stockholm , with a passion for ballooning . He bought his own balloon , the Svea , in 1893 and made nine journeys with it , starting from Gothenburg or Stockholm and travelling a combined distance of 1 @,@ 500 kilometers ( 930 mi ) . In the prevailing westerly winds , the Svea flights had a strong tendency to carry him uncontrollably out to the Baltic Sea and drag his basket perilously along the surface of the water and / or slam it into one of the many rocky islets in the Stockholm archipelago ( see artist 's impression , right ) . On one occasion he was blown clear across the Baltic to Finland . His longest trip was due east from Gothenburg , across the breadth of Sweden and out over the Baltic to Gotland . Even though he saw a lighthouse and heard breakers off Öland , he remained convinced that he was travelling over land and seeing lakes . 
 During a couple of the Svea flights , Andrée tested and tried out the drag @-@ rope steering technique which he had developed and wanted to use on his projected North Pole expedition . Drag ropes , which hang from the balloon basket and drag part of their length on the ground , are designed to counteract the tendency of lighter @-@ than @-@ air craft to travel at the same speed as the wind , a situation that makes steering by sails impossible . The friction of the ropes was intended to slow the balloon to the point where the sails would have an effect ( beyond that of making the balloon rotate on its axis ) . Andrée reported , and presumably believed , that with drag rope / sails steering he had succeeded in deviating about ten degrees either way from the wind direction . This notion is rejected by modern balloonists ; the Swedish Ballooning Association maintains that Andrée 's belief that he had deviated from the wind was mistaken , being misled by <unk> and a surfeit of enthusiasm in an environment of variable winds and poor visibility . Use of drag ropes ( prone to snapping , falling off , or becoming entangled with each other or the ground , in addition to being ineffective ) is not considered by any modern expert to be a useful steering technique . 
 = = Promotion and fundraising = = 
 The Arctic ambitions of Sweden were still unrealized in the late 19th century , while neighboring and politically subordinate Norway was a world power in Arctic exploration through such pioneers as Fridtjof Nansen . The Swedish political and scientific elite were eager to see Sweden take that lead among the Scandinavian countries which seemed her due , and Andrée , a persuasive speaker and fundraiser , found it easy to gain support for his ideas . At a lecture in 1895 to the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences , Andrée thrilled the audience of geographers and meteorologists . A polar exploration balloon , he explained , would need to fulfill four conditions : 
 It must have enough lifting power to carry three people and all their scientific equipment , advanced cameras for aerial photography , provisions for four months , and ballast , altogether about 3000 kilograms ( about 3 @.@ 5 short tons ) . 
 It must retain the gas well enough to stay aloft for 30 days . 
 The hydrogen gas must be manufactured , and the balloon filled , at the Arctic launch site . 
 It must be at least somewhat steerable . 
 Andrée gave a glowingly optimistic account of the ease with which these requirements could be met . Larger balloons had been constructed in France , he claimed , and more airtight , too . Some French balloons had remained hydrogen @-@ filled for over a year without appreciable loss of buoyancy . As for the hydrogen , filling the balloon at the launch site could easily be done with the help of mobile hydrogen manufacturing units ; for the steering he referred to his own drag @-@ rope experiments with the Svea , stating that a deviation of 27 degrees from the wind direction could be routinely achieved . 
 Andrée assured the audience that Arctic summer weather was uniquely suitable for ballooning . The midnight sun would enable observations round the clock , halving the voyage time required , and do away with all need for anchoring at night , which might otherwise be a dangerous business . Neither would the balloon 's buoyancy be adversely affected by the cold of night . The drag @-@ rope steering technique was particularly well adapted for a region where the ground , consisting of ice , was " low in friction and free of vegetation " . He said that the minimal precipitation in the area posed no threat of weighing down the balloon . If some rain or snow did fall on the balloon , Andrée argued , " precipitation at above @-@ zero temperatures will melt , and precipitation at below @-@ zero temperatures will blow off , for the balloon will be travelling more slowly than the wind . " The audience was convinced by these arguments , so disconnected were they from the realities of the Arctic summer storms , fogs , high humidity , and ever @-@ present threat of ice formation . The academy approved Andrée 's expense calculation of 130 @,@ 800 kronor in all , corresponding in today 's money to just under a million U.S. dollars , of which the single largest sum , 36 @,@ 000 kronor , was for the balloon . With this endorsement , there was a rush to support his project , headed by King Oscar II , who personally contributed 30 @,@ 000 kronor , and Alfred Nobel , the dynamite magnate and founder of the Nobel Prize . 
 There was also considerable international interest , and the European and American newspaper @-@ reading publics were curious about a project that seemed as modern and scientific as the books of contemporary author Jules Verne . The press fanned the interest with a wide range of predictions , from certain death for the explorers to a safe and comfortable " guidance " of the balloon ( upgraded by the reporter to an " airship " ) to the North Pole in a manner planned by Parisian experts and Swedish scientists . 
 " In these days , the construction and guidance of airships have been improved greatly " , wrote The Providence Journal , " and it is supposed , both by the Parisian experts and by the Swedish scientists who have been assisting M. Andree , that the question of a sustained flight in this case will be very satisfactorily answered by the character of the balloon , by its careful guidance and , providing it gets into a Polar current of air , by the elements themselves . " 
 Faith in the experts and in science was common in the popular press , but with international attention came also for the first time informed criticism . Andrée being Sweden 's first balloonist , no national had the requisite knowledge to second @-@ guess him about buoyancy or drag ropes ; but both Germany and France had long ballooning traditions and several of their more experienced balloonists expressed skepticism about Andrée 's methods and inventions . However , just as with the Svea mishaps , all objections failed to dampen Andrée 's optimism . <unk> followed by national and international media , he began negotiations with the well @-@ known aeronaut and balloon builder Henri <unk> in Paris , world capital of ballooning , and ordered a varnished three @-@ layer silk balloon , 20 @.@ 5 meters ( 67 ft ) in diameter , from his workshop . The balloon , originally called Le Pôle Nord ( French for " The North Pole " ) , was to be renamed <unk> ( Swedish for " The Eagle " ) . 
 Special technical solutions had to be designed for the accommodations for three adults to be confined in a small balloon basket for up to 30 days . The sleeping berths for the crew were fitted at the floor of the basket , along with some of stores and provisions . The highly flammable hydrogen meant that cooking could not be done in the basket itself . The solution was a modified primus stove ( designed by a friend of Andrée 's ) that could be dangled 8 m ( 26 ft ) below the crew and then lit from the basket , at a safe distance . An angled mirror attached to the specially designed stove allowed the crew to determine whether it was successfully lit or not . 
 = = The 1896 fiasco = = 
 For his 1896 attempt to launch the balloon , Andrée had many eager volunteers to choose from . He picked Nils Gustaf Ekholm ( 1848 – 1923 ) , an experienced Arctic meteorological researcher and formerly his boss during an 1882 – 83 geophysical expedition to Spitsbergen , and Nils Strindberg ( 1872 – 97 ) , a brilliant student who was doing original research in physics and chemistry . The main scientific purpose of the expedition was to map the area by means of aerial photography , and Strindberg was both a devoted amateur photographer and a skilled constructor of advanced cameras . This was a team with many useful scientific and technical skills , but lacking any particular physical prowess or training for survival under extreme conditions . All three men were indoor types , and only one , Strindberg , was young . Andrée expected a sedentary voyage in a balloon basket , and strength and survival skills were far down on his list . 
 Modern writers all agree that Andrée 's North Pole scheme was unrealistic . He relied on the winds blowing more or less in the direction he wanted to go , on being able to fine @-@ tune his direction with the drag ropes , on the balloon being sealed tight enough to stay airborne for 30 days , and on no ice or snow sticking to the balloon to weigh it down . In the attempt of 1896 , the wind immediately refuted his optimism by blowing steadily from the north , straight at the balloon hangar at Danes Island , until the expedition had to pack up , let the hydrogen out of the balloon , and go home . It is now known that northerly winds are to be expected at Danes Island ; but in the late 19th century , information on Arctic airflow and precipitation existed only as contested academic hypotheses . Even Ekholm , an Arctic climate researcher , had no objection to Andrée 's theory of where the wind was likely to take them . The observational data simply did not exist . 
 On the other hand , Ekholm was skeptical of the balloon 's ability to retain hydrogen , from his own measurements . His buoyancy checks in the summer of 1896 , during the process of producing the hydrogen and pumping it into the balloon , convinced him that the balloon leaked too much to ever reach the Pole , let alone go on to Russia or Canada . The worst leakage came from the approximately eight million tiny stitching holes along the seams , which no amount of glued @-@ on strips of silk or applications of special secret @-@ formula varnish seemed to seal . The balloon was losing 68 kilograms ( 150 lb ) of lift force a day . Taking into account its heavy load , Ekholm estimated that it would be able to stay airborne for 17 days at most , not 30 . When it was time to go home , he warned Andrée that he would not take part in the next attempt , scheduled for summer 1897 , unless a stronger , better @-@ sealed balloon was bought . 
 Andrée resisted Ekholm 's criticisms to the point of deception . On the boat back from Svalbard , Ekholm learned from the chief engineer of the hydrogen plant the explanation of some anomalies he had noticed in his measurements : Andrée had from time to time secretly ordered extra topping @-@ up of the hydrogen in the balloon . Andrée 's motives for such self @-@ destructive behavior are not known . Several modern writers , following Sundman 's Andrée portrait in the semi @-@ documentary novel , The Flight of the Eagle ( 1967 ) , have speculated that Andrée had by this time become the prisoner of his own successful funding campaign . The sponsors and the media followed every delay and reported on every setback , and were clamoring for results . Andrée , Strindberg , and Ekholm had been seen off by cheering crowds in Stockholm and Gothenburg ( see image from Aftonbladet , right ) , and now all the expectations were coming to nothing with the long wait for southerly winds at Danes Island . Especially pointed was the contrast between Nansen 's simultaneous return , covered in polar glory from his daring yet well @-@ planned expedition on the ship Fram , and Andrée 's failure even to launch his own much @-@ hyped conveyance . Sundman theorizes that Andrée could not face letting the press report that he did not know the prevailing wind direction , and had also miscalculated in ordering the balloon , and needed a new one to rectify his error . 
 After the 1896 launch was called off , enthusiasm declined for joining the expedition for a second attempt in 1897 . From the candidates Andrée picked the 27 @-@ year @-@ old engineer , Knut Frænkel , to replace Ekholm . Frænkel was a civil engineer from the north of Sweden , an athlete who was fond of long mountain hikes . He was enrolled specifically to take over Ekholm 's meteorological observations . Despite lacking Ekholm 's theoretical and scientific knowledge , he handled this task efficiently . His meteorological journal has enabled researchers to reconstruct the movements of the three men during their last few months with considerable precision . 
 = = The 1897 disaster = = 
 = = = Launch , flight , and landing = = = 
 Returning to Danes Island in the summer of 1897 , the expedition found that the balloon hangar built the year before had weathered the winter storms well . The winds were more favorable , too . Andrée had strengthened his leadership by replacing the older and critical Ekholm , an authority in his field , with the 27 @-@ year @-@ old enthusiast Knut Frænkel . On July 11 , in a steady wind from the south @-@ west , the top of the plank hangar was dismantled , the three explorers climbed into the already heavy basket , and Andrée dictated one last @-@ minute telegram to King Oscar and another to the paper Aftonbladet , holder of press rights to the expedition . The large support team cut away the last ropes holding the balloon and it rose slowly . Moving out low over the water , it was pulled so far down by the friction of the several @-@ hundred @-@ meter @-@ long drag ropes against the ground as to dip the basket into the water . The friction also twisted the ropes round , detaching them from their screw holds . These holds were a new safety feature that Andrée had reluctantly been persuaded to add , whereby ropes that got caught on the ground could be more easily dropped . 
 Most of them unscrewed at once and 530 kilograms ( 1170 lb ) of rope were lost , while the three explorers could simultaneously be seen to dump 210 kilograms of sand overboard to get the basket clear of the water . Seven hundred and forty kilograms ( 1630 lb ) of essential weight was thus lost in the first few minutes . Before it was well clear of the launch site , the Eagle had turned from a supposedly steerable craft into an ordinary hydrogen balloon with a few ropes hanging from it , at the mercy of the wind ; its crew had no means to direct it to any particular goal and had too little ballast for stability . <unk> , the balloon rose to 700 meters ( 2300 ft ) , an unimagined height , where the lower air pressure made the hydrogen escape all the faster through the eight million little holes . 
 The balloon had two means of communication with the outside world , buoys and homing pigeons . The buoys , steel cylinders encased in cork , were intended to be dropped from the balloon into the water or onto the ice , to be carried to civilization by the currents . Only two buoy messages have ever been found . One was dispatched by Andrée on July 11 , a few hours after takeoff , and reads " Vår <unk> har <unk> <unk> bra . <unk> <unk> på <unk> 250 m. <unk> med en <unk> till en <unk> åt N 10 ° ost <unk> men <unk> åt N 45 ° ost <unk> . [ … ] <unk> <unk> [ sic ] . <unk> <unk> . " ( " Our journey goes well so far . We sail at an altitude of about 250 m , at first N 10 ° east , but later N 45 ° east . [ … ] Weather delightful . Spirits high . " ) The second was dropped an hour later and gave the height as 600 meters . 
 The newspaper Aftonbladet had supplied the pigeons , bred in northern Norway with the optimistic hope that they would manage to return there , and their message cylinders contained pre @-@ printed instructions in Norwegian asking the finder to pass the messages on to the newspaper 's address in Stockholm . Andrée released at least four pigeons , but only one was ever retrieved , by a Norwegian steamer where the pigeon had alighted and been promptly shot . Its message is dated July 13 and gives the travel direction at that point as East by 10 ° South . The message reads : " <unk> <unk> <unk> till Aftonbladet , Stockholm . Den 13 <unk> kl . 12 @,@ 30 <unk> . Lat . 82 ° 2 ' Long . 15 ° 5 ' ost god fart åt ost 10 ° syd . Allt <unk> <unk> . Detta <unk> <unk> <unk> . Andrée . " ( " The Andree Polar Expedition to the " Aftonbladet " , Stockholm . July 13 <unk> , 82 <unk> north latitude , 15 <unk> <unk> east longitude . Good journey eastwards , 10 <unk> south . All goes well on board . This is the third message sent by pigeon . Andree . " ) Lundström and others note that all three messages fail to mention the accident at takeoff , or the increasingly desperate situation , which Andrée was describing fully in his main diary . The balloon was out of equilibrium , sailing much too high and thereby losing hydrogen faster than even Nils Ekholm had feared , then repeatedly threatening to crash on the ice . It was weighed down by being rain @-@ soaked ( " dripping wet " , writes Andrée in the diary ) , and the men were throwing all the sand and some of the payload overboard to keep it airborne . 
 Free flight lasted for 10 hours and 29 minutes and was followed by another 41 hours of bumpy ride with frequent ground contact before the inevitable final crash . The Eagle traveled for 2 days and 3 ½ hours altogether , during which time , according to Andrée , none of the three men got any sleep . The definitive landing appears to have been gentle . Neither the men nor the homing pigeons in their wicker cages were hurt , and none of the equipment was damaged , not even the delicate optical instruments and Strindberg 's two cameras . 
 = = = On foot on the ice = = = 
 From the moment the three were grounded on July 14 , Strindberg 's highly specialized cartographic camera , which had been brought to map the region from the air , became instead a means of recording daily life in the <unk> and the constant danger and drudgery of the trek . Strindberg took about 200 photos with his seven @-@ kilogram ( 15 lb ) camera over the course of the three months they spent on the pack ice , one of the most famous being his picture of Andrée and Frænkel contemplating the fallen Eagle ( see image above ) . 
 Andrée and Frænkel also kept meticulous records of their experiences and geographical positions , Andrée in his " main diary " , Frænkel in his meteorological journal . Strindberg 's own stenographic diary was more personal in content , and included his general reflections on the expedition , as well as several messages to his fiancée Anna Charlier . All three manuscripts were eventually retrieved from the ice on Kvitøya in 1930 . 
 The Eagle had been stocked with safety equipment such as guns , snowshoes , sleds , skis , a tent , a small boat ( in the form of a bundle of bent sticks , to be assembled and covered with balloon silk ) , most of it stored not in the basket but in the storage space arranged above the balloon ring . These items had not been put together with great care , or with any acknowledgement of adopting indigenous peoples ' techniques for dealing with the extreme environment . In this , Andrée contrasted not only with later but also with many earlier explorers . Sven Lundström points to the agonizing extra efforts that became necessary for the team due to Andrée 's mistaken design of the sleds , with a rigid construction that borrowed nothing from the long proven Inuit sleds , and were so impractical for the difficult terrain . Andrée called it " dreadful terrain " , with channels separating the ice floes , high ridges , and partially iced @-@ over melt ponds . The men 's clothes included no furs but were woollen coats and trousers , plus <unk> . They wore the <unk> but the explorers reported always seeming to be damp or wet from the half @-@ frozen pools of water on the ice and the typically foggy , humid Arctic summer air , and preoccupied with drying their clothes , mainly by wearing them . Danger was everywhere , as it would have meant certain death to lose the provisions lashed to one of the inconvenient sleds into one of the many channels that had to be laboriously crossed . 
 Before starting the march across the " dreadful terrain , " the three men spent a week in a tent at the crash site , packing up and making decisions about what and how much to bring and where to go . The far @-@ off North Pole was not mentioned as an option ; the choice lay between two depots of food and ammunition laid down for their safety , one at Cape Flora in Franz Josef Land and one at Sjuøyane ( Seven Islands ) in Svalbard ( see map ) . <unk> from their faulty maps that the distances to each were about equal , they decided to try for the bigger depot at Cape Flora . Strindberg took more pictures during this week than he would at any later point , including 12 frames that make up a 360 @-@ degree panorama of the crash site . 
 The balloon had carried a lot of food , of a kind adapted more for a balloon voyage than for travels on foot . Andrée had reasoned that they might as well throw excess food overboard as sand , if losing weight was necessary ; and if it was not , the food would serve if wintering in the Arctic desert did after all become necessary . There was therefore less ballast and large amounts of heavy @-@ type provisions , 767 kg ( 1690 lb ) altogether , including 200 liters of water and some crates of champagne , port , beer , etc . , donated by sponsors and manufacturers . There was also lemon juice , though not as much of this precaution against scurvy as other polar explorers usually thought necessary . Much of the food was in the form of cans of pemmican , meat , sausages , cheese , and condensed milk . By the time they crashed , they had thrown some of it overboard . The three men took most of the rest with them on leaving the crash site , along with other necessities such as guns , tent , ammunition , and cooking utensils , making a load on each sled of more than 200 kg ( 440 lb ) . This was not realistic , as it broke the sleds and wore out the men . After one week , they sorted out and left behind a big pile of food and non @-@ essential equipment , bringing the loads down to 130 kg per sled . It became more necessary than ever to hunt for food . They shot and ate seals , walruses , and especially polar bears throughout the march . 
 Starting out for Franz Josef Land to the south @-@ east on July 22 , the three soon found that their struggle across the ice , which had ridges two @-@ stories high , was hardly bringing the goal any nearer : the drift of the ice was in the opposite direction , moving them backwards . On August 4 they decided , after a long discussion , to aim for Sjuøyane in the southwest instead , hoping to reach the depot there after a six- to seven @-@ week march , with the help of the current . The terrain in that direction was mostly extremely difficult , sometimes necessitating a crawl on all fours , but there was occasional relief in the form of open water — the little boat ( not designed by Andrée ) was apparently a functional and safe conveyance — and smooth , flat ice floes . " Paradise ! " wrote Andrée . " Large even ice floes with pools of sweet drinking water and here and there a tender @-@ fleshed young polar bear ! " They made fair apparent headway , but the wind turned almost as soon as they did , and they were again being pushed backwards , away from Sjuøyane . The wind varied between southwest and northwest over the coming weeks ; they tried in vain to overcome this by turning more and more westward , but it was becoming clear that Sjuøyane was out of their reach . 
 On September 12 , the explorers resigned themselves to wintering on the ice and camped on a large floe , letting the ice take them where it would , " which " , writes Kjellström , " it had really been doing all along " ( p . 47 ) . Drifting rapidly due south towards Kvitøya , they hurriedly built a winter " home " on the floe against the increasing cold , with walls made of water @-@ reinforced snow to Strindberg 's design ( see plan , below , left ) . Observing the rapidity of their drift , Andrée recorded his hopes that they might get far enough south to feed themselves entirely from the sea . However , the floe began to break up directly under the hut on October 2 from the stresses of pressing against Kvitøya , and they were forced to bring their stores on to the island itself , which took a couple of days . " Morale remains good " , reports Andrée at the very end of the coherent part of his diary , which ends : " Med <unk> <unk> <unk> man <unk> <unk> sig under <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> som <unk> . " ( " With such comrades one should be able to manage under , I may say , any circumstances " . ) It is inferred from the incoherent and badly damaged last pages of Andrée 's diary that the three men were all dead within a few days of moving onto the island . 
 = = Speculation and recovery = = 
 For the next 33 years , the fate of the expedition was shrouded in mystery and its disappearance part of cultural lore in Sweden and to a certain extent elsewhere . It was actively sought for a couple of years and remained the subject of myth and rumor , with frequent international newspaper reports of possible findings . An extensive archive of American newspaper reports from the first few years , 1896 – 99 , titled " The Mystery of Andree " , shows a much richer media interest in the expedition after it disappeared than before . A great variety of fates are suggested for it , inspired by finds , or reported finds , of remnants of what might be a balloon basket , or great amounts of balloon silk , or by stories of men falling from the sky , or visions by psychics , all of which would typically locate the stranded balloon far from Danes Island and Svalbard . 
 Lundström points out ( p . 134 ) that some of the international and national reports took on the features of urban legends . They reflected a prevailing disrespect for the indigenous peoples of the Arctic , who were portrayed in the newspapers as uncomprehending savages who had killed the three men or showed a deadly indifference to their plight . These speculations were refuted in 1930 , upon the discovery of the expedition 's final resting place on Kvitøya by the crews of two ships , the Bratvaag and the Isbjørn . 
 The Norwegian Bratvaag Expedition , studying the glaciers and seas of the Svalbard archipelago from the Norwegian sealing vessel Bratvaag of Ålesund , found the remains of the Andrée expedition on August 5 , 1930 . Kvitøya was usually inaccessible to the sealing or whaling ships of the time , as it is typically surrounded by a wide belt of thick polar ice and often hidden by thick ice fogs . However , summer in 1930 had been particularly warm , and the surrounding sea was practically free of ice . As Kvitøya was known to be a prime hunting ground for walrus and the fogs over the island on that day were comparatively thin , some of the crew of the Bratvaag took this rare opportunity to land on what they called the " inaccessible island " . Two of the sealers in search of water , Olav <unk> and Karl <unk> , discovered Andrée 's boat near a small stream , frozen under a mound of snow and full of equipment , including a <unk> engraved with the words " Andrée 's Polar Expedition , 1896 " . Presented with this hook , the Bratvaag 's captain , Peder <unk> , assigned the crew to search the site together with the expedition members . Among other finds , they uncovered a journal and two skeletons , identified as Andrée 's and Strindberg 's remains by monograms found on their clothing . 
 The Bratvaag left the island to continue its scheduled hunting and observations , with the intent of coming back later to see if the ice had melted further and uncovered more artifacts . Further discoveries were made by the M / K Isbjørn of Tromsø , Norway , a sealing sloop chartered by news reporters to waylay the Bratvaag . Unsuccessful in this , the reporters and the Isbjørn crew made instead for Kvitøya , landing on the island on September 5 in fine weather and finding even less ice than the Bratvaag had . After photographing the area , they searched for and found Frankel 's body , and additional artifacts , including a tin box containing Strindberg 's photographic film , his logbook and maps . The crews of both ships turned over their finds to a scientific commission of the Swedish and Norwegian governments in Tromsø on September 2 and 16 , respectively . The bodies of the three explorers were transported to Stockholm , arriving on October 5 . 
 = = Cause of deaths = = 
 The bodies of the three men were cremated in 1930 without further examination upon being returned to Sweden . The question of what , exactly , caused their deaths has attracted both interest and controversy among scholars . Several medical practitioners and amateur historians have read the extensive diaries with a detective 's eye , looking for clues in the diet , for telltale complaints of symptoms , and for suggestive details at the death site . They agree on many particulars . For instance , the explorers are known to have eaten mainly scanty amounts of canned and dry goods from the balloon stores , plus huge portions of half @-@ cooked meat of polar bears and occasionally seals . They suffered often from foot pains and diarrhea , and were always tired , cold , and wet . When they moved on to Kvitøya from the ice , they left much of their valuable equipment and stores outside the tent , and even down by the water 's edge , as if they were too exhausted , indifferent , or ill to carry it further . Strindberg , the youngest , died first and was " buried " ( wedged into a cliff aperture ) by the others . However , the interpretation of these observations is contested . 
 The best @-@ known and most widely credited suggestion is that made by Ernst Tryde , a medical practitioner , in his book De <unk> på <unk> ( " The Dead on Kvitøya " ) in 1952 : that the men succumbed to trichinosis , which they had contracted from eating undercooked polar bear meat . Larvae of Trichinella spiralis were found in parts of a polar bear carcass at the site . Lundström and Sundman both favor this explanation . Critics note that the diarrhea , which Tryde cites as the main symptomatic evidence , hardly needs an explanation beyond the general poor diet and physical misery , but some more specific symptoms of trichinosis are missing . Also , Fridtjof Nansen and his companion Hjalmar Johansen had lived largely on polar bear meat in exactly the same area for 15 months without any ill effects . Other suggestions have included vitamin A poisoning from eating polar bear liver ; however , the diary shows Andrée to have been aware of this danger . Carbon monoxide poisoning is a theory that has found a few adherents , such as the explorer Vilhjalmur Stefansson . The chief objection is that their primus stove had kerosene still in the tank when found . Stefansson argues that they were using a malfunctioning stove , something he has experienced in his own expeditions . Lead poisoning from the cans in which their food was stored is an alternative suggestion , as are scurvy , botulism , suicide ( they had plenty of opium ) , and polar bear attack . A combination favoured by Kjellström is that of cold and hypothermia as the Arctic winter closed in , with dehydration and general exhaustion , apathy , and disappointment . Kjellström argues that Tryde never takes the nature of their daily life into account , and especially the crowning blow of the ice breaking up under their promisingly mobile home , forcing them to move onto a glacier island . " Posterity has expressed surprise that they died on Kvitøya , surrounded by food , " writes Kjellström . " The surprise is rather that they found the strength to live so long " ( p . 54 ) . 
 In 2010 , writer and researcher Bea <unk> at Karolinska <unk> , Sweden , rejected the theory that larvae of Trichinella spiralis killed the expedition members . After examining the men 's clothes , she concluded that at least Strindberg was killed by polar bears . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1897 , Andrée 's daring or foolhardy undertaking nourished Swedish patriotic pride and Swedish dreams of taking the scientific lead in the Arctic . The title of " Engineer " — " <unk> Andrée " — was generally and reverentially used in speaking of him , and expressed high esteem for the late 19th @-@ century ideal of the engineer as a representative of social improvement through technological progress . The three explorers were fêted when they departed and mourned by the nation when they disappeared . When they were found , they were celebrated for the heroism of their doomed two @-@ month struggle to reach populated areas and were seen as having selflessly perished for the ideals of science and progress . The procession carrying their mortal remains from the ships into Stockholm on October 5 , 1930 , writes Swedish historian of ideas Sverker <unk> , 
 " must be one of the most solemn and grandiose manifestations of national mourning that has ever occurred in Sweden . One of the rare comparable events is the national mourning that followed the Estonia disaster in the Baltic Sea in September 1994 " ( p . 100 ) . 
 More recently , Andrée 's heroic motives have been questioned , beginning with Per Olof Sundman 's bestselling semi @-@ documentary novel of 1967 , The Flight of the Eagle . Sundman portrays Andrée as the victim of the demands of the media and the Swedish scientific and political establishment , and as ultimately motivated by fear rather than courage . Sundman 's interpretation of the personalities involved , the blind spots of the Swedish national culture , and the role of the press is reflected in the film adaptation , Flight of the Eagle ( 1982 ) , based on his novel and directed by Jan Troell . It was nominated for an Oscar . 
 Appreciation of Nils Strindberg 's role seems to be growing , both for the fortitude with which the untrained and unprepared student kept photographing , in what must have been a more or less permanent state of near @-@ collapse from exhaustion and exposure , and for the artistic quality of the result . Out of the 240 exposed frames that were found on Kvitøya in waterlogged containers , 93 were saved by John Hertzberg at the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm , Strindberg 's former workplace . In his article , " Recovering the visual history of the Andrée expedition " ( 2004 ) , Tyrone <unk> has lamented the traditional focus by previous researchers on the written records — the diaries — as primary sources of information ; he renewed his claim for the historical significance of the photographs . 
 Some of the items from the expedition , including the balloon @-@ silk boat and the tent , are on display at the <unk> Polar Centre at <unk> Museum , Sweden . The expedition is also featured in the Spitsbergen Airship Museum in Longyearbyen , Svalbard . 
 = = Representation in other media = = 
 In 1983 , American composer Dominick Argento created a song cycle for baritone and piano entitled The Andrée Expedition . This cycle sets to music texts from the diaries and letters . 
 Swedish composer Klas <unk> 's opera <unk> ( 1994 – 99 ) is based on Andrée 's story . 
 An account of the expedition is included in The Ghost Disease and Twelve Other Stories of Detective Work in the Medical Field , by Michael Howell and Peter Ford ( Penguin , 1986 ) . 
 It was dramatised as a play by Michael Butt for BBC Radio 4 as The Stranded Eagle , as part of the " Medical Detectives " series . The radio play aired 1 April 1998 and starred John Woodvine ( Knut <unk> ) , Clive <unk> ( Ernst Tryde ) , Ken Stott ( S.A. Andrée ) , Jack <unk> ( Knut Fraenkel ) and Scott Handy ( Nils Strindberg ) . The play has subsequently been broadcast on the digital channel , BBC 7 . 
 In 2013 the NIE Theatre Group produced a play about the expedition , entitled North , North , North , and presented it on tour around the UK . 
 = North by North Quahog = 
 " North by North Quahog " is the first episode of the fourth season of Family Guy , following the revival of the series three years after its cancellation in 2002 . The episode was first broadcast on May 1 , 2005 , on Fox , though it had premiered three days earlier at a special screening at the University of Vermont , Burlington . In the episode , Peter and Lois go on a second honeymoon to spice up their marriage , but are chased by Mel Gibson after Peter steals the sequel to The Passion of the Christ from Gibson 's private hotel room . Meanwhile , Brian and Stewie take care of Chris and Meg at home . 
 Family Guy had been canceled in 2002 due to low ratings , but was revived by Fox after reruns on Adult Swim became the cable network 's most watched program , and more than three million DVDs of the show were sold . " North by North Quahog " was directed by Peter Shin and written by series creator Seth MacFarlane . Much of the plot and many of the technical aspects of the episode , as well as the title , are direct parodies of the 1959 Alfred Hitchcock movie North by Northwest ; in addition , the episode makes use of Bernard Herrmann 's theme music from that film . The episode contains many cultural references ; in the opening sequence Peter lists 29 shows that were canceled by Fox after Family Guy was canceled and says that if all of those shows were to be canceled , they might have a chance at returning . 
 Critical responses to " North by North Quahog " were mostly positive , with the opening sequence being praised in particular . The episode was watched by nearly 12 million viewers and received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Animated Program ( for Programming Less Than One Hour ) . Shin won an Annie Award for Directing in an Animated Television Production for this episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the cold open , Peter tells his family that they have " been canceled " . He then lists all 29 shows that were canceled by Fox between the show 's cancellation and revival and says that if all of those shows were to be canceled , they might have a chance at returning . 
 As Peter and Lois are having sex , she yells out George Clooney 's name , so Peter realizes that she is imagining him as Clooney to maintain her libido . Lois and Peter decide to take a second honeymoon to enliven their marriage , and leave their anthropomorphic dog Brian to take care of their children Stewie , Chris , and Meg . Brian is unable to control the children , but Stewie offers to help ( in exchange for Brian changing his diaper ) and together they manage the home . The pair chaperone a dance at Chris 's school , during which a school staff member catches Chris in the boys ' restroom with vodka that belongs to his classmate Jake Tucker . Although Brian and Stewie punish Chris by grounding him , they try to clear his name . Jake 's father Tom refuses to believe Brian and Stewie , so they resort to planting cocaine in Jake 's locker , and Jake is sentenced to community service . 
 On the way to their vacation spot , Peter reads a comic book while driving with Lois asleep , and crashes his car into a tree . They are forced to spend their entire honeymoon money on car repairs and are about to return home when Peter discovers that actor / director Mel Gibson has a private suite at a luxurious hotel nearby , " which he barely uses " . He and Lois then go to the hotel , where Peter poses as Gibson to gain access to his room . When Lois yells out Gibson 's name during intercourse , Peter , again , decides to return home . As the two are about to leave , Peter accidentally stumbles upon Gibson 's private screening room and discovers a sequel to The Passion of the Christ entitled The Passion of the Christ 2 : Crucify This . To spare the world from " ... another two hours of Mel Gibson Jesus mumbo @-@ jumbo , " Peter steals the film . However , when they leave the hotel , they are noticed by two priests , Gibson 's associates , who were there to collect the film . 
 Pursued by the priests in a car chase that leads them through a shopping mall , Lois and Peter escape from the priests and drive to a cornfield where Peter buries the film . While he is doing so , the priests fly down in a crop @-@ duster and kidnap Lois . Peter is then given a message telling him that if he does not return the film to Gibson at his estate on top of Mount Rushmore , his wife will be killed . Peter arrives at the house and gives Gibson a film can . As Peter and Lois are about to leave , Gibson discovers that the film has been replaced with dog feces , leading to a chase on the face of the mountain . While being chased , Lois slips but hangs on to George Washington 's lips . Peter grabs her and , while being held at gunpoint , he tells Gibson that the film " is in President Rushmore 's mouth " and points to the other side of the monument . Gibson follows Peter 's direction and falls off the edge as Peter pulls Lois to safety . Upon climbing back to the top of the mountain , the two have sexual intercourse there , improving their marriage . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 In 2002 , Family Guy was canceled after three seasons due to low ratings . The show was first canceled after the 1999 – 2000 season , but following a last @-@ minute reprieve , it returned for a third season in 2001 . Fox tried to sell rights for reruns of the show , but it was hard to find networks that were interested ; Cartoon Network eventually bought the rights , " [ ... ] basically for free " , according to the president of 20th Century Fox Television Production . When the reruns were shown on Cartoon Network 's Adult Swim in 2003 , Family Guy became Adult Swim 's most @-@ watched show with an average 1 @.@ 9 million viewers an episode . Following Family Guy 's high ratings on Adult Swim , the first season was released on DVD in April 2003 . Sales of the DVD set reached 2 @.@ 2 million copies , becoming the best @-@ selling television DVD of 2003 and the second highest @-@ selling television DVD ever , behind the first season of Comedy Central 's Chappelle 's Show . The second season DVD release also sold more than a million copies . The show 's popularity in both DVD sales and reruns rekindled Fox 's interest in it . They ordered 35 new episodes in 2004 , marking the first revival of a television show based on DVD sales . Fox president Gail Berman said that it was one of her most difficult decisions to cancel the show , and was therefore happy it would return . The network also began production of a film based on the series . 
 " North by North Quahog " was the first episode to be broadcast after the show 's cancellation . It was written by MacFarlane and directed by Peter Shin , both of whom also wrote and directed the pilot . MacFarlane believed the show 's three @-@ year hiatus was beneficial because animated shows do not normally have hiatuses , and towards the end of their seasons " ... you see a lot more sex jokes and ( bodily function ) jokes and signs of a fatigued staff that their brains are just fried " . With " North by North Quahog " , the writing staff tried to keep the show " ... exactly as it was " before its cancellation , and did not " ... have the desire to make it any slicker " than it already was . Walter Murphy , who had composed music for the show before its cancellation , returned to compose the music for " North by North Quahog " . Murphy and the orchestra recorded an arrangement of Bernard Herrmann 's score from North by Northwest , a film referenced multiple times in the episode . 
 Fox had ordered five episode scripts at the end of the third season ; these episodes had been written but not produced . One of these scripts was adapted into " North by North Quahog " . The original script featured Star Wars character Boba Fett , and later actor , writer and producer Aaron Spelling , but the release of the iconic film The Passion of the Christ inspired the writers to incorporate Mel Gibson into the episode . Multiple endings were written , including one in which Death comes for Gibson . During production , an episode of South Park was released entitled " The Passion of the Jew " that also featured Gibson as a prominent character . This gave the Family Guy writers pause , fearing accusations " [ ... ] that we had ripped them off . " 
 Three days before the episode debuted on television , it was screened at the University of Vermont ( <unk> ) in Burlington , accompanied by an hour @-@ long question @-@ and @-@ answer session with MacFarlane . The <unk> 's special screening of the episode was attended by 1 @,@ 700 people . As promotion for the show , and to , as Newman described , " expand interest in the show beyond its die hard fans " , Fox organized four Family Guy Live ! performances , which featured cast members reading old episodes aloud ; " North by North Quahog " was also previewed . In addition , the cast performed musical numbers from the Family Guy Live in Vegas comedy album . The stage shows were an extension of a performance by the cast during the 2004 Montreal Comedy Festival . The Family Guy Live ! performances , which took place in Los Angeles and New York , sold out and were attended by around 1 @,@ 200 people each . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode opens with Peter telling the rest of the family that Family Guy has been canceled . He lists the following 29 shows ( in chronological order ) , that he says Fox has to make room for : Dark Angel , Titus ( though Titus was facing cancellation the same year Family Guy was ) , Undeclared , Action , That ' 80s Show , <unk> , Fastlane , Andy Richter Controls the Universe , Skin , Girls Club , Cracking Up , The Pitts , Firefly , Get Real , <unk> , Wanda at Large , Costello , The Lone Gunmen , A Minute with Stan Hooper , Normal , Ohio , Pasadena , Harsh Realm , Keen Eddie , The $ treet , The American Embassy , Cedric the Entertainer Presents , The Tick , Luis , and Greg the Bunny . Lois asks whether there is any hope , to which Peter replies that if all these shows are canceled they might have a chance , the joke being all these shows had indeed already been canceled by Fox . The New York Times reported that , during the first Family Guy Live ! performance , " ... the longer [ the list ] went , the louder the laughs from the Town Hall crowd [ became ] " . 
 Australian @-@ American actor Mel Gibson is prominently featured in the episode ; his voice was impersonated by André Sogliuzzo . Gibson directed the film The Passion of the Christ and , in the episode , is seen making a sequel entitled Passion of the Christ 2 : Crucify This . The fictional sequel is a combination of The Passion of the Christ and Rush Hour , and stars Chris Tucker , who starred in Rush Hour , and James Caviezel who portrayed Jesus in The Passion of the Christ . 
 The episode contains several references to Alfred Hitchcock 's 1959 film North by Northwest . Besides the title of the episode , several scenes in " North by North Quahog " are inspired by the Hitchcock film . In the scene in which Lois is kidnapped by Gibson 's associates , the two priests chase Peter through a cornfield , flying a crop @-@ duster , parodying the crop @-@ duster scene from the film . The final face @-@ off between Peter , Lois and Gibson that takes place on Mount Rushmore is also a reference to North by Northwest . 
 As Peter and Lois are driving to Cape Cod for their second honeymoon , Peter is reading a Jughead comic book and their car crashes . The fictional Park Barrington Hotel , where Peter and Lois steal Gibson 's film , is located in Manhattan . The car chase scene through a shopping mall is a recreation of a scene from the 1980 comedy film The Blues Brothers . To stop Meg and Chris from fighting , Brian reads to them from one of the few books Peter owns , a novelization of the 1980 film Caddyshack and quotes a line by Chevy Chase 's character , Ty Webb . 
 The episode contains a number of other cultural references . When Peter and Lois enter their motel room and find a hooker on the bed , Peter warns Lois to stay perfectly still , as the prostitute 's vision is based on movement . This is a reference to a scene in the movie Jurassic Park in which Dr. Grant gives this warning in reference to a Tyrannosaurus Rex . Pinocchio appears in a cutaway gag , in which Gepetto bends over and deliberately sets Pinocchio up to tell a lie in an attempt to emulate anal sex . This was based on a joke MacFarlane 's mother had told her friends when he was a child . Lois yells out George Clooney 's name when she and Peter are having sex . The 1950s sitcom The Honeymooners is also referenced when a fictional episode of the sitcom is shown in which Ralph Kramden , the show 's main character , hits his wife , something he would only threaten to do on the show . Meg watches an episode of the CBS sitcom Two and a Half Men , which shows three men in a living room , one of whom is cut in half at the waist and screaming in agony , the other two standing over him and screaming in horror . Fictional army soldier Flint of G.I. Joe : A Real American Hero appears briefly after Chris is caught drinking vodka , and educates the children on drinking and informs them that " ... knowing is half the battle " . Flint 's voice was provided by Bill Ratner , the actor who had voiced the character in the G.I. Joe television series . According to Seth Green , who voices Chris , the reason the Family Guy cast members did not voice Flint themselves is because if you have the original actor providing the voice " [ ... ] you take it with a little bit more gravitas " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " North by North Quahog " was broadcast on May 1 , 2005 as part of an animated television night on Fox , was preceded by two episodes of The Simpsons ( including the show 's 350th episode ) , and was followed by the premiere of MacFarlane 's new show , American Dad ! . It was watched by 11 @.@ 85 million viewers , higher than both The Simpsons and American Dad . The episode 's ratings were Family Guy 's highest ratings since the airing of the season one episode " Brian : Portrait of a Dog " . Family Guy was the week 's highest @-@ rated show among teens and men in the 18 to 34 demographic , and more than doubled Fox 's average in its timeslot . The episode 's first broadcast in Canada on Global was watched by 1 @.@ 27 million viewers , making it fourth for the week it was broadcast , behind CSI : Crime Scene Investigation , CSI : Miami and Canadian Idol . 
 The reactions of television critics to " North by North Quahog " were mostly positive . In a simultaneous review of the two episodes of The Simpsons that preceded this episode and the American Dad ! pilot , Chase Squires of the St. Petersburg Times stated that " North by North Quahog " " ... score [ d ] the highest " . Multimedia news and reviews website IGN was pleased to see Stewie and Brian get more screen time as a duo , something they thought had always been one of the show 's biggest strengths . IGN placed Peter 's idea to pose as Mel Gibson and steal Passion of the Christ 2 in 9th place on their list of " Peter Griffin 's Top 10 Craziest Ideas " . Matthew Gilbert of The Boston Globe commented that the episode 's material " would wear thin after a while if the character 's weren 't as distinct and endearing as they are , most notably Stewie , the wrathful infant . " 
 Critics reacted positively to the opening sequence ; in his review of the episode , Mark McGuire of The Times Union wrote : " ... the first minute or so of the resurrected Family Guy ranks among the funniest 60 seconds I 've seen so far this season . " Variety critic Brian Lowry considered the opening sequence to be the best part of the episode . M. Keith Booker , author of the book Drawn to Television : Primetime Television from The Flintstones to Family Guy , called the opening sequence an " ... in @-@ your @-@ face , I @-@ told @-@ you @-@ so rejoinder to the Fox brass [ ... ] followed by one of the most outrageous Family Guy episodes ever " . 
 However , the episode also garnered negative responses . Melanie McFarland of the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer stated that " Three years off the air has not made the ' Family Guy ' team that much more creative " . Kevin Wong of PopMatters thought the episode made fun of easy targets such as Gibson and The Passion of The Christ , although he felt Family Guy regained " ... its admirable mix of niche nostalgia and hysterical characterizations " after the first two episodes of the new season . Though Alex Strachan , critic for The Montreal Gazette , praised the opening sequence , he felt " it 's all downhill from there " . Bill Brioux of the Toronto Star considered the show to be similar to The Simpsons . Media watchdog group the Parents Television Council , a frequent critic of the show , branded the episode the " worst show of the week " . 
 " North by North Quahog " was nominated for an Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program ( for Programming Less Than One Hour ) , the eventual recipient of the award being South Park episode " Best Friends Forever " . Peter Shin , director of the episode , won the Annie Award for Best Directing in an Animated Television Production . Fellow Family Guy director Dan Povenmire , was nominated for the same award for directing " PTV " . 
 = My Chick Bad = 
 " My Chick Bad " is a song by American rapper Ludacris . The song features American recording artist Nicki Minaj , who co @-@ wrote the song with Ludacris , Samuel Lindley , and <unk> Davidson . The track was produced by The Legendary Traxster . " My Chick Bad " serves as the second single from Ludacris ' eighth album , Battle of the Sexes . An official remix to the song was also released , featuring female rappers Diamond , Eve , and Trina . 
 The song was a commercial success , peaking at number 11 on the Billboard Hot 100 . The song reached number two on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs and Rap Songs charts , and also appeared on the Pop Songs without an official release to pop radio . " My Chick Bad " was nominated for a 2011 Grammy Award in the category Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group . The accompanying music video for both versions of the song take place in a dungeon during the filming of a movie , with Minaj portraying a Freddy Krueger @-@ esque character . 
 = = Background = = 
 In an interview with Rap @-@ Up , on Nicki Minaj , Ludacris said , " She ’ s an animated female and I ’ m an animated rapper myself . " Before it was released as a single , in the interview , he said , " That ’ s one of the records that we gonna put out there . " The official remix features Eve , Trina , and Diamond , while Ludacris only has background vocals . The remix was also included on Battle of the Sexes , and an extension of the original video was made to accompany it . On the set of the video , Eve said , " I ’ m just happy that Luda [ <unk> ] got this together and made this happen . This is just a nice prelude to what ’ s about to happen . I think it ’ s about to be another movement of strong women . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 The song carries a " thumping " and " dark " tone described as " spooky . " Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club described the song as " swaggering " , and it has been called " rambunctious " by XXL . It also features the catchy hook , " My chick bad / My chick ' hood / My chick do stuff that your chick wish she could . " As Ludacris 's verse brags about his significant other , Minaj 's as well as the females present on the remix , brag about themselves . In the song , Ludacris refers to tennis stars Venus and Serena Williams , and to the Tiger Woods scandal in a reference of his wife , Elin Nordegren . Minaj refers to basketball star Lisa Leslie , as well as the horror franchises A Nightmare on Elm Street and Friday the 13th , and their respective main antagonists , Freddy Krueger and Jason Voorhees . 
