 Arboreal woodpeckers , which depend on their tails — particularly the strong central pair of rectrices — for support while they feed , have a unique tail moult . Rather than moulting their central tail feathers first , as most birds do , they retain these feathers until last . Instead the second pair of rectrices ( both R2 feathers ) are the first to drop . ( In some species in the genera Celeus and <unk> , the third pair is the first dropped . ) The pattern of feather drop and replacement proceeds as described for passerines ( above ) until all other rectrices have been replaced ; only then are the central tail rectrices moulted . This provides some protection to the growing feathers , since they 're always covered by at least one existing feather , and also ensures that the bird 's newly strengthened tail is best able to cope with the loss of the crucial central rectrices . Ground @-@ feeding woodpeckers , such as the wrynecks , do not have this modified moult strategy ; in fact , wrynecks moult their outer tail feathers first , with moult proceeding proximally from there . 
 = = Age differences in flight feathers = = 
 There are often substantial differences between the remiges and rectrices of adults and juveniles of the same species . Because all juvenile feathers are grown at once — a tremendous energy burden to the developing bird — they are softer and of poorer quality than the equivalent feathers of adults , which are moulted over a longer period of time ( as long as several years in some cases ) . As a result , they wear more quickly . 
 As feathers grow at variable rates , these variations lead to visible dark and light bands in the fully formed feather . These so @-@ called growth bars and their widths have been used to determine the daily nutritional status of birds . Each light and dark bar correspond to around 24 hours and the use of this technique has been called <unk> ( analogous to dendrochronology ) . 
 In general , juveniles have feathers which are narrower and more sharply pointed at the tip . This can be particularly visible when the bird is in flight , especially in the case of raptors . The trailing edge of the wing of a juvenile bird can appear almost serrated , due to the feathers ' sharp tips , while that of an older bird will be straighter @-@ edged . The flight feathers of a juvenile bird will also be uniform in length , since they all grew at the same time . Those of adults will be of various lengths and levels of wear , since each is moulted at a different time . 
 The flight feathers of adults and juveniles can differ considerably in length , particularly among the raptors . Overall , juveniles tend to have slightly longer rectrices , and shorter , broader wings ( with shorter outer primaries , and longer inner primaries and secondaries ) than do adults of the same species . However , there are many exceptions . In longer @-@ tailed species , such as swallow @-@ tailed kite , secretary bird and European honey buzzard , for example , juveniles have shorter rectrices than adults do . Juveniles of some Buteo buzzards have narrower wings than adults do , while those of large juvenile falcons are longer . It is theorized that the differences help young birds compensate for their inexperience , weaker flight muscles and poorer flying ability . 
 = = Wing formula = = 
 A wing formula describes the shape of distal end of a bird 's wing in a mathematical way . It can be used to help distinguish between species with similar plumages , and thus is particularly useful for those who ring ( band ) birds . 
 To determine a bird 's wing formula , the distance between the tip of the most distal primary and the tip of its greater covert ( the longest of the feathers that cover and protect the shaft of that primary ) is measured in millimeters . In some cases , this results in a positive number ( e.g. , the primary extends beyond its greater covert ) , while in other cases it is a negative number ( e.g. the primary is completely covered by the greater covert , as happens in some passerine species ) . Next , the longest primary feather is identified , and the differences between the length of that primary and that of all remaining primaries and of the longest secondary are also measured , again in millimeters . If any primary shows a notch or emargination , this is noted , and the distance between the feather 's tip and any notch is measured , as is the depth of the notch . All distance measurements are made with the bird 's wing closed , so as to maintain the relative positions of the feathers . 
 While there can be considerable variation across members of a species — and while the results are obviously impacted by the effects of moult and feather regeneration — even very closely related species show clear differences in their wing formulas . 
 = = Primary extension = = 
 The distance that a bird 's longest primaries extend beyond its longest secondaries ( or tertials ) when its wings are folded is referred to as the primary extension or primary projection . As with wing formulae , this measurement is useful for distinguishing between similarly plumaged birds ; however , unlike wing formulae , it is not necessary to have the bird in @-@ hand to make the measurement . Rather , this is a useful relative measurement — some species have long primary extensions , while others have shorter ones . Among the <unk> flycatchers of the Americas , for example , the dusky flycatcher has a much shorter primary extension than does the very similarly plumaged Hammond 's flycatcher . Europe 's common skylark has a long primary projection , while that of the near @-@ lookalike Oriental skylark is very short . 
 As a general rule , species which are long distance migrants will have longer primary projection than similar species which do not migrate or migrate shorter distances . 
 = Coprinellus micaceus = 
 Coprinellus micaceus is a common species of fungus in the family Psathyrellaceae with a cosmopolitan distribution . The fruit bodies of the saprobe typically grow in clusters on or near rotting hardwood tree stumps or underground tree roots . Depending on their stage of development , the tawny @-@ brown mushroom caps may range in shape from oval to bell @-@ shaped to convex , and reach diameters up to 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) . The caps , marked with fine radial grooves that extend nearly to the center , rest atop whitish stems up to 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) long . In young specimens , the entire cap surface is coated with a fine layer of reflective mica @-@ like cells that provide the inspiration for both the mushroom 's species name and the common names mica cap , shiny cap , and glistening inky cap . Although small and with thin flesh , the mushrooms are usually bountiful , as they typically grow in dense clusters . A few hours after collection , the gills will begin to slowly dissolve into a black , inky , spore @-@ laden liquid — an enzymatic process called autodigestion or deliquescence . The fruit bodies are edible before the gills blacken and dissolve , and cooking will stop the autodigestion process . 
 The microscopic characteristics and cytogenetics of C. micaceus are well known , and it has been used frequently as a model organism to study cell division and meiosis in Basidiomycetes . Chemical analysis of the fruit bodies has revealed the presence of antibacterial and enzyme @-@ inhibiting compounds . Formerly known as Coprinus micaceus , the species was transferred to Coprinellus in 2001 as phylogenetic analyses provided the impetus for a reorganization of the many species formerly grouped together in the genus Coprinus . Based on external appearance , C. micaceus is virtually indistinguishable from C. truncorum , and it has been suggested that many reported collections of the former may be of the latter . 
 = = History and taxonomy = = 
 Coprinellus <unk> was illustrated in a woodcut by the 16th @-@ century botanist Carolus Clusius in what is arguably the first published monograph on fungi , the 1601 Rariorum plantarum historia . Fungorum in <unk> <unk> brevis historia ( History of rare plants . Brief history of fungi observed in Pannonia [ Hungary ] ) . Clusius erroneously believed the species to be poisonous , and classified it as a genus of Fungi <unk> ( harmful fungi ) . The species was first described scientifically by French botanist Jean Baptiste François Pierre Bulliard in 1786 as Agaricus micaceus in his work Herbier de la France . In 1801 , Christian Hendrik Persoon grouped together all of the gilled fungi that auto @-@ digested ( <unk> ) during spore discharge into the section Coprinus of the genus Agaricus . Elias Magnus Fries later raised Persoon 's section Coprinus to genus rank in his Epicrisis Systematis Mycologici , and the species became known as Coprinus micaceus . It was the type species of subsection <unk> in section <unk> of the genus Coprinus , a grouping of related taxa with veils made of sphaerocysts ( round swollen cells usually formed in clusters ) exclusively or with thin @-@ filamentous connective hyphae intermixed . Molecular studies published in the 1990s demonstrated that many of the coprinoid ( Coprinus @-@ like ) mushrooms were in fact unrelated to each other . This culminated in a 2001 revision of the genus Coprinus , which was split into four genera ; C. <unk> was transferred to Coprinellus . 
 Due partly to their ready availability and the ease with which they may be grown in the laboratory , C. micaceus and other coprinoid mushrooms were common subjects in cytological studies of the 19th and 20th centuries . The German botanist Johann Heinrich Friedrich Link reported his observations of the structure of the hymenium ( the fertile spore @-@ bearing surface ) in 1809 , but misinterpreted what he had seen . Link thought that microscopic structures known today as basidia were <unk> , comparable in form to the asci of the Ascomycetes , and that each <unk> contained four series of spores . His inaccurate drawings of the hymenium of C. micaceus were copied in subsequent mycological publications by other authors , and it was not until microscopy had advanced that mycologists were able to determine the true nature of the basidia , when nearly three decades later in 1837 Joseph @-@ Henri Léveillé and August Corda independently published correct descriptions of the structure of the hymenium . In 1924 , A. H. Reginald Buller published a comprehensive description and analysis of the processes of spore production and release in the third volume of his Researches on Fungi . 
 The specific epithet micaceus is derived from the Latin word mica , for " crumb , grain of salt " and the suffix <unk> , " like , similar " ; the modern application of " mica " to a very different substance comes from the influence of <unk> , " glitter " . The mushroom is commonly known as the " shiny cap " , the " mica cap " or the " glistening inky cap " , all in reference to the mealy particles found on the cap that glisten like mica . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is initially 1 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 0 in ) in diameter , oval to cylindrical , but expands to become <unk> ( bell @-@ shaped ) , sometimes with an umbo ( a central nipple @-@ like protrusion ) ; finally it flattens somewhat , becoming convex . When expanded , the cap diameter reaches 0 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 0 cm ( 0 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) with the margin torn into rays and turned upwards slightly . The color is yellow @-@ brown or tan often with a darker center , then pale yellow or buff from the margin inwards . The cap margin is prominently grooved almost all the way to the center ; the grooves mark the positions of the longer gills on the underside of the cap . When young , the cap surface is covered with white or whitish shiny particles , remnants of the universal veil that covers immature specimens . The particles are loosely attached and easily washed away , so that older specimens are often smooth . Coprinellus micaceus is hygrophanous , meaning it assumes different colors depending on its state of hydration . 
 The gills are crowded together closely , and have an adnexed ( narrow ) attachment to the stem . Initially white , they change color to dark brown then eventually black as the spores mature . Expansion of the cap causes the gills to split open down their median planes , tearing the cap margin into rays . The process of spore discharge and autodigestion begin at the bottom of the gills before the upper parts of the gills have become completely blackened . The brittle stem is hollow , and measures 4 – 10 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) long by 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 2 in ) thick and is roughly the same diameter throughout the length of the stem . It is generally white , but may discolor to pale dirty cream from the base up . The stem surface is at first velvety with a very fine whitish powder , but this eventually wears off , leaving it more or less smooth . Stems may have a rudimentary ring at the base , another universal veil remnant . The spore print is dark brown or black . The flesh is thin , fragile , white in the stem , and brownish in the cap . Its odor and taste are not distinctive . Individual fruit bodies take an average of five to seven days to fully mature . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spores of C. micaceus are reddish @-@ brown , with dimensions of 7 – 10 by 4 @.@ 5 – 6 µm . Generally , they are <unk> ( shaped like a biconvex lens ) , but viewed from the side they appear more almond @-@ shaped or spindle @-@ shaped , while in front view they appear oval or <unk> ( roughly the shape of a <unk> — a peaked cap ) . Spores have a germ pore , a flattened area in the center of the spore surface through which a germ tube may emerge . The spore @-@ bearing cells ( the basidia ) are four @-@ spored , club @-@ shaped , and measure 10 – 15 by 4 – 7 µm . Studies have shown that the basidia develop in four discrete generations . The first generation basidia are the most protuberant , and extend out the greatest distance from the surface of the hymenium . Subsequent generations of basidia have shorter and less protuberant bodies . When a living gill is viewed with a microscope , the four sets of basidia can be seen distinctly . Arthur Buller coined the term <unk> to describe this mode of hymenial development . The purpose of the staggered basidia sizes is to facilitate the release of spores from the hymenium . There are four zones of spore discharge that correspond to the four sets of basidia , and basidia that have released all of their spores quickly begin to <unk> . The staggered setup minimizes the chance of spores colliding with neighboring basidia during release . 
 Cystidia that are located along the edge of the cap ( called cheilocystidia ) are spherical , and 30 – 120 by 20 – 74 µm . The facial cystidia ( called pleurocystidia ) are club @-@ shaped or elongated ellipses , up to 130 – 155 µm in length . The pleurocystidia protrude from the face of the gill and act as guards , preventing adjacent gills from touching each other , and also ensuring that the basidia and spores have sufficient room for development . C. micaceus may also have scattered caulocystidia ( cystidia on the stem ) that are 60 – 100 by 5 – 10 µm , but their presence is variable and cannot reliably be used for identification . Both De Bary and Buller , in their investigations into the structure of the cystidia , concluded that there is a central mass of cytoplasm formed where numerous thin plates of cytoplasm meet at the center of the cell . De Bary believed that the plates were filamentous branching processes , but Buller thought that they were formed in a process similar to the walls of foam bubbles , and that the central mass was able to slowly change form and position by altering the relative volumes of the vacuoles enclosed by the numerous thin cytoplasmic walls . In older cells , the cytoplasm may be limited to the periphery of the cell , with one huge vacuole occupying the cell center . 
 The globular cells that make up the mica @-@ resembling scales on the cap are colorless , smooth @-@ walled , and range in size from about 25 – 65 µm , although most are between 40 – 50 µm . Buller explained the " glitter " of these cells as follows : " The sparkling of the meal @-@ cells , as well as of the cystidia on the edges and faces of the gills , is simply due to light which strikes them from without and is refracted and reflected to the eye in the same manner as from the minute drops of water one so often sees at the tips of grass leaves on English lawns early in the morning after a dewy night . " 
 In 1914 , Michael Levine was the first to report successfully cultivating C. micaceus from spores in the laboratory . In his experiments , fruit bodies appeared roughly 40 to 60 days after initially inoculating the growth media ( agar supplemented with soil , horse dung , or cornmeal ) with spores . Like other coprinoid species , C. micaceus undergoes synchronous meiosis . The chromosomes are readily discernible with light microscopy , and all of the meiotic stages are well @-@ defined . These features have made the species a useful tool in laboratory investigations of Basidiomycete cytogenetics . The chromosome number of C. micaceus is n = 12 . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 Coprinellus micaceus is an edible species , and cooking inactivates the enzymes that cause autodigestion or deliquescence — a process that can begin as soon as one hour after collection . It is considered ideal for omelettes , and as a flavor for sauces , although it is " a very delicate species easily spoiled by <unk> " . The flavor is so delicate that it is easy to overpower and hide with almost anything . The fungus also appeals to fruit flies of the genus Drosophila , who frequently use the fruit bodies as hosts for larvae production . 
 A study of the mineral contents of various edible mushrooms found that C. micaceus contained the highest concentration of potassium in the 34 species tested , close to half a gram of potassium per kilogram of mushroom . Because the species can bioaccumulate detrimental heavy metals like lead and cadmium , it has been advised to restrict consumption of specimens collected from roadsides or other collection sites that may be exposed to or contain pollutants . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The edible Coprinellus bisporus is nearly identical but lacks the yellowish cap granules and only has two spores per basidium . The scaly inky cap ( Coprinus variegatus = Coprinus quadrifidus ) has a grayish @-@ brown cap with dull white to brownish scales ; its odor is disagreeable . The trooping crumble cap ( Coprinellus disseminatus , edible ) has smaller , yellow @-@ brown to grey @-@ brown caps and white gills that turn black but do not dissolve away ; it always grows in large clusters on rotting wood ( sometimes buried wood ) . Coprinus atramentarius is a larger , gray species that grows in dense clusters on stumps or on the ground from buried wood , lacks glistening particles on the cap , and the cap and gills dissolve at maturity . Coprinellus radians develops singly or in clumps from a tufted mat of coarse yellow @-@ orange mycelium on the wood . Coprinellus truncorum is also covered with glistening granules and is said to be almost indistinguishable from C. micaceus in the field ; microscopy is needed to tell the difference , as C. truncorum has ellipsoid spores with a rounded germ pore , compared to the shield @-@ shaped ( <unk> ) spores with truncated germ pores of C. micaceus . One study suggests that compared to C. truncorum , C. micaceus is browner in the center of the cap ( rather than grayish ) and has a greater tendency to grow in clusters ; more molecular evidence is required to determine if the two taxa are genetically identical . 
 = = Ecology , habitat and distribution = = 
 Coprinellus micaceus is a saprotrophic species , deriving nutrients from dead and decomposing organic matter , and grows in and around stumps or logs of broad @-@ leaved trees or attached to buried wood . It prefers feeding on bark , particularly the secondary phloem , rather than the wood . In the scheme of the succession of fungal species involved in the decomposition of wood , C. micaceus is a late stage colonizer , and prefers to feed on wood that has already decomposed sufficiently to have reached " a friable softened consistency " . A 2010 study suggests that the fungus can also live as an endophyte , inhabiting the woody tissue of healthy trees without causing disease symptoms . The fungus is also associated with disturbed or developed ground , such as the sides of roads and paths , gardens , building sites and the edges of parking lots ; it has also been noted for growing indoors on rotting wood in humid environments . In one instance it was discovered about 120 m ( 400 ft ) underground in an abandoned coal mine , growing on wooden gangways and props used to support the roof . 
 Fruit bodies are commonly found growing in dense clusters , but can also be found growing singly or in small clumps , especially in forested areas . In North America , C. micaceus is one of the first edible mushrooms to appear in the spring , and fruits from May to September . In Europe , it fruits from May to December . Although it can grow at any time of the year , it is more prevalent during the spring and fall , coinciding with the higher humidity resulting from spring and autumn rains . A study of air quality conducted in the city of Santiago de Compostela in the Iberian Peninsula , concluded that most " Coprinus " spores present in the atmosphere belonged to C. micaceus , and that the number of spores went up with increased humidity and rainfall , but decreased with greater temperatures . The species is known for reappearing with successive fruitings at the same location . In one case , a total of 38 lb ( 17 @.@ 2 kg ) of fresh mushrooms were collected from one elm stump in 10 successive crops over a spring and summer . 
 Coprinellus micaceus has a cosmopolitan distribution , and has been collected in northern Africa , South Africa , Europe ( including Turkey ) , North America ( as far north as Alaska ) , the Hawaiian islands , South America , India , Australia , New Zealand , and Japan . Phylogenetic analysis of rDNA sequences from specimens collected in southeastern Asia and Hawaii show that the Hawaiian species form a distinct clade with little genetic diversity compared to Asian populations ; this suggests that the Hawaiian populations have been introduced relatively recently and have not had much time to develop genetic variation . One study suggests that in South Africa , where C. micaceus is rare , it has been frequently confused with the similar @-@ appearing C. truncorum , a more common species in that region . A similar inference has been raised about North American species . 
 = = Bioactive compounds = = 
 Research into the natural product chemistry of Coprinellus micaceus has revealed the presence of several chemical compounds unique to the species . <unk> is a sterol with " modest " antibacterial activity against the pathogens Corynebacterium <unk> and Staphylococcus aureus . The compound ( Z , Z ) -4 @-@ oxo @-@ 2 @,@ 5 @-@ <unk> acid has inhibitory activity against glutathione S @-@ transferase , an enzyme that has been implicated in the resistance of cancer cells against chemotherapeutic agents , especially alkylating drugs . A 2003 study did not find any antibacterial activity in this species . A 1962 publication reported the presence of the biologically active indole compound tryptamine in C. micaceus , although the concentration was not determined . The fruit bodies additionally produce a variety of pigment compounds known as melanins — complex chemical polymers that contribute to the formation of soil humus after the fruit bodies have disintegrated . C. micaceus has been found to be devoid of the toxin coprine , the Antabuse @-@ mimicking chemical found in Coprinopsis atramentaria that causes illness when consumed simultaneously with alcohol . 
 = = = Cited books = = = 
 Arora D. ( 1986 ) . Mushrooms Demystified : a Comprehensive Guide to the Fleshy Fungi . Berkeley , California : Ten Speed Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 89815 @-@ 169 @-@ 4 . 
 Buller AH . ( 1924 ) . " Chapter XI : The micaceus sub @-@ type illustrated by Coprinus micaceus " . Researches on Fungi III . London , UK : Longmans , Green , and Co. pp. 328 – 56 . 
 = Frances Oldham Kelsey = 
 Frances Kathleen Oldham Kelsey , CM ( July 24 , 1914 – August 7 , 2015 ) was a Canadian pharmacologist and physician . As a reviewer for the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) , she refused to authorize thalidomide for market because she had concerns about the drug 's safety . Her concerns proved to be justified when it was shown that thalidomide caused serious birth defects . Kelsey 's career intersected with the passage of laws strengthening FDA oversight of pharmaceuticals . Kelsey was the second woman to be awarded the President 's Award for Distinguished Federal Civilian Service by President John F. Kennedy . 
 = = Birth and education = = 
 Born in <unk> Lake on Vancouver Island , British Columbia , Kelsey was graduated by St. Margaret 's School high school at age 15 , and attended Victoria College , British Columbia ( 1930 – 1931 ) in Victoria , British Columbia ( now University of Victoria ) . She then enrolled at McGill University to study pharmacology . At McGill , she received both a B.Sc. ( 1934 ) and a M.Sc. ( 1935 ) in pharmacology , and " on [ a ] professor 's urging , wrote to <unk> Geiling , M.D. , a noted researcher [ who ] was starting up a new pharmacology department at the University of Chicago , asking for a position doing graduate work " . Geiling presumed that Frances was a man and offered her the position . Kelsey accepted and began working for Geiling in 1936 . 
 During her second year , Geiling was retained by the FDA to research unusual deaths related to elixir <unk> , a sulfonamide medicine . Kelsey assisted on this research project , which showed that the 107 deaths were caused by the use of diethylene glycol as a solvent . The next year , the United States Congress passed the Federal Food , Drug , and Cosmetic Act of 1938 . That same year she completed her studies and received a Ph.D. in pharmacology at the University of Chicago . Working with Geiling led to her interest in teratogens , drugs that cause congenital malformations . 
 = = Early career and marriage = = 
 Upon completing her Ph.D. , Kelsey joined the University of Chicago faculty . In 1942 , like many other pharmacologists , Kelsey was looking for a synthetic cure for malaria . As a result of these studies , Kelsey learned that some drugs are able to pass through the placental barrier . While there she also met fellow faculty member Dr. Fremont Ellis Kelsey , whom she married in 1943 . 
 While on the faculty at the University of Chicago , Kelsey was awarded her M.D. during 1950 . She supplemented her teaching with work as an editorial associate for the American Medical Association Journal for two years . Kelsey left the University of Chicago in 1954 , decided to take a position teaching pharmacology at the University of South Dakota , and moved with her husband and two daughters to Vermillion , South Dakota , where she taught until 1957 . 
 She became a dual @-@ citizen of Canada and the United States in the 1950s in order to continue practicing medicine in the U.S. , but retained strong ties to Canada where she continued to visit her siblings regularly until late in life . 
 = = Work at the FDA and thalidomide = = 
 In 1960 , Kelsey was hired by the FDA in Washington , D.C. At that time , she " was one of only seven full @-@ time and four young part @-@ time physicians reviewing drugs " for the FDA . One of her first assignments at the FDA was to review an application by Richardson <unk> for the drug thalidomide ( under the tradename <unk> ) as a tranquilizer and painkiller with specific indications to prescribe the drug to pregnant women for morning sickness . Even though it had already been approved in Canada and more than 20 European and African countries , she withheld approval for the drug and requested further studies . Despite pressure from thalidomide 's manufacturer , Kelsey persisted in requesting additional information to explain an English study that documented a nervous system side effect . 
 Kelsey 's insistence that the drug should be fully tested prior to approval was vindicated when the births of deformed infants in Europe were linked to thalidomide ingestion by their mothers during pregnancy . Researchers discovered that the thalidomide crossed the placental barrier and caused serious birth defects . She was hailed on the front page of The Washington Post as a heroine for averting a similar tragedy in the U.S. Morton Mintz , author of The Washington Post article , said " [ Kelsey ] prevented … the birth of hundreds or indeed thousands of armless and legless children . " Kelsey insisted that her assistants , <unk> Jiro and Lee Geismar , as well as her FDA superiors who backed her strong stance , deserved credit as well . The narrative of Dr. Kelsey 's persistence , however , was used to help pass rigorous drug approval regulation in 1962 . 
 After Morton Mintz broke the story in July 1962 , there was a substantial public outcry . The Kefauver Harris Amendment was passed unanimously by Congress in October 1962 to strengthen drug regulation . Companies were required to demonstrate the efficacy of new drugs , report adverse reactions to the FDA , and request consent from patients participating in clinical studies . The drug testing reforms required " stricter limits on the testing and distribution of new drugs " to avoid similar problems . The amendments , for the first time , also recognized that " effectiveness [ should be ] required to be established prior to marketing . " The new laws were not without controversy . 
 As a result of her blocking American approval of thalidomide , Kelsey was awarded the President 's Award for Distinguished Federal Civilian Service by President John F. Kennedy , becoming the second woman to receive that award . British Pathé released a film of Kennedy acknowledging Kelsey in a speech . After receiving the award , Kelsey continued her work at the FDA . There she played a key role in shaping and enforcing the 1962 amendments . She also became responsible for directing the surveillance of drug testing at the FDA . 
 Kelsey retired from the FDA in 2005 , at age 90 , after 45 years of service . In 2010 the FDA named the Kelsey Award for her , to be awarded annually to an FDA employee . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Kelsey continued to work for the FDA while being recognised for her earlier work . She was still working at the FDA 's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research in 1995 and was appointed deputy for scientific and medical affairs . In 1994 , the Frances Kelsey Secondary School in Mill Bay , British Columbia was named in her honour . She retired in 2005 . 
 In 2010 , the FDA presented Kelsey with the first Drug Safety Excellence Award and named the annual award after her , announcing that it would be given to one FDA staff member annually . In announcing the awards , Center Director Steven K. <unk> said “ I am very pleased to have established the Dr. Frances O. Kelsey Drug Safety Excellence Award and to recognize the first recipients for their outstanding accomplishments in this important aspect of drug regulation . ” 
 Kelsey turned 100 in July 2014 , and shortly thereafter , in the fall of 2014 , she moved from Washington , D.C. , to live with her daughter in London , Ontario . In June 2015 , when she was named to the Order of Canada , <unk> <unk> , a thalidomide victim and the head of the Thalidomide Victims Association of Canada , praised Dr. Kelsey for showing strength and courage by refusing to bend to pressure from drug company officials , and said “ To us , she was always our heroine , even if what she did was in another country . ” 
 Kelsey died in London , Ontario , on August 7 , 2015 at the age of 101 , less than 24 hours after Ontario ’ s Lieutenant @-@ Governor , Elizabeth <unk> , visited her home to present her with the insignia of Member of the Order of Canada for her role against thalidomide . 
 = = Legacy and awards = = 
 1962 • President 's Award for Distinguished Federal Civilian Service 
 1963 • Gold Key Award from University of Chicago , Medical and Biological Sciences Alumni Association 
 2000 • Inducted into the National Women 's Hall of Fame 
 2001 • Named a Virtual Mentor for the American Medical Association 
 2006 • <unk> Award from the National Research Center for Women & Families 
 2010 • Recipient of the first Dr. Frances O. Kelsey Award for Excellence and Courage in Protecting Public Health given out by the FDA 
 2012 • Honorary doctor of science degree from Vancouver Island University 
 2015 • Named to the Order of Canada 
 = Battle of Boroughbridge = 
 The Battle of Boroughbridge was a battle fought on 16 March 1322 between a group of rebellious barons and King Edward II of England , near Boroughbridge , north @-@ west of York . The culmination of a long period of antagonism between the King and Thomas , Earl of Lancaster , his most powerful subject , it resulted in Lancaster 's defeat and execution . This allowed Edward to re @-@ establish royal authority , and hold on to power for another five years . 
 Not in itself a part of the Wars of Scottish Independence , the battle is significant for its employment of tactics learned in the Scottish wars in a domestic , English conflict . Both the extensive use of foot soldiers rather than cavalry , and the heavy impact caused by the longbow , represented significant steps in military developments . 
 = = Background = = 
 Edward II was a weak and ineffectual king ( made to look the more so by comparison with his father and son , Edward I and Edward III ) , and his reign was marked by military failure and internal strife . A great number of the barony turned against the King , and the leader of the opposition eventually became Thomas of Lancaster . Lancaster was Edward 's cousin , and next to the King he was the richest man in the country . Through a set of regulations known as the Ordinances , Lancaster and his associates had been trying to put restrictions on royal authority , but by the late 1310s Edward was again in full control of central government . The situation was aggravated by the King 's ostentatious patronage of his favourite , Hugh Despenser , and Hugh 's father by the same name . 
 In 1319 , the King and Lancaster fell out during a failed campaign against Scotland . The next year Lancaster refused to attend a parliament summoned by the King , and later the same year , Edward obtained papal absolution from his oath to follow the Ordinances . Meanwhile , an inheritance dispute had broken out in the Welsh Marches between the Despensers and certain marcher lords , including Humphrey de Bohun , Earl of Hereford . Lancaster now took the initiative with the discontented . In 1321 he summoned two meetings of magnates , one at Lancaster 's residence of Pontefract in March , and the other at Sherburn in June . The meetings consisted of northern and marcher lords , as well as Lancaster 's own retainers , but little assistance was forthcoming from the northerners . The marcher rebellion , and the threat of civil war , forced the King to exile the younger Despenser , but the favourite was recalled within weeks . 
 Edward now seized the initiative , and moved northwards . Lancaster convened one final meeting at Doncaster in November , and also entered into an alliance with Robert I of Scotland to strengthen his hand against the King . In January 1322 Edward crossed the River Severn , and secured the surrender of several of the marcher lords while Lancaster remained passive . As the royal army crossed the River Trent after the Battle of Burton Bridge , Lancaster was forced to flee north . On 16 March Lancaster and his army had reached Boroughbridge by the River Ure where they were joined by the Earl 's Secretary Sir Robert de Holland and the force he had raised in Lancashire . There they were cut off by the forces of Sir Andrew Harclay , a veteran from the Scottish wars , who had gathered the levies from the counties of Cumberland and Westmorland . 
 = = Battle = = 
 When Lancaster arrived at the town of Boroughbridge , Harclay was already in possession of the bridge crossing the river . The rebel forces counted probably no more than 700 knights and men @-@ at @-@ arms , against the 4 @,@ 000 or so soldiers in the royal army . Lancaster initially tried to negotiate , but Harclay could not be swayed . Since there was no realistic alternative place to cross the river , and with the royal forces in pursuit from the south , the rebels had no choice but to fight . The ensuing battle was short and one @-@ sided . 
 Harclay had deployed his men on foot to hold the bridge from the northern side . Additional forces were placed at a nearby ford , though contemporary sources do not specify the exact location of this ford . The royal pikemen were deployed in a <unk> formation , a tactic learned from the Scots in the Scottish wars . The formation proved effective against the oncoming cavalry . The rebels divided into two columns ; one led by Hereford and Roger de Clifford , attacking the bridge on foot , the other under Lancaster , trying to cross the ford by horse . According to a graphic description in the chronicle the Brut , Hereford was killed as he crossed the bridge by a <unk> hiding underneath , who thrust his spear up through the Earl 's anus . Clifford was also severely injured , and that column of the army fell into disarray . Lancaster 's party fared little better ; under heavy archery fire his cavalry was cut off before it even reached the ford , and was forced to retreat . This event shows an early – if not entirely novel – effective use of the longbow against cavalry , a tactic which was to become central to future English military success . 
 Lancaster negotiated a truce with Harclay , and withdrew to the town . During the night a great number of the rebels deserted , and the next day the sheriff of York arrived from the south with additional forces . Lancaster , now greatly outnumbered and with no chance of retreat , had no choice but to surrender to Harclay . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Thomas of Lancaster was taken to Pontefract Castle , which by then had fallen to the King . There he was submitted to what was little more than a show trial , and – in front of a gathering of earls and barons – sentenced to death . On 22 March 1322 , he was led out of the castle and beheaded in front of a jeering crowd . In the years to come , a cult emerged around the person of the late earl as a martyr , and even a possible saint . Lancaster had shown no signs of extraordinary piety or other personal abilities during his lifetime , and the cult has been interpreted as a reaction to the incompetent and oppressive reign of Edward II . 
 Some thirty of Lancaster 's followers were also executed , among these Clifford and the baron John Mowbray . 
 Andrew Harclay was richly rewarded for his loyal and competent performance at Boroughbridge . On 15 March he was created Earl of Carlisle , and promised lands worth 1000 marks yearly . Yet Harclay , who had turned down Lancaster 's overtures to join in the rebellion , was no great adherent of the King . As a warden of the Scottish Marches he grew constantly more frustrated with the King 's idleness , and eventually negotiated a peace treaty with the Scots . This action on Harclay 's part amounted to treason , and early in 1323 he was apprehended by the King 's men , and hanged , drawn and quartered . 
 As for Edward II himself , his dependence on the Despensers grew only deeper , and their transgressions more severe . Lancaster 's supporters ( including Roger Mortimer , William Trussell and Robert de Holland ) found themselves systematically accused of false charges , being imprisoned and having their lands taken over by the <unk> . Mortimer and Trussell eventually fled to Paris where they were to be joined by Edward 's estranged wife Isabella who was to become Mortimer 's lover . 
 In 1327 Isabella and Mortimer staged a coup against the King . Edward II was deposed and his son , Edward III , succeeded in his place . 
 = = External sources = = 
 The Battle of Boroughbridge at The Battlefields Trust . 
 English Heritage Battlefield Report : Boroughbridge 1322 
 = History of Minnesota = 
 The history of the U.S. state of Minnesota is shaped by its original Native American residents , European exploration and settlement , and the emergence of industries made possible by the state 's natural resources . Minnesota achieved prominence through fur trading , logging , and farming , and later through railroads , and iron mining . While those industries remain important , the state 's economy is now driven by banking , computers , and health care . 
 The earliest known settlers followed herds of large game to the region during the last glacial period . They preceded the Anishinaabe , the Dakota , and other Native American inhabitants . Fur traders from France arrived during the 17th century . Europeans , moving west during the 19th century , drove out most of the Native Americans . Fort Snelling , built to protect United States territorial interests , brought early settlers to the area . Early settlers used Saint Anthony Falls for powering sawmills in the area that became Minneapolis , while others settled downriver in the area that became Saint Paul . 
 Minnesota gained legal existence as the Minnesota Territory in 1849 , and became the 32nd U.S. state on May 11 , 1858 . After the upheaval of the American Civil War and the Dakota War of 1862 , the state 's economy started to develop when natural resources were tapped for logging and farming . Railroads attracted immigrants , established the farm economy , and brought goods to market . The power provided by St. Anthony Falls spurred the growth of Minneapolis , and the innovative milling methods gave it the title of the " milling capital of the world " . 
 New industry came from iron ore , discovered in the north , mined relatively easily from open pits , and shipped to Great Lakes steel mills from the ports at Duluth and Two Harbors . Economic development and social changes led to an expanded role for state government and a population shift from rural areas to cities . The Great Depression brought layoffs in mining and tension in labor relations but New Deal programs helped the state . After World War II , Minnesota became known for technology , fueled by early computer companies Sperry Rand , Control Data and Cray . The Twin Cities also became a regional center for the arts with cultural institutions such as the Guthrie Theater , Minnesota Orchestra , and the Walker Art Center . 
 = = Native American inhabitation = = 
 The oldest known human remains in Minnesota , dating back about 9000 years ago , were discovered near Browns Valley in 1933 . " Browns Valley Man " was found with tools of the Clovis and Folsom types . Some of the earliest evidence of a sustained presence in the area comes from a site known as Bradbury Brook near Mille Lacs Lake which was used around 7500 BC . Subsequently , extensive trading networks developed in the region . The body of an early resident known as " Minnesota Woman " was discovered in 1931 in Otter Tail County . Radiocarbon dating places the age of the bones approximately 8 @,@ 000 years ago , approximately <unk> ± 70 BP or near the end of the Eastern Archaic period . She had a conch shell from a snail species known as Busycon <unk> , which had previously only been known to exist in Florida . 
 Several hundred years later , the climate of Minnesota warmed significantly . As large animals such as mammoths became extinct , native people changed their diet . They gathered nuts , berries , and vegetables , and they hunted smaller animals such as deer , bison , and birds . The stone tools found from this era became smaller and more specialized to use these new food sources . They also devised new techniques for catching fish , such as fish hooks , nets , and harpoons . Around 5000 BC , people on the shores of Lake Superior ( in Minnesota and portions of what is now Michigan , Wisconsin , and Canada ) were the first on the continent to begin making metal tools . Pieces of ore with high concentrations of copper were initially pounded into a rough shape , heated to reduce brittleness , pounded again to refine the shape , and reheated . Edges could be made sharp enough to be useful as knives or spear points . 
 Archaeological evidence of Native American settlements dates back as far as 3000 BC ; the Jeffers Petroglyphs site in southwest Minnesota contains carvings thought to date to the Late Archaic Period ( 3000 BC to 1000 BC ) . Around 700 BC , burial mounds were first created , and the practice continued until the arrival of Europeans , when 10 @,@ 000 such mounds dotted the state . 
 By AD 800 , wild rice became a staple crop in the region , and corn farther to the south . Within a few hundred years , the Mississippian culture reached into the southeast portion of the state , and large villages were formed . The Dakota Native American culture may have descended from some of the peoples of the Mississippian culture . 
 When Europeans first started exploring Minnesota , the region was inhabited primarily by tribes of Dakota , with the Ojibwa ( sometimes called Chippewa , or Anishinaabe ) beginning to migrate westward into the state around 1700 . The economy of these tribes was chiefly based on hunter @-@ gatherer activities . There was also a small group of Ho @-@ Chunk ( Winnebago ) Native Americans near Long Prairie , who later moved to a reservation in Blue Earth County in 1855 . 
 = = European exploration = = 
 Though highly controversial , an inscribed stone known as the Kensington Runestone suggests that a group of Norse explorers may have ventured as far inland as Minnesota as early as 1362 , though many consider it a hoax . 
 It was a few more centuries before contact between Europeans and Native Americans of Minnesota could be confirmed . In the late 1650s , Pierre Esprit Radisson and <unk> des Groseilliers were probably the first to meet Dakota Native Americans while following the southern shore of Lake Superior ( which would become northern Wisconsin ) . The north shore was explored in the 1660s . Among the first to do this was Claude <unk> , a missionary on Madeline Island . He made an early map of the area in 1671 . 
 Around this time , the Ojibwa Native Americans reached Minnesota as part of a westward migration . Having come from a region around Maine , they were experienced at dealing with European traders . They dealt in furs and possessed guns . Tensions rose between the Ojibwa and Dakota in the ensuing years . 
 In 1671 , France signed a treaty with a number of tribes to allow trade . Shortly thereafter , French trader Daniel Greysolon , Sieur du Lhut arrived in the area and began trading with the local tribes . Du Lhut explored the western area of Lake Superior , near his namesake , the city of Duluth , and areas south of there . He helped to arrange a peace agreement between the Dakota and Ojibwa tribes in 1679 . 
 Father Louis Hennepin with companions Michel Aco and Antoine <unk> ( aka Picard Du Gay ) headed north from the area of Illinois after coming into that area with an exploration party headed by René @-@ Robert Cavelier , Sieur de La Salle . They were captured by a Dakota tribe in 1680 . While with the tribe , they came across and named the Falls of Saint Anthony . Soon , Du Lhut negotiated to have Hennepin 's party released from captivity . Hennepin returned to Europe and wrote a book , Description of Louisiana , published in 1683 , about his travels where many portions ( including the part about Saint Anthony Falls ) were strongly embellished . As an example , he described the falls as being a drop of fifty or sixty feet , when they were really only about sixteen feet . Pierre @-@ Charles Le Sueur explored the Minnesota River to the Blue Earth area around 1700 . He thought the blue earth was a source of copper , and he told stories about the possibility of mineral wealth , but there actually was no copper to be found . 
 Explorers searching for the fabled Northwest Passage and large inland seas in North America continued to pass through the state . In 1721 , the French built Fort Beauharnois on Lake Pepin . In 1731 , the Grand Portage trail was first traversed by a European , Pierre La Vérendrye . He used a map written down on a piece of birch bark by <unk> , an Assiniboine guide . The North West Company , which traded in fur and competed with the Hudson 's Bay Company , was established along the Grand Portage in 1783 – 1784 . 
 Jonathan Carver , a shoemaker from Massachusetts , visited the area in 1767 as part of another expedition . He and the rest of the exploration party were only able to stay for a relatively short period , due to supply shortages . They headed back east to Fort Michilimackinac , where Carver wrote journals about the trip , though others would later claim the stories were largely plagiarized from others . The stories were published in 1778 , but Carver died before the book earned him much money . Carver County and Carver 's Cave are named for him . 
 Until 1818 the Red River Valley was considered British and was subject to several colonization schemes , such as the Red River Colony . The boundary where the Red River crossed the 49th parallel was not marked until 1823 , when Stephen H. Long conducted a survey expedition . When several hundred settlers abandoned the Red River Colony in the 1820s , they entered the United States by way of the Red River Valley , instead of moving to eastern Canada or returning to Europe . The region had been occupied by Métis people , the children of voyageurs and Native Americans , since the middle 17th century . 
 Several efforts were made to determine the source of the Mississippi River . The true source was found in 1832 , when Henry Schoolcraft was guided by a group of Ojibwa headed by <unk> ( " Yellow Head " ) to a lake in northern Minnesota . Schoolcraft named it Lake Itasca , combining the Latin words veritas ( " truth " ) and caput ( " head " ) . The native name for the lake was <unk> , meaning elk . Other explorers of the area include Zebulon Pike in 1806 , Major Stephen Long in 1817 , and George William Featherstonhaugh in 1835 . Featherstonhaugh conducted a geological survey of the Minnesota River valley and wrote an account entitled A Canoe Voyage up the <unk> <unk> . 
 Joseph Nicollet scouted the area in the late 1830s , exploring and mapping the Upper Mississippi River basin , the St. Croix River , and the land between the Mississippi and Missouri Rivers . He and John C. Frémont left their mark in the southwest of the state , carving their names in the <unk> quarries near <unk> Falls ( an area now part of Pipestone National Monument in Pipestone County ) . 
 Henry Wadsworth Longfellow never explored the state , but he did help to make it popular . He published The Song of Hiawatha in 1855 , which contains references to many regions in Minnesota . The story was based on Ojibwa legends carried back east by other explorers and traders ( particularly those collected by Henry Rowe Schoolcraft ) . 
 = = Territorial foundation and settlement = = 
 = = = Land acquisition = = = 
 All of the land east of the Mississippi River was granted to the United States by the Second Treaty of Paris at the end of the American Revolution in 1783 . This included what would become modern day Saint Paul but only part of Minneapolis , including the northeast , north @-@ central and east @-@ central portions of the state . The wording of the treaty in the Minnesota area depended on landmarks reported by fur traders , who erroneously reported an " Isle <unk> " in Lake Superior , a " Long Lake " west of the island , and the belief that the Mississippi River ran well into modern Canada . Most of the state was purchased in 1803 from France as part of the Louisiana Purchase . Parts of northern Minnesota were considered to be in Rupert 's Land . The exact definition of the boundary between Minnesota and British North America was not addressed until the Anglo @-@ American Convention of 1818 , which set the U.S. – Canada border at the 49th parallel west of the Lake of the Woods ( except for a small chunk of land now dubbed the Northwest Angle ) . Border disputes east of the Lake of the Woods continued until the Webster @-@ Ashburton Treaty of 1842 . 
 Throughout the first half of the 19th century , the northeastern portion of the state was a part of the Northwest Territory , then the Illinois Territory , then the Michigan Territory , and finally the Wisconsin Territory . The western and southern areas of the state , although theoretically part of the Wisconsin Territory from its creation in 1836 , were not formally organized until 1838 , when they became part of the Iowa Territory . 
 = = = Fort Snelling and the establishment of Minneapolis and Saint Paul = = = 
 Fort Snelling was the first major U.S. military presence in the state . The land for the fort , at the confluence of the Minnesota and Mississippi rivers , was acquired in 1805 by Zebulon Pike . When concerns mounted about the fur trade in the area , construction of the fort began in 1819 . Construction was completed in 1825 , and Colonel Josiah Snelling and his officers and soldiers left their imprint on the area . One of the missions of the fort was to mediate disputes between the Ojibwe and the Dakota tribes . Lawrence Taliaferro was an agent of the U.S. Bureau of Indian Affairs . He spent 20 years at the site , finally resigning in 1839 . 
 In the 1850s , Fort Snelling played a key role in the infamous Dred Scott court case . Slaves Dred Scott and his wife were taken to the fort by their master , John Emerson . They lived at the fort and elsewhere in territories where slavery was prohibited . After Emerson 's death , the Scotts argued that since they had lived in free territory , they were no longer slaves . Ultimately , the U.S. Supreme Court sided against the Scotts . Dred Scott Field , located just a short distance away in Bloomington , is named in the memory of Fort Snelling 's significance in one of the most important legal precedents in U.S. History . 
 By 1851 , treaties between Native American tribes and the U.S. government had opened much of Minnesota to settlement , so Fort Snelling no longer was a frontier outpost . It served as a training center for soldiers during the American Civil War and later as the headquarters for the Department of Dakota . A portion has been designated as Fort Snelling National Cemetery where over 160 @,@ 000 are interred . During World War II , the fort served as a training center for nearly 300 @,@ 000 inductees . After World War II , the fort was threatened with demolition due to the building of freeways Highway 5 and Highway 55 , but citizens rallied to save it . Fort Snelling is now a historic site operated by the Minnesota Historical Society . 
 Fort Snelling was largely responsible for the establishment of the city of Minneapolis . In an effort to be self @-@ sufficient , the soldiers of the fort built roads , planted crops , and built a grist mill and a sawmill at Saint Anthony Falls . Later , Franklin Steele came to Fort Snelling as the post sutler ( the operator of the general store ) , and established interests in lumbering and other activities . When the Ojibwe signed a treaty ceding lands in 1837 , Steele staked a claim to land on the east side of the Mississippi River adjacent to Saint Anthony Falls . In 1848 , he built a sawmill at the falls , and the community of Saint Anthony sprung up around the east side of the falls . Steele told one of his employees , John H. Stevens , that land on the west side of the falls would make a good site for future mills . Since the land on the west side was still part of the military reservation , Stevens made a deal with Fort Snelling 's commander . Stevens would provide free ferry service across the river in exchange for a tract of 160 acres ( 0 @.@ 65 km2 ) at the head of the falls . Stevens received the claim and built a house , the first house in Minneapolis , in 1850 . In 1854 , Stevens platted the city of Minneapolis on the west bank . Later , in 1872 , Minneapolis absorbed the city of Saint Anthony . 
 The city of Saint Paul , Minnesota owes its existence to Fort Snelling . A group of squatters , mostly from the ill @-@ fated Red River Colony in what is now the Canadian province of Manitoba , established a camp near the fort . The commandant of Fort Snelling , Major Joseph Plympton , found their presence problematic because they were using timber and allowing their cattle and horses to graze around the fort . Plympton banned lumbering and the construction of any new buildings on the military reservation land . As a result , the squatters moved four miles downstream on the Mississippi River . They settled at a site known as Fountain Cave . This site was not quite far enough for the officers at the fort , so the squatters were forced out again . Pierre " Pig 's Eye " Parrant , a popular <unk> among the group , moved downriver and established a saloon , becoming the first European resident in the area that later became Saint Paul . The squatters named their settlement " Pig 's Eye " after Parrant . The name was later changed to Lambert 's Landing and then finally Saint Paul . However , the earliest name for the area comes from a Native American colony Im @-@ in @-@ i @-@ ja Ska , meaning " White Rock " and referring to the limestone bluffs nearby . 
 Minneapolis and Saint Paul are collectively known as the " Twin Cities " . The cities enjoyed a rivalry during their early years , with Saint Paul being the capital city and Minneapolis becoming prominent through industry . The term " Twin Cities " was coined around 1872 , after a newspaper editorial suggested that Minneapolis could absorb Saint Paul . Residents decided that the cities needed a separate identity , so people coined the phrase " Dual Cities " , which later evolved into " Twin Cities " . Today , Minneapolis is the largest city in Minnesota , with a population of 382 @,@ 618 in the 2000 census . Saint Paul is the second largest city , with a population of 287 @,@ 151 . Minneapolis and Saint Paul anchor a metropolitan area with a population of 2 @,@ 968 @,@ 806 as of 2000 , with a total state population of 4 @,@ 919 @,@ 479 . 
 = = = Early European settlement and development = = = 
 Henry Hastings Sibley built the first stone house in the Minnesota Territory in Mendota in 1838 , along with other limestone buildings used by the American Fur Company , which bought animal pelts at that location from 1825 to 1853 . Another area of early economic development in Minnesota was the logging industry . Loggers found the white pine especially valuable , and it was plentiful in the northeastern section of the state and in the St. Croix River valley . Before railroads , lumbermen relied mostly on river transportation to bring logs to market , which made Minnesota 's timber resources attractive . Towns like Marine on St. Croix and Stillwater became important lumber centers fed by the St. Croix River , while Winona was supplied lumber by areas in southern Minnesota and along the Minnesota River . The unregulated logging practices of the time and a severe drought took their toll in 1894 , when the Great Hinckley Fire ravaged 480 square miles ( 1 @,@ 200 km2 ) in the Hinckley and Sandstone areas of Pine County , killing over 400 residents . The combination of logging and drought struck again in the <unk> Fire of 1910 and the <unk> Fire of 1918 . 
 Saint Anthony , on the east bank of the Mississippi River later became part of Minneapolis , and was an important lumber milling center supplied by the Rum River . In 1848 , businessman Franklin Steele built the first private sawmill on the Saint Anthony Falls , and more sawmills quickly followed . The oldest home still standing in Saint Anthony is the Ard Godfrey house , built in 1848 , and lived in by Ard and Harriet Godfrey . The house of John H. Stevens , the first house on the west bank in Minneapolis , was moved several times , finally to Minnehaha Park in south Minneapolis in 1896 . 
 = = = Minnesota Territory = = = 
 Stephen A. Douglas ( D ) , the chair of the Senate Committee on Territories , drafted the bill authorizing Minnesota Territory . He had envisioned a future for the upper Mississippi valley , so he was motivated to keep the area from being carved up by neighboring territories . In 1846 , he prevented Iowa from including Fort Snelling and Saint Anthony Falls within its northern border . In 1847 , he kept the organizers of Wisconsin from including Saint Paul and Saint Anthony Falls . The Minnesota Territory was established from the lands remaining from Iowa Territory and Wisconsin Territory on March 3 , 1849 . The Minnesota Territory extended far into what is now North Dakota and South Dakota , to the Missouri River . There was a dispute over the shape of the state to be carved out of Minnesota Territory . An alternate proposal that was only narrowly defeated would have made the 46th parallel the state 's northern border and the Missouri River its western border , thus giving up the whole northern half of the state in exchange for the eastern half of what later became South Dakota . 
 With Alexander Ramsey ( W ) as the first governor of Minnesota Territory and Henry Hastings Sibley ( D ) as the territorial delegate to the United States Congress , the populations of Saint Paul and Saint Anthony swelled . Henry M. Rice ( D ) , who replaced Sibley as the territorial delegate in 1853 , worked in Congress to promote Minnesota interests . He lobbied for the construction of a railroad connecting Saint Paul and Lake Superior , with a link from Saint Paul to the Illinois Central . 
 = = = Statehood = = = 
 In December 1856 , Rice brought forward two bills in Congress : an enabling act that would allow Minnesota to form a state constitution , and a railroad land grant bill . Rice 's enabling act defined a state containing both prairie and forest lands . The state was bounded on the south by Iowa , on the east by Wisconsin , on the north by Canada , and on the west by the Red River of the North and the Bois de Sioux River , Lake Traverse , Big Stone Lake , and then a line extending due south to the Iowa border . Rice made this motion based on Minnesota 's population growth . 
 At the time , tensions between the northern and the southern United States were growing , in a series of conflicts that eventually resulted in the American Civil War . There was little debate in the United States House of Representatives , but when Stephen A. Douglas introduced the bill in the United States Senate , it caused a firestorm of debate . Northerners saw their chance to add two senators to the side of the free states , while Southerners were sure that they would lose power . Many senators offered polite arguments that the population was too sparse and that statehood was premature . Senator John Burton Thompson of Kentucky , in particular , argued that new states would cost the government too much for roads , canals , forts , and lighthouses . Although Thompson and 21 other senators voted against statehood , the enabling act was passed on February 26 , 1857 . 
 After the enabling act was passed , territorial legislators had a difficult time writing a state constitution . A constitutional convention was assembled in July 1857 , but Republicans and Democrats were deeply divided . In fact , they formed two separate constitutional conventions and drafted two separate constitutions . Eventually , the two groups formed a conference committee and worked out a common constitution . The divisions continued , though , because Republicans refused to sign a document that had Democratic signatures on it , and vice versa . One copy of the constitution was written on white paper and signed only by Republicans , while the other copy was written on blue @-@ tinged paper and signed by Democrats . These copies were signed on August 29 , 1857 . An election was called on October 13 , 1857 , where Minnesota residents would vote to approve or disapprove the constitution . The constitution was approved by 30 @,@ 055 voters , while 571 rejected it . 
 The state constitution was sent to the United States Congress for ratification in December 1857 . The approval process was drawn out for several months while Congress debated over issues that had stemmed from the Kansas @-@ Nebraska Act . Southerners had been arguing that the next state should be pro @-@ slavery , so when Kansas submitted the pro @-@ slavery Lecompton Constitution , the Minnesota statehood bill was delayed . After that , Northerners feared that Minnesota 's Democratic delegation would support slavery in Kansas . Finally , after the Kansas question was settled and after Congress decided how many representatives Minnesota would get in the House of Representatives , the bill passed . The eastern half of the Minnesota Territory , under the boundaries defined by Henry Mower Rice , became the country 's 32nd state on May 11 , 1858 . The western part remained unorganized until its incorporation into the Dakota Territory on March 2 , 1861 . 
 = = Civil War era and Dakota War of 1862 = = 
 Minnesota strongly supported the Union war effort , with about 22 @,@ 000 Minnesotans serving . The 1st Minnesota Volunteer Infantry was particularly important to the Battle of Gettysburg . Governor Alexander Ramsey happened to be in Washington D.C. when Ft . Sumter was fired upon . He went immediately to the White House and made his state the first to offer help in putting down the rebellion . 
 At the same time , the state faced another crisis as the Dakota War of 1862 broke out . The Dakota had signed the Treaty of Traverse des Sioux and Treaty of Mendota in 1851 because they were concerned that without money from the United States government , they would starve , due to the loss of habitat of huntable game . They were initially given a strip of land of ten miles ( 16 km ) north and south of the Minnesota River , but they were later forced to sell the northern half of the land . In 1862 , crop failures left the Dakota with food shortages , and government money was delayed . After four young Dakota men , searching for food , shot a family of white settlers near Acton , the Dakota leadership decided to continue the attacks in an effort to drive out the settlers . Over a period of several days , Dakota attacks at the Lower Sioux Agency , New Ulm and Hutchinson , as well as in the surrounding farmlands , resulted in the deaths of at least 300 to 400 white settlers and government employees , causing panic in the settlements and provoking counterattacks by state militia and federal forces which spread throughout the Minnesota River Valley and as far away as the Red River Valley . The ensuing battles at Fort Ridgely , Birch Coulee , Fort Abercrombie , and Wood Lake punctuated a six @-@ week war , which ended with the trial of 425 Native Americans for their participation in the war . Of this number , 303 men were convicted and sentenced to death . 
 Episcopal Bishop Henry Benjamin Whipple pleaded to President Abraham Lincoln for clemency , and the death sentences of all but 39 men were reduced to prison terms . On December 26 , 1862 , 38 men were hanged by the U.S. Army at Mankato — the largest mass execution in the United States . Many of the remaining Dakota Native Americans , including non @-@ combatants , were confined in a prison camp at Pike Island over the winter of 1862 – 1863 , where more than 300 died of disease . Survivors were later exiled to the Crow Creek Reservation , then later to a reservation near Niobrara , Nebraska . 
 A small number of Dakota Native Americans managed to return to Minnesota in the 1880s and establish communities near Granite Falls , Morton , Prior Lake , and Red Wing . However , after this time Dakota people were no longer allowed to reside in Minnesota with the exception of the meritorious Sioux called the Loyal Mdewakanton . This separate class of Dakota did not participate in the Dakota War of 1862 , since they were assimilated Christians and instead decided to help some of the missionaries escape the Sioux warriors who chose to fight . 
 = = Economic and social development = = 
 = = = Farming and railroad development = = = 
 After the Civil War , Minnesota became an attractive region for European immigration and settlement as farmland . Minnesota 's population in 1870 was 439 @,@ 000 ; this number tripled during the two subsequent decades . The Homestead Act in 1862 facilitated land claims by settlers , who regarded the land as being cheap and fertile . The railroad industry , led by the Northern Pacific Railway and Saint Paul and Pacific Railroad , advertised the many opportunities in the state and worked to get immigrants to settle in Minnesota . James J. Hill , in particular , was instrumental in reorganizing the Saint Paul and Pacific Railroad and extending lines from the Minneapolis @-@ Saint Paul area into the Red River Valley and to Winnipeg . Hill was also responsible for building a new passenger depot in Minneapolis , served by the landmark Stone Arch Bridge which was completed in 1883 . During the 1880s , Hill continued building tracks through North Dakota and Montana . In 1890 , the railroad , now known as the Great Northern Railway , started building tracks through the mountains west to Seattle . Other railroads , such as the Lake Superior and Mississippi Railroad and the Milwaukee Road , also played an important role in the early days of Minnesota 's statehood . Later railways , such as the Soo Line and Minneapolis and St. Louis Railway facilitated the sale of Minneapolis flour and other products , although they were not as involved in attracting settlers . 
 Oliver Hudson Kelley played an important role in farming as one of the founders of the National Grange , along with several other clerks in the United States Department of Agriculture . The movement grew out of his interest in cooperative farm associations following the end of the Civil War , and he established local Grange chapters in Elk River and Saint Paul . The organization worked to provide education on new farming methods , as well as to influence government and public opinion on matters important to farmers . One of these areas of concern was the freight rates charged by the railroads and by the grain elevators . Since there was little or no competition between railroads serving Minnesota farm communities , railroads could charge as much as the traffic would bear . By 1871 , the situation was so heated that both the Republican and Democratic candidates in state elections promised to regulate railroad rates . The state established an office of railroad commissioner and imposed maximum charges for shipping . Populist Ignatius L. Donnelly also served the Grange as an organizer . 
 Saint Anthony Falls , the only waterfall of its height on the Mississippi , played an important part in the development of Minneapolis . The power of the waterfall first fueled sawmills , but later it was tapped to serve flour mills . In 1870 , only a small number of flour mills were in the Minneapolis area , but by 1900 Minnesota mills were grinding 14 @.@ 1 % of the nation 's grain . Advances in transportation , milling technology , and water power combined to give Minneapolis a dominance in the milling industry . Spring wheat could be sown in the spring and harvested in late summer , but it posed special problems for milling . To get around these problems , Minneapolis millers made use of new technology . They invented the middlings purifier , a device that used jets of air to remove the husks from the flour early in the milling process . They also started using roller mills , as opposed to grindstones . A series of rollers gradually broke down the kernels and integrated the gluten with the starch . These improvements led to the production of " patent " flour , which commanded almost double the price of " bakers " or " clear " flour , which it replaced . Pillsbury and the Washburn @-@ Crosby Company ( a forerunner of General Mills ) became the leaders in the Minneapolis milling industry . This leadership in milling later declined as milling was no longer dependent on water power , but the dominance of the mills contributed greatly to the economy of Minneapolis and Minnesota , attracting people and money to the region . 
 = = = Industrial development = = = 
 At the end of the 19th century , several forms of industrial development shaped Minnesota . In 1882 , a hydroelectric power plant was built at Saint Anthony Falls , marking one of the first developments of hydroelectric power in the United States . Iron mining began in northern Minnesota with the opening of the Soudan Mine in 1884 . The Vermilion Range was surveyed and mapped by a party financed by Charlemagne Tower . Another mining town , Ely began with the foundation of the Chandler Mine in 1888 . Soon after , the Mesabi Range was established when ore was found just under the surface of the ground in Mountain Iron . The Mesabi Range ultimately had much more ore than the Vermilion Range , and it was easy to extract because the ore was closer to the surface . As a result , open @-@ pit mines became well @-@ established on the Mesabi Range , with 111 mines operating by 1904 . To ship the iron ore to refineries , railroads such as the Duluth , <unk> and Iron Range Railway were built from the iron ranges to Two Harbors and Duluth on Lake Superior . Large ore docks were used at these cities to load the iron ore onto ships for transport east on the Great Lakes . The mining industry helped to propel Duluth from a small town to a large , thriving city . In 1904 , iron was discovered in the Cuyuna Range in Crow Wing County . Between 1904 and 1984 , when mining ceased , more than 106 million tons of ore were mined . Iron from the Cuyuna Range also contained significant proportions of manganese , increasing its value . 
 = = = Mayo Clinic = = = 
 Dr. William Worrall Mayo , the founder of the Mayo Clinic , emigrated from Salford , United Kingdom to the United States in 1846 and became a medical doctor in 1850 . In 1863 , Mayo moved to Rochester , followed by his family the next year . In the summer of 1883 , an F5 tornado struck , dubbed the 1883 Rochester tornado , causing a substantial number of deaths and injuries . Dr. W. W. Mayo worked with nuns from the Sisters of St. Francis to treat the survivors . After the disaster , Mother Alfred <unk> and Dr. Mayo recognized the need for a hospital and joined together to build the 27 @-@ bed Saint Marys Hospital which opened in 1889 . The hospital , with over 1100 beds , is now part of the Mayo Clinic , which grew out of the practice of William Worrall Mayo and his sons , William James Mayo ( 1861 – 1939 ) and Charles Horace Mayo . Dr. Henry Stanley Plummer joined the Mayo Brothers ' practice in 1901 . Plummer developed many of the systems of group practice which are universal around the world today in medicine and other fields , such as a single medical record and an interconnecting telephone system . 
 = = = Urbanization and government = = = 
 As a result of industrialization , the population became more concentrated into urban areas . By 1900 , the Twin Cities were becoming a center of commerce , led by the Minneapolis Grain Exchange and the foundation of the Federal Reserve Bank with its ninth district in Minneapolis . Many of the businessmen who had made money in the railroad , flour milling , and logging industries lived in the Twin Cities and personified the gilded age . They started to donate money for cultural institutions such as the Minneapolis Symphony Orchestra ( now the Minnesota Orchestra ) . The parks of Minneapolis , under the direction of Theodore Wirth became famous , and the new Minnesota State Capitol building and the Cathedral of Saint Paul attracted attention to Saint Paul . 
 The role of government also grew during the early 20th century . In the rural areas , most people obtained food and manufactured goods from neighbors and other people they knew personally . As industry and commerce grew , goods such as food , materials , and medicines were no longer made by neighbors , but by large companies . In response , citizens called on their government for consumer protection , inspection of goods , and regulation of public utilities . The growth of the automobile spurred calls to develop roads and to enforce traffic laws . The state officially started its trunk highway system in 1920 , with the passage of the Babcock Amendment that established 70 Constitutional Routes around the state . New regulation was necessary for banking and insurance . The safety of industrial workers and miners became an increasing concern , and brought about the workers ' compensation system . Since government was getting more complex , citizens demanded more of a role in their government , and became more politically active . 
 = = = Great Depression = = = 
 Wilbur Foshay , an owner of several utility companies , built the Foshay Tower in 1929 , just before the Wall Street Crash of 1929 . The building was the tallest building in Minnesota at the time . It remained the tallest building in Minneapolis until 1973 , when the IDS Tower surpassed it . The tower was a symbol of the wealth of the times , but when the stock market crashed , Foshay lost his fortune in the crash . 
 The Great Depression had several effects on Minnesota , with layoffs on the Iron Range and a drought in the Great Plains from 1931 through 1936 . While the Depression had several causes , one most relevant to Minnesota was that United States businesses in the 1920s had improved their efficiency through standardizing production methods and eliminating waste . Business owners were reaping the benefits of this increase in productivity , but they were not sharing it with their employees because of the weakness of organized labor , nor were they sharing it with the public in the form of lowered prices . Instead , the windfall went to stockholders . The eventual result was that consumers could no longer afford the goods that factories were producing . 
 Floyd B. Olson of the Minnesota Farmer @-@ Labor Party was elected as the governor in the 1930 election . In his first term , he signed a bonding bill that authorized $ 15 million ( $ 210 million as of 2016 ) for highway construction , in an effort to provide work for the unemployed . He also signed an executive order that provided for a minimum wage of 45 cents per hour for up to 48 hours weekly . This effort predated the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 that established a nationwide minimum wage . By 1932 , with the Depression worsening , the Farmer @-@ Labor Party platform was proposing a state income tax , a graduated tax on nationwide chain stores ( such as J.C. Penney and Sears , Roebuck and Company ) , low @-@ interest farm loans , and a state unemployment insurance program . The progressive 1933 legislative session saw a comprehensive response to the depression including a moratorium on mortgage foreclosures , a reduction in property taxes for farmers and homeowners , the state income tax , and chain store taxes , tavern reform , ratification of a child labor amendment , a state old @-@ age pension system , and steps toward preserving the area that later became the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness . 
 Meanwhile , formerly quiet labor unions began asserting themselves rather forcefully . The Minneapolis Teamsters Strike of 1934 turned ugly , with the union demanding the right to speak for all trucking employees . As a result of this strike and many others across the nation , Congress passed the National Labor Relations Act in 1935 . Government programs such as the Civilian Conservation Corps and Works Progress Administration brought much @-@ needed work projects to the state . Congress passed the Indian Reorganization Act in 1934 , giving Minnesota 's Ojibwa and Dakota tribes more autonomy over their own affairs . 
 = = Modern Minnesota = = 
 = = = Arts and culture = = = 
 The Minneapolis Institute of Arts was established in 1883 . The present building , a neoclassical structure , was opened in 1915 , with additions in 1974 by Kenzo Tange and in 2006 by Michael Graves . 
 The Minnesota Orchestra dates back to 1903 when it was founded as the Minneapolis Symphony Orchestra . It was renamed the Minnesota Orchestra in 1968 and moved into its own building , Orchestra Hall , in downtown Minneapolis in 1974 . The building has a modern look with a brick , glass , and steel exterior , in contrast to the old @-@ world look of traditional concert halls . The interior of the building features more than 100 large cubes that deflect sound and provide excellent acoustics . Later the Saint Paul Chamber Orchestra became the second full @-@ time professional orchestral ensemble in the cities . 
 The Walker Art Center was established in 1927 as the first public art gallery in the Upper Midwest . In the 1940s , the museum shifted its focus toward modern art , after a gift from Mrs. Gilbert Walker made it possible to acquire works by Pablo Picasso , Henry Moore , Alberto Giacometti , and others . The museum continued its focus on modern art with traveling shows in the 1960s . 
 The Guthrie Theater , opened in 1963 , was the brainchild of Sir Tyrone Guthrie , who wanted to found a regional theater without the commercial constraints of Broadway . The high cost of staging Broadway productions meant that shows had to be immediately successful and return a high amount of revenue . This discouraged innovation and experimentation , and made it difficult to stage important works of literature . These ideas were first disseminated in a 1959 article in the drama section of the New York Times , and citizens in the Minneapolis @-@ Saint Paul area were eager to support the idea . The theater served as a prototype for other resident non @-@ profit theaters . 
 = = = Minnesota in World War II = = = 
 Like other U.S. States , Minnesota made its contributions to the effort of World War II in wartime manufacturing and other areas . The United States Navy contracted with Cargill to build ships after seeing their success in building ships and barges used to haul grain . Cargill built facilities in Savage , Minnesota on the south bank of the Minnesota River and turned out 18 refueling ships and four towboats in four years . After the war , the Cargill facilities became a major grain shipping terminal . Honeywell built airplane control systems and periscope sights for submarines , and also developed a proximity fuse for anti @-@ aircraft shells . The United States government built the Twin Cities Ordnance Plant to produce munitions . The plant employed 8 @,@ 500 workers in 1941 , and since there was a shortage of male workers during the war , more than half of the workers at the munitions plant were women . The plant also employed nearly 1000 African American workers , as President Roosevelt had issued an executive order forbidding racial discrimination in defense industries . Native American workers also found opportunities due to workforce shortages in wartime . 
 During the wartime years , Savage was also the home of Camp Savage , a school designed to improve the foreign language skills of Japanese @-@ American soldiers and to train them in military intelligence gathering . The school was originally established in San Francisco , but moved to Minnesota after the bombing of Pearl Harbor . Eventually , the school outgrew its facilities in Savage and was moved to Fort Snelling . Fort Snelling itself served a major role as a reception center for newly drafted recruits after the Selective Service Act was passed in 1940 . New recruits were given a physical exam and the Army General Qualification Test to determine their fitness for service in a particular branch . The most intelligent recruits , about 37 % of Minnesotans going through Fort Snelling , were assigned to the Army Air Corps . Recruits were also issued uniforms and sent from the fort to other training centers . Over 300 @,@ 000 recruits were processed through Fort Snelling during the World War II years . 
 = = = Modern economy = = = 
 Agriculture evolved from an individual occupation into a major industry after World War II . Technological developments increased productivity on farms , such as automation of feedlots for hogs and cattle , machine milking at dairy farms , and raising chickens in large buildings . Planting also became more specialized with hybridization of corn and wheat , fertilization , and mechanical equipment such as tractors and combines became the norm . University of Minnesota professor Norman Borlaug contributed to this knowledge as part of the Green Revolution . Large canneries such as the Minnesota Valley Canning Company fed the country from Minnesota 's productive farmland . 
 The Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company ( 3M ) was founded in 1902 in Two Harbors , Minnesota , and was later moved to Duluth , Saint Paul , and then Maplewood . The founders of 3M got their start by manufacturing sandpaper . Under the leadership of William L. McKnight , the company established product lines such as abrasives for wet sanding , masking tape and other adhesives , roofing granules , resins , and films . 
 Suburban development intensified after the war , fueled by the demand for new housing . In 1957 , the Legislature created a planning commission for the Twin Cities metropolitan area . This became the Metropolitan Council in 1967 . 
 Northwest Airlines , the dominant airline at Minneapolis @-@ Saint Paul International Airport , was founded in 1926 carrying mail from the Twin Cities to Chicago . The airline , long headquartered in Eagan , merged with Delta Air Lines in October 2008 . The company will keep the Delta name and will be headquartered in Atlanta . 
 = = = The digital state = = = 
 More than any other Midwestern state , Minnesota attracted engineers , especially in the computer industry . Minnesota also became a center of technology after the war . Engineering Research Associates was formed in 1946 to develop computers for the Navy . It later merged with Remington Rand , and later became Sperry Rand . William Norris left Sperry in 1957 to form Control Data Corporation ( CDC ) . Cray Research was formed when Seymour Cray left CDC to form his own company . Medical device maker Medtronic also was founded in the Twin Cities in 1949 . Honeywell was a national player as well , until 1999 when it was bought out and its headquarters moved to New Jersey . National firms , such as International Business Machines , operated large branch offices . IBM also operated a substantial manufacturing and development site in Rochester , starting in 1956 . State government and powerful politicians such as Hubert Humphrey maintained a favorable climate . The University of Minnesota trained many computer specialists who decided to stay in the Minnesota rather than move to sunny California . Minnesota thus became a successful junior partner to Route 128 around Boston and Silicon Valley . 
 = = = Postwar politics = = = 
 Historian Annette Atkins has explored the changing long @-@ term pattern of Minnesota politics . In the late nineteenth and early twentieth century , the heavily rural state was hostile to business and railroads , with the Republicans dominant in the small towns , and the Democrats on the farms . Numerous left @-@ wing groups and third @-@ parties emerged , such as the Anti @-@ Monopolist party in the 1870s , the Populists in the 1890s , the Non @-@ Partisan League in the 1910s , and the Farmer @-@ Labor party in the 1930s . <unk> was strong , Atkins argues , because of the fear that Eastern bankers and industrialists forced the United States into World War I to enlarge their profits . Business fought unions , and the unions fought back , and with the governor on their side unions won some violent battles in the 1930s . In recent decades , however , the liberal coalition has weakened . Labor unions are a shadow of their old strength . Most farmers have left for the towns and especially the Twin Cities , where half the people live . The state high income tax is troublesome , and complaints are often heard about to generous welfare benefits . The New Right has mobilized social conservatives , especially those from traditional religious backgrounds , with abortion a furiously contested issue . State government has become much more friendly toward growth and the needs of business entrepreneurship . Environmentalism has split left and right , with the industrial workers in the Up North and Iron Range districts demanding that their jobs be protected from environmentalists . Atkins finds that : 
 What makes the North country valuable to conservationists is the seclusion , beauty , isolation , quiet , clear water , and absence of development . The preservationists have tried to limit or prohibit roads , hydroelectric generators , sawmills and lumbering , resorts , power boats , airplanes , and snowmobiles … . The tensions between development and preservation , restraint and grows , beauty and jobs runs deep and strong . 
 Hubert Humphrey was a Minnesotan who became a nationally prominent politician . He first ran for mayor of Minneapolis in 1943 , but lost the election to the Republican candidate by just a few thousand votes . As a Democrat , Humphrey recognized that his best chance for political success was to obtain the support of the Minnesota Farmer @-@ Labor Party . Other members of the Farmer @-@ Labor Party had been considering the idea , as encouraged by Franklin D. Roosevelt , but the merger only became reality after Humphrey traveled to Washington , D.C. to discuss the issue . Rather than simply absorbing the Farmer @-@ Labor party , with its constituency of 200 @,@ 000 voters , Humphrey suggested calling the party the Minnesota Democratic @-@ Farmer @-@ Labor Party . He was elected mayor of Minneapolis in 1945 , and one of his first actions was to propose an ordinance making racial discrimination by employers subject to a fine . This ordinance was adopted in 1947 , and although few fines were issued , the city 's banks and department stores realized that public relations would improve by hiring blacks in increasing numbers . Humphrey delivered an impassioned speech at the 1948 Democratic National Convention encouraging the party to adopt a civil rights plank in their platform . He was elected to the United States Senate in 1948 and was re @-@ elected in 1954 and 1960 . 
 In the early 1960s , the topic of civil rights was coming to national prominence with sit @-@ ins and marches organized by Martin Luther King Jr. and other black leaders . In 1963 , President John F. Kennedy sent a comprehensive civil rights bill to Congress , based largely on the ideas that Humphrey had been placing before the Senate for the previous fifteen years . The bill passed the House in early 1964 , but passage through the Senate was more difficult , due to southern segregationists who filibustered for 75 days . Finally , in June 1964 , the Civil Rights Act of 1964 became law . Humphrey called this his greatest achievement . Lyndon B. Johnson recruited Humphrey for his running mate in the 1964 presidential election , and Humphrey became Vice President of the United States . Governor Karl Rolvaag ( DFL ) appointed Walter Mondale to fill Humphrey 's Senate seat . Humphrey voiced doubts about the 1965 bombings of North Vietnam , which alienated him from Johnson . He later defended Johnson 's conduct of the Vietnam War , alienating himself from liberals , who were beginning to oppose the war around 1967 . In the 1968 presidential election , Humphrey ran against Richard Nixon and Independent candidate George Wallace and lost the popular vote by only 0 @.@ 7 % . Humphrey later returned to the Senate in 1971 after Eugene McCarthy left office . 
 Eugene McCarthy ( DFL ) served in the United States House of Representatives from 1949 through 1959 and in the United States Senate from 1959 through 1971 . He gained a reputation as an intellectual with strong convictions and integrity . In 1967 , he challenged Lyndon B. Johnson for the presidential nomination , running on an anti @-@ war platform in contrast to Johnson 's policies . His strong support in the New Hampshire primary convinced Johnson to leave the race . 
 Democrat Walter Mondale also achieved national prominence as Vice President under Jimmy Carter . He served in the Senate from his appointment in 1964 until becoming Vice President in 1977 . In 1984 , he ran for President of the United States , choosing Geraldine Ferraro as his running mate . The election proved to be a landslide victory for popular incumbent Ronald Reagan . In 2002 , just 11 days before election day , when incumbent Senator Paul Wellstone was killed in a plane crash , Mondale stepped into the race as the Democratic candidate for the U.S. Senate . He lost the bid by two percentage points to the Republican , Norm Coleman . 
 In 1970 , Wendell Anderson ( DFL ) was elected as governor of Minnesota . He spent two years working with a split Minnesota Legislature to enact a tax and school finance reform package that shifted the source of public education funding from local property taxes to state sales taxes , as well as adding excise taxes to liquor and cigarettes . This achievement , dubbed the " Minnesota Miracle " , was immensely popular . In the next few years , the Legislature enacted other facets of their " new liberalism " , including ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment , strong environmental laws , increases in workers ' compensation and unemployment benefits , and elimination of income taxes for the working poor . Time Magazine featured Wendell Anderson and the state in an article entitled , " Minnesota : A State That Works " . In 1976 when Mondale resigned his Senate seat to become Jimmy Carter 's running mate , Anderson resigned the governor 's seat and turned it over to Lieutenant Governor Rudy Perpich ( DFL ) , who promptly appointed Anderson to fill Mondale 's vacant Senate seat . Voters turned Perpich and Anderson out of office in 1978 , in an election dubbed the " Minnesota Massacre " . Perpich was again elected as governor in 1983 and served until 1991 . 
 Paul Wellstone ( DFL ) was elected to the United States Senate in 1990 , defeating incumbent Rudy <unk> ( R ) in one of the biggest election upsets of the decade . In 1996 , he defeated <unk> again in a rematch of the 1990 election . Wellstone was known for being a liberal activist , as evidenced by his books How the Rural Poor Got Power : Narrative of a Grassroots Organizer , describing his work with the group Organization for a Better Rice County , and The Conscience of a Liberal : Reclaiming the Compassionate Agenda . He explored a possible presidential bid in 1998 , telling people he represented the " Democratic wing of the Democratic Party " . On October 25 , 2002 , he was killed in a plane crash near Eveleth , Minnesota , along with his wife , his daughter , three campaign staffers , and the two pilots . 
 Jesse Ventura , elected governor in 1998 , had a colorful past as a Navy SEAL , a professional wrestler , an actor , mayor of Brooklyn Park , and a radio and TV broadcaster . He left office after one term . His election brought international attention to the Independence Party . 
 = The Fab Five ( film ) = 
 The Fab Five is a 2011 ESPN Films documentary about the 1990s Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball players known collectively as the Fab Five : Chris Webber , Jalen Rose , Juwan Howard , Jimmy King , and Ray Jackson . It chronicles the recruitment , glory years , notorious time @-@ out fiasco , cultural impact and the scandal that followed these players who are described as iconic figures in the media . The film originally aired on March 13 , 2011 on a national broadcast on ESPN . On its original airing , the film drew 2 @.@ 7 million viewers , setting a record as the highest @-@ rated ESPN documentary ever . 
 The film spawned critical commentary in a broad spectrum of media outlets which include leading newspapers such as The New York Times , The Wall Street Journal and The Washington Post ; leading periodicals such as Forbes ; online forums such as Slate ; and leading news outlets such as MSNBC . In particular , the film sparked a verbal war between Jalen Rose and Duke University 's Grant Hill through the media regarding issues of race in sports and education that fueled the Duke – Michigan basketball rivalry . Coincidentally , the following week , the 2011 editions of Michigan and Duke met in the third round of the 2011 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament ; Duke won , 73 @-@ 71 . 
 = = Story = = 
 Previously Mitch Albom had chronicled the Fab Five in a book entitled Fab Five : Basketball , Trash Talk , The American Dream , and Fox Sports had attempted to review the group . The press regarded this as the first complete recounting of the fabled group . Rose describes this film as " almost like the Bible of the Fab Five Story " . An ESPN commentator describes the five players as the greatest incoming college basketball recruiting class ever . He notes that they were presented to the world as the embodiment of what was wrong with college sports because they wore revolutionary baggy shorts and black socks and blasted hip @-@ hop music while talking a lot of trash . The film documents the " formation , rise , scandal and epilogue of the team " . It documents the 1991 – 92 and 1992 – 93 teams , the University of Michigan basketball scandal , and related off the court issues such as hate mail . Forbes notes that the legacy of the quintet , which includes successive appearances in the championship game of the NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Championship , was overshadowed by the scandal , which necessitated the removal of Final Four banners and vacating of games . The film is noted for presenting the inside story a group of players who the contemporary media derided as thugs and villains , while enterprise rode them as a multimillion @-@ dollar merchandising juggernaut . 
 The film chronicles a group of athletes who influenced a nation of basketball fans – some of whom became professional basketball players . It includes commentaries from former Michigan coaches Steve Fisher , Brian Dutcher , and Perry Watson , and rap icons Ice Cube and Chuck D. It also extends to details such as : " Howard discussing his grandmother 's death the day he signed his letter of intent , to Ray Jackson talking about being ' the fifth wheel ' and considering a transfer , to Jimmy King 's brutal honesty about his disdain for Christian Laettner -- in somewhat unpalatable verbiage , to Rose talking about the loitering ticket he got in the Detroit ' crack house . ' " The film also presented numerous other highlights of the era as well as some from the high school days of the featured players . Webber was considered notable for his non @-@ involvement in the production , while the rest of the Fab Five were credited as executive producers . Rose approached ESPN Films about the project and brought the other players into the fold . His production role came through his own company , Three Tier Entertainment . The film was directed by Jason <unk> and narrated by Taye Diggs . 
 At first , only three of the freshmen started . Although they all played when the season opened on December 2 , 1991 against the University of Detroit , they did not all play at the same time until December 7 against Eastern Michigan and did not start regularly until February 9 , 1992 . In that first game starting together as a regular unit , the five freshmen accounted for all the team 's points in a 74 – 65 victory against Notre Dame . The film presented the opinions of upperclassmen Eric Riley and James <unk> when they were replaced by freshmen in the starting lineup . Both fought off impulses to transfer . 
 The four members of the Fab Five who participated in the film have had a tense relationship with Chris Webber , the one player who was not in the film . There was speculation that Chris Webber did not participate to avoid questions about the timeout call in the 1993 NCAA tournament title game . Webber said he initially agreed to be in the documentary but backed out after being told shooting would wrap up in a week , giving him insufficient time to prepare . Jimmy King called that assertion “ a flat @-@ out lie . ” 
 = = Ratings = = 
 ESPN built up the film with nearly a month of previews and promos . The week before the initial broadcast , ESPN aired clips of the film during some of its other programming ; they featured the team 's feelings about Duke prior to the 1992 championship game . These clips started what would become a national controversy . 
 The film 's initial airing established a record as the ratings leader among all ESPN documentaries with a 2 @.@ 1 rating according to Nielsen Company , surpassing two of the 30 for 30 films , each of which posted a 1 @.@ 8 rating : Pony Exce $ $ ( aired December 11 , 2010 , focusing on SMU football of the 1980s , a decade that culminated in scandal ) and The U ( aired December 12 , 2009 , detailing the University of Miami football team in the 1980s and 1990s ) . The Fab Five aired at 9 p.m. ET , drawing an average of 2 @,@ 088 @,@ 000 households and 2 @,@ 746 @,@ 000 viewers , both bests among ESPN documentaries ; it surpassed the previous high marks set by Pony Exce $ $ , when it was seen by an average of 1 @,@ 843 @,@ 000 homes and 2 @,@ 517 @,@ 000 viewers on ESPN . The Fab Five was rebroadcast at 11 p.m. on ESPN2 . In excess of 11 million people watched part of the movie on one of the two original national broadcasts on the day of the 2011 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament selections . 
 The Fab Five also garnered high TV ratings during their playing days ; they were one of the featured teams in both of the two highest rated NCAA Men 's Basketball Championship games ever played in terms of households ( although not viewers ) , The film aired almost precisely twenty years after the legendary group was assembled . In an attempt to meet the same college basketball fan viewer interest on the tournament selection weekend , HBO produced its own hour @-@ long documentary titled Runnin ’ Rebels of UNLV on Jerry <unk> and the UNLV Runnin ' Rebels basketball teams of the 1972 – 92 era . Fox Sports also aired an hour @-@ long special featuring sports agent Rob Pelinka , a Michigan teammate of the Fab Five , called Pelinka Chips In on March 14 , but the special had low ratings . Pelinka had a cameo in the Fab Five film . ⋅ 
 = = Critical review = = 
 The New York Times described the film as a " flashback to a time when baggy basketball shorts , hip @-@ hop music and black shoes were considered controversial and an affront to hoops purists " . Washington Post columnist Jason Reid noted that the film went out of its way to present the inappropriate racial commentary by Jalen Rose when he described Duke basketball head coach Mike Krzyzewski 's recruits as Uncle Toms . Among those critical of the racial commentary was Duke player Grant Hill , who was cited in an Associated Press story that ran in major national media outlets . Hill blogged on The New York Times with a response naming a litany of <unk> castigated by Rose 's general aspersions . His response was at the top of The New York Times ' " most @-@ emailed list " for several days and was shared on Facebook by nearly 100 @,@ 000 people within its first few days . King responded to Hill in The Wall Street Journal . In the midst of the media exchange , the 2011 editions of the teams advanced to meet on March 20 at 2011 NCAA Tournament West Regional in Charlotte , North Carolina , at the Time Warner Cable Arena with Duke ranked as a # 1 seed and Michigan as an # 8 seed . Duke head coach Mike Krzyzewski did not respond until after both teams were eliminated from the tournament , but he noted that he felt the statements were insulting and gave specific reasons why each of the Fab Five members did not go to Duke . Duke player and Michigan native Shane Battier supported Hill 's statements saying , " Maya Angelou couldn ’ t have written it and expressed it better . " 
 The Detroit Free Press ' Mark Snyder regarded The Fab Five as a " Warts and all " depiction . He went on to describe it as a " . . .a tour de force of information from coaches . . .to the scorned upperclassmen . . . , then @-@ Free Press beat writer Greg <unk> and the Detroit News ' Bryan Burwell , and even rappers Ice Cube and Chuck D reflecting on the style elements . . . " The article concluded by summarizing the film as " riveting , brutal in its honesty , realistic in its language and stunning in its archival footage " . One reviewer , however , felt that the reserves were a bit overlooked . 
 A Michigan writer from The Grand Rapids Press described the film as " youthful nostalgia that must be felt by a whole generation " , but noted that the film was lacking in terms of outside perspective . He noted that fans would have welcomed voices of Bobby Knight , Dick Vitale , Jimmy Jackson , or Christian Laettner . He also noted the absence of Webber 's voice as leaving the film with a hole . However , he noted that as much as the Fab Five revolutionized basketball in the American culture , this film remade the image of the Fab Five . Nonetheless , some questioned why Webber declined to participate and speculate on various reasons . 
 Another Michigan writer from SB Nation described the film as thorough in its ability to provide the viewer with the answers to natural intrigues such as : " How was the recruiting class assembled ? Who pushed for the baggy shorts ? The black socks ? How did a stodgy University of Michigan culture react to this bold , brash and outspoken team ? " Other columnists were also satisfied to learn that Rose came up with the shorts and Jackson came up with the socks . He also commended the film on its detail surrounding Chris Webber 's infamous timeout in the 1993 NCAA championship . The same reviewer enumerated his five biggest omissions from the film : Michigan athletic director Bill Martin , 1991 – 92 Duke Blue Devils men 's basketball team , 1992 – 93 North Carolina Tar Heels men 's basketball team , Michael Talley and Webber . He was also critical of Mitch Albom 's involvement with the Fab Five . 
 Rivals.com spoke against the tone of the film , which shows a lack of respect for team values . However , in describing the payment scandal , Webber 's related legal problems and the removal of the Fab Five 's banners from Crisler Arena , and the infamous timeout gaffe at the end of the 1993 national championship game at the 1993 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament the documentary was considered fearless . 
 Another controversy arose from the film when the Illinois Fighting Illini men 's basketball teams of the late 1980s with Kendall Gill and Stephen Bardo claimed to be the originators of baggy shorts in basketball . All of the Wolverines who took part in the production of the film described how they felt they originated the baggy shorts as a result of Rose 's request . Even rapper Ice Cube described his recollection of them as the originators . 
 = The Sweet Escape ( song ) = 
 " The Sweet Escape " is a song by American singer and songwriter Gwen Stefani from her second studio album of the same name ( 2006 ) . It was written by Stefani , Akon , and Giorgio Tuinfort . Akon , who is also a featured artist , developed the song 's beat before collaborating with Stefani . He designed it based on her previous work with No Doubt , and Stefani later commented that it put her " on the yellow brick road to the No Doubt record I might do " . " The Sweet Escape " is an apology for a fight between two lovers and describes a dream of a pleasant life for them . As the album 's title track , its title was chosen to help market Stefani 's music and fashion lines . 
 The song received generally positive reviews from contemporary music critics , though there was a negative response to Akon 's presence as a featured artist . " The Sweet Escape " was released as the album 's second single on December 19 , 2006 and was commercially successful in mainstream and adult contemporary markets . It reached the top 10 of most singles charts and topped the New Zealand Singles Chart . The song was nominated for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals at the 50th Grammy Awards . In the song 's accompanying music video , Stefani attempts to escape from a golden prison . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 Interscope Records ' CEO Jimmy Iovine , who helped with A & R for The Sweet Escape , arranged the collaboration between Stefani and Akon . Interscope sent Stefani a copy of Akon 's 2004 debut album Trouble and repeatedly encouraged her to work with him . Akon readily accepted , and Stefani accepted after several people had pushed her to work with him . 
 When Akon was asked to work with Stefani , he reviewed her work , ranging from her music with No Doubt to her solo career . He noted that the sound Stefani had cultivated with No Doubt was missing from her solo work . Stefani , preoccupied with her baby Kingston Rossdale , cancelled their session and commented that she " didn 't want to go through the pain of trying to work with someone [ she ] didn 't know " . Iovine called Stefani , telling her , " You can cancel everything else in your life , but don 't cancel this session . " She decided to work with Akon and expected that they would work on writing a write a generic hip hop song , one that would not fit her well . 
 When they met , Akon played some of his tracks for her . They thought about words that would suit the marketing of Stefani 's music and her clothing lines L.A.M.B. and Harajuku Lovers , settling on " Sweet Escape " . Akon played her the beat he had developed , and they began working on the song . They wrote it in 10 minutes , coming up with a doo @-@ wop song rather than the hip hop sound Stefani had expected . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 " The Sweet Escape " is a ska and doo @-@ wop song composed in the key of B ♭ minor . It is written in compound quadruple meter , commonly used in doo @-@ wop , and has a moderate tempo of 120 beats per minute . Stefani 's vocal range covers nearly two octaves , from G3 to F5 . 
 The song uses two @-@ measure phrases that , aside from the choruses , use a i – III – IV – VI chord progression . The B ♭ minor chord is held for 1 ⅓ of a beat , and a relative transformation is then used to produce a second @-@ inversion D ♭ major chord , which is held for 1 ⅔ of a beat . In the second measure , a first @-@ inversion E ♭ major chord with an added ninth precedes a G ♭ major major seventh chord ; the chords are held for the same durations as the previous two . 
 The song opens with an introduction which consists of eight measures of instrumentals , followed by eight measures in which Akon sings " Woohoo , <unk> " . The introduction has been claimed to be similar to that in the 1986 song " Sweet Sweet Gwendoline " by German band Die Ärzte . Overdubbing is introduced in the middle of the first verse to produce a sequence of eighth note B ♭ minor chords from Stefani 's vocals . Stefani 's voice is overdubbed again when she sings the chorus twice . Akon performs , and Stefani then sings the second verse and the choruses again . She returns to the latter part of the first verse and repeats the choruses . The song closes as Akon repeats the lines " Woohoo , <unk> " and " I want to get away to our sweet escape " as the song fades . 
 The song 's lyrics discuss an argument between spouses . Stefani apologizes " for acting stank " to her lover . She asks her lover for forgiveness and describes wanting to be a better wife . Although Stefani acknowledges her misdeeds , she nonetheless pushes off some of the blame in a manner that drew comparisons to Monica 's 1995 single " Don 't Take It Personal ( Just One of Dem Days ) " and TLC 's 1999 single " I 'm Good at Being Bad " . In contrast to her songwriting on No Doubt 's Tragic Kingdom ( 1995 ) , Stefani intimates a desire for a pleasant domestic life , most extensively during the chorus . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " The Sweet Escape " received generally positive reviews from contemporary pop music critics . In a review for AllMusic , Stephen Thomas Erlewine described the song as " an irresistible [ ... ] track , driven by a giddy ' wee @-@ oh ! ' hook and supported by a nearly anthemic summertime chorus " . John Murphy of musicOMH referred to " The Sweet Escape " as " a lovely , summery bouncy pop song with a very infectious chorus " . Murphy compared the song to Weezer 's 2002 single " Keep <unk> ' " , and Blender 's Ben Sisario compared it to the work of The Beach Boys . Alex Miller from the NME compared the song to Madonna 's early work but added that it sounded " cringey and saccharine " . Anna Britten from Yahoo ! Music commented that it sounded like music from 1970 , specifically that of soul group Chairmen of the Board . Bill Lamb of About.com called the song " a welcome change from the over @-@ produced ' Wind It Up ' " , but noted that it " easily jets in one ear and out the other leaving little trace of its presence " . MuchMusic 's video review program Video on Trial referred to the song as " incredibly intoxicating " . 
 Akon 's presence as a featured artist on the track received negative reviews . Quentin B. Huff of PopMatters found that Akon contributed too few vocals to the song and that they were wasted . Rolling Stone reviewer Rob Sheffield agreed , viewing the song as a fumbled attempt to capitalize on the success of Akon 's " Smack That " featuring Eminem . The Observer 's Paul Flynn was displeased with his presence in lieu of higher profile hip hop artists such as Dr. Dre and André 3000 on Stefani 's previous album Love . Angel . Music . Baby . ( 2004 ) . He added that the song sounded like a " weirdly flat " version of Madonna 's 1986 single " True Blue " . Charles Merwin of Stylus Magazine described his vocals as " yelping " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , " The Sweet Escape " debuted at number 93 on the Billboard Hot 100 on the issue dated December 30 , 2006 . Following Stefani and Akon 's performance of the song on American Idol in late March 2007 , it peaked at number two on the chart dated April 14 behind Akon 's subsequent single " Don 't Matter " , selling 140 @,@ 200 downloads during that week . The song spent 15 consecutive weeks in the top 10 and remained on the chart for over nine months , listed at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 year @-@ end chart . The single was successful in mainstream music , topping the Pop 100 and Pop 100 Airplay charts and reaching number two on the Mainstream Top 40 chart . It had strong airplay on adult contemporary stations and reached the top five of the Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks and Hot Adult Top 40 Tracks charts . The song was nominated for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals at the 2008 Grammy Awards , but lost to Robert Plant and Alison Krauss ' " Gone Gone Gone ( Done Moved On ) " . At over 2 @.@ 1 million downloads , " The Sweet Escape " was the third best @-@ selling digital track of 2007 , and Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems listed it as the fifth most played song of the year . The song had equal success on Billboard 's Canadian Hot 100 ; it reached number two on unpublished versions of the chart , and debuted at number 14 when the chart was introduced during the week of June 2 , 2007 , the 10th week that " The Sweet Escape " had been listed . The song remained on the Canadian Hot 100 for over six months after the chart was officially introduced . 
 " The Sweet Escape " was similarly successful in Europe , topping the Billboard European Hot 100 Singles chart for three weeks in March 2007 . In the United Kingdom , the song entered the UK Singles Chart at number three , selling 30 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . The following week , the track peaked at number two behind Take That 's " Shine " , giving Stefani her highest @-@ charting solo single in the UK . It spent a second consecutive week at number two behind Sugababes and Girls Aloud 's cover of " Walk This Way " , selling 23 @,@ 500 copies . The single was successful across continental Europe as well , reaching the top five in France , Hungary , Norway , the Netherlands , and Romania , and the top 10 in Austria , Belgium , the Czech Republic , Finland , Germany , and Switzerland . 
 The song debuted at number two on Australia 's ARIA Singles Chart and remained there for six weeks , behind Hinder 's " Lips of an Angel " and later Silverchair 's " Straight Lines " . The Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) certified " The Sweet Escape " double platinum for shipping 140 @,@ 000 copies . In New Zealand , the single debuted atop the chart and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The song 's music video premiered on January 10 , 2007 on LAUNCHcast . The video opens with scenes of Stefani and the Harajuku Girls in a golden jail . After obtaining the key from a dog , they escape . Stefani is then shown in a penthouse two hours later . She lets down two long braids , allowing the Harajuku Girls to scale the building and cut off the braids . They meet Akon at a parking lot , and Stefani drives off with him . They are pursued by two of the Harajuku Girls as police officers , and the video closes with Stefani back in jail after two hours of chasing . The video is intercut with sequences of Stefani and Akon in front of a letter G in lights . 
 The video was filmed in December 2006 , several days before Christmas . It was directed by Joseph Kahn and produced by Maryann <unk> of <unk> Productions . The jail and penthouse scenes in the video are symbolic of " being jailed by love " . Stefani being unable to escape her metaphoric prisons represents how one cannot escape from oneself . The penthouse scene is an allusion to the 19th @-@ century fairy tale " Rapunzel " . The video features product placement for two General Motors vehicles , the Chevrolet Tahoe , and the Buick Lucerne . 
 " The Sweet Escape " premiered on MTV 's top @-@ 10 video chart program Total Request Live at number seven January 16 , 2007 , and it peaked at number two the next month . The video was nominated for Most Earthshattering Collaboration , one of four categories created for the reinvented 2007 MTV Video Music Awards , but lost to Beyoncé and Shakira 's " Beautiful Liar " . After its January 20 debut on MuchMusic 's Countdown , it reached number one for two weeks in March 2007 . In December 2007 , MTV International introduced a certification system to recognize music videos that were successful on stations outside the US . Plays were totaled from February through June 2007 , and with 11 @,@ 000 plays , " The Sweet Escape " was the most successful video , receiving a platinum award . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " The Sweet Escape " was featured on Stefani 's The Sweet Escape Tour . She also performed the song with Akon at the 2007 Kids ' Choice Awards , American Idol , and The Ellen DeGeneres Show . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The song and video were parodied on the February 17 , 2007 episode of Mad TV as " Aren 't Asians Great ? " . The video features Nicole Parker as Stefani and discusses the singer 's love of Asian culture as well as Asian contributions to the world . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 UK and German CD single 
 " The Sweet Escape " ( featuring Akon ) – 4 : 06 
 " Hollaback Girl " ( Harajuku Lovers Live Version ) – 4 : 49 
 Australian and German CD maxi single 
 " The Sweet Escape " ( featuring Akon ) – 4 : 06 
 " Hollaback Girl " ( Harajuku Lovers Live Version ) – 4 : 49 
 " Wind It Up " ( Robots to Mars Remix ) – 3 : 34 
 " The Sweet Escape " ( video ) – 4 : 05 
 US 12 " single 
 A1 . " The Sweet Escape " ( Konvict Remix ) ( featuring Akon ) – 4 : 03 
 A2 . " The Sweet Escape " ( Album Version ) ( featuring Akon ) – 4 : 06 
 B1 . " The Sweet Escape " ( Konvict Instrumental ) – 4 : 03 
 B2 . " The Sweet Escape " ( Album Version Instrumental ) – 4 : 06 
 B3 . " The Sweet Escape " ( Album Version Acappella ) – 3 : 51 
 Digital download – Konvict Remix 
 " The Sweet Escape " ( Konvict Remix ) ( featuring Akon ) – 4 : 01 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of The Sweet Escape . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Honorius of Canterbury = 
 Honorius ( died 30 September 653 ) was a member of the Gregorian mission to Christianize the Anglo @-@ Saxons from their native Anglo @-@ Saxon paganism in 597 AD who later became Archbishop of Canterbury . During his archiepiscopate , he consecrated the first native English bishop of Rochester as well as helping the missionary efforts of Felix among the East Anglians . Honorius was the last to die among the Gregorian missionaries . 
 = = Early life = = 
 A Roman by birth , Honorius may have been one of those chosen by Pope Gregory the Great for the Gregorian mission to England , although it seems more likely that he was a member of the second party of missionaries , sent in 601 . It is not known if his name was given to him at birth or if he chose it when he became archbishop . 
 = = Archbishop = = 
 In 627 , Honorius was consecrated as archbishop by Paulinus of York at Lincoln . Honorius wrote to Pope Honorius I asking the pope to raise the see of York to an archbishopric , so that when one archbishop in England died , the other would be able to consecrate the deceased bishop 's successor . The pope agreed , and sent a pallium for Paulinus , but by this time , Paulinus had already been forced to flee from Northumbria . When Paulinus , after the death of King Edwin of Northumbria in October 633 , fled Northumbria , he was received by Honorius and appointed to the bishopric of Rochester . The papal letter is dated to June 634 , and implies that news of Edwin 's death had not reached the pope . This evidence may mean that the traditional date of Edwin 's death may need to be moved to October 634 . The papal letter may also mean that the traditional date of consecration for Honorius may need re @-@ dating , as the long gap between 627 , when he is said to have been consecrated , and 634 , when he finally received a pallium , is much longer than usually found . It may be that Honorius was consecrated closer to 634 . The papal letter to Honorius is given in the Ecclesiastical History of the medieval writer Bede . 
 Honorius consolidated the work of converting the English by sending Felix , a Burgundian , to Dunwich after Felix came to the archbishop and made known his desire to go to East Anglia as a missionary . Honorius may have consecrated Felix as the first bishop of East Anglia or Felix may have already have been consecrated on the continent . The dating of this episode is unclear , but it is probably close to 631 . It is possible that King Sigeberht of East Anglia , who converted to Christianity while he was in exile on the continent , had already met Felix and was behind Felix 's journey to Honorius . As well as his help to Felix , Honorius consecrated the first Anglo @-@ Saxon bishop , Ithamar of Rochester , and his successor was also a native of England . 
 Honorius had few conflicts with the Irish missionary efforts , and admired Aidan , one of the leading Irish clergy . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Honorius died on 30 September 653 , the last of the Gregorian missionaries . He was buried at the Church of St. Augustine 's in Canterbury . He was later revered as a saint , with his feast day being 30 September . His relics were translated to a new tomb in 1091 , and around that same time a <unk> of his life was written by Goscelin . In the 1120s his relics were still being venerated at St Augustine 's . 
 = Spiderland = 
 Spiderland is the second and final studio album by the American rock band Slint . It was released on March 27 , 1991 , through Touch and Go Records . Featuring dramatically alternating dynamics and vocals ranging from spoken word to shouting , the album contains narrative lyrics that emphasize alienation . Spiderland was Slint 's first release on Touch and Go , and the group 's only album to feature Todd Brashear . 
 Although Spiderland was not widely recognized on its initial release , it eventually sold more than 50 @,@ 000 copies and became a landmark album in underground music after Slint broke up . The album has been highly influential on the styles of many bands in the post @-@ rock and math rock genres , including Mogwai and Godspeed You ! Black Emperor , and has been named a favorite of several indie rock musicians . In 2007 , Slint reunited for a tour consisting of performances of Spiderland in its entirety . 
 = = Context = = 
 Slint formed in 1987 in Louisville , Kentucky , from the remnants of the punk rock band Squirrel Bait ; the founding members included Brian McMahan ( guitar , vocals ) , David Pajo ( guitar ) , Britt Walford ( drums ) and Ethan Buckler ( bass guitar ) . The band 's debut album , the Steve Albini @-@ produced Tweez , was released on the group 's self @-@ owned label Jennifer Hartman Records and Tapes . The album 's sound has been described as a combination of " scratchy guitars , thumping bass lines and hard hitting drums " . Buckler promptly left the band out of dissatisfaction with Albini 's production , and was replaced with Todd Brashear . The band 's second recording was for the instrumental extended play Slint , which included a new version of " Rhoda " from Tweez . The EP , which would not be released until 1994 , was a departure from Tweez 's sound and reflected the band 's new musical direction . 
 After the band ended its brief tour in support of Tweez , most of its members attended college . Around this time McMahan and Walford began writing together for the band 's next record , creating six new songs which the band practiced throughout the summer of 1990 . Slint entered River North Records in August 1990 to record Spiderland . At that time there were no vocals or lyrics prepared for the album , so the band wrote them while in the studio . The album 's producer , Brian Paulson , was known for his " live " recording style in the studio , with minimal takes . Paulson recalled " It was weird while I was doing [ Spiderland ] because I remember sitting there , and I just knew there was something about it . I 've never heard anything like this . I 'm really digging this but it 's really fucking weird . " 
 The recording sessions for Spiderland are reputed to have been difficult for the members of the band and were , according to AllMusic , " intense , traumatic and one more piece of evidence supporting the theory that band members had to be periodically institutionalized during the completion of the album . " Rumors circulated that at least one member of Slint had been checked into a psychiatric hospital . Walford later addressed these stories in an article in Select by saying , " [ We were ] definitely trying to be serious about things , pretty intense , which made recording the album kinda stressful . " The recording was completed in four days . 
 = = Music = = 
 The music of Spiderland is noted for its angular guitar rhythms , dramatically alternating dynamic shifts and irregular time signatures . McMahan 's singing style interchanges between mumbling spoken word and strained shouting . The lyrics of Spiderland are often written in a narrative style . Influences on the record included Gang of Four , Black Sabbath and Sonic Youth . Will Hermes of Spin summarized the album 's sound as " mid- ' 70s King Crimson gone emo : screeching guitar chords and gorgeous note @-@ spinning in odd @-@ metered instrumentals speckled with words both spoken and sung " . 
 The album 's opening track , " <unk> Trail " , describes a day spent at a carnival with a fortune @-@ teller . The song features a complex arrangement with sharp transitions , and the guitar fluctuates between a clean @-@ sounding riff with harmonics in the verse to heavy distortion featuring extremely high @-@ pitched notes in the chorus . 
 " Nosferatu Man " , the second track , is inspired by the 1922 German Expressionist silent film Nosferatu . The song 's verse includes a dissonant guitar riff , which uses high @-@ pitched notes similar to those in " <unk> Trail " and a drumbeat based on snare and toms , absent of cymbals . The chorus , featuring " jagged " distorted guitar and a thrash @-@ influence beat , segues into an extended jam before the song ends with 30 seconds of feedback . 
 " Don , Aman " features Walford on lead vocals and guitar . Delivered in a hushed tone , the song 's ambiguous lyrics depict the thoughts of an " isolated soul " before , after and during an evening at a bar . The tempo quickens throughout , and then becomes loud and distorted before slowing back to the original tempo . 
 " Washer " , the album 's longest track , features a " barely audible " intro with guitar and cymbals before the rest of the band comes in . The song builds tension until the final verse , which features loud distortion , and is followed by a lengthy outro . 
 " For Dinner ... " is an instrumental track . Beginning with a quiet section of " brooding chords throb [ <unk> ] with the occasional rumble of muted toms and bass drum " , the song cycles through sections of building and releasing tension . One guitar chord is repeatedly strummed for the last minute of the song before ending . 
 The final song of the album , " Good Morning Captain " , is a tribute to the Samuel Taylor Coleridge poem The Rime of the Ancient Mariner . The song features a two chord guitar structure , a " spindly , tight riff " from the rhythm section and a " jerky " beat . During the recording of the song 's final chorus , McMahan became physically sick due to the strain of yelling over the guitars . David Peschek of The Guardian compared " Good Morning Captain " to Led Zeppelin 's " Stairway to Heaven " , writing that " the extraordinary Good Morning Captain is [ Slint 's ] Stairway to Heaven , if it 's possible to imagine Stairway to Heaven bleached of all bombast . " 
 On the iTunes edition of the album , an additional track is added to the end of the album , entitled " Utica Quarry , Nighttime " . The track is , simply , 15 minutes of field recordings of Utica Quarry , the same place where the photos for Spiderland were taken . 
 = = Title and packaging = = 
 The name Spiderland originates from McMahan 's younger brother , who thought that the record sounded " spidery " . The album 's black @-@ and @-@ white cover photograph , which depicts the members of the band ( Brashear , McMahan , Walford and Pajo , from left to right ) treading water in the lake of an abandoned quarry , was taken by Will Oldham . An article in The Stranger credited the cover for creating a mystique surrounding Slint , noting " [ m ] ost people only had seen Slint as four heads floating in a Kentucky quarry on Spiderland 's cover . Listeners pondered the band 's sparsely adorned black @-@ and @-@ white covers as if they were runes bearing secrets . " Chris Gaerig of the Michigan Daily wrote , " the cover of Slint 's masterful Spiderland captures the joyous fear and violence of the album so precisely it shakes souls . The group — submerged in a lake to their chins with deranged smiles — seems to be stalking you , hovering out of the black @-@ and @-@ white façade . " Several other promotional images have been taken from the same photo session with Oldham . 
 A photo of a spider taken by Noel Saltzman is used on the back cover , reflecting the album 's title . The inside sleeve contains the message " interested female vocalists write 1864 douglas <unk> <unk> , ky . <unk> " . McMahan confirmed that this message was serious , and said " We did get some responses and we did listen to CDs and tapes . We didn 't end up doing anything immediately , so that idea of adding someone sort of fell by the wayside . " The message " this recording is meant to be listened to on vinyl " is printed on some CD issues of Spiderland , demonstrating Slint 's preference of analog audio devices . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Spiderland received positive reviews from music critics , including Spin , NME , and The Village Voice . In a contemporary review for Melody Maker , Steve Albini , producer of Slint 's 1989 album Tweez , gave the album ten stars and called it " a majestic album , sublime and strange , made more brilliant by its simplicity and quiet grace . " Albini found its unadorned production impeccable and said that it vividly captures McMahan and Pajo 's playing so well that their guitars " seem to hover in space directly past the listener 's nose " , while " the incredibly precise @-@ yet @-@ instinctive drumming has the same range and wallop it would in your living room . " 
 In a retrospective review for AllMusic , Dean Carlson said that Spiderland is " one of the most essential and chilling releases in the mumbling post @-@ rock arena " . However , he felt that it is " slightly overrated " and that McMahan 's vocals convey " strangled pity instead of outright empathy . " Robert Christgau was less enthusiastic and wrote that , despite their " sad @-@ sack affect " , Slint are actually " art @-@ rockers without the courage of their pretensions " with poor lyrics . In The New Rolling Stone Album Guide , Rolling Stone journalist Mac Randall felt that the album 's music lacks <unk> , even though it sounds more accessible than Tweez : " [ t ] he absence of anything resembling a tune continues to nag . " 
 In 2003 , Pitchfork wrote of Spiderland : " a heady , chilling listen ; the irregularity of its hypnotic melodies , fractured beats and mismatched lyrics demand a new kind of appreciation , independent of traditional notions of songcraft . With its half @-@ mumbled , half @-@ hollered vocals , deliberate percussion and drone @-@ gone @-@ aggressive guitars , Spiderland 's urgency is almost traumatic to swallow : despondency never tasted so real . " They named it the twelfth best album of the 1990s . In 2014 , Spiderland was reissued with 14 previously unreleased tracks and received universal acclaim from critics . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Though largely ignored upon its initial release , Spiderland has attracted greater attention through time . This growth in popularity has been attributed in part to the appearance of the track " Good Morning , Captain " on the soundtrack to the 1995 film Kids . The soundtrack has sold over 50 @,@ 000 copies , though Kory Grow of the College Music Journal suggested that the album " has inspired countless bands ( and therefore fans ) far beyond its SoundScan numbers " . Spiderland has become a landmark indie rock album and is considered , along with Talk Talk 's Spirit of Eden and Laughing Stock , to have been the primary catalyst of the post @-@ rock genre . The album is also regarded as being essential to " the fabric of math @-@ rock genre " . David Peschek said that the album is " the ur @-@ text for what became known as post @-@ rock , a fractured , almost geometric reimagining of rock music stripped of its <unk> impulse . " Rachel Devine of The List called Spiderland " arguably the most disproportionately influential [ album ] in music history " . Pitchfork Media reviewer Stuart Berman commented : " Spiderland ’ s greatest legacy is not that it motivated a cluster of semi @-@ popular bands in the late @-@ 90s and early 2000s to adopt its whisper @-@ to @-@ scream schematic . It ’ s the boundless inspiration it perpetually provides for all the bands that have yet to emerge from the basement . " 
 McMahan reflected on the album 's success : " We worked really hard on Spiderland . I mean , I definitely felt much more personal about it . I thought it represented us as people , musically , a lot more than Tweez did . That 's about it . It seemed like when we were around , and actively playing and stuff , that people 's responses to us were fairly ambivalent . I thought it was funny when the press picked up on it . For an independent release , it had a strange sort of audience and kept selling three or four years after we recorded it ; it still sells more copies than when it first came out . " Touch and Go founder Corey Rusk said that Spiderland is " like an icon now . But when it came out , nobody cared ! The band had broken up by the time the album came out , and it really didn 't sell particularly well or get written about all that much in the year it was released . But it was a revolutionary , groundbreaking record , and it 's one of the few instances where people catch up to it later on . " 
 Post @-@ rock bands Mogwai , Godspeed You ! Black Emperor , Isis and Explosions in the Sky have been influenced by Spiderland . Dinosaur Jr and Sebadoh member Lou Barlow said of Spiderland , " It was quiet @-@ to @-@ loud without sounding like grunge or indie rock . It sounded more like a new kind of music . " PJ Harvey has named Spiderland as one of her favorite albums , and supposedly contacted Slint regarding the band 's request for a female vocalist . Bob <unk> of Pavement and Mark Clifford of Seefeel have also cited Spiderland as among their favorite albums . The album cover of Spiderland was recreated by The Shins in the music video for " New Slang " . 
 = = = Reunion = = = 
 Despite having plans for a tour of Europe to promote Spiderland , Slint broke up in 1991 for reasons that were not revealed . Members of the band went on to join other musical projects , including Tortoise , The Breeders , Palace and The For Carnation . Slint reunited briefly in 2005 for an eighteen @-@ date tour . Pajo said , " We don 't want to be a reunion band that keeps reuniting . [ ... ] I know that this is going to be it . " However , in 2007 Slint reunited again for a tour featuring performances of Spiderland in its entirety as part of All Tomorrow 's Parties ' " Don 't Look Back " concert series celebrating classic albums . The tour included appearances at the 2007 Pitchfork Music Festival and Primavera Sound Festival . McMahan said in an interview at the Pitchfork Music Festival that performing the album live was " pretty cool . It moves a little slower than it does on the record , but it 's all there . [ ... ] It took some getting used to , some revisiting the material and rehearsing . " In an August 2013 interview with <unk> Khanna , former producer Steve Albini revealed that the band was working on remastering Spiderland with engineer Bob Weston . 
 Critical responses to Slint 's reunion has been mixed , with detractors commenting on the music 's unsuitability for a live setting . Chicago Sun @-@ Times music critic Jim DeRogatis wrote that although " fans greeted [ Slint 's performance at the Pitchfork Music Festival ] as manna from heaven . [ ... ] the musicians ' fragile , intertwining guitar lines , mumbled attempts at poetry and uninspiring <unk> personas were poor matches for the setting and the occasion , especially during the static , percussion @-@ deprived ' Don , Aman ' and the bloated anthem ' Good Morning , Captain ' . " According to members of The A.V. Club , Slint 's performance of " Don , Aman " at the festival " capture [ d ] the band 's greatness and its greatest weakness : Slint completely lacks stage charisma , and playing a deathly quiet , moody song on a big outdoor stage just doesn 't work . " Both DeRogatis and the A. V. Club review also noted that the band 's performance was plagued by sound problems . A New York review of a performance at Webster Hall opined " the deeply brooding , fussily @-@ executed album finally sounded , sixteen years later , like the existential , cosmos @-@ annihilating shrug it was envisioned as . Which is to say : It sounded fucking great . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Todd Brashear , Brian McMahan , David Pajo , and Britt Walford , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Slint 
 Todd Brashear – bass guitar 
 David Pajo – guitar 
 Brian McMahan – guitar , vocals 
 Britt Walford – drums , vocals , guitar 
 Technical personnel 
 Will Oldham – photography 
 Brian Paulson – engineering 
 Noel Saltzman – photography 
 = = Accolades = = 
 = Phil Pressey = 
 Phillip Michael " Phil " Pressey ( born February 17 , 1991 ) is an American professional basketball player for the Salt Lake City Stars of the NBA Development League . His prior professional teams were the Boston Celtics , Philadelphia 76ers and Phoenix Suns of the National Basketball Association and the Maine Red Claws of the NBADL . As a junior playing point guard for the 2012 – 13 Missouri Tigers men 's basketball team , Pressey announced on April 10 , 2013 , that he would forgo his senior season of eligibility at Missouri and enter the 2013 NBA draft instead . He led the 2011 – 12 Big 12 Conference in assists , steals and assist @-@ to @-@ turnover ratio and was a 2011 – 12 All @-@ Big 12 team selection as a result . He shares the Southeastern Conference ( SEC ) single @-@ game assists record ( 19 ) and was the 2012 SEC Preseason Player of the Year . He earned 2012 – 13 All @-@ SEC First team selection and was the conference assist champion . He earned Associated Press 2013 All @-@ American honorable mention recognition . He holds Missouri single @-@ game , single @-@ season and career assists records and numerous Missouri steals records , including career steals . 
 Pressey was a high school basketball All @-@ state selection by the Texas Association of Basketball Coaches ( TABC ) and helped his team achieve 2009 and 2010 Southwest Preparatory Conference ( SPC ) state championships in basketball . In high school , several YouTube videos of him dunking ( often over much taller players ) became popular . He is the son of 1982 NBA Draft first @-@ round selection and 1982 Consensus All @-@ American Paul Pressey . 
 = = Early years = = 
 In June 2006 , Pressey stood at 5 feet 3 inches ( 1 @.@ 60 m ) . That year , he led the Boston Amateur Basketball Club ( <unk> ) , also known as the Boston Amateur Athletic Club , to the 2006 Amateur Athletic Union ( AAU ) National Championship . He had joined the team as a seventh grader in 2005 . He played his freshman and sophomore high school basketball seasons for Cushing Academy . As the family moved for Paul 's jobs with various NBA franchises , Pressey spent summers with <unk> teammate ( and future Missouri teammate ) Alex Oriakhi . 
 In 2008 , Pressey 's family moved to Dallas when Paul took a job with the New Orleans Hornets , and Phil began to play with Episcopal School of Dallas for his junior season . During his two years at Episcopal , the team won its second and third consecutive SPC Division I boy 's state championship in 2009 and 2010 . He was one of the two best point guards at the July 2009 LeBron James Skills Academy , according to reports in The Plain Dealer . Pressey made his verbal commitment to Missouri on September 13 , 2009 . Pressey 's father , Paul , had been teammates with Missouri head coach Mike Anderson . Anderson had known Pressey since he was an infant and remained close to the family as " Uncle Mike " . On April 12 , 2010 , Pressey 's older brother Matt , who was a junior college transfer , gave his verbal commitment to join his brother in Missouri 's 2010 entering class . On April 15 , Oregon attempted to lure Anderson , but after meeting with Oregon 's athletic director , Anderson decided to stay at Missouri . 
 As a senior Pressey earned TABC All @-@ state recognition and Dallas Morning News first team All @-@ area recognition . The All @-@ area team included Perry Jones , Le 'Bryan Nash , Marcus Smart and Kyan Anderson . During the 2010 SPC championship game , Pressey tallied 32 points , 9 assists , 8 rebounds and 3 steals against Greenhill School . Videos of him dunking in high school have made him a YouTube sensation . During the 2010 TABC All @-@ star game , he dunked over Tony Mitchell , who at the time was a player approximately a foot taller than Pressey . As of 31 December 2012 , this video has about 800 @,@ 000 views . Because of his diminutive stature , he is often compared to another undersized Dallas basketball player , Spud Webb . 
 = = College career = = 
 = = = Freshman season = = = 
 On December 18 , 2010 , Pressey tallied 11 assists while adding 15 points against the Central Arkansas Bears . This tied a Missouri Tigers freshman single @-@ game assist record ( Shawn Teague , 1980 vs. Lamar ) . Then , he broke his right index finger prior to the December 22 , 2010 <unk> ' Rights game against Illinois . Pressey missed four games and did not return to the lineup until the January 8 Big 12 Conference opener against Colorado , where he appeared in the second half . Another highlight for Pressey came when he posted 6 steals for the Tigers against the Texas A & M Aggies in the 2011 Big 12 Men 's Basketball Tournament on March 10 , 2011 . This established a new Missouri Tigers postseason single @-@ game record . Freshman single @-@ game records do not appear in the media guide . He started 12 games for the 2010 – 11 Tigers and set numerous Missouri freshman season records , including average steals ( 2 @.@ 0 ) , average assists ( 3 @.@ 9 ) and total assists ( 117 ) . 
 = = = Sophomore season = = = 
 In a January 14 , 2012 contest against the Texas Longhorns , Pressey posted 18 points and 10 assists for his second career double @-@ double . During his sophomore season for the 2011 – 12 Tigers , he recorded 12 assists in a game four times : Villanova ( 12 / 6 ) , Texas Tech ( 1 / 28 ) , # 5 Kansas ( 2 / 25 ) and Oklahoma State ( 3 / 8 ) . At the end of February , he was named to the Naismith Award top 30 midseason Watchlist . Pressey 's total of 223 assists and average of 6 @.@ 4 assists broke Anthony Peeler 's school single @-@ season records ( 179 , 5 @.@ 8 ) set for the 1989 – 90 Missouri Tigers . For the 2011 – 12 Big 12 season , he was an All @-@ Big 12 selection ( 1st team - CBSSports.com ; 2nd team - Associated Press ; 3rd team - Big 12 coaches ) . He was also a 2012 Big 12 Men 's Basketball Tournament all @-@ tournament selection and a Bob Cousy Award finalist . 
 = = = Junior season = = = 
 Pressey became captain of the Missouri team as a junior . CBS Sports listed him as a 2012 first team preseason All @-@ American and the 8th best player in its preseason top 100 . Sports Illustrated also named him to its preseason All @-@ American first team . CBS also named him the second best point guard ( behind Isaiah Canaan ) . Pressey was both a preseason John R. Wooden Award top 50 selection and a preseason Naismith Award top 50 selection in 2012 . Pressey was the preseason SEC player of the year selection by the SEC media and a first team All @-@ SEC selection by the coaches . Pressey holds the Missouri career assists average record and entered the season within striking distance of Peeler 's Missouri career assists and career steals totals of 497 and 196 . 
 In December , the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame named Pressey as a Cousy Award nominee . In the December 22 , 2012 <unk> ' Rights game against Illinois he posted 11 assists and 12 points for his third career double @-@ double . In Missouri 's subsequent game on December 28 , 2012 , he recorded another double @-@ double with 19 assists and 19 points against UCLA tying the Southeastern Conference single @-@ game assist record ( Kenny Higgs , 1976 @-@ 77 LSU ; Bill Hann , 1967 @-@ 68 Tennessee ) . On January 5 , Pressey established a new career high with 26 points , while recording 5 assists and 3 rebounds against Bucknell . This earned him SEC player of the week . On January 8 , Pressey tied the Mizzou Arena single @-@ game assist record with 13 against Alabama along with 11 points as part of his fifth double @-@ double . On January 9 , he was selected as one of 20 Cousy Award finalists . At the time , he was described as the most efficient defender in the nation in terms of points allowed per play defended . On January 10 the Wooden Award midseason top 25 list , which included Pressey , was announced . On February 9 , he surpassed Peeler 's career assist total of 497 against Ole Miss . Pressey posted a new career @-@ high 27 points along with 10 assists and 4 steals on February 23 against Kentucky as part of his fourth double @-@ double of the season and sixth of his career . On March 12 , the U.S. Basketball Writers Association named Pressey to its 2012 – 13 Men 's All @-@ District VI ( IA , MO , KS , OK , NE , ND , SD ) Team , based upon voting from its national membership . That same day , he was a selection to the 8 @-@ man 2013 All @-@ SEC First Team by the SEC coaches . He was a selection to the 5 @-@ man 2013 All @-@ SEC First Teams by three of four FOX Sports South writers . Pressey was also an All @-@ SEC First Team selection by the Kansas City Star . Pressey ended the season with 196 career steals , tying Peeler 's school record , and bettered his own school single @-@ season assist records with 240 and 7 @.@ 1 / game . He was named to the National Association of Basketball Coaches Division I All ‐ District 21 first team on March 26 , as selected and voted on by member coaches of the NABC , making him eligible for the State Farm Coaches ’ Division I All @-@ America team . Pressey earned Associated Press honorable mention All @-@ American recognition . He was the 2012 – 13 Southeastern Conference men 's basketball season assist champion with a 7 @.@ 1 assists / game average . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = 2013 NBA Draft = = = 
 On April 10 , 2013 , Pressey announced he would not be returning to play his senior season for the Missouri Tigers , choosing instead to enter the 2013 NBA Draft . Pressey stated his intentions in a statement posted on the Tigers team website . According to the Associated Press , while averaging a career @-@ best 11 @.@ 9 points and 7 @.@ 1 assists as a junior his play was erratic as he also committed an average 3 @.@ 5 turnovers . Pressey had a 37 @.@ 6 % field goal percentage during his final season , which the Associated Press described as one in which he " struggled with late @-@ game decision @-@ making in losses to UCLA , Louisiana State , Texas A & M , Arkansas , Kentucky and Tennessee " . ESPN noted that he is projected to be a late second round draft selection at best . Three senior starters , including Oriakhi , as well as Laurence Bowers and Keion Bell were graduating . Pressey was one of 60 players invited to the NBA Draft Combine . 
 = = = Boston Celtics ( 2013 – 2015 ) = = = 
 After going undrafted in the 2013 NBA Draft , Pressey signed with the Boston Celtics to play in the 2013 Orlando Summer League . He was a known commodity to the Celtics . Pressey 's AAU team had even practiced at the team facility in Waltham . His performance in the Summer League led to Pressey signing a deal with the Celtics on July 22 , 2013 . The contract was believed to be a three @-@ year deal for the league minimum , which was $ 490 @,@ 180 during his rookie season . The Celtics began the season without four @-@ time All @-@ Star point guard Rajon Rondo who had endured a anterior cruciate ligament injury during the prior season . Pressey made his regular season debut in the 2013 – 14 Celtics season opener on October 30 at the Air Canada Centre against the Toronto . He did not play in the next three games , but after the Celtics got off to an 0 – 4 start , head coach Brad Stevens shuffled the lineup . On November 6 , at home against the Utah Jazz , Pressey recorded the first three assists , first steal and first field goal of his career . Then on November 9 , he posted four assists and tallied in 7 points in 21 minutes of play . He posted a team @-@ high 5 assists on November 19 , 2013 against the Houston Rockets . He established a new career high with 8 assists on November 25 against the Charlotte Bobcats . On January 15 , with Rondo 's return imminent , the Celtics traded guards Jordan Crawford and <unk> Brooks , clearing the way for Pressey to start that night against the Toronto Raptors . Pressey posted 10 assists and no turnovers in his first start . On January 22 , with Rondo , Avery Bradley and Jerryd Bayless all sitting out and Pressey making his second career start , Pressey scored a career @-@ high 20 points against Washington before fouling out . Since Rondo 's return , Pressey 's occasional starts have been to give Rondo rest . He posted a double @-@ double on April 5 against the Detroit Pistons with 12 points and a career @-@ high 11 assists . On April 11 , he had another career high with 13 assists as part of a 10 @-@ point double double against the Charlotte Bobcats . He matched the 13 assists the following night against the Cleveland Cavaliers . 
 In July 2014 , Pressey re @-@ joined the Celtics for the 2014 NBA Summer League . His performance earned him a roster spot for the regular season , as the team guaranteed his contract for the 2014 – 15 season . On February 5 , 2015 , he was assigned to the Maine Red Claws of the NBA Development League . He was recalled the next day . On July 15 , Pressey was waived by the Celtics . 
 = = = Philadelphia 76ers ( 2015 ) = = = 
 On July 24 , 2015 , Pressey signed with the Portland Trail Blazers , but was waived on October 23 after appearing in four preseason games . On October 25 , he was claimed off waivers by the Utah Jazz , but was waived by the team the following day . On November 1 , he was acquired by the Idaho Stampede of the NBA Development League as an affiliate player of the Jazz . However , three days later , he signed with the Philadelphia 76ers to help the team deal with numerous injuries . Philadelphia had to use an NBA hardship exemption in order to sign him as he made their roster stand at 16 , one over the allowed limited of 15 . He debuted with the 76ers that night against the Milwaukee Bucks , his father 's long @-@ time team . On December 4 , he was waived by the 76ers after appearing in 14 games . 
 = = = Idaho Stampede / Phoenix Suns ( 2015 – present ) = = = 
 On December 7 , 2015 , Pressey was reacquired by the Idaho Stampede of the NBA Development League . Two days later , he made his debut with Idaho in a 102 – 96 loss to the Texas Legends , recording four points , six rebounds , six assists and one steal in 24 minutes . He scored a season @-@ high 21 points twice , and had three double @-@ doubles for Idaho , recording a season @-@ high 13 assists on February 8 , 2016 against the Los Angeles D @-@ Fenders . 
 On February 20 , 2016 , Pressey signed a 10 – day contract with the Phoenix Suns . He made his debut for the Suns the following day , recording six points , two rebounds , five assists , one steal and three blocks in 28 minutes off the bench in a 118 – 111 loss to the San Antonio Spurs , becoming the first NBA player shorter than 6 ' 0 " to record three blocks in a game since Nate Robinson in 2013 . A day later , he had a 10 @-@ assist game against the Los Angeles Clippers . On March 1 , he signed a second 10 @-@ day contract with the Suns . Following the expiration of his second 10 @-@ day contract , the Suns parted ways with Pressey . 
 On March 12 , 2016 , Pressey was reacquired by Idaho . 
 = = NBA career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = Personal = = 
 Phil 's parents are Elizabeth ( Liz ) and Paul Pressey . Together they have four children : Ashley , Angela , Paul Jr . ( known by his middle name of Matthew ) and Phillip . Paul was an NCAA basketball All @-@ American , National Invitation Tournament Champion , NBA All @-@ Defensive Team selection , <unk> National champion and a first round NBA Draft choice . Phil was teammates with his older brother Matt for two years at Missouri . As of September 2013 , Matt is playing with the Plymouth Raiders in the British Basketball League . Their older sister Angie was an All @-@ American volleyball player for the California Golden Bears . Pressey wore cornrows throughout his high school basketball career . Pressey was a childhood friend and AAU teammate of Alex Oriakhi who transferred from Connecticut after playing for the 2010 – 11 national champion Huskies team to join the 2012 – 13 Tigers . 
 = Cauldron II : The Pumpkin Strikes Back = 
 Cauldron II : The Pumpkin Strikes Back is a computer game developed and published by British developer Palace Software ( Palace ) as a sequel to their 1985 title Cauldron . The two @-@ dimensional ( 2D ) platform game was released in 1986 for the ZX Spectrum , Commodore 64 and Amstrad CPC home computers . Players control a bouncing pumpkin that is on a quest of vengeance against the " Witch Queen " . The roles of the two were reversed from the first game , in which the witch defeated a monster pumpkin . 
 Following the success of Cauldron , Palace employee Steve Brown began work on a sequel . To provide fans of the original title with a new experience , a very different gameplay was implemented for the sequel , although several minor features retained connections to the first . Inspired by the bouncing pumpkin character in Cauldron , Brown designed the game around the character 's movement . The bouncing mechanic proved problematic for the programmers who were unable to perfect its implementation . Technical limitations also prevented them from implementing certain animations , such as turning pages of a book . 
 Cauldron II was first released on the Commodore 64 . It was released in the following years on other systems and as re @-@ releases . The game received praise , mainly for its audio @-@ visuals , in video game magazines . Difficulty in handling the bouncing pumpkin 's movement was a common complaint , although reviewers felt the overall package was of good value . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In Cauldron , the protagonist was a witch who became the " Witch Queen " by defeating an enemy called the " Pumpking " . In its sequel , players control a pumpkin that has survived the witch 's ascent to power and seeks to defeat her . Cauldron II takes place in the witch 's castle , and players control the pumpkin , moving it through the 2D game world that is shown as side views . Six magical items — a Goblet , Axe , Shield , Crown , Scissors , and Book of Spells — are scattered throughout the castle and when collected by the player character , augments the pumpkin 's abilities , providing it with offensive and defensive capabilities . Collecting the items also allows the pumpkin to access the witch 's chambers and cut a lock of her hair , which is required to defeat the witch and complete the game . 
 The protagonist traverses the castle by bouncing , and players control the pumpkin by manipulating the direction and height of its bounce . Similar to the previous game , Halloween @-@ themed enemies , such as ghosts , monsters , and skeletons , inhabit the game world . Contact with an enemy drains the pumpkin 's magic meter that also fuels the protagonist 's offensive projectiles . The character dies once the meter is depleted . The pumpkin has a limited number of lives to continue the game , which ends once all of the pumpkin 's lives have been expended . On continuing , the pumpkin reappears on the screen with a refilled meter . 
 = = Development = = 
 The success of Cauldron in 1985 prompted Palace Software to produce a sequel . Rather than recycle the previous game 's design , the development team wanted to be innovative and implement new gameplay features . Steven Brown and Richard Leinfellner resumed their roles as designer and programmer , respectively . Richard Joseph handled the audio design and Stan Schembri programmed the Commodore 64 version . 
 Brown first drew inspiration from the final scene of Cauldron : the witch 's fight against the Pumpking , which bounced around a room . He felt the bouncing pumpkin looked " cool " and decided to base the sequel 's gameplay on this aspect . Although unsure about the idea , the other team members proceeded with development . Intended to mimic a bouncing ball , the pumpkin 's movement could change direction only if force is applied to it while it is in contact with a surface that provides friction . This mechanic prohibited the pumpkin from changing directions while in mid @-@ air , and proved problematic for the programmers to implement . Issues included difficulties with collision detection , unpredictable movements that led to glitches , and troubles with the firing mechanism . The pumpkin 's ability to fire projectiles was intended to provide offensive game mechanics to players . In early designs , however , the projectile inadvertently generated a force that changed the pumpkin 's direction . The programmers tried to correct this , but were unable to create a perfect solution . 
 As the gameplay designs were being implemented , Brown switched focus to the game 's aesthetics . Scenes from the game were sketched on storyboards to aid development . Cauldron II 's game world , the witch 's castle , was designed to resemble Palace Software 's logo as an advertising tactic . Brown photographed separate screens of the game and assembled them into a complete map , showing the shape of his company 's logo , for video game magazines . Enemy designs were similar to those in the previous game , based on the Halloween holiday . Brown envisioned a graphical effect for the game 's narration , showing a book whose pages turned as the story is read . However , technical limitations at the time prohibited the implementation of such a visual effect . Brown also wanted the game 's visuals to scroll seamlessly as the character moved through the game world , but flick @-@ screening ( showing one section of the world at a time ) was more feasible . As with the previous game , Brown created a Plasticine model of the witch character as a reference for a painting that was used for the game 's box art . The group tested the game prior to release and deemed it too challenging . They reduced the difficulty level so that more players could complete the game . 
 Palace Software developed Cauldron II for three home computers : Amstrad CPC , Commodore 64 , and ZX Spectrum . The game was first released for the Commodore 64 , and then for the Amstrad CPC and ZX Spectrum . It was later re @-@ released on the ZX Spectrum in 1989 by <unk> under its Silverbird budget label . Cauldron II was also re @-@ released with the first game as a compilation title for Amstrad CPC and ZX Spectrum computers . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game was well received by video game journalists upon its release . ZX Spectrum magazines Crash and ZX Computing awarded Cauldron II their top accolades : " Crash Smash " and " Monster Hit " , respectively . Similar to the first Cauldron , praise from the video game press focused on the graphical quality , and criticism directed at the gameplay was mixed . Computer and Video Games reviewer Paul Boughton praised the size of the game world , but criticized the audio quality of the Amstrad CPC and ZX Spectrum versions , citing the limited capabilities of the two systems . In concluding his review , Boughton felt any version of the game would be worth purchasing . Phil South of Your Sinclair praised the game 's presentation and design , calling the graphics " lovely " and the platform gameplay " original " . ZX Computing ' reviewer praised the audio @-@ visuals , and recommended the title for fans of the previous game . A Crash magazine reviewer lauded the audio @-@ visuals of the ZX Spectrum version and commented that the gameplay offered more than its predecessor 's . The reviewer described Cauldron II as difficult , but felt that the sense of accomplishment gained from successful completion outweighed the negative aspect . Computer Gamer 's reviewer criticized the bouncing gameplay , citing unpredictable reactions and difficulty in navigating around tough enemies . Rich Pelley and Jon Pillar of Your Sinclair echoed similar comments . Retro Gamer writer Craig Grannell described the game 's difficulty as the " only real criticism " . The ZX Computing reviewer also criticized the bouncing aspect , but praised the overall game design as enjoyable . Phil King , another Crash reviewer , praised the Silverbird re @-@ release . He called the graphics " colorful " and " well @-@ animated " , and felt that the game was of good value despite an excessive difficulty . The commercial success of the two Cauldron games prompted Palace to give Brown more creative freedom for his following project , Barbarian : The Ultimate Warrior . 
 = 30 Seconds to Mars ( album ) = 
 30 Seconds to Mars is the debut studio album by American rock band Thirty Seconds to Mars . It was first released on August 27 , 2002 , by Immortal Records and distributed by Virgin Records . The album was produced by Bob Ezrin , Brian Virtue , and Thirty Seconds to Mars , and was recorded in rural Wyoming during 2001 and early 2002 . It had been in the works for a couple of years , with lead vocalist Jared Leto writing the majority of the songs . 
 30 Seconds to Mars was described as a concept album centering on human struggle and self @-@ determination , characterized by personal lyrics that use otherworldly elements and conceptual ideas to illustrate a truthful personal situation . The album incorporates progressive sounds with influences and elements from new wave , space rock , and electronica . Upon release , 30 Seconds to Mars received mostly positive reviews from music critics , who commended the album 's lyrical content and the band 's musicianship , which has been compared to the works of Pink Floyd , Tool , and Brian Eno . 
 The album debuted at number 107 on the Billboard 200 and number one on the US Top Heatseekers . It was a slow @-@ burning success that eventually sold two million copies worldwide . It produced two singles , " Capricorn ( A Brand New Name ) " and " Edge of the Earth " . Thirty Seconds to Mars promoted the album by opening concerts for bands such as Puddle of Mudd , Incubus , Sevendust , and Chevelle . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 By 1998 , Thirty Seconds to Mars was performing gigs at small American venues and clubs . When they first started , lead vocalist Jared Leto did not allow his vocation as a Hollywood actor to be used in promotion of the band . They played their first concerts under different names , before finally settling on the name " Thirty Seconds to Mars " , which was taken from a rare manuscript titled Argus Apocraphex . During this period , the band recorded demo tracks such as " Valhalla " and " Revolution " , or " Jupiter " and " Hero " , which later appeared on the debut album as " Fallen " and " Year Zero " respectively , but also " Buddha for Mary " . Their work led to a number of record labels being interested in signing Thirty Seconds to Mars , which eventually signed to Immortal Records . In 1999 , Virgin Records entered into the contract . 
 The work of Thirty Seconds to Mars generated the interest of record producer Bob Ezrin , who had previously worked on several groundbreaking projects , including The Wall by Pink Floyd , Love It to Death by Alice Cooper , and Destroyer by Kiss . Thirty Seconds to Mars contacted Ezrin because they felt that he had the ability to help them achieve their own vision and create a distinct sound ; moreover , the band 's members grew up listing to his work with Pink Floyd , Kiss and Alice Cooper . Brian Virtue , who had previously worked with Jane 's Addiction , joined the band and Ezrin in producing the record . 
 Thirty Seconds to Mars retreated to the isolation of Wyoming 's countryside in 2001 to record the album , tentatively titled Welcome to the Universe . The band and Ezrin chose an empty warehouse lot on 15 @,@ 000 acres , starting an intense period of preproduction focused on fifty songs . The isolation allowed the band to work at a different pace . Jared Leto said that while recording in Wyoming , " there was an interesting dichotomy , a kind of contradiction with the technology and the organic world that we were surrounded [ ... ] It 's something that I think ended up in the music " . Ezrin helped the band to understand the importance of an album 's structure and how to create a progression , rather than a simple series of singles . " We really wanted to create something that had depth , " Leto explained . He described the process of working with Ezrin as tumultuous but also fulfilling , having its own dynamics . He also stated that Virtue was a key element in helping the band define their sound . 
 The track " Fallen " , originally titled " Jupiter " , was the first to be produced for the album . Thirty Seconds to Mars initially thought to exclude the track from the record since they were not satisfied with it , but then they decided to rework the song because there were people that had strong feelings about it . The track features programming by Danny Lohner and background vocals by Maynard James Keenan . Several musicians , including Elijah Blue Allman , Renn Hawkey , as well as producers Ezrin and Virtue , contributed on selected tracks . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Style and influences = = = 
 The style of the album combined progressive metal and space rock with influences and elements from new wave and electronica , utilizing programming and synthesizers . According to Jared Leto , the band wanted to create " something that had cohesiveness and kind of an atmospheric musical story to it " . He identified groups that had a sense of identity and atmosphere as being influential on the album 's songwriting . He cited classic stoner rock artists , to which he and his brother Shannon had listened while growing up . Eventually , they gravitated toward more conceptual work like Pink Floyd , David Bowie and The Cure . Thirty Seconds to Mars also drew influences from acts such as Björk , Rush , and Depeche Mode ; according to Shannon Leto , the inspirations derived from " mostly big <unk> bands ; bands that had depth ; bands that were dynamic " . 
 The sound of 30 Seconds to Mars takes on many musical stylistic shifts . Elizabeth <unk> from Now magazine described it as a concoction of ' 80s electronics , industrial music and nu metal with a heavy dose of progressive rock . Jaan Uhelszki of Alternative Press felt that the album is made of " sterner stuff " , with the band 's prog @-@ metal foundation " enhanced by an unexpectedly powerful sense of melody " . Smiley Ben of BBC Collective noted in the album alternative rock tendencies . Ryan Rayhill from Blender found the album befitting prog @-@ rock prototypes Rush and opined that Thirty Seconds to Mars " emerged with an eponymous debut that sounds like Tool on The Dark Side of the Moon " , referring to the 1973 album by Pink Floyd . 
 = = = Lyrics and themes = = = 
 30 Seconds to Mars is a concept album focusing on human struggle and self @-@ determination . It deals with characters who battle with social alienation , emotional isolation , and political malaise . The title itself " 30 Seconds to Mars " indicates the accelerated human society and suggests a potential escapism from it . The album 's lyrics describe the personal human experience through the use of metaphors and moments of fantasy . Jared Leto regarded it as a " very personal album that sometimes uses otherworldly elements and conceptual ideas to illustrate a truthful personal situation " . He cited the human struggle as the most inspiring source for the band and explained that the record features " a definite desire for change , for renewal , for a new beginning and ultimately , for escape " . Author Karin <unk> commented that Leto , who wrote most of the lyrics , allows the listener to draw his or her own conclusions to the meanings of the songs . She noted that " this makes the music especially personal , as whatever images you conjure from the sound and words can be interpreted by your own inner language " . 
 Opening track " Capricorn ( A Brand New Name ) " deals with a desire for renewal . Leto , however , stated that he prefers to let the listener take its own understanding and meaning from the song , claiming that the interpretation , from individual to individual , is one of the most interesting aspects of music . The track " Fallen " faces the necessity to escape from the inner world that every person has created for itself . The lyrics of " Oblivion " , originally titled " The Reckoning " , lead into a frantic threat , in which " Unity divides / Division will unite " . Leto described this paradox as a rather common but unfortunate occurrence . A dramatic narration drives " Buddha for Mary " , whose story is not about a specific person and represents a metaphor . " End of the Beginning " features a foreboding tone and emphasizes the human nature in constant search for something . The album ends with the hidden track " The Struggle " , whose lyrics were taken from the ancient Chinese military treatise The Art of War , attributed to Sun Tzu . 
 The track " Revolution " , excluded from the final track listing , was considered by some critics as having an anti @-@ American tone . Leto rejected the claim and explained that it can be taken " many different ways " and if taken literally or politically , it could be misinterpreted . He said that the band " didn 't want a song like that to overshadow what we are about " and especially after the September 11 attacks , they felt it did not fit thematically with the rest of the album , stating that " it took on new dimensions " . The album features elements inspired by the science fiction novel Dune by Frank Herbert , which influenced the album 's songwriting for its themes regarding the interactions of politics , religion , technology , and human emotion . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 The photography for the album was handled by drummer Shannon Leto , with additional works provided by Ken <unk> . The cover art features a teenage boy and some of the band 's symbolism . It includes a phoenix logo , named " Mithra " by the band , that bears the motto " <unk> in <unk> " . Roughly translated from Latin , the phrase means " Launch forth into the deep " . The band chose a phoenix for its association with rebirth and renewal in the Greek mythology . The group expressed interest in signs and symbols and their relationships with cultures and subcultures . The album 's cover art was unveiled through the band 's official website on July 29 , 2002 . However , it was not conceived to be the original concept for the artwork . The initial cover art was discontinued and destroyed during production following the September 11 attacks due to the graphic content of the image . It featured a fighter pilot ejecting from an exploding plane . Thirty Seconds to Mars explained that they never saw it as a violent image , but felt that it was inappropriate in the wake of the events . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 30 Seconds to Mars was released on August 27 , 2002 on Immortal Records in the United States and September 30 on EMI in the United Kingdom . It was originally expected to be released in early 2002 . However , the band was behind schedule and the cover design needed a reshoot . The album 's compact disc featured enhanced material developed by Little Lion Studios , including a promotional video titled " Capricorn " directed by Lawton Outlaw and a behind the scenes footage edited by Ari Sandel . The Japanese edition of the album included the bonus track " Anarchy in Tokyo " . " Capricorn ( A Brand New Name ) " was the first single taken from 30 Seconds to Mars . It was issued a month before the album 's release on July 23 , 2002 . It had an accompanying music video directed by Paul Fedor . The British released of the single was pressed with the B @-@ side " Phase 1 : Fortification " . " Edge of the Earth " was released as the album 's second single on March 3 , 2003 , with a music video directed by Kevin McCullough . 
 After five years since its original release , 30 Seconds to Mars was made available in Australia on April 7 , 2007 on Virgin Records . EMI re @-@ issued a limited edition of the album in Japan on December 2 , 2009 . To commemorate the 10th anniversary of the album , Thirty Seconds to Mars hosted an event called <unk> on August 27 , 2012 . It was broadcast worldwide through the online platform VyRT and included live playback and commentary of the record with the band , interactive discussion focused on the formation of Thirty Seconds to Mars , and exclusive acoustic performances . The album was also re @-@ issued as a limited edition picture disc double @-@ vinyl LP . 
 = = = Touring = = = 
 The band promoted the album through a number of tours in North America . Even before its release , Puddle of Mudd invited Thirty Seconds to Mars to open a six @-@ week tour for them in the spring of 2002 . On January 30 , Thirty Seconds to Mars began a promotional tour in North America . The band played its first European concert on June 24 , 2002 , at The <unk> in London , England . In July 2002 , they began a club tour and also embarked on a North American tour supporting Incubus . In early October , they were invited by MTV to join the Campus Invasion Tour , playing ten dates in Canada alongside I Mother Earth , Billy Talent , and Pepper Sands . The band was also scheduled to open a spring tour for Adema but was forced to withdraw due to scheduling conflicts . 
 After playing a series of shows supporting Our Lady Peace , Thirty Seconds to Mars opened an autumn tour for Sevendust . The band 's first appearance on television was on Last Call with Carson Daly on November 18 , which aired on November 27 , 2002 . It was the last performance with guitarist Solon Bixler , which left the band due to issues primarily related to touring . The band later performed on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno and The Late Late Show with Craig Kilborn , which marked the first live performance with guitarist Tomo Miličević . In 2003 , the band went on tour with Chevelle , Trust Company , and Shihad , and played thirteen shows for Lollapalooza . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 30 Seconds to Mars earned mostly positive reviews upon release . However , at Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 60 , based on 5 reviews . Jason Pettigrew from Alternative Press regarded it as " an ambitious , immense @-@ sounding work that 's at once rich in melody " and " lyrically jarring " . Ryan Rayhill from Blender noticed " throbbing synths " and " exploding guitars " , and called the album a " high @-@ minded space opera of epic scope " narrating " tales of living in deep , black oblivion " . Smiley Ben of BBC Collective described the overall sound as " certainly compelling " , and praised the sonic variety , writing that the band " knowingly push [ es ] boundaries " producing " great music with an edge " . AllMusic reviewer Jon O 'Brien called the record a " highly ambitious space @-@ themed concept album " , and commended its " heavy , riff @-@ laden " guitars , " soaring " vocals and sci @-@ fi lyrics . 
 Johan Wippsson from Melodic claimed that the band has " something new to add to the world " with their space @-@ influenced modern rock . Jeremy Gladstone of Kludge commented that the album reaches its peak with " Buddha for Mary " , which he called a " virtual sonic achievement " , but felt that the quality of the songs drops off at the halfway point , describing the entire project as " top @-@ heavy " . Canadian critic Karin <unk> found the group 's sound and vision reminiscent of their " concept @-@ styled forbears " but " uniquely owned " for a contemporary audience , and wrote that the band " defies the trend by stepping out ahead of it and into the future " , giving the listener something original to enjoy . Amber <unk> from Exclaim ! echoed this sentiment , stating that the band stretched musical borders and represented something that is " a little different " , offering a " solid sound " . 
 Mitch Joel from Blistering commended the band 's musical diversity , noting that they are " worth more than most of their peers on a song @-@ by @-@ song magnitude . " Elizabeth <unk> of Now magazine found the track @-@ to @-@ track variation limited , although she appreciated the range of styles . Peter Relic of Rolling Stone gave a mixed response , stating that the album has its finer moments but felt that it is undone by Jared Leto 's " baffling , pretentious poetry " and the " sanitized quality of the heavy guitars . Q magazine described it as having " a polished sheen " , but opined that the " earnest , sci @-@ fi @-@ tinged lyrics gets monotonous " over the course of the album . In contrast , Jason D. Taylor from AllMusic commented that the " space @-@ age themes compliment the group 's advanced musical achievements wonderfully " . Megan O 'Toole of The Gazette felt that every track on the album is a " unique masterpiece that simultaneously operates on a number of different musical and spiritual levels " , writing that its music has the potential to " affect and infect the deepest recesses " of the soul . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Jason D. Taylor of AllMusic considered the release of 30 Seconds to Mars a " daring new step in musical evolution " and noted that its impact left " vast corridors of sound open for the listener to meander down at will " . He commented that Thirty Seconds to Mars managed to record an album that " breathes life " into the " empty shell that corporate rock has become " , and felt that in " reanimating an avenue of musical expression that has for many years been on its deathbed " , the band possibly offered the best rock experience of 2002 . Kludge listed 30 Seconds to Mars as one of the best 100 albums of 2002 . Melodic included it on their list of top 50 albums of the year and regarded it as " one of the most unique album when it comes to an own style " . Music critic Megan O 'Toole felt Thirty Seconds to Mars managed to " carve out a unique niche for themselves in the rock realm " . 
 A writer of MuchMusic called the album a " work that is built to last " , noting that the band produced " something unique " with " depth and substance " . Artistdirect agreed and explained that 30 Seconds to Mars established the group as " fresh , new force " , revealing a " multi @-@ faceted outfit that thrived on creative exploration and escape " . Jon O 'Brien , writing for AllMusic , labelled the album one of the " more convincing actor @-@ turned @-@ rock star " efforts . In a retrospective review in 2012 , Ian Winwood from Kerrang ! deemed the record an " epic starting point " for the music that followed , and stated that it displayed Jared Leto 's " vast , cinematic writing style " . He considered its music " undoubtedly the most aggressive they 've created " and regarded lead single " Capricorn ( A Brand New Name ) " as the band 's " most muscular moment " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , 30 Seconds to Mars entered the Billboard 200 at number 107 on the issue dated September 14 , 2002 . It also debuted at number one on the Top Heatseekers . After nine weeks , it fell to number 40 , with sales of over 40 @,@ 000 units . As of August 2006 , Nielsen SoundScan estimates actual sales of the album at over 120 @,@ 000 in the United States . Its lead single , " Capricorn ( A Brand New Name ) " , entered the Mainstream Rock Tracks chart at number 40 and eventually reached a peak of number 31 . In the United Kingdom , 30 Seconds to Mars debuted at number 136 on the UK Albums Chart . It was certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) in July 2013 , denoting shipments of over 60 @,@ 000 units . 
 In France , 30 Seconds to Mars debuted at number 142 on the national albums chart on October 5 , 2002 . After its release to the Australian market , the album entered the ARIA Charts at number 95 on the issue dated June 11 , 2007 . It peaked at number 89 the following week . In Greece , it entered the national albums chart in June 2011 , in view of a band 's concert held in Athens in July , reaching a peak of number 41 . 30 Seconds to Mars was a slow @-@ burning success , and eventually sold two million copies worldwide as of March 2011 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Jared Leto , except where noted . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from 30 Seconds to Mars album liner notes . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Action of 27 June 1798 = 
 The Action of 27 June 1798 was a minor naval engagement between British and French frigates in the Strait of Sicily in the Mediterranean Sea . The engagement formed part of a wider campaign , in which a major French convoy sailed from Toulon to Alexandria at the start of the Napoleonic campaign in Egypt . The French frigate Sensible had been detached from the convoy after the capture of Malta , under orders to carry wounded soldiers and looted treasure back to France while the main body continued to Egypt . The British frigate HMS Seahorse was one of a number of vessels detached from the main British Mediterranean Fleet in the Tagus River , sent to augment the fleet under Sir Horatio Nelson that was actively hunting the French convoy . 
 Lookouts on Seahorse spotted Sensible at 16 : 00 on 26 June and Captain Edward Foote immediately gave chase , the French frigate fleeing southwards . For 12 hours the pursuit continued until Foote was able to catch and defeat his opponent , inflicting heavy casualties on the weaker and overladen French frigate . Among the prisoners captured was General Louis Baraguey d 'Hilliers who had been wounded in the storming of Malta , and among the treasure was an ornate seventeenth century cannon once owned by Louis XIV . The captured Sensible was initially fitted out as an active warship , but on arrival in Britain in 1799 the ship was downgraded to a transport . The action provided the British with the first conclusive evidence of the French intention to invade Egypt , but despite an extensive search for Nelson 's fleet Foote was unable to relay the location of the French to his admiral before the Battle of the Nile on 1 August . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 19 May 1798 , a French fleet departed Toulon for a top secret destination . The force consisted of 22 warships and 120 transports , to be joined by additional forces from Genoa , Corsica and Civitavecchia as it passed south through the Ligurian Sea . The fleet 's target was Egypt , a territory nominally controlled by the Ottoman Empire that French General Napoleon Bonaparte considered an ideal springboard for operations against British India . Passing southwards without interference from the Royal Navy , which had been absent from the Mediterranean for over a year following the outbreak of war between Britain and Spain , Bonaparte 's convoy passed Sicily on 7 June and two days later was at anchor off the harbour of Valletta on Malta . The island nation of Malta was under the command of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem , a religious order that depended on France for much of its wealth and recruits . Bonaparte believed that capturing Malta was essential to controlling the Central Mediterranean , and when Grand Master Ferdinand von Hompesch zu Bolheim refused the fleet entry to the harbour , Bonaparte responded with a large scale invasion . The knights put up no resistance , although fighting against native Maltese troops lasted for 24 hours until the central city of Mdina fell . With this defeat the knights withdrew to their fortress at Valletta but were persuaded to surrender the following day with promises of pensions and estates in France . 
 With Malta secure , Bonaparte seized the Maltese army and navy , adding them to his own forces . He garrisoned Valletta and among the wealth he appropriated from the island was the entire property of the Roman Catholic Church in the island . Much of this was auctioned off , while other treasures were to be transported to France , along with dispatches carried by the wounded General Louis Baraguey d 'Hilliers and other soldiers wounded during the invasion . On 19 June Bonaparte divided his forces , leaving 4 @,@ 000 men to hold the island while the remainder of the convoy embarked on the second leg of the journey to Egypt . One ship was detailed to return to France with the wounded , despatches and some of the treasure . For this purpose the 36 @-@ gun frigate Sensible under Captain G. F. J. Bourdé was selected , although much of the regular crew was removed and replaced with freed Maltese galley slaves . 
 Although Bonaparte had not expected British interference in his operations against Egypt , the Royal Navy had responded to the reports of French mobilisation on the south coast by despatching a small squadron to the Ligurian Sea under Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Horatio Nelson . Arriving on 21 May , Nelson 's squadron was struck by a severe storm and was forced to make hasty repairs off Sardinia . The storm had also dispersed the squadron 's frigates , leaving Nelson with only three ships of the line . Although he was reinforced by another ten ships of the line and a fourth rate on 7 June , he still lacked any scouts and was thus severely hampered in his ability to search for information on French operations . The detached frigates had been scattered across the Western Mediterranean , and were unable to locate either the British or the French fleets . Reinforcements sent by Vice @-@ Admiral Earl St Vincent at the Tagus River suffered from the same problem , the frigates spreading out widely in their search but failing to discover either of the main British or French forces , which were rapidly sailing southeastwards towards Alexandria . 
 = = Battle = = 
 One of the British reinforcements cruising in the Central Mediterranean in June was the frigate HMS Seahorse , commanded by Captain Edward Foote . Seahorse was officially rated as a 38 @-@ gun ship , but in reality carried 46 guns , including 14 32 @-@ pounder carronades , very heavy short @-@ range cannon . Foote had been despatched by Earl St. Vincent to join Nelson 's squadron in his hunt for the French and carried on board a number of reinforcements for HMS Culloden , one of Nelson 's ships commanded by Captain Thomas Troubridge . On 26 June 1798 , Seahorse was passing along the southern Sicilian coast in search of information about the whereabouts of the British fleet when at 16 : 00 his lookout sighted a ship . Advancing rapidly , Foote recognised the stranger as a French frigate and prepared for battle . The frigate was Sensible , which was on a northeasterly course from Malta to Toulon when sighted . Bourdé , knowing that his ship was overladen , undermanned and carried only 36 guns , some of which were only 6 @-@ pounders , turned away and sailed south , hoping to outrun his opponent during the night . 
 For 12 hours Sensible fled southwards , but Foote 's pursuit was relentless and Bourdé found the distance between his frigate and Seahorse gradually disappearing . At 04 : 00 on 27 July , with the island of Pantelleria 36 miles ( 58 km ) to the northwest , Foote was able to pull Seahorse alongside his opponent and open a heavy fire from close range . At the first shots , many of the galley slaves deserted their positions and fled below decks , leaving the French ship dangerously exposed . Within eight minutes Sensible was battered into submission , Bourdé 's desperate attempt to board Seahorse easily avoided by Foote . The French frigate received 36 cannon shot in the hull and significant damage to the masts . Casualty estimates vary , but between 18 and 25 men were killed and 35 to 55 were wounded from a total of approximately 300 . Seahorse by contrast suffered only light damage , losing two men dead and 16 , including first Lieutenant Wilmot , wounded . 
 Foote removed much of the treasure and prisoners from Sensible before despatching the vessel under a prize crew to Earl St. Vincent in the Tagus . Among the goods seized from the frigate were copies of the French naval code books , as well as information about the destination of Bonaparte 's invasion fleet . Sailing immediately for Alexandria , Foote was joined soon afterwards by HMS Terpsichore under Captain William Hall Gage , who was also searching for Nelson . Together they reached Alexandria on 21 July , discovering that the French were already in the harbour although Nelson was nowhere to be seen . Observing the French dispositions , Foote and Gage disguised their ships as a French frigate and its prize , Gage hoisting French colours over British to indicate that his ship had been captured and Foote displaying the secret French recognition codes . This appears to have convinced the French that the strangers were not enemy ships , and no move was made against them , Foote and Gage free to observe the French anchorage in Aboukir Bay before striking out along the African coast in search of Nelson . The British admiral was at this time resupplying his ships at Syracuse on Sicily , and when he sailed on 25 July he passed eastwards to Morea where he learned of the French invasion of Egypt from the Turkish governor of Coron . Striking directly southwards , Nelson arrived at Aboukir Bay on 1 August without ever encountering Foote or learning his intelligence . Seahorse eventually returned to Alexandria on 17 August to discover that Nelson had fought and won the Battle of the Nile nearly three weeks earlier . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Earl St Vincent was suffering from an extreme shortage of frigates , and on the arrival of Sensible at the Tagus immediately ordered the frigate to be commissioned as HMS Sensible , stripping six men from each of his ships to man her and turning the frigate into an active warship in just 12 hours . For a year Sensible remained with St. Vincent , until she was sent back to Britain in November 1799 . On arrival the ship was downgraded from frontline service , but did spend several years commissioned as a military transport until wrecked off Ceylon on 3 March 1802 . Among the treasures removed from the ship was a decorated brass cannon captured from the Ottomans in the seventeenth century and presented to the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem by King Louis XIV of France , as well as a model of a galley made from gilt silver . These were sold , along with the other cargo and ships fittings at Sheerness in November 1799 , the prize money shares subsequently awarded to the crew of Seahorse . 
 General d 'Hilliers and the other prisoners were taken to Britain , but the officers were soon paroled . On their return to France , d 'Hilliers and Bourdé were court martialled and initially condemned by the Minister of Marine Étienne Eustache Bruix . Bruix believed that the ship had been too easily surrendered and publicly released a strongly worded letter criticising their " talents and courage " . This level of criticism , which British naval historian William James considers excessive , was eventually toned down and after a spirited defence by d 'Hilliers both officers were honourably acquitted . Foote was praised for his success , and Lieutenant Wilmot , who successfully carried the frigate to the Tagus , was promoted . Foote later commanded Seahorse off Naples , and became embroiled in the controversy that surrounded the execution of the leaders of the Parthenopean Republic in 1799 . 
 = Xavier Mertz = 
 Xavier Mertz ( 6 October 1882 – 8 January 1913 ) was a Swiss explorer , mountaineer and skier , from Basel . He took part in the Far Eastern Party , a 1912 – 13 component of the Australasian Antarctic Expedition , which claimed his life . The Mertz Glacier is named after him . 
 The son of a textile machinery manufacturer , Mertz studied patent law at the University of Bern , and science at the University of Lausanne , specialising in glacier and mountain formations . While a student , Mertz became active as a skier , competing in national competitions , and as a mountaineer , climbing many of the highest peaks in the Alps . In early 1911 , Mertz was hired by geologist and explorer Douglas Mawson for his Australasian Antarctic Expedition . He was initially employed as a ski instructor , but in Antarctica Mertz instead joined Belgrave Edward Sutton Ninnis in the care of the expedition 's Greenland Huskies . 
 In the summer of 1912 – 13 , Mertz and Ninnis were chosen by Mawson to accompany him on the Far Eastern Party , using the dogs to push rapidly from the expedition 's base in Adélie Land towards Victoria Land . After Ninnis and a sledge carrying most of the food disappeared down a crevasse , 311 miles ( 501 km ) from the hut , Mertz and Mawson headed back west , gradually using the dogs to supplement their remaining food stocks . About 100 miles ( 160 km ) from safety , Mertz died , leaving Mawson to carry on alone . The cause of Mertz 's death has never been firmly established ; the commonly purported theory is hypervitaminosis A ( an excessive intake of vitamin A ) from consuming the livers of the Huskies . Other theories suggest he may have died from a combination of malnutrition , a change in diet , cold exposure , and psychological stresses . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Xavier Mertz was born in Basel , the son of Emile Mertz , who owned a large engineering firm in the city . With the aim of working in the family business , which manufactured textile machinery , Mertz attended the University of Bern , where he studied patent law . While in Bern , he became active as a mountaineer and skier . Mertz competed in several national competitions ; in 1906 he was third in the Swiss cross @-@ country skiing championship , and second in the German championship . In 1908 , he won the Swiss ski jumping championship , with a distance of 31 metres ( 102 ft ) . As a mountaineer , he was particularly prolific in the Alps ; he climbed Mont Blanc — the highest peak in the range — and claimed several first ascents of other mountains . After he attained his degree of Doctor of Laws from the University of Bern , Mertz studied science at the University of Lausanne ; he specialised in glacier and mountain formations , for which he received his second doctorate . 
 = = Antarctic = = 
 In early 1911 , Mertz went to London to meet with the Australian geologist and explorer Douglas Mawson . Mawson , who had served as physicist during Ernest Shackleton 's 1908 – 09 Nimrod Expedition , was planning his own Antarctic expedition . In his application letter , Mertz wrote that he hoped Mawson would be using skis , as " they have proved so good for the purpose & knowing that I am as good as any one on <unk> . " While Mawson was intending to recruit only British subjects ( chiefly Australians and New Zealanders ) , Mertz 's qualifications prompted him to make an exception , and hire the Swiss as a ski instructor . First , however , he was given responsibility for the expedition 's 49 Greenland Huskies , aboard the expedition ship SY Aurora , bound for Hobart . 
 On the Aurora , Mertz met Belgrave Edward Sutton Ninnis , a lieutenant in the Royal Fusiliers . Like Mertz , Ninnis was responsible for the expedition 's dogs ; Aurora 's captain , John King Davis , regarded the pair as " idlers " . " I wish we had some one on board who could look after [ the dogs ] , " he wrote in his diary , " it is a great shame that they should suffer from neglect . " On 2 December 1911 , after final preparations and loading were completed in Hobart , the Aurora sailed south ; she stopped briefly at Macquarie Island , where a wireless relay base was established , and reached the site of the expedition 's main base at Cape Denison in Adélie Land , on the Antarctic continent , in early January . 
 = = = Adélie Land = = = 
 Over the following winter , preparations were made for the summer sledging . Because the conditions — constant , strong winds and an excessive slope by the hut — prevented Mertz from conducting skiing lessons as regularly as intended , he focussed instead on helping Ninnis to care for the dogs . On days when the weather was good they drove the dogs around outside the hut , teaching them to run in teams ; when the winds returned the pair fitted and sewed harnesses for each dog , and prepared their sledging food . By this time Mertz and Ninnis developed a close friendship , as the expedition 's taxidermist Charles <unk> later wrote : 
 The two [ Mertz and Ninnis ] had joined the Expedition together in London , and had been associated longer and in a more intimate manner than any other members of the Expedition . During the winter months we had all been drawn together , but between Mertz and Ninnis there existed a very deep bond . Mertz , in his warm @-@ hearted impulsive way , had practically adopted Ninnis , and his affection was almost maternal . Ninnis , less demonstrative , reciprocated this to the full , and indeed it was hard to dissociate them in our thoughts . It was always ' Mertz and Ninnis ' or ' Ninnis and Mertz ' , a composite entity , each the complement of the other . 
 In August , the preparations extended to laying depots ; an early party established a depot 5 @.@ 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 9 km ) to the south of the main hut — a grotto in the ice known as Aladdin 's Cave — but returned without the dogs . Mertz and two others set off to rescue the dogs , but in heavy winds covered less than a mile in two hours , and returned to the hut . " If it depended only on me , " Mertz wrote in his diary , after four days ' more wind confined them to the hut , " we would be in our sleeping bags outside in the snow , and we would at least try to find the dogs . Mawson is definitely too cautious , and I wonder if he would show enough gumption during the sledging expedition . " The following day Mertz was part of a party of three that made it to Aladdin 's Cave to rescue the dogs ; when strong winds confined them to the depot for three days they spent the time expanding the cave . 
 In September , Mertz , Ninnis and Herbert Murphy formed a survey party , man @-@ hauling to the south @-@ east of Aladdin 's cave . In strong winds , they travelled just 12 @.@ 5 miles ( 20 @.@ 1 km ) in three days , before the temperature dropped to − 34 ° C ( − 29 ° F ) and the wind speed increased to 90 miles per hour ( 78 kn ) , confining them to the tent . When a gap in the wind allowed , they hurried back to the hut . 
 = = = Death during the Far Eastern Party = = = 
 On 27 October 1912 , Mawson outlined the summer sledging program . Mertz and Ninnis were assigned to Mawson 's own party , which would use the dogs to push quickly to the east of the expedition 's base in Commonwealth Bay , towards Victoria Land . The party departed Cape Denison on 10 November , heading first to Aladdin 's Cave , and from there south @-@ east towards a massive glacier encountered by Aurora on the outward journey . Mertz skied ahead , scouting and providing a lead for the dogs to chase ; Mawson and Ninnis manoeuvred the two dog teams behind . They reached the glacier on 19 November ; negotiating fields of crevasses , it was crossed in five days . The party made quick progress once on the plateau again , but they soon encountered another glacier , far larger than the first . Despite strong winds and poor light , Mertz , Mawson and Ninnis reached the far side on 30 November . 
 On 14 December , the party were more than 311 miles ( 501 km ) from the Cape Denison hut . As Mertz skied ahead , singing songs from his student days , Ninnis , the largest sledge and the strongest dog team were lost when they broke through the snow lid of a crevasse . Together with the death of their companion , Mawson and Mertz were now severely compromised ; on the remaining sledge they had just ten days ' worth of food , and no food for the dogs . They immediately turned back west , gradually using the six remaining dogs to supplement their food supply ; they ate all parts of the animals , including their livers . They initially made good progress , but as they cleared the largest glacier Mertz began to feel ill ; he had lost his waterproof <unk> on Ninnis ' sledge , and in the cold his wet clothes were unable to dry . On 30 December , a day Mawson recorded that the companion was " off colour " , Mertz wrote that he was " really tired [ and ] shall write no more . " Mertz 's condition deteriorated over the following days — Mawson recorded he was " generally in a very bad condition . Skin coming off legs , etc " — and his illness severely slowed their progress . On 8 January , the pair about 100 miles ( 160 km ) from the hut , Mawson recorded : 
 He [ Mertz ] is very weak , becomes more and more delirious , rarely being able to speak coherently . He will eat or drink nothing . At 8 pm he raves & breaks a tent pole . Continues to rave & call ' Oh Veh , Oh Veh ' [ O weh ! , ' Oh dear ! ' ] for hours . I hold him down , then he becomes more peaceful & I put him quietly in the bag . He dies peacefully at about 2 am on morning of 8th . 
 Mawson buried Mertz in his sleeping bag under rough @-@ hewn blocks of snow , along with the remaining photographic plates and an explanatory note . Mawson staggered back into the Cape Denison hut a month later , missing the Aurora by a matter of hours ; she had waited for Mertz , Mawson and Ninnis for three weeks until — concerned by the encroaching winter ice — Davis had sailed her out of Commonwealth Bay and back to Australia . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In November 1913 , a month before the Aurora returned for the final time , Mawson and the six men remaining at Cape Denison erected a memorial cross for Mertz and Ninnis on Azimuth Hill to the north @-@ west of the main hut . The cross , constructed from pieces of a broken radio mast , was accompanied by a plaque cut from wood from Mertz 's bunk . The cross still stands , although the crossbar has required reattaching several times , and the plaque was replaced with a replica in 1986 . The first glacier the Far Eastern Party crossed on the outward journey — previously unnamed — was named by Mawson after Mertz , becoming the Mertz Glacier . At a speaking engagement upon his return to Australia , Mawson praised his dead comrades : " The survivors might have an opportunity of doing something more , but these men had done their all . " At another , Mawson said that " Dr. Mertz was a Swiss by birth , but he was a man every Englishman would have liked to have called an Englishman ... He was a man of great feelings , generous — one of Nature 's gentlemen . " A telegram was sent on behalf of the Australian people to Emile Mertz , condoling him on his " great loss , but congratulating you on your son 's imperishable fame . " 
 The cause of Mertz 's death is not certain ; at the time , it was believed Mertz may have died of colitis . A 1969 study by Sir John Cleland and R. V. Southcott of the University of Adelaide concluded that the symptoms Mawson described — hair , skin and weight loss , depression , dysentery and persistent skin infections — indicated the men had suffered hypervitaminosis A , an excessive intake of vitamin A. Vitamin A is found in unusually high quantities in the livers of Greenland Dogs , of which both Mertz and Mawson consumed large amounts ; indeed , as Mertz 's condition deteriorated , Mawson may have given him more of the liver to eat , believing it to be more easily digested . This theory is the most widely accepted , but there have been other theories . Phillip Law , former director of Australian National Antarctic Research Expeditions ( <unk> ) , believed cold exposure could account for Mertz 's symptoms . A 2005 article in The Medical Journal of Australia by Denise Carrington @-@ Smith , noting certain sources indicating that Mertz was essentially a vegetarian , suggested that general malnutrition and the sudden change to a predominantly meat diet could have triggered Mertz 's illness . Carrington @-@ Smith adds a more hypothetical reason : " the psychological stresses related to the death of a close friend [ Ninnis ] and the deaths of the dogs he had cared for , as well as the need to kill and eat his remaining dogs " . 
 = Washington State Route 162 = 
 State Route 162 ( SR 162 ) is a 17 @.@ 37 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 27 @.@ 95 km ) state highway in the U.S. state of Washington , serving rural Pierce County . The highway travels from an interchange with SR 410 in Sumner and travels south along the Puyallup River to Orting and northeast to South Prairie , ending at an intersection with SR 165 near Buckley . SR 162 was established in 1964 as the successor to Secondary State Highway 5E ( SSH 5E ) , which was codified in 1937 . The highway crosses the Puyallup River northwest of Orting on the McMillin Bridge , which opened in 1934 and is scheduled to be replaced with a newer bridge that will begin construction in 2014 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 162 begins at a diamond interchange with the SR 410 freeway in Sumner and travels south as a continuation of Valley Avenue , crossing the Puyallup River . The highway continues south through rural Pierce County , following a Ballard Terminal Railroad line and the Puyallup River . It serves the community of Alderton and joins the Pierce County Foothills Trail , traveling southeast from Puyallup . SR 162 crosses the Puyallup River on the McMillin Bridge , listed on the National Register of Historical Places , west of its confluence with the Carbon River . It becomes Washington Avenue as it travels southeast through Orting , serving Orting High School . The highway turns southwest onto Bridge Street and crosses the Foothills Trail before turning back southeast onto Herman Way , later Pioneer Way outside of Orting , towards South Prairie . SR 162 continues northeast , crossing the Foothills Trail and the Carbon River before passing through South Prairie . The highway travels east , crossing South Prairie Creek and passing White River High School , before ending at an intersection with SR 165 southwest of Buckley . 
 Every year , the Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2011 , WSDOT calculated that between 4 @,@ 100 and 21 @,@ 000 vehicles per day used the highway , mostly between Sumner and Orting . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 162 was codified as SSH 5E during the creation of the primary and secondary state highways in 1937 , beginning at Primary State Highway 5 ( PSH 5 ) and U.S. Route 410 in Puyallup , traveling through Orting and South Prairie to end at an intersection with a branch of PSH 5 southwest of Buckley . SSH 5E had a branch that traveled south from Orting to Electron that was removed from the state highway system in 1955 . The highway traveled across the Puyallup River into Orting on the McMillin Bridge , which opened in 1934 as a concrete half @-@ through truss bridge to save the Department of Highways a total of $ 826 . SR 165 was established during the 1964 highway renumbering and was codified in 1970 as the replacement to SSH 5E . The western terminus , now at SR 410 , was moved east to an interchange in Sumner after the completion of the Sumner Freeway in 1972 . The McMillin Bridge was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1982 as an example of a half @-@ through truss bridge built with concrete instead of steel . The route of the highway has not seen a major revision since 1972 ; however , WSDOT repaved the roadway and added guardrails between Orting and Buckley in 2008 . The deteriorating McMillin Bridge is being replaced by WSDOT with a newer , wider span over the Puyallup River scheduled to begin construction in 2014 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Pierce County . 
 = No Mercy ( 2004 ) = 
 No Mercy ( 2004 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) , which took place on October 3 , 2004 , at the Continental Airlines Arena in East Rutherford , New Jersey . It was the seventh annual No Mercy event , and featured eight professional wrestling matches on the event 's card . The buildup to the matches and the scenarios that took place before , during , and after the event were planned by WWE 's script writers . The event starred wrestlers from the SmackDown ! brand : a storyline expansion of the promotion where employees are assigned to a wrestling brand under the WWE banner . 
 The main event was a Last Ride match , where the objective was to place an opponent in a hearse located on the entrance stage and drive them out of the arena . WWE Champion John " Bradshaw " Layfield ( JBL ) defeated The Undertaker in this match to retain his title . Two predominant bouts were featured on the undercard ; in respective singles matches , John Cena defeated Booker T to win the WWE United States Championship , and The Big Show defeated Kurt Angle . 
 Presented by THQ 's WWE Day of Reckoning , No Mercy grossed over $ 700 @,@ 000 ticket sales from an attendance of 10 @,@ 000 , and received 240 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys . This event helped WWE increase its pay @-@ per @-@ view revenue by $ 6 @.@ 2 compared to the previous year . 
 = = Background = = 
 The event featured eight professional wrestling matches that involved different wrestlers from pre @-@ existing scripted feuds , plots and storylines . Wrestlers portrayed either a villainous or fan favorite gimmick as they followed a series of events which generally built tension , leading to a wrestling match . All wrestlers were from the SmackDown ! brand – a storyline division in which WWE assigned its employees to a different program , the other being Raw . 
 The main event featured WWE Champion John " Bradshaw " Layfield ( JBL ) defending the title against The Undertaker in a match where the objective is to place an opponent in a hearse located on the entrance stage and drive them out of the arena , dubbed a Last Ride match . The buildup to the match began after SummerSlam , Smackdown 's previous pay @-@ per @-@ view event , where JBL defeated the Undertaker in a standard wrestling match , also called a singles match , via disqualification to retain his championship . During that week on an episode of SmackDown ! , JBL wore a neck brace , to signify that he was recuperating from a chokeslam that the Undertaker gave him on top of his limo . On the August 26 , 2004 episode of SmackDown ! , Orlando Jordan , one of JBL 's associates , defended the WWE Championship for JBL against the Undertaker . Undertaker won the match via disqualification following interference from JBL ; as a result , JBL retained the title . Two weeks later , General Manager Theodore Long , a fictitious match maker and rules enforcer , announced that Undertaker would get another opportunity for JBL 's title at No Mercy in a Last Ride match . 
 One of the featured matches was contested for the WWE United States Championship , in which Booker T defended the title against John Cena . At SummerSlam , Cena defeated Booker in the first series of " best of five " match . On the August 26 episode of SmackDown ! , the second match was won by Booker , to even the series one @-@ to @-@ one . The following night at a SmackDown ! live event , Booker defeated Cena to win the third match . On the September 16 episode of SmackDown ! , Cena defeated Booker in the fourth match , making the series even at two wins apiece . The following week it was announced that the final series title match would be scheduled at No Mercy . 
 The other featured preliminary match was Kurt Angle versus The Big Show in a singles match . The buildup to the match began on September 9 , 2004 during an episode of SmackDown ! , where a Lumberjack match ( a standard match where non @-@ participating wrestlers prevent contestants from fleeing the ring ) was scheduled between Kurt Angle and Eddie Guerrero . The match ended in a no contest when The Big Show marked his return to SmackDown ! by interfering in the match , chokeslamming both Angle and Guerrero in the process . The following week , Big Show was given two contracts to choose from ; one contract to face Guerrero and one contract to face Angle . Big Show signed the contract with Guerrero 's name on it . After signing it , Angle and his associate Luther Reigns , threw Guerrero out of the ring and offered Big Show a handshake . Big Show , however , tore up Guerrero 's contract and signed the one with Angle 's name on it to face him at No Mercy . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the event went live on pay @-@ per @-@ view , Mark Jindrak defeated Scotty 2 Hotty in a match taped for Heat , one of WWE 's secondary television programs . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The first televised match was a standard wrestling match between Eddie Guerrero and Luther Reigns accompanied with Mark Jindrak . In the early stages both competitors took the advantage over one another . Reigns controlled most of the match , as Guerrero tried to avoid Luther 's assaults . Reigns began to work on Guerrero 's lower back , suplexing him down and bending him over his knee following a backbreaker . The match saw Guerrero take the advantage , as he was able to counter a swinging neckbreaker . The match concluded when Guerrero won the match by striking Reigns with a baton taken from a security guard . 
 The next match was for the WWE Cruiserweight Championship , in which champion Spike Dudley accompanied by The Dudleys ( D @-@ Von and Bubba Ray ) defended the title against Nunzio with <unk> Stamboli . The match began with Nunzio performing a <unk> , a slingshot crossbody where the wrestler goes from the inside of the ring over the top ring rope to the outside , on Spike . The match saw interference from Devon as he pushed Nunzio off the top ropes . Spike took control of the match , as he was able to slip both arms underneath Nunzio 's armpits and locked his hands behind his neck and pushing Nunzio 's head forward against his chest . Back and forth action saw both competitors take the advantage over one another . The match ended when Stamboli tried to prevent interference from D @-@ Von , allowing Bubba to trip up Nunzio and crotched him on the ring post and giving Spike the win and retention of his title . 
 The next match that followed was between Billy Kidman and Paul London . The start of the match saw London toss Kidman out of the ring and perform a running springboard moonsault , a move in which a wrestler springboards and executes a backflip to land on the opponent , from the top ropes to the outside onto Kidman . Kidman , however , took control once back in the ring , as he performed various stiff kicks on London 's midsection and focusing on his lower back . London attempted to perform a powerbomb , but was not successful in doing so as Kidman reversed it into a sitout facebuster for a near @-@ fall . The match concluded with Kidman as he executed a Shooting star press on London to get the pinfall victory over London . 
 The fourth match was for the WWE Tag Team Championship , in which champions René Duprée and Kenzo Suzuki defended the title against Rob Van Dam and Rey Mysterio . The match began with Van Dam and Duprée gaining the upper hand over each other . Duprée tagged Kenzo into the match , which led him to take offense over Van Dam . Mysterio was tagged in the match and performed a flying headbutt on Kenzo , followed by a tornado DDT onto Kenzo . Mysterio followed this by knocking Duprée off the apron and launching himself back into the ring , onto Kenzo in a seated senton , a move performed by jumping forward off a raised platform or springboarding on to the shoulders of a standing opponent forcing them to the ground . Mysterio tried to perform the 619 on Kenzo , however , Duprée stopped Mysterio from doing so . Mysterio then performed the 619 on Kenzo . As he prepared to perform the West Coast Pop , Duprée pulled Mysterio off the ropes . This led to Kenzo pinning Mysterio , as he held onto the ropes for leverage to pick up the win and retain the tag team title . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The first main match was between Kurt Angle and The Big Show . A stipulation in the match was placed that anyone who tried to interfere would get fired . For the duration of the match , The Big Show , who stood at 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) and weighed 500 pounds ( 230 kg ) , used his body size to his advantage as he squashed , or easily and quickly performed moves on , Angle . Angle , who had enough , began to walk away from the match . Angle ran back to the ring and counted along with the referee for the 10 count . General Manager Theodore Long ordered Angle to return to the match with a no count out stipulation or else Angle would never wrestle on SmackDown ! again . Angle returned to the ring , in which Big Show dominated once more , even standing on Angle . A frustrated Angle brought a steel chair , but backfired when Big Show punched the chair onto Angle 's face . As Big Show prepared to perform a chokeslam , Angle countered into an ankle lock hold . Big Show managed to get a hold of the ropes to force Angle to break the hold and he was scripted to knock the referee down . Angle began targeting Big Show 's knee and even hitting his knee with the steel chair , to take advantage of the referee 's state . The match ended with Big Show chokeslamming Angle from the top of the ring . During this time , the referee regained consciousness and gave Big Show the pinfall victory . 
 The second main match was a singles match , in which United States Champion Booker T defended the title against John Cena in the final " best of five " match . In the early stages of the match , Cena and Booker fought at ringside . During this tussle Booker pounded Cena 's head into the ring steps before being reversed into them himself . The match then returned to the ring , which saw Booker and Cena getting the upper hand over one another . Cena took control as he performed several of his signature moves ; he ran up from behind Booker , grabbed his head with one hand and leaped forward to drive Booker 's face into the mat . He then followed with hitting a fist drop with theatrics , which Cena calls the Five Knuckle Shuffle . Cena tried to follow up with lifting Booker onto his shoulder , but Booker countered it into a Book End . Booker went for the pin on Cena , but he kicked out . Cena was able to dodge a kick to the back of the head that would force him to hit his face first into the mat , with lifting Booker over his shoulders and throwing him down to execute the FU . He pinned Booker to be declared the new United States Champion . 
 Another match on the undercard was a mixed tag team match between the team of the Dudley Boyz ( D @-@ Von and Bubba Ray ) and Dawn Marie versus Charlie Haas , Rico Constantino , and Miss Jackie . The start of the match saw Haas get back body dropped by the Dudley 's . Dawn was tagged in to the match , as was Jackie who tagged herself in , if a man tags her female partner , both men leave the ring and both women enter the match . The two women began to beat one another . Bubba Ray tagged himself in and demanded Jackie give him a kiss , and closed his eyes . Rico came in and kissed Bubba Ray , prompting Bubba Ray to run away and gag audibly . Rico wrestled against D @-@ Von , and was in control until Bubba Ray and D @-@ Von double teamed him . Bubba Ray called for the flying head butt to the crotch , but D @-@ Von was hesitant in performing the move on Rico . This caused Dawn and Jackie to continue their fight , as both entered the ring . The match ended when Haas performed a flying axe handle setting up the legal tag to Rico to perform a moonsault and get the win . 
 The main event was the Last Ride match for the WWE Championship , in which John " Bradshaw " Layfield ( JBL ) defended the title against The Undertaker . During the beginning of the match , the Undertaker began hitting JBL in the corner , before twisting his arm around and dropping JBL 's arm on the top rope . Following this , the Undertaker chokeslammed JBL in the ring , and performed a leg drop off the ring apron . Outside the ring , the Undertaker threw JBL towards the steel ring steps . The Undertaker continued to uphold the upper hand over JBL , as he began to remove the television set from the Spanish announce table , but JBL managed to hit Undertaker upside the head with the steel ring steps . JBL tried to put the Undertaker in the hearse , but the Undertaker fought back . A frustrated JBL took the Undertaker back to the ring and hit a shoulder block from the top rope . The Undertaker managed to get the upper hand once more , as he applied a triangle choke hold on JBL , leading JBL to tap out , but submissions do not count prior in this match . The Undertaker <unk> out of a piledriver attempt on the steel ring steps and grabbed JBL , turned him upside @-@ down and dropped into a kneeling position , driving JBL 's head into the steel steps , making JBL bleed from the head . Minutes later , the Undertaker chokeslammed JBL off the announce table through the Spanish table . The Undertaker carried JBL to the hearse , and Jon Heidenreich came out of the hearse . Heidenreich began to attack the Undertaker , covered his mouth with a soaked rag filled with chloroform . Heidenreich placed the Undertaker into the hearse and drove off . Inside the hearse , a camera was inside the hearse to show the Undertaker wake up and jump out and attack Heidenreich . JBL recovered , and swung his arm forward while running towards the Undertaker , a move JBL calls Clothesline from Hell , and helped Heidenreich place the Undertaker back into the hearse to be driven away . Backstage , Paul Heyman drove the hearse to the parking lot , where Heidenreich drove his car into it at high speed , causing an inexplicable explosion . As a result , JBL won the match and retained his title . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following No Mercy , the storyline between JBL and The Undertaker ended . JBL was then placed in a new angle against Booker T. On an episode of SmackDown ! , a six man tag team match involving Booker T , Rob Van Dam , and Rey Mysterio taking on JBL , Kenzo Suzuki , and René Duprée was scheduled . At the time , Booker T being a villain , congratulated JBL with the success that he has accomplished within the company in a segment backstage . The tag team match got underway , and JBL was led to believe that Booker was going to betray his tag partners , as Booker warned both Van Dam and Mysterio not to interfere with him during the match . The match concluded with Booker pinning JBL for the win , thus turning Booker into a crowd favorite . The following week on SmackDown ! , Booker defeated Orlando Jordan , JBL 's associate , to earn the right to face JBL for the WWE Championship at Survivor Series . At Survivor Series , JBL defeated Booker to retain the WWE title . 
 On the October 21 episode of SmackDown ! , Paul Heyman requested that Theodore Long schedule a match between Heidenreich and the Undertaker at Survivor Series . Long agreed to the match , but informed Heyman that in order for the match to take place , he had to get the Undertaker to sign the contract personally . The following week , Heyman met the Undertaker at an undisclosed location where he pleaded his case about Heidenreich wanting to face the Undertaker in a match . The Undertaker signed the contract and warned Heyman he would defeat Heidenreich at Survivor Series . At the November event , the Undertaker was successful in defeating Heidenreich . 
 Following his win at No Mercy , John Cena lost the WWE United States Championship to Carlito Caribbean Cool , who debuted on SmackDown ! . As part of the storyline , Carlito was given a bodyguard , Jesús , who stabbed Cena in the kidney while at a Boston @-@ area nightclub . On the November 18 episode of SmackDown ! , Cena captured the United States Championship after defeating Carlito for it . Cena also debuted a " custom made " spinner @-@ style title belt . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The Continental Airlines Arena usually can accommodate 20 @,@ 000 , but the capacity was reduced for the event . This event grossed over $ 700 @,@ 000 from an approximate attendance of 10 @,@ 000 – the maximum allowed . It also received 240 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys . No Mercy helped WWE earn $ 24 @.@ 7 million in revenue from pay @-@ per @-@ view events versus $ 18 @.@ 5 million the previous year , which was later confirmed by Linda McMahon , the CEO of WWE , on November 23 , 2004 in a quarterly result . Canadian Online Explorer 's professional wrestling section rated the event 5 out of 10 . The rating was the same as the No Mercy 2005 event , which was marked as an " absolutely terrible " pay @-@ per @-@ view from WWE . The standard match between Billy Kidman and Paul London was rated a 7 out of 10 . Additionally , the matches of Eddie Guerrero versus Luther Reigns , Spike Dudley versus Nunzio , Booker T versus John Cena , and the Last Ride match were all rated a 4 out of 10 . 
 The event was released on DVD on November 9 , 2004 . The DVD was distributed by the label , Sony Music Entertainment . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Sir John Brunner , 1st Baronet = 
 Sir John Tomlinson Brunner , 1st Baronet , PC DL ( 8 February 1842 – 1 July 1919 ) was a British chemical industrialist and Liberal Party politician . At Hutchinson 's alkali works in Widnes he rose to the position of general manager . There he met Ludwig Mond , whom he later formed a partnership with to create the chemical company Brunner Mond & Co . , initially making alkali by the Solvay process . As a Member of Parliament he represented Northwich , Cheshire , in 1885 – 1886 and then from 1887 – 1910 . He was a paternalistic employer and as a politician supported Irish Home Rule , trade unions , free trade , welfare reforms and , leading up to the First World War , a more sympathetic stance towards Germany . Brunner was a prominent Freemason , and a generous benefactor to the towns in his constituency and to the University of Liverpool . He is the great grandfather of the Duchess of Kent . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 John Tomlinson Brunner was born in Everton , Liverpool , the fourth child and second son of John Brunner ( b . 20 June 1800 ) , a Swiss Unitarian and schoolmaster , and Margaret Catherine <unk> ( d . 8 September 1847 ) , who originated from the Isle of Man , daughter of Thomas <unk> and wife Margaret Leece . His father established a school in Netherfield Road , Everton , known as St George 's House , to teach children along the lines advocated by Pestalozzi . Brunner 's mother died in 1847 , when he was aged five ; his father married Nancy Inman in 1851 . She had a shrewd business sense and Brunner gave credit to her for teaching him skills in practical matters . Brunner was educated at his father 's school and then , at the age of 15 , he decided to follow a career in commerce . He spent four years in a shipping house in Liverpool , but found it neither exciting nor lucrative , and so decided on a change of career . In 1861 , Brunner took a clerical post at Hutchinson 's alkali works in Widnes , where his older brother Henry was already working as technical manager . There , he rose to the position of general manager . Shortly after starting work at Hutchinson 's , Brunner met the German @-@ born chemist Ludwig Mond . 
 = = Brunner Mond and Company = = 
 In 1873 Brunner formed a partnership with Mond and together they founded Brunner Mond & Company . Their initial capital was less than £ 20 @,@ 000 ( £ 1 @.@ 6 million in 2016 ) , most of which was borrowed . In April 1872 Mond had been to Belgium to meet Ernest Solvay to negotiate terms to manufacture alkali by the process Solvay had developed . The Solvay process produced soda ash more cheaply than the established Leblanc process , from raw materials which were more easily obtainable , and produced fewer waste products . Mond made a gentlemen 's agreement with Solvay to apportion the global markets , with Mond 's company having exclusive rights to the United States and to the British Isles . 
 Brunner and Mond decided to build their factory at Winnington , near Northwich , Cheshire on land owned by Lord Stanley of Alderley . This was sited on the River Weaver which allowed for the transport of the raw materials and finished products to and from the works . Lord Stanley insisted on selling the house , Winnington Hall , as well as the surrounding land , as part of the deal . The purchase was completed in 1873 , and for a time both Mond and Brunner lived separately in the wings of the hall . The early years were extremely difficult , initially in getting the plant to work efficiently and then in selling the soda ash . It was not until 1878 that success was achieved when they outsold their competitors and were producing their products more cheaply . In 1881 , the partnership was converted into a limited company with capital assets listed at £ 600 @,@ 000 ( £ 5 @.@ 5 million in 2016 ) and the founders became managing directors for life . In 1891 , Brunner became the chairman and retained that position until April 1918 , 14 months before his death . However , by then his duties were being increasingly performed by his son , Roscoe . 
 After its slow start , Brunner Mond & Company became the wealthiest British chemical company of the late 19th century . On its merger with three other British chemical companies to form Imperial Chemical Industries ( ICI ) in 1926 , it had a market capitalization of over £ 18 million ( £ 940 million in 2016 ) . Brunner 's sobriquet , " Chemical Croesus " , was given to him by The Times . He was a paternalistic employer and went to great lengths to improve the situation of his employees . Measures introduced by Brunner and Mond were shorter working hours , sickness and injury insurance , and holidays with pay . 
 = = Politics = = 
 During the years he was working at Hutchinson 's in Widnes , Brunner was developing his political interests . He joined the Widnes chapter of the National Education League and became its secretary in 1872 . This gave him the opportunity to come into contact with Liberals from Liverpool and other parts of the country . Soon after moving to Northwich Brunner became more practically involved with education locally , in particular with the British School in the town . He later served on its board of governors and also on the local sanitary authority . As a result of the Redistribution of Seats Act 1885 the parliamentary constituency of Northwich was created and Brunner offered himself as a candidate for the Liberal Party . In his speech for the position he expressed support for the disestablishment of the Church of England , for reform of property laws , for Irish Home Rule and for compensation for those whose properties had been damaged by the pumping of brine from the salt mines in the area . During the campaign he was heckled because he had a foreign @-@ sounding name . He responded " My father was a Swiss , my mother was a Manx woman , I was born in Liverpool , my nurse was Welsh : is that Cheshire enough for you ? " At the general election on 1 December 1885 Brunner beat William Henry Verdin , his Conservative rival , with a majority of 1 @,@ 028 . 
 The Liberal Party won more seats than any other party in the election , but insufficient to form a majority government , leaving the Irish Parliamentary Party holding the balance of power . It proved impossible to form a stable government , and so another general election was called in June 1886 . In the meantime , the Liberal Party had split , and the Liberal Unionist Party had been formed . Brunner 's opponent at the 1886 election was William Henry Verdin 's brother , Robert , standing as a Liberal Unionist . The election was held on 13 July 1886 , and Brunner was defeated by 458 votes . In November 1886 , Brunner embarked on a world tour , accompanied by his wife and his son Stephen . His return to Northwich on 2 July 1887 was greeted with great celebration , as he was extremely popular in the town , regarded as a kind and sympathetic employer and a generous benefactor . Within three weeks of Brunner 's return , Robert Verdin died and a by @-@ election was called . Brunner 's opponent was Lord Henry Grosvenor , who was standing as a Liberal Unionist . This time , at the election on 13 August , Brunner won with a majority of 1 @,@ 129 . At the 1892 general election , Brunner 's opponent was not a Liberal Unionist , but a Conservative , George Whiteley , who was a cotton manufacturer from Blackburn . Brunner was returned with an increased majority of 1 @,@ 255 . In the 1895 election he beat Thomas Ward , another Conservative , by 1 @,@ 638 votes . The 1900 general election was held during the Boer War , to which Brunner was opposed . He retained his seat , but with a reduced majority of 699 . In the 1906 general election , Brunner 's opponent was the Conservative Colonel <unk> North who had fought in the Boer War . Brunner increased his majority to 1 @,@ 792 . He continued to be the Member of Parliament for Northwich until the general election in January 1910 , when he decided not to stand again , partly because of his own health and also because of concern for his wife 's health . Subsequently he moved to Surrey , but continued to play a part in politics when he was elected to the Chertsey division of Surrey County Council . 
 As a Liberal MP he supported Irish Home Rule , trade unions , free trade and welfare reforms . Leading up to the First World War he argued that Britain should adopt a more sympathetic approach towards Germany , including naval disarmament . When war did break out , Brunner was resolute in the opinion that it should be fought and won . In addition to the production of alkali , his factories were making other chemicals for use as explosives . He also built a new factory to purify <unk> . 
 = = Benefactions = = 
 Brunner was a generous benefactor whose gifts included the provision of schools , <unk> and social clubs . In Northwich he provided a free library and re @-@ endowed Sir John Deane 's Grammar School . In Runcorn he purchased a disused chapel and presented it to the town to be used by the trades unions and the Friendly Societies , and in nearby Weston village he bought a disused school and gave it to the local community to serve as its village hall . He also endowed the chairs of economics , physical chemistry and Egyptology at the University of Liverpool . 
 Abroad he gave gifts to the Landesmuseum in Zürich and provided a hospital , also in Switzerland . In 1885 he became a Freemason and in 1900 founded the John Brunner Lodge at Over Winsford . The following year he was honoured with the brevet rank of Past Grand Deacon of England . 
 In 1899 Brunner ( who had by then been created a baronet ) became chairman of the Runcorn and Widnes Transporter Bridge Company . He subscribed £ 25 @,@ 000 ( £ 2 @.@ 5 million in 2016 ) towards its construction plus a loan of £ 12 @,@ 000 ( £ 1 @.@ 2 million in 2016 ) together with a personal guarantee on a bank loan of £ 31 @,@ 000 ( £ 3 @.@ 1 million in 2016 ) . When the building of the bridge was complete in 1905 it was due to be opened by Edward VII , but the king was unable to attend , and so Brunner performed the ceremony himself . By 1911 it had become apparent that the bridge would always operate at a loss , and Brunner assigned his interest in it to Widnes Corporation . The Times stated that this action amounted to a " virtual gift of £ 68 @,@ 000 " ( £ 6 @.@ 2 million in 2016 ) . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 On 14 June 1864 Brunner married Salome Davies , the daughter of a Liverpool merchant with whom he had six children . Salome died on 29 January 1874 and the following year he married Jane Wyman , the daughter of a Kettering physician and the governess to his children . From this marriage three more children , all daughters , were born . In 1891 the <unk> moved from Winnington Hall to Wavertree , a suburb of Liverpool . 
 Amongst other offices held , he was Vice @-@ President of the British Science Guild , Deputy Lieutenant for the County of Lancashire ( from 1904 ) and Pro @-@ Chancellor of the University of Liverpool . In 1909 the University of Liverpool awarded him the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws . In 1895 he was made the Baronet of Druids Cross in the County of Lancashire and in 1906 he became a member of the privy council , but he declined offers of a peerage . He died in 1919 at his home in Chertsey , Surrey . His estate amounted to over £ 906 @,@ 000 ( £ 38 million in 2016 ) . In addition , he had given generously to his five married daughters , and had transferred investments to his sons . 
 The baronetcy passed to his eldest son , John Fowler Leece Brunner . His descendants include , through his elder son 's daughter ( Joyce Brunner Worsley ) , Katharine , Duchess of Kent ( born 1933 ) , married since 1961 to a grandson of Britain 's King George V , and Shelagh Brunner ( 1902 @-@ 1983 ) , daughter of his younger son ( Harold Roscoe Brunner ) , who morganatically married Prince Ferdinand of Liechtenstein ( 1901 @-@ 1981 ) in 1925 , a member of that principality 's still reigning dynasty . 
 = Battle of Quebec ( 1690 ) = 
 The Battle of Quebec was fought in October 1690 between the colonies of New France and Massachusetts Bay , then ruled by the kingdoms of France and England , respectively . It was the first time Quebec 's defences were tested . 
 Following the capture of Port Royal in Acadia , during King William 's War , the New Englanders hoped to seize Montreal and Quebec itself , the capital of New France . The loss of the Acadian fort shocked the Canadians , and Governor @-@ General Louis de Buade de Frontenac ordered the immediate preparation of the city for siege . 
 When the envoys delivered the terms of surrender , the Governor @-@ General famously declared that his only reply would be by " the mouth of my cannons . " Major John Walley led the invading army , which landed at Beauport in the Basin of Quebec . However , the militia on the shore were constantly harassed by Canadian militia until their retreat , while the expedition 's ships , commanded by Sir William Phips , were nearly destroyed by cannon volleys from the top of the city . 
 Both sides learned from the battle : the French improved the city 's defences , while the New Englanders realized they needed more artillery and better support from England to take the city . 
 = = Background = = 
 The colony of New France claimed the largest area of North America , although by population it was numerically inferior to the neighbouring colonies of New England and New York . By 1689 , there were only about 14 @,@ 000 settlers in New France , but most of the population lived in towns protected by elaborate forts . 
 In 1690 , Sir William Phips was appointed major @-@ general by Massachusetts to command an expedition against French Acadia . He sailed with seven vessels carrying a 450 @-@ strong militia " Foot Regiment " , and Port Royal surrendered on 21 May . Its governor , Louis @-@ Alexandre des <unk> de <unk> , had only about 70 men , and no guns mounted , and would have been unable to resist . On 22 May , Phips recorded " We cut down the cross , rifled the Church , pulled down the High @-@ Altar , breaking their images " ; and on 23 May , " kept gathering Plunder both by land and water , and also under ground in their Gardens " . 
 This shocked the French colonists , who feared that their capital city would be the next target . Quebec did not have extensive fortifications in 1690 , and the whole landward side of the city to the north and west was exposed , particularly at the Plains of Abraham . Count Frontenac returned to Canada for a second term as Governor @-@ General , and ordered the construction of a wooden palisade to enclose the city from the fort at the Château Saint @-@ Louis to the Saint @-@ Charles River . Town Major Provost oversaw the construction of eleven small stone redoubts in this enceinte , which would have protected against cannon . Facing the plains on the west side was the strong point of the landward defences — a windmill called Mont @-@ Carmel where a three @-@ gun battery was in place . The palisade line ended on the east side of the city , near the hospital . The batteries facing the river were also improved , with eight guns mounted beside the Château and six 18 @-@ pounders at the <unk> . Temporary obstacles had also been put in place on the street leading up to the upper city . 
 Meanwhile , a mobile war party of 150 Albany militia and Iroquois warriors under Captain John Schuyler marched and canoed overland to Montreal , imitating the petite guerre tactics ( long @-@ range expeditions into enemy territory ) perfected by the French colonists . Schuyler 's expedition was designed to seize Montreal and pin French forces south of Quebec , allowing the Boston fleet to sail against the capital unopposed . Smallpox , lack of supplies , and disagreements among the officers caused most of the militia and Iroquois to turn back in disgust , leaving Schuyler with a fraction of the 855 men promised by the New England authorities . On 4 September the English raiders attacked settlements south of Montreal , killing some 50 habitants in the middle of their harvests . Too weak to risk a battle with the town 's garrison , Schuyler wrapped up the New England invasion and turned home . Thus , when Phips was sighted off <unk> , Frontenac ordered the garrisons of Montreal and Trois @-@ Rivières to make for the threatened capital with all haste . Four days later the Governor arrived in Quebec with 200 – 300 troops freed @-@ up by the failure of Schuyler 's invasion , considerably lifting the capital 's spirit of resistance . 
 = = Arrival of Phips = = 
 While the New England colonies and New York dispatched a force overland against Montreal , which accomplished virtually nothing , Massachusetts launched a separate expedition against Quebec . The whole operation had been financed by issuing paper bonds set against the expected booty to be taken from the city . The expedition consisted of about 32 ships ( only four of which were of any size ) and over 2 @,@ 300 Massachusetts militiamen , and was under the overall command of Phips , the victor at Port Royal . Its departure was delayed until quite late in the summer because it was waiting ( in vain ) for the arrival of additional munitions from England . Consequently , when Phips ' expedition set out from Hull on 20 August , it was inadequately supplied with ammunition . Bad weather , contrary winds , and lack of pilots familiar with the Saint Lawrence River hampered progress , and Phips did not anchor in the Quebec basin until 16 October . 
 Frontenac , a shrewd and experienced officer , reached Quebec from Montreal on 14 October . When all the militia whom he had summoned arrived , he had nearly 3 @,@ 000 men to defend the place . The New Englanders had been " quite confident that the cowardly and effete French would be no match for their hardy men " , but in fact the opposite was the case . Frontenac had reason for confidence , as he possessed a force of three battalions of colonial regulars that were certainly superior to Phips 's amateur companies — in the event the regulars were not needed as the Canadien militia succeeded in repulsing Phips ' landing parties . Furthermore , the city was " sited on the strongest natural position they [ the English officers ] had likely ever seen . " Not only did it have impressive cliffs and Cape Diamond , but the eastern shore was so shallow that ships could not approach and landing craft would be needed . 
 On 16 October , Phips sent Major Thomas Savage as an envoy to deliver a summons of surrender to Frontenac . The encounter has been described as an application of psychological warfare . Before the fighting Frontenac led Phips ' envoys blindfolded through roaring mobs in the streets of Quebec in order to mask his numerical inferiority . Then , in the Château Saint @-@ Louis , Frontenac and many of his officers in their best dress listened to the envoy as he demanded the city 's surrender . <unk> by this " stately Hall full of Brave <unk> men , " Savage did his best to deliver <unk> 's ultimatum . Drafted by Massachusetts Puritans , the document began severely : 
 The New Englander told them they had one hour to comply , and then pulled out his watch . The proud and temperamental Frontenac was so enraged that he wanted to have the envoy hanged before the full view of the English fleet , and it was only because of the Bishop of Quebec , François de Laval , that he was calmed . Asked for a written response , Frontenac shot back : 
 Savage accepted his blindfold with relief and was led back to his ship . Phips ' council of war was extremely vexed by the reply , having expected to fall upon a defenseless and panicked city . That evening drums and fifes were heard approaching Quebec , followed by heavy cheering from the town : Louis @-@ Hector de Callière had arrived with the remaining Montreal militia , giving Frontenac a numerical advantage over the New Englanders . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The New Englanders saw that the only possible place to crack the defences was on the city 's northeastern side , where the walls were weakest . Their plan was to land their main force on the Beauport shore east of the Saint Charles River , and have it cross the river in the fleet 's boats , along with the field guns . When the landing force was on the heights west of Quebec , the fleet would attack the city and land a second force there . Frontenac had expected the land attack to come from Beauport , and the banks of the river had already been built up with field fortifications on the southwestern side . He proposed to fight only a skirmishing action there , holding his regulars in reserve for a European @-@ style battle on the open ground west of Quebec . 
 However , the open battle never took place . The 1 @,@ 200 @-@ strong English landing force under Major John Walley , Phips ' second @-@ in @-@ command , never got across the Saint Charles . Frontenac had sent strong detachments of Canadian militiamen under Jacques Le Moyne de Sainte @-@ Hélène , along with some Indians , into the wooded areas east of the river . When the English landed on 18 October , they were immediately harassed by Canadian militia , while the ships ' boats mistakenly landed the field guns on the wrong side of the Saint Charles . Meanwhile , Phips 's four large ships , quite contrary to the plan , anchored before Quebec and began bombarding the city until 19 October , at which point the English had shot away most of their ammunition . The French shore batteries had also proved to be much more than a match , and the ships were pounded until the rigging and hulls were badly damaged ; the ensign of Phips ' flagship the Six Friends was cut down and fell into the river , and under a hail of musket shots , a daring group of Canadians paddled a canoe up to the ships to capture it . They triumphantly brought the ensign back to the Governor unscathed . 
 During the bombardment , the land force under Walley remained inactive , suffering from cold and complaining of shortage of rum . After a couple of miserable days , they decided to carry the shore positions and try to overcome the French earthworks . They set out on 20 October " in the best European tradition , with drums beating and colors unfurled , " but there was a skirmish at the edge of the woods . The New Englanders could not cope with the maintained heavy Canadian fire , and the brass field guns fired into the woods had no effect . Although Sainte @-@ Hélène was mortally wounded , 150 of the attackers had been killed in action , and were utterly discouraged . They made a retreat in a state of near panic on 22 October , even abandoning five field guns on the shore . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On 23 and 24 October , an exchange of prisoners was negotiated and effected , and the ships set sail for Boston . Although Phips ' own account of the expedition admitted only 30 dead in combat , smallpox and marine accident claimed about 1 @,@ 000 more . James Lloyd of Boston wrote in the following January , " 7 vessels yet wanting 3 more cast away & burnt . " Cotton Mather tells how one brigantine was wrecked on Anticosti ; her crew maintained themselves on the island through the winter and were apparently rescued the following summer by a ship from Boston . Phips ' defeat was complete and disastrous ; fortunately for the French , since food was lacking to feed the large force assembled to defend Quebec in case of a prolonged siege . Phips himself had displayed no natural military talents to offset his lack of experience . It can be argued however that the absence of trained soldiers and adequate supplies had doomed the enterprise from the start . Governor of New York Henry Sloughter captured the mood in the English colonies when he wrote : 
 Canada exulted in its victory and survival ; on 5 November the Te Deum was sung in Quebec in a chapel renamed Notre Dame de la Victoire , Our Lady of Victory . When news of the expedition reached Versailles , Louis XIV ordered a medal struck bearing the inscription : <unk> liberata <unk> – Francia in novo <unk> victrix , or " Deliverance of Quebec 1690 – France victorious in the New World . " 
 Jacques Le Moyne , who died soon after the battle , was mourned by the whole colony for his courtesy and valour . The Onondaga Iroquois sent a wampum collar as a token of sympathy , and released two captives to honour his memory . His brother , Charles Le Moyne , won fame for his part in the battle , and he later received an additional grant of land for his services and became the first Baron de Longueuil . 
 Both sides learned from the battle . The French victory showed that to take Quebec , the cannon of " Old England would have to be brought in " . Similarly , Frontenac realised the defences needed significant improvement , and in 1692 , he gave Ingénieur du Roi Josué Berthelot de <unk> the task of designing a fortress that could withstand a European @-@ style siege . This was delayed by the Canadian winter , and work commenced in the summer of 1693 on an earth rampart with large bastions to enclose the city , and pointed wooden stakes to top the walls . A complete shore battery , known as the " Royal battery " , was built immediately after the siege . It was shaped like a small bastion , and featured 14 gun embrasures to cover both sides of the Saint Laurence and the river itself . 
 Although another expedition was launched against Quebec during Queen Anne 's War , it failed to reach its target when transports wrecked with great loss of life in the Gulf of St. Lawrence . The city 's improved defences would not be tested until the Battle of the Plains of Abraham in 1759 . 
 = 1992 Cape Mendocino earthquakes = 
 The 1992 Cape Mendocino earthquakes ( or 1992 Petrolia earthquakes ) occurred along the Lost Coast of Northern California on April 25 and 26 . The three largest events were the M7.2 thrust mainshock that struck near the unincorporated community of Petrolia midday on April 25 and two primary strike @-@ slip aftershocks measuring 6 @.@ 5 and 6 @.@ 6 that followed early the next morning . The sequence encompassed both interplate and intraplate activity that was associated with the Mendocino Triple Junction , a complex system of three major faults ( including the Cascadia subduction zone , San Andreas Fault , and Mendocino Fracture Zone ) that converge near Cape Mendocino . The total number of aftershocks that followed the events exceeded 2 @,@ 000 . 
 The three shocks damaged and destroyed homes and businesses in Humboldt County and injured 356 people , but the single largest loss was due to a post @-@ earthquake fire that consumed a business center in Scotia . <unk> that had been in place in the Cape Mendocino area since the late 1970s recorded the event and the readings were moderate to strong , with the exception of the instruments closest to the epicenter , which went off scale a few seconds into the recording . No surface ruptures were present in the epicentral area , but landslides closed roads and railroad tracks for at least a week while cleanup took place . Also discovered was about 1 m ( 3 ft 3 in ) of coastal uplift near Cape Mendocino and Punta Gorda . 
 As the largest earthquake in California since the 1989 Loma Prieta event several years earlier , the mainshock caused a non @-@ destructive tsunami that quickly reached the coast , and eventually Alaska and Hawaii several hours later . The tsunami was significant not because of its run @-@ up , but because of the speed with which it reached the coast and for how long the waves persisted . Other strong earthquakes have affected the same area , with some that were clearly associated with the ( interplate ) Mendocino Fracture Zone , and others ( like the two shocks on April 26 ) were intraplate earthquakes that ruptured within the Gorda Plate , but events that are unequivocally associated with the Cascadia subduction zone are very infrequent . 
 = = Tectonic setting = = 
 The northernmost coastal area is one of California 's most seismically active regions and , in a 50 @-@ year period , the area including the Mendocino Fracture Zone at the southern flank of the Gorda Plate generated about 25 percent of all seismic energy unleashed in the state . The Mendocino Triple Junction ( strike @-@ slip / strike @-@ slip / trench ) formed 29 – 30 mya at 31 ° N ( west of present @-@ day Baja California ) when the Pacific @-@ Farallon spreading center initially approached the subduction zone off the coast of western North America . Simultaneously , the Rivera Triple Junction shifted to the southeast to its current position at 23 ° N. Once the Pacific Plate and North American Plate connected the boundary became that of a transform fault ( San Andreas ) due to the northwestward motion of the Pacific Plate relative to the North American Plate . The San Andreas Fault continues to lengthen to the northwest and the southeast as the two triple junctions continue their transient motion . 
 North of the Mendocino Triple Junction , the Gorda plate is subducting beneath the North American Plate at the Cascadia subduction zone , with a convergence rate of 2 @.@ 5 – 3 centimeters ( 0 @.@ 98 – 1 @.@ 18 in ) per year , but comparisons with other subduction zones have led to a belief that the convergence may be taking place <unk> . The distinct lack of interplate events there has generated contention regarding the zone 's seismic hazard , though there are strong indications that substantial historic events have occurred in the Pacific Northwest . Submerged wetlands and raised marine terraces both illustrate the presence of past events , and radiocarbon dating of rock layers has revealed that three seismic events took place in the last 2 @,@ 000 years , with the most recent event being the 1700 Cascadia earthquake . The Gorda Plate is undergoing a process of intraplate deformation and experiences large intraplate earthquakes that may be the result of north @-@ south compression of the oceanic crust along the Mendocino Fracture Zone . 
 = = Earthquakes = = 
 The region near the triple junction experiences high seismicity , with more than 60 earthquakes of intensity VI ( Strong ) or greater or magnitudes ≥ 5 @.@ 5 since 1853 . The mainshock in the sequence ( 11 : 06 a.m. Pacific Daylight Time ) occurred onshore , 4 kilometers ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) west of Petrolia at a depth of 10 @.@ 5 kilometers , and was among an infrequent number of earthquakes with fault @-@ plane solutions that conveyed evidence of slip at the Cascadia subduction zone . While the focal mechanism indicated slip on a thrust fault striking <unk> ° W with a shallow dip of 13 ° to the east @-@ northeast , the rupture most likely propagated to the west , based on the mainshock location at the southeastern boundary of the aftershock zone . Investigation of more than 1 @,@ 200 surveys from the North Coast area led to the assignment of an intensity rating of IX ( Violent ) on the Modified Mercalli scale for the region near Petrolia . 
 In opposition to the mainshock that was located onshore , the two large strike @-@ slip aftershocks occurred the following morning ( 12 : 41 a.m. and 4 : 18 a.m. PDT ) and were located offshore , 30 km ( 19 mi ) to the west of the main shock within the Gorda Plate . Both shocks ( M6.5 and 6 @.@ 6 ) were of intensity VIII ( Severe ) , occurred at a depth of 20 kilometers ( 12 mi ) , and exhibited right @-@ lateral motion . Of the several thousand aftershocks in the sequence , none were found to have occurred on the Mendocino Fracture Zone , but numerous events were located on the eastward projection of that fault . The mainshock 's rupture duration was described as a smooth nine seconds , while the two aftershocks had more complex and slightly longer ruptures of 14 – 15 seconds . That the two strike @-@ slip events followed a thrust event indicated a strong coupling of stresses at the North American and Gorda plate boundaries , and underscored the convoluted nature of the interconnected faults in that area . 
 = = = Damage = = = 
 The initial event caused a number of wood framed homes in Scotia to come off their foundations while the porches of some other homes became detached . The 25 mW cogeneration plant there that used wood waste products to power both the lumber company and the town suffered damage and both lumber mills were shut down for several weeks . In Rio Dell , across the Eel River from Scotia , glass store fronts along the main street were shattered and numerous buildings slipped into a culvert along Monument Road . In Petrolia ( the small community closest to the epicenter ) the general store ( combined with a post office and gas station ) was destroyed by fire , and in Fortuna , damage totaled $ 4 million . A six figure portion of that figure was due to losses at the high school 's gymnasium . 
 The two aftershocks the following morning were separated by less than four hours and both caused at least as much damage as the mainshock . A large fire was triggered following the first aftershock at a shopping center in Scotia that destroyed four businesses , with the resulting damage at that site alone estimated at $ 15 million , and was the largest individual financial misfortune of the sequence of earthquakes . The water supply in Rio Dell was terminated when the water main was severed at the abutment to the Eel River bridge and power outages were widespread throughout Humboldt County . Some were mere seconds while others lasted for hours , but the hydroelectric plant 's performance at Ruth Reservoir was deemed acceptable , and power that was not generated locally was unaffected . 
 Damage estimates were as high as $ 75 million , one third of which was due to bridges and roads , and the remainder of the costs were structure @-@ related . The American Red Cross compiled damage statistics in the county and the totals included 906 damaged homes and apartments . Almost half of those were severely damaged and an additional 200 homes were destroyed . In Petrolia , the post office , three businesses , and 44 homes were destroyed , and another 68 residences were damaged . In Ferndale , 29 homes were destroyed and 126 were damaged , along with 51 businesses . In Rio Dell , 127 buildings were damaged or destroyed . With 98 homes and 41 businesses experiencing some form of damage , the city of Fortuna experienced losses totaling $ 3 @.@ 8 million . Eureka and Arcata ( 25 miles ( 40 km ) north of the Eel River valley ) saw light damage and no injuries , while the unincorporated communities of <unk> and Carlotta reported damage of less than $ 2 million combined . 
 = = = Strong motion = = = 
 As the largest earthquake in California since the October 1989 event in the Santa Cruz Mountains , the mainshock near Petrolia produced some of the highest ground motions ever recorded ( at that time ) by the California Strong Motion Instrumentation Program ( CSMIP ) . Fourteen existing CSMIP stations comprising 84 strong motion sensors recorded the event , ten of which were ground response stations . The remaining four were located on structures , including a Highway 101 overpass in Rio Dell , a dam , a one @-@ story supermarket in Fortuna , and a 5 @-@ story residential building in Eureka . The supermarket , residential building , and dam were 28 , 50 , and 75 kilometers distant from the epicenter respectively , and recorded peak accelerations of .46g , <unk> , and <unk> An <unk> at the Painter Street overpass ( a concrete bridge , 24 km ( 15 mi ) from the epicenter ) recorded a free field acceleration of <unk> and an instrument on the structure saw an amplified peak of <unk> during the mainshock . 
 The CSMIP Cape Mendocino station was installed in 1978 and was located just 4 kilometers ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) from the epicenter on the slope of a ridge in the coast ranges . The instruments there had been mounted on a concrete platform adjacent to a roadway and remained firmly secured to the rock platform following the shocks . A landslide came within 50 meters ( 160 ft ) of the device and left debris on the road , but a lack of large rocks close to the instrument and no cracking of the rocks near the platform left geologists with no clear explanation for the extraordinarily high vertical component reading of <unk> The tri @-@ axial analog accelerometer that was in use was physically limited to that value and all three traces had uniformly significant values at three seconds into the recording . A post @-@ earthquake lab test of the seismometer and an inspection of the photographically enlarged <unk> revealed that the limit was hit twice , with a maximum deflection of 31 mm , as the needle bounced off the unit 's mass . An extrapolation of the vertical record led to a maximum acceleration estimate of <unk> for that site , and the unit was eventually replaced with a higher capacity digital device . 
 = = = Ground effects = = = 
 The sequence of earthquakes caused widespread landslides from the coast to east of Scotia and from the northern extent of the Eel River basin near Thompson Hill to south of Petrolia . Most of these were existing landslides that had been re @-@ initiated and the largest of the slides were either slumps or bedding plane failures along the coastal bluffs . Several slump failures between Guthrie Creek and Oil Creek stretched from the bluffs out towards the shore for a distance of 150 meters ( 490 ft ) , leaving some of the slide to be eroded by the surf . The road between Ferndale and Petrolia was closed for more than a week where about six mostly minor landslides blocked the passage , with the roadway itself sustaining light damage due to sliding or settlement of the road fill in a few instances . One of the largest slides occurred along the railroad tracks at the Scotia bluffs where previous slides had taken place . That slide also took about a week to clear . 
 During a survey following the earthquake , evidence of coastal uplift was detected when dead and decomposing intertidal organisms were discovered along the beaches in the epicentral region . Further investigation revealed that a 15 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) portion of the shoreline between Cape Mendocino and near Punta Gorda had been uplifted by as much as 1 m ( 3 ft 3 in ) near the middle portion , and decreasing amounts near the outer portions of the affected area . Evidence of previous events has been found in the form of sequential marine terraces along the coast , with periodic events creating shelves at 300 , 1 @,@ 700 , 3 @,@ 000 , and 5 @,@ 000 years before present . No surface ruptures were found during aerial surveillance , but lateral spreading features were observed on a channel near the mouth of the Eel River . 
 = = Tsunami = = 
 The mainshock generated a small tsunami that was recorded by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 's sea level gauge stations on the coasts of northern California , Oregon , and Hawaii . The series of waves first came ashore at the North Spit station in Eureka after a 26 @-@ minute travel time , but the largest surges were seen just to the north at Crescent City and arrived close to low tide , a condition that would have lowered the risk had the surges had a destructive capacity . The first packet of energy reached that location in 47 minutes and had a maximum wave height of 35 cm ( 14 in ) , and a second , larger packet arrived later with a maximum amplitude of 53 cm ( 21 in ) . The waves were also detected to the south in the interior of San Francisco Bay at Alameda , but with a considerable delay ( 135 minutes after the mainshock ) , due to the shallow waters of the bay and the shelf surrounding the bay 's entrance . The speed a tsunami travels is directly related to the depth of the water in which it is traversing . The tsunami was detected farther to the south in Monterey , for example , after just a 64 @-@ minute travel time , due to the deeper offshore waters and those in the Monterey Bay . 
 At 3 @,@ 720 kilometers ( 2 @,@ 310 mi ) distant , the tsunami was perceptible on the Hawaiian island of Maui at Kahului . The location of the islands lay on a great circle route that is also perpendicular to the region of ( presumed ) uplifted land at the coast near Cape Mendocino and any energy distributed would be the strongest in that direction . No tsunami was detected at Johnston Atoll , 5 @,@ 050 kilometers ( 3 @,@ 140 mi ) from Cape Mendocino in the north Pacific Ocean , but bottom pressure recorders registered a maximum amplitude of .4 cm ( 0 @.@ 16 in ) in 4 @,@ 000 meters ( 13 @,@ 000 ft ) of water in the Gulf of Alaska , with 3 @.@ 75 hours of travel time . While the waves generated by the earthquake were limited , the event demonstrated the rapid onset of tsunami hazards , giving little time for coastal residents to prepare . And in this case , the strongest waves came ashore in Crescent City three to four hours after the initial surge , but it is possible to be just the opposite where the first waves could be the strongest . Also detailed from this event was that the wave hazard can be of long duration , with wave action lingering for more than eight hours . 
 = = Other events = = 
 The Mendocino Fault is seismically active with mostly small and moderate earthquakes , but the largest event that was unequivocally associated with the fault was the <unk> earthquake on September 1 , 1994 at 125 @.@ 8 W longitude . Aftershocks of that event with corresponding dextral strike @-@ slip focal mechanisms occurred farther to the east and close to the Mendocino Triple Junction . Another large event ( 7 @.@ 3 – 7 @.@ 6 ) occurred on January 31 , 1922 ( with an aftershock of M7 + the next day ) but the sources of these shocks could not be determined with any precision as the first seismographs did not arrive in the area until 1932 . Due to their offshore epicenters all of these events caused little damage though were felt across a broad area . Previous Gorda plate events include the July 13 and August 17 , 1991 shocks of 6 @.@ 8 and 7 @.@ 1 and the M7.3 event on November 10 , 1980 west of Arcata . 
 = Orion ( mythology ) = 
 In Greek mythology , Orion ( Ancient Greek : <unk> or <unk> , Latin : Orion ) was a giant huntsman whom Zeus placed among the stars as the constellation of Orion . 
 Ancient sources tell several different stories about Orion ; there are two major versions of his birth and several versions of his death . The most important recorded episodes are his birth somewhere in Boeotia , his visit to Chios where he met Merope and was blinded by her father , Oenopion , the recovery of his sight at Lemnos , his hunting with Artemis on Crete , his death by the bow of Artemis or the sting of the giant scorpion which became Scorpio , and his elevation to the heavens . Most ancient sources omit some of these episodes and several tell only one . These various incidents may originally have been independent , unrelated stories and it is impossible to tell whether omissions are simple brevity or represent a real disagreement . 
 In Greek literature he first appears as a great hunter in Homer 's epic the Odyssey , where Odysseus sees his shade in the underworld . The bare bones of his story are told by the Hellenistic and Roman collectors of myths , but there is no extant literary version of his adventures comparable , for example , to that of Jason in Apollonius of Rhodes ' Argonautica or Euripides ' Medea ; the entry in Ovid 's Fasti for May 11 is a poem on the birth of Orion , but that is one version of a single story . The surviving fragments of legend have provided a fertile field for speculation about Greek prehistory and myth . 
 Orion served several roles in ancient Greek culture . The story of the adventures of Orion , the hunter , is the one on which we have the most evidence ( and even on that not very much ) ; he is also the personification of the constellation of the same name ; he was venerated as a hero , in the Greek sense , in the region of Boeotia ; and there is one etiological passage which says that Orion was responsible for the present shape of the Strait of Sicily . 
 = = Legends = = 
 = = = Homer and Hesiod = = = 
 Orion is mentioned in the oldest surviving works of Greek literature , which probably date back to the 7th or 8th century BC , but which are the products of an oral tradition with origins several centuries earlier . In Homer 's Iliad Orion is described as a constellation , and the star Sirius is mentioned as his dog . In the Odyssey , Odysseus sees him hunting in the underworld with a bronze club , a great slayer of animals ; he is also mentioned as a constellation , as the lover of the Goddess Dawn , as slain by Artemis , and as the most handsome of the earthborn . In the Works and Days of Hesiod , Orion is also a constellation , one whose rising and setting with the sun is used to reckon the year . 
 The legend of Orion was first told in full in a lost work by Hesiod , probably the Astronomia ; simple references to Hesiod will refer to this , unless otherwise stated . This version is known through the work of a Hellenistic author on the constellations ; he gives a fairly long summary of Hesiod 's discourse on Orion . According to this version , Orion was likely the son of the sea @-@ god Poseidon and Euryale , daughter of Minos , King of Crete . Orion could walk on the waves because of his father ; he walked to the island of Chios where he got drunk and attacked Merope , daughter of Oenopion , the ruler there . In vengeance , Oenopion blinded Orion and drove him away . Orion stumbled to Lemnos where Hephaestus — the lame smith @-@ god — had his forge . Hephaestus told his servant , Cedalion , to guide Orion to the uttermost East where Helios , the Sun , healed him ; Orion carried Cedalion around on his shoulders . Orion returned to Chios to punish Oenopion , but the king hid away underground and escaped Orion 's wrath . Orion 's next journey took him to Crete where he hunted with the goddess Artemis and her mother Leto , and in the course of the hunt , threatened to kill every beast on Earth . Mother Earth objected and sent a giant scorpion to kill Orion . The creature succeeded , and after his death , the goddesses asked Zeus to place Orion among the constellations . Zeus consented and , as a memorial to the hero 's death , added the Scorpion to the heavens as well . 
 = = = Other sources = = = 
 Although Orion has a few lines in both Homeric poems and in the Works and Days , most of the stories about him are recorded in incidental allusions and in fairly obscure later writings . No great poet standardized the legend . The ancient sources for Orion 's legend are mostly notes in the margins of ancient poets ( scholia ) or compilations by later scholars , the equivalent of modern reference works or encyclopedias ; even the legend from Hesiod 's Astronomy survives only in one such compilation . In several cases , including the summary of the Astronomy , although the surviving work bears the name of a famous scholar , such as Apollodorus of Athens , Eratosthenes , or Gaius Julius Hyginus , what survives is either an ancient forgery or an abridgement of the original compilation by a later writer of dubious competence ; editors of these texts suggest that they may have borne the names of great scholars because they were abridgments , or even pupil 's notes , based on the works of the scholars . 
 The margin of the Empress Eudocia 's copy of the Iliad has a note summarizing a Hellenistic poet who tells a different story of Orion 's birth . Here the gods Zeus , Hermes and Poseidon come to visit Hyrieus of Tanagra , who roasts a whole bull for them . When they offer him a favor , he asks for the birth of sons . The gods take the bull 's hide and ejaculate or urinate into it and bury it in the earth , then tell him to dig it up ten months later . When he does , he finds Orion ; this explains why Orion is earthborn . 
 A second full telling ( even shorter than the summary of Hesiod ) is in a Roman @-@ era collection of myths ; the account of Orion is based largely on the mythologist and poet <unk> of Leros . Here Orion is described as earthborn and enormous in stature . This version also mentions Poseidon and Euryale as his parents . It adds a first marriage to Side before his marriage to Merope . All that is known about Side is that Hera threw her into Hades for rivalling her in beauty . It also gives a different version of Orion 's death than the Iliad : Eos , the Dawn , fell in love with Orion and took him to Delos where Artemis killed him . 
 Another narrative on the constellations , three paragraphs long , is from a Latin writer whose brief notes have come down to us under the name of Hyginus . It begins with the oxhide story of Orion 's birth , which this source ascribes to Callimachus and <unk> , and sets the location at Thebes or Chios . Hyginus has two versions . In one of them he omits Poseidon ; a modern critic suggests this is the original version . 
 The same source tells two stories of the death of Orion . The first says that because of his " living joined in too great a friendship " with Oenopion , he boasted to Artemis and Leto that he could kill anything which came from Earth . Earth objected and created the Scorpion . In the second story , Apollo objected to his sister Artemis 's love for Orion , and , seeing Orion swimming with just his head visible , challenged her to shoot at that mark , which she hit , killing him . He connects Orion with several constellations , not just Scorpio . Orion chased Pleione , the mother of the Pleiades , for seven years , until Zeus intervened and raised all of them to the stars . In Works and Days , Orion chases the Pleiades themselves . Canis Minor and Canis Major are his dogs , the one in front is called Procyon . They chase Lepus , the hare , although Hyginus says some critics thought this too base a prey for the noble Orion and have him pursuing Taurus , the bull , instead . A Renaissance mythographer adds other names for Orion 's dogs : <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> . 
 = = = Variants = = = 
 There are numerous variants in other authors . Most of these are incidental references in poems and <unk> . The Roman poet Vergil shows Orion as a giant wading through the Aegean Sea with the waves breaking against his shoulders ; rather than , as the mythographers have it , walking on the water . There are several references to Hyrieus as the father of Orion that connect him to various places in Boeotia , including Hyria ; this may well be the original story ( although not the first attested ) , since Hyrieus is presumably the eponym of Hyria . He is also called Oeneus , although he is not the <unk> Oeneus . Other ancient scholia say , as Hesiod does , that Orion was the son of Poseidon and his mother was a daughter of Minos ; but they call the daughter <unk> or <unk> . There are two versions where Artemis killed Orion , either with her arrows or by producing the Scorpion . In the second variant , Orion died of the Scorpion 's sting as he does in Hesiod . Although Orion does not defeat the Scorpion in any version , several variants have it die from its wounds . Artemis is given various motives . One is that Orion boasted of his beast @-@ killing and challenged her to a contest with the discus . Another is that he assaulted either Artemis or the <unk> maiden Opis in her band of <unk> . Aratus 's brief description , in his Astronomy , conflates the elements of the myth : according to Aratus , Orion attacks Artemis while hunting on Chios , and the Scorpion kills him there . Nicander , in his <unk> , has the scorpion of ordinary size and hiding under a small ( oligos ) stone . Most versions of the story that continue after Orion 's death tell of the gods raising Orion and the Scorpion to the stars , but even here a variant exists : Ancient poets differed greatly as to who Aesculapius brought back from the dead ; the Argive epic poet <unk> is quoted as saying in a scholion that Aesculapius resurrected Orion . Other ancient authorities are quoted anonymously that Aesculapius healed Orion after he was blinded by Oenopion . 
 The story of Orion and Oenopion also varies . One source refers to Merope as the wife of Oenopion and not his daughter . Another refers to Merope as the daughter of Minos and not of Oenopion . The longest version ( a page in the Loeb ) is from a collection of melodramatic plots drawn up by an Alexandrian poet for the Roman Cornelius Gallus to make into Latin verse . It describes Orion as slaying the wild beasts of Chios and looting the other inhabitants to make a bride @-@ price for Oenopion 's daughter , who is called <unk> or <unk> . Oenopion does not want to marry her to someone like Orion , and eventually Orion , in frustration , breaks into her bedchamber and rapes her . The text implies that Oenopion blinds him on the spot . 
 Lucian includes a picture with Orion in a rhetorical description of an ideal building , in which Orion is walking into the rising sun with Lemnos nearby , Cedalion on his shoulder . He recovers his sight there with Hephaestus still watching in the background . 
 The next picture deals with the ancient story of Orion . He is blind , and on his shoulder carries Cedalion , who directs the sightless eyes towards the East . The rising Sun heals his infirmity ; and there stands Hephaestus on Lemnos , watching the cure . 
 Latin sources add that Oenopion was the son of Dionysus . Dionysus sent satyrs to put Orion into a deep sleep so he could be blinded . One source tells the same story but converts Oenopion into Minos of Crete . It adds that an oracle told Orion that his sight could be restored by walking eastward and that he found his way by hearing the Cyclops ' hammer , placing a Cyclops as a guide on his shoulder ; it does not mention <unk> or Lemnos — this is presumably the story of Cedalion recast . Both Hephaestus and the Cyclopes were said to make thunderbolts ; they are combined in other sources . One scholion , on a Latin poem , explains that Hephaestus gave Orion a horse . 
 Giovanni Boccaccio cites a lost Latin writer for the story that Orion and Candiope were son and daughter of Oenopion , king of Sicily . While the virgin huntsman Orion was sleeping in a cave , Venus seduced him ; as he left the cave , he saw his sister shining as she crossed in front of it . He ravished her ; when his father heard of this , he banished Orion . Orion consulted an oracle , which told him that if he went east , he would regain the glory of kingship . Orion , Candiope , and their son <unk> sailed to Thrace , " a province eastward from Sicily " . There he conquered the inhabitants , and became known as the son of Neptune . His son begat the Dryas mentioned in Statius . 
 = = Cult and popular appreciation = = 
 In Ancient Greece , Orion had a hero cult in the region of Boeotia . The number of places associated with his birth suggest that it was widespread . Hyria , the most frequently mentioned , was in the territory of Tanagra . A feast of Orion was held at Tanagra as late as the Roman Empire . They had a tomb of Orion most likely at the foot of Mount <unk> ( now Mount Tanagra ) . Maurice Bowra argues that Orion was a national hero of the Boeotians , much as Castor and Pollux were for the Dorians . He bases this claim on the Athenian epigram on the Battle of Coronea in which a hero gave the Boeotian army an oracle , then fought on their side and defeated the Athenians . 
 The Boeotian school of epic poetry was chiefly concerned with the genealogies of the gods and heroes ; later writers elaborated this web . Several other myths are attached to Orion in this way : A papyrus fragment of the Boeotian poet Corinna gives Orion fifty sons ( a traditional number ) . This included the oracular hero <unk> , who , she sings , gave a response to Asopus regarding Asopus ' daughters who were abducted by the gods . Corinna sang of Orion conquering and naming all the land of the dawn . Bowra argues that Orion was believed to have delivered oracles as well , probably at a different shrine . Hyginus says that <unk> 's mother was <unk> , daughter of Orion . Another mythographer , Liberalis , tells of Menippe and <unk> , daughters of Orion , who sacrificed themselves for their country 's good and were transformed into comets . 
 Orion also has etiological connection to the city of Messina in Sicily . Diodorus of Sicily wrote a history of the world up to his own time ( the beginning of the reign of Augustus ) . He starts with the gods and the heroes . At the end of this part of the work , he tells the story of Orion and two wonder @-@ stories of his mighty earth @-@ works in Sicily . One tells how he aided <unk> , the founder of Zancle ( the former name for Messina ) , by building the promontory which forms the harbor . The other , which Diodorus ascribes to Hesiod , relates that there was once a broad sea between Sicily and the mainland . Orion built the whole <unk> , the Punta del Faro , and the temple to Poseidon at the tip , after which he settled in Euboea . He was then " numbered among the stars of heaven and thus won for himself immortal remembrance " . The Renaissance historian and mathematician Francesco <unk> , who came from Messina , identified the remains of a temple of Orion near the present Messina Cathedral . <unk> also designed an ornate fountain , built by the sculptor Giovanni Angelo <unk> in 1547 , in which Orion is a central figure , symbolizing the Emperor Charles V , also a master of the sea and restorer of Messina ; Orion is still a popular symbol of the city . 
 Images of Orion in classical art are difficult to recognize , and clear examples are rare . There are several ancient Greek images of club @-@ carrying hunters that could represent Orion , but such generic examples could equally represent an archetypal " hunter " , or indeed Heracles . Some claims have been made that other Greek art represents specific aspects of the Orion myth . A tradition of this type has been discerned in 5th century BC Greek pottery — John Beazley identified a scene of Apollo , Delian palm in hand , <unk> Orion for the attempted rape of Artemis , while another scholar has identified a scene of Orion attacking Artemis as she is revenged by a snake ( a counterpart to the scorpion ) in a funerary group — supposedly symbolizing the hope that even the criminal Orion could be made immortal , as well as an astronomical scene in which Cephalus is thought to stand in for Orion and his constellation , also reflecting this system of iconography . Also , a tomb frieze in Taranto ( ca . 300 BC ) may show Orion attacking Opis . But the earliest surviving clear depiction of Orion in classical art is Roman , from the depictions of the Underworld scenes of the Odyssey discovered at the Esquiline Hill ( 50 – 40 BC ) . Orion is also seen on a 4th @-@ century bas @-@ relief , currently affixed to a wall in the Porto neighborhood of Naples . The constellation Orion rises in November , the end of the sailing season , and was associated with stormy weather , and this characterization extended to the mythical Orion — the bas @-@ relief may be associated with the sailors of the city . 
 = = Interpretations = = 
 = = = Renaissance = = = 
 <unk> have discussed Orion at least since the Renaissance of classical learning ; the Renaissance interpretations were allegorical . In the 14th century , Boccaccio interpreted the oxhide story as representing human conception ; the hide is the womb , Neptune the moisture of semen , Jupiter its heat , and Mercury the female coldness ; he also explained Orion 's death at the hands of the moon @-@ goddess as the Moon producing winter storms . The 16th @-@ century Italian mythographer <unk> Comes interpreted the whole story of Orion as an allegory of the evolution of a storm cloud : Begotten by air ( Zeus ) , water ( Poseidon ) , and the sun ( Apollo ) , a storm cloud is diffused ( Chios , which Comes derives from <unk> , " pour out " ) , rises though the upper air ( <unk> , as Comes spells Merope ) , chills ( is blinded ) , and is turned into rain by the moon ( Artemis ) . He also explains how Orion walked on the sea : " Since the subtler part of the water which is rarefied rests on the surface , it is said that Orion learned from his father how to walk on water . " Similarly , Orion 's conception made him a symbol of the philosophical child , an allegory of philosophy springing from multiple sources , in the Renaissance as in alchemical works , with some variations . The 16th @-@ century German alchemist Michael Maier lists the fathers as Apollo , Vulcan and Mercury , and the 18th @-@ century French alchemist Antoine @-@ Joseph <unk> gave them as Jupiter , Neptune and Mercury . 
 = = = Modern = = = 
 Modern mythographers have seen the story of Orion as a way to access local folk tales and cultic practices directly without the interference of ancient high culture ; several of them have explained Orion , each through his own interpretation of Greek prehistory and of how Greek mythology represents it . There are some points of general agreement between them : for example , that the attack on Opis is an attack on Artemis , for Opis is one of the names of Artemis . 
 There was a movement in the late nineteenth century to interpret all the Boeotian heroes as merely personifications of the constellations ; there has since come to be wide agreement that the myth of Orion existed before there was a constellation named for him . Homer , for example , mentions Orion , the Hunter , and Orion , the constellation , but never confuses the two . Once Orion was recognized as a constellation , astronomy in turn affected the myth . The story of Side may well be a piece of astronomical mythology . The Greek word side means pomegranate , which bears fruit while Orion , the constellation , can be seen in the night sky . Rose suggests she is connected with <unk> in Boeotia , and that the pomegranate , as a sign of the Underworld , is connected with her descent there . 
 The 19th @-@ century German classical scholar Erwin Rohde viewed Orion as an example of the Greeks erasing the line between the gods and mankind . That is , if Orion was in the heavens , other mortals could hope to be also . 
 The Hungarian mythographer Karl Kerényi , one of the founders of the modern study of Greek mythology , wrote about Orion in Gods of the Greeks ( 1951 ) . Kerényi portrays Orion as a giant of Titanic vigor and criminality , born outside his mother as were <unk> or Dionysus . Kerényi places great stress on the variant in which Merope is the wife of Oenopion . He sees this as the remnant of a lost form of the myth in which Merope was Orion 's mother ( converted by later generations to his stepmother and then to the present forms ) . Orion 's blinding is therefore parallel to that of Aegypius and Oedipus . 
 In Dionysus ( 1976 ) , Kerényi portrays Orion as a shamanic hunting hero , surviving from Minoan times ( hence his association with Crete ) . Kerényi derives Hyrieus ( and Hyria ) from the Cretan dialect word <unk> - <unk> , meaning " beehive " , which survives only in ancient dictionaries . From this association he turns Orion into a representative of the old mead @-@ drinking cultures , overcome by the wine masters Oenopion and Oeneus . ( The Greek for " wine " is <unk> . ) Fontenrose cites a source stating that Oenopion taught the Chians how to make wine before anybody else knew how . 
 Joseph Fontenrose wrote Orion : the Myth of the Hunter and the Huntress ( 1981 ) to show Orion as the type specimen of a variety of grotesque hero . Fontenrose views him as similar to Cúchulainn , that is , stronger , larger , and more potent than ordinary men and the violent lover of the Divine Huntress ; other heroes of the same type are Actaeon , Leucippus ( son of Oenomaus ) , Cephalus , <unk> , and Zeus as the lover of Callisto . Fontenrose also sees Eastern parallels in the figures of <unk> , Attis , Dumuzi , Gilgamesh , Dushyanta , and Prajapati ( as pursuer of <unk> ) . 
 In The Greek Myths ( 1955 ) , Robert Graves views Oenopion as his perennial Year @-@ King , at the stage where the king pretends to die at the end of his term and appoints a substitute , in this case Orion , who actually dies in his place . His blindness is <unk> from a picture of Odysseus blinding the Cyclops , mixed with a purely Hellenic solar legend : the Sun @-@ hero is captured and blinded by his enemies at dusk , but escapes and regains his sight at dawn , when all beasts flee him . Graves sees the rest of the myth as a syncretism of diverse stories . These include Gilgamesh and the Scorpion @-@ Men , Set becoming a scorpion to kill Horus and the story of <unk> and <unk> from Ras <unk> , as well as a conjectural story of how the priestesses of Artemis Opis killed a visitor to their island of <unk> . He compares Orion 's birth from the bull 's hide to a West African <unk> charm and claims that the son of Poseidon should be a rainmaker . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The ancient Greek and Roman sources which tell more about Orion than his being a gigantic huntsman are mostly both dry and obscure , but poets do write of him : The brief passages in Aratus and Vergil are mentioned above . Pindar celebrates the <unk> <unk> of Thebes " who was not granted the build of an Orion " , but whose strength was still great . 
 Cicero translated Aratus in his youth ; he made the Orion episode half again longer than it was in the Greek , adding the traditional Latin topos of madness to Aratus 's text . Cicero 's <unk> is one of the oldest Latin poems to come down to us as more than isolated lines ; this episode may have established the technique of including <unk> in non @-@ epic poems . 
 Orion is used by Horace , who tells of his death at the hands of Diana / Artemis , and by Ovid , in his Fasti for May 11 , the middle day of the Lemuria , when ( in Ovid 's time ) the constellation Orion set with the sun . Ovid 's episode tells the story of Hyrieus and the three gods , although Ovid is bashful about the climax ; Ovid makes Hyrieus a poor man , which means the sacrifice of an entire ox is more generous . There is also a single mention of Orion in his Art of Love , as a sufferer from unrequited love : " Pale Orion wandered in the forest for Side . " 
 Statius mentions Orion four times in his <unk> ; twice as the constellation , a personification of storm , but twice as the ancestor of Dryas of Tanagra , one of the defenders of Thebes . The very late Greek epic poet Nonnus mentions the oxhide story in brief , while listing the <unk> in his Catalogue of the Boeotian army of Dionysius . 
 References since antiquity are fairly rare . At the beginning of the 17th century , French sculptor Barthélemy <unk> cast a bronze statue Orion et <unk> , some time between 1600 and 1611 . This featured Orion with Cedalion on his shoulder , in a depiction of the ancient legend of Orion recovering his sight ; the sculpture is now displayed at the Louvre . 
 Nicolas Poussin painted <unk> avec Orion <unk> <unk> le soleil ( 1658 ) ( " Landscape with blind Orion seeking the sun " ) , after learning of the description by the 2nd @-@ century Greek author Lucian , of a picture of Orion recovering his sight ; Poussin included a storm @-@ cloud , which both suggests the transient nature of Orion 's blindness , soon to be removed like a cloud exposing the sun , and includes <unk> Comes ' esoteric interpretation of Orion as a storm @-@ cloud . Poussin need not have consulted Lucian directly ; the passage is in the notes of the illustrated French translation of Philostratus ' Imagines which Poussin is known to have consulted . The Austrian Daniel Seiter ( active in Turin , Italy ) , painted Diane <unk> du cadavre d <unk> ( <unk> ) ( " Diana next to Orion 's corpse " ) , pictured above . 
 In Endymion ( 1818 ) , John Keats includes the line " Or blind Orion hungry for the morn " , thought to be inspired by Poussin . William Hazlitt may have introduced Keats to the painting — he later wrote the essay " On Landscape of Nicholas Poussin " , published in Table Talk , Essays on Men and Manners ( 1821 @-@ 2 ) . Richard Henry Horne , writing in the generation after Keats and Hazlitt , penned the three volume epic poem Orion in 1843 . It went into at least ten editions and was reprinted by the <unk> Press in 1928 . 
 Science fiction author Ben Bova re @-@ invented Orion as a time @-@ traveling servant of various gods in a series of five novels . In The Blood of Olympus , the final volume of a series , Rick Riordan depicts Orion as one of the giant sons of the Earth Goddess Gaea . 
 Italian composer Francesco Cavalli wrote the opera , L <unk> in 1653 . The story is set on the Greek island of Delos and focuses on Diana 's love for Orion as well as on her rival , Aurora . Diana shoots Orion only after being tricked by Apollo into thinking him a sea monster — she then laments his death and searches for Orion in the underworld until he is elevated to the heavens . Johann Christian Bach ( ' the English Bach ' ) wrote an opera , Orion , or Diana <unk> 'd , first presented at London 's Haymarket Theatre in 1763 . Orion , sung by a castrato , is in love with Candiope , the daughter of Oenopion , King of Arcadia but his arrogance has offended Diana . Diana 's oracle forbids him to marry Candiope and foretells his glory and death . He bids a touching farewell to Candiope and marches off to his destiny . Diana allows him his victory and then kills him , offstage , with her arrow . In another aria , his mother <unk> ( Queen of Thebes ) , laments his death but ultimately sees his elevation to the heavens . The 2002 opera Galileo Galilei by American composer Philip Glass includes an opera within an opera piece between Orion and Merope . The sunlight , which heals Orion 's blindness , is an allegory of modern science . Philip Glass has also written a shorter work on Orion , as have Tōru Takemitsu , <unk> <unk> , and John <unk> . David Bedford 's late @-@ twentieth @-@ century works are about the constellation rather than the mythical figure ; he is an amateur astronomer . 
 The twentieth @-@ century French poet René Char found the blind , lustful huntsman , both pursuer and pursued , a central symbol , as James Lawler has explained at some length in his 1978 work René Char : the Myth and the Poem . French novelist Claude Simon likewise found Orion an apt symbol , in this case of the writer , as he explained in his Orion <unk> of 1970 . Marion Perret argues that Orion is a silent link in T. S. Eliot 's The Waste Land ( 1922 ) , connecting the lustful Actaeon / Sweeney to the blind <unk> and , through Sirius , to the Dog " that 's friend to men " . 
 = Yours Truly ( Ariana Grande album ) = 
 Yours Truly is the debut studio album by American singer Ariana Grande . It was released on August 30 , 2013 , by Republic Records . Incorporating R & B , Yours Truly was influenced by Whitney Houston , Amy Winehouse , Christina Aguilera and Mariah Carey , amongst other of Grande 's greatest idols . Grande describes the album 's first half as a " throwback " to the R & B music of the 1990s , and the second half being " very unique and very special that I 've sort of written " which is completely original . On the album , Grande co @-@ wrote six out of the twelve tracks . Contribution by Harmony Samuels , Kenneth " Babyface " Edmonds , Patrick " J. Que " Smith and Victorious co @-@ star Leon Thomas III , as well as others , handling the production on the album . Grande recorded a number of songs on this album over a three @-@ year period . The collaborations with Big Sean , Mika and Mac Miller , in addition to Mary J. Blige , who is featured on the song " Lovin ' It " ( which sampled her song " Real Love " ) , and The Wanted 's Nathan Sykes , who features on the song " Almost is Never Enough " which was also included on the The Mortal Instruments : City of Bones soundtrack . Occasionally , the album dips into other genres such as adult contemporary music and dance music . 
 Yours Truly was promoted with live renditions of the album 's songs during The Listening Sessions Tour . The album was preceded by the release of the lead single , " The Way " , featuring American rapper Mac Miller . It became a top @-@ ten hit on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart , peaking at number nine . The second single , " Baby I " , was released a month before the album and peaked just outside the top @-@ twenty of the Billboard Hot 100 chart at number twenty @-@ one . The third and final single " Right There " featuring Big Sean was released on August 6 , 2013 and peaked at number 84 on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 Yours Truly debuted at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200 selling 138 @,@ 000 copies in its opening week . Grande became the first female artist in three and a half years to have her debut record in the peak position since Animal by Kesha in January 2010 , and the fifteenth female artist overall . Internationally , the album reached the top @-@ ten position in Australia , Canada , Denmark , Ireland , Japan , the Netherlands , and the United Kingdom . 
 = = Background and conception = = 
 Yours Truly is the result of three years of work . The project underwent significant conceptual and sonic changes throughout that time . Grande began working on the album in August 2010 while she was filming Victorious and formally started to work on it with a record label after she was signed to Republic Records on August 10 , 2011 . By September 10 of that year , Grande already had twenty songs prepared and was going through the process of narrowing it down to thirteen . The first single , a bubblegum pop song called " Put Your Hearts Up " , was released on December 12 , 2011 . The single was aimed at young audiences , perhaps intending to cater to Grande 's core audience , which at that time was almost entirely made up by kids who knew her from Victorious . During an interview in June 2012 , Grande described everything on the album as being " 50s , 60s doo @-@ wop @-@ inspired " and revealed that two new singles were going to be released before the album , one of which was called " Do You Love Me ? " and featured <unk> . Other songs that Grande had named ( and later leaked ) as being part of the album included " Honeymoon Avenue " , " Voodoo Love " , " Pink Champagne " , " Boyfriend Material " , " Tattooed Heart " , " Daydreamin ' " and " You 're My Only Shorty " . The latter one was eventually recorded by Demi Lovato who included it on her 2011 R & B @-@ infused album Unbroken . 
 In 2013 , Grande met up with her label and expressed dissatisfaction with the direction the album was taking . In several interviews during 2013 , she admitted to having completely disliked her debut single " Put Your Hearts Up " and not having an interest in pursuing music of that genre . She expressed a desire to make the type of music she grew up listening to , which was , " urban pop , 90s music . " Rapper Iggy Azalea turned down working on the album ; she however did collaborate with Grande on her second album My Everything . The album was originally titled Daydreamin and set to be released during August 2013 . 
 The album is inspired by a variety of different artists , ranging from Amy Winehouse and Christina Aguilera to Mariah Carey and Whitney Houston . Grande describes the album 's first half is a " throwback " to the R & B music of the 1990s , and the second half is she describes as " something that is very unique and very special that I 've sort of written " which is completely original . In summation of the record she stated : " So half of it is a throwback and like very familiar feeling , feel @-@ good , and then half of it is something that I 've created that 's sort of special and unique and refreshing and wonderful and I love it " . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 To promote her debut single " The Way " , Grande visited various radio stations , including : Y @-@ 100 Miami , 93 @.@ 3 FM , Z100 , KIIS @-@ FM , and 99 – 7 Now . Grande performed " The Way " at several concerts produced for Top 40 radio stations , including KIIS @-@ FM 's Wango Tango concert on May 11 , 2013 in Los Angeles , 101 @.@ 3 KDWB 's Star Party concert on May 17 in Minneapolis , Kiss 108 's Kiss Concert 2013 event on May 18 in Boston , 103 @.@ 3 AMP Radio 's Birthday Bash concert on June 30 also in Boston , and Mix 93 @.@ 3 's Red White & Boom concert on July 5 in Kansas City . Her first televised performance of the song was aired on May 29 , 2013 on The Ellen DeGeneres Show . 
 On August 1 , 2013 , Grande revealed the official artwork for Yours Truly , which features her kneeling on a bed of roses in front of a pink background . Due to fan criticism , she quickly unveiled a new cover , which simply featured the singer standing beneath a spotlight in a black @-@ and @-@ white image . On August 7 , 2013 , Grande revealed the official track listing via iTunes , and Republic Records made pre @-@ orders for the album available . A music video for " Almost is Never Enough " a duet with The Wanted 's Nathan Sykes premiered online on Vevo on August 19 to promote the film The Mortal Instruments : City of Bones . The track is featured on the film 's official soundtrack . The album version of the track is two minutes longer and has been slightly altered . It debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 84 . " Popular Song " featuring Grande was released on 21 December 2012 as a single from Mika 's third studio album , The Origin of Love . The album version of the song features vocals from the original songwriter , Priscilla Renea , and contains expletives . However , the single version removes Renea and replaces her with Grande , removing the expletives . 
 Grande performed " The Way " and " Baby I " at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards ' <unk> on August 25 , 2013 . During the album 's release week Grande also performed " The Way " with Mac Miller on the Today Show along with " Tattooed Heart " on September 3 , 2013 , she also performed the latter at the 2013 Style Awards on September 4 , 2013 . Grande also made several other appearances throughout the week appearing on Live ! with Kelly and Michael , The Today Show and Late Night With Jimmy Fallon , where she performing an acoustic version of " The Way " . 
 = = = The Listening Sessions = = = 
 Grande embarked on her first solo concert tour titled The Listening Sessions in support of Yours Truly . Pre @-@ sale tickets went on sale on July 18 , 2013 . Regular tickets went on sale on July 19 . Pre @-@ sale tickets had to be taken down early , as they were selling at such a fast rate that the tour was almost sold before regular tickets were available . Grande also was the opening act for the last three US dates of Justin Bieber 's Believe Tour . The performances took place in Jacksonville , Tampa , and Atlanta on August 7 , August 8 , and August 10 , in support of the album . It was at these Listening Sessions that Grande discovered the album reached number one on US iTunes . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " The Way " was released to digital retailers through Republic Records in the United States on March 26 , 2013 as the album 's official lead single . It was written by the song 's producer Harmony Samuels , alongside Amber Streeter , Al Sherrod Lambert , Jordin Sparks , Brenda Russell and Mac Miller , who is also featured in the song . Seven hours after its release on the iTunes Store , " The Way " topped its " Top Singles " chart . It debuted at number ten on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Grande and Miller 's first top ten song on the chart . This made Ariana the first top 10 arrival for a lead female artist making her first Hot 100 appearance since Yael Naim , who launched with " New Soul " back in 2008 . The song peaked at number 9 on the Billboard Hot 100 . " The Way " sold over 120 @,@ 000 units in the first 48 hours . Having sold over 219 @,@ 000 units in its opening week , " The Way " holds the third best @-@ selling first @-@ week sales figure of 2013 behind Justin Timberlake 's " Suit & Tie " and One Direction 's " Best Song Ever " . The song received a triple platinum certification by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . 
 " Baby I " was released to digital retailers by Republic Records on July 22 , 2013 , as the second single from the album . It was written and produced by Kenneth " Babyface " Edmonds , Antonio Dixon and Patrick " J. Que " Smith . The song sold 141 @,@ 000 copies in its first week and debuted at number 21 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , her second top 40 hit . It also debuted at number 6 on the Hot Digital Songs chart , making Grande the only woman to debut two songs in the top ten on the Digital Songs chart during the year 2013 . Filming for the song 's music video took place July 28 – 29 , 2013 . Grande hinted that the video would " travel " back to the 1990s and that there would be " lots of color " and " lots of baggy clothes . " 
 " Right There " featuring Big Sean , was released to digital retailers by Republic Records on August 6 , 2013 , as the third and final single from the album . It was written by Grande , Carmen Reece , Lonny Bereal , James " J @-@ Doe " Smith , Trey <unk> , Al Sherrod Lambert , Sean Anderson , Jeff Lorber , and Harmony Samuels , who also handled the song 's production . " Right There " debuted on the US Billboard Hot 100 at number 84 . It was then serviced to rhythmic contemporary radio on September 10 , 2013 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average score out of 100 based on ratings and reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average of 81 , based on 9 reviews , indicating " universal acclaim " . At AllMusic , Matt Collar rated the album four stars out of five , saying that Yours Truly was " surprisingly sophisticated and unique " which showcases Grande 's soulful R & B vocals . He stated that the album often " brings to mind the intonations of Mariah Carey which are most likely intentional . " Collar closed the statement saying that Yours Truly " makes the most of her talent . " Nick Catucci of Entertainment Weekly graded the album an A- , calling the album " pure pop bliss " and " one of the most purely enjoyable albums of the year " that is powered by her " lithe , Broadway @-@ honed voice " . At The New York Times , Jon Caramanica gave a positive review of the album , writing that television shows such as American Idol and Glee " have been responsible for an intense surge of interest in music on television , but they haven 't left much of a mark on the shape of pop . That 's because both shows are fundamentally conservative institutions , privileging the familiar and the unchallenging . They 're about emulating , not innovating . " Caramanica commended Grande for becoming the first " identifiable pop star " who takes the " rules of those enterprises , uses them as a foundation , and innovates atop them ... She uses the " Glee " / " Idol " template as a jumping @-@ off point to make modern pop @-@ R & B with a sturdy vintage backbone . " 
 Writing in his track @-@ by @-@ track review Jason Lipshutz from Billboard rated the album an eighty @-@ six out of 100 , saying that " Yours Truly carries the expectations of a young singer who has already proven herself on the pop charts , and even if the songs on her debut could not equal the quality of " The Way , " Grande had the fan base and powerful pipes to survive a misfire . " At PopMatters , Scott <unk> rated the album eight discs out of ten , writing that " Minor missteps aside , Yours Truly is ultimately an impressive debut for Grande . " Ryan Dennehy of AbsolutePunk rated the album a 70 @-@ percent , stating that " Yours Truly is more tempered and less likely to put you in a beaming state of catatonia " that is " a missive containing some of her most personal thoughts and her oft @-@ regrettable youthful impulses . " At Pitchfork , Andrew Ryce rated the album a 6 @.@ 5 out of ten , calling it " a very safe record . " Lewis Conner of Digital Spy rated the album four stars out of five , writing how " The production feels fresh , the lyrics are relatable and the melodies are as cool and sweet as a dollop of raspberry ripple " , and where he also states that " The tone and pace of the album rarely changes , but the songs feel accomplished , polished and vibrant " . Corner concluded by calling " Yours Truly " a " little less than a triumph . " At The Michigan Daily , Gregory Hicks graded the album a B , saying " most tracks are of quality composition , lyrically and melodically , but beat usage becomes excessive at times . " Jim Farber of The New York Daily News rated the album three stars out of five , stating that because the " armies of song doctors " that the release is " far more tuneful than Mariah 's interchangeable hits . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 On September 4 , 2013 , Billboard reported that Yours Truly would most likely sell between 110 @,@ 000 and 120 @,@ 000 copies in its first week in the United States by the end of September 11 , 2013 . After Yours Truly was released , the album went to number one on the iTunes Store charts in over 30 countries , including the United States , where it reached number 1 in 19 minutes . Yours Truly officially debuted atop the US Billboard 200 chart , with 138 @,@ 000 copies sold in its first week , becoming Grande 's first number @-@ one album as a solo artist . This made Grande the fifteenth female artist ever and the first female artist to have their first album debut atop of the charts since January 2010 , when Kesha 's Animal opened at number one . Grande 's sales were especially strong digitally , as 108 @,@ 000 of her first @-@ week sales were from digital downloads , while the album sold 30 @,@ 000 copies through physical sales . In its second week , the album dropped eight places to number 9 selling 31 @,@ 000 more copies , bringing its total sales in the United States to 169 @,@ 000 . As of March 2016 , the album has sold 572 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 Yours Truly also debuted in the top ten in several other countries , including Australia , where it debuted at number 6 , the United Kingdom , where it debuted at number 7 , Ireland , where it debuted at number 6 , and the Netherlands , where it debuted at number 5 . It also debuted just outside the top ten on New Zealand 's top 40 chart at number 11 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 ^ [ a ] denotes a co @-@ producer 
 ^ [ b ] denotes a vocal producer 
 ^ [ c ] denotes an additional producer 
 ^ [ d ] denotes a remixer 
 " Right There " features a prominent sample of the 1979 jazz instrumental song " Rain Dance " by The Jeff Lorber Fusion 
 " Lovin ' It " embodies portions of " Real Love " performed by Mary J. Blige , written by Mark Morales , Mark C. Rooney , Kirk Robinson , Nat Robinson Jr . , and Roy Hammond . 
 " The Way " interpolates the piano melody from Russell 's " A Little Bit of Love " and lyrics from Big Pun 's " Still Not a Player " . 
 " Popular Song " is a cover , based on the song " Popular " from the Broadway musical Wicked . 
 = = Credits = = 
 Adapted from AllMusic and album liner notes . 
 = = = Recording locations = = = 
 = = = Personnel = = = 
 Technical credits 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Russian battleship Sevastopol ( 1911 ) = 
 Sevastopol ( Russian : Севастополь ) was the first ship completed of the Gangut @-@ class battleships of the Imperial Russian Navy , built before World War I. The Ganguts were the first class of Russian dreadnoughts . She was named after the Siege of Sevastopol during the Crimean War . She was completed during the winter of 1914 – 15 , but was not ready for combat until mid @-@ 1915 . Her role was to defend the mouth of the Gulf of Finland against the Germans , who never tried to enter , so she spent her time training and providing cover for minelaying operations . Her crew joined the general mutiny of the Baltic Fleet after the February Revolution and joined the Bolsheviks later that year . She was laid up in 1918 for lack of manpower , but her crew joined the Kronstadt Rebellion of 1921 . She was renamed Parizhskaya Kommuna after the rebellion was crushed to commemorate the Paris Commune and to erase the ship 's ' betrayal ' of the Communist Party . 
 She was recommissioned in 1925 , and refitted in 1928 in preparation for her transfer to the Black Sea the following year . Parizhskaya Kommuna and the cruiser Profintern ran into a severe storm in the Bay of Biscay that severely damaged Parizhskaya Kommuna 's false bow . They had to put into Brest for repairs , but reached Sevastopol in January 1930 . Parizhskaya Kommuna was comprehensively reconstructed in two stages during the 1930s that replaced her boilers , upgraded her guns , augmented her anti @-@ aircraft armament , modernized her fire @-@ control systems and gave her anti @-@ torpedo bulges . During World War II she provided gunfire support during the Siege of Sevastopol and related operations until she was withdrawn from combat in April 1942 when the risk from German aerial attack became too great . She was retained on active duty after the war until she became a training ship in 1954 . She was broken up in 1956 – 57 . 
 = = Design = = 
